According to the USUN copy of this telegram, it was drafted by Akalovsky and cleared in substance by Stevenson.
Stevenson and McCloy had a three-and-a-half hour meeting with Kuznetsov, Zorin, and Mendelevich today.
Stevenson and McCloy referred to Kuznetsov's conversation with McCloy yesterday ,121 in which former expressed misgivings re inclusion IL-28 aircraft in armaments subject to removal.
B Sovs surprised IL-28 aircraft regarded by United States as offensive, because they basically obsolete in view their low ceiling and low speed.
Stevenson and McCloy stressed question IL-28 aircraft not new, since President's October 22 statement, quarantine proclamation, as well as October 28 letter contained either specific or general reference to offensive weapons other than missiles.
Pointed out jet bombers capable of carrying nuclear warheads could hardly be qualified as obsolete.
Noted such armaments in hands of man like Castro could create gravest situation, and LA countries deeply concerned by this.
Denied Kuznetsov's insinuation United States seeking obstruct negotiations by raising this very important question.
A United States is to give assurances against invasion of Cuba either by United States or by its Allies, or by any state in Western hemisphere; Kuznetsov commented United States trying evade this subject; B As evident from Khrushchev's message, USSR will remove missiles which President regards as offensive.
He commented there no question that missiles had been subject President-Khrushchev exchange, Security Council debate, and current talks.
In response to direct question whether USSR would include IL-28's in arms to be removed, Kuznetsov replied in negative, stating that they not offensive arms and SovGov would act accordingly.
Kuznetsov referred to schedule of removal, saying first Soviet vessel, Labinsk, due to leave November 6, with eight other ships, Bratsk, Leninskiy Komsomol, Kurchatov, Asosov, Divnogorsk, Volgoles, Polzunov, Alapayevsk, to leave November 7.
Said he had no information whether this would complete removal operation.
Details re signals and identification would have be worked out and appropriate information had been given to member UN Secretariat.
This vessel would be stationed north of Cuba and all Sov ships bound for Cuba would use only northern route, although southern route might be used after November 12.
McCloy and Stevenson pointed out no commitment had been made re United States willingness accept Soviet ship, and noted neutral,e., Swedish, ship could also be used.
Kuznetsov professed surprise, claiming United States had not objected to Soviet ship.
McCloy reiterated he had expressly stated he could not commit United States Govt re use of Soviet ship.
McCloy then raised subject of removal of warheads, pointing out this very important matter, and wondered how USSR could satisfy United States re their removal.
Kuznetsov asserted this question of detail; USSR's actions clearly indicate that all equipment related to what United States calls offensive missiles will be removed.
Thus, there should be no doubt re warheads, if warheads are indeed in Cuba.
USSR intends fulfill all these commitments in good faith, but United States raising these questions in order postpone final solution of problem.
Stevenson and McCloy stressed importance removal warheads, pointing out that with some modification they could also be used on bombers.
Suggested verification removal of warheads could perhaps be done on see-and-count basis as Kuznetsov had suggested for missiles.
Stevenson noted problem of warheads highlighted importance ground inspection, and wondered what progress Mikoyan had made in Havana.
Reiterated that as to warheads, USSR would remove from Cuba everything related to ""so-called"" offensive missiles, but noted he could not say anything beyond that.
Removal IL-28 aircraft, nationality inspection ship, and verification removal of warheads, although Kuznetsov had given assurances warheads would be removed.
Kuznetsov disagreed, saying there no open question from Sov standpoint.
Concluded United States should consider Soviet deeds and respond in kind.
Ball reported the Secretary's conversation to Bundy/1/ saying the Secretary suggested the three of them sort this thing out and decide what we want to do.
Bundy said that Bobby was away today and the President doesn't get back until the middle of the afternoon.
It doesn't seem complicated to him, but he would be glad to sit down with Ball and Bob.
All we have to do today is to point out the rapid departure and emphasize the speed in the verification procedure.
Ball thought the farther out to sea they get the more difficult it would be for psychological reasons.
Bundy thought rather than have the Executive Committee meeting, he would like to have a clear sense that Ball, the Secretary, Bob and Bundy know what we want to do and check it out with the President; then proceed on that basis.
Ball told him that Bob thought we ought to make immediate representation to Kuznetsov; that since they are leaving, it is urgent to get a neutral observer on board.
The easiest way to do it is to take a United States ship alongside, and if they won't do it, would we take a Soviet ship to do it.
Bundy asked if they were willing to have a United States ship alongside and Ball replied they talked like they were prepared to do it.
These missiles are not crated; they are under tarps, so that it is pretty good from that point of view.
Also if we could get the tarp rolled back to make sure they are not duds, and take some pictures.
Bundy would be inclined to take up Kuznetsov on his offer yesterday for UN ships alongside and if we can't count through the tarps ask to see under them.
Bundy will check this out with Bob and the President and call Ball back.
He suggested that Ball go into that with Ros-he said he meant the MIGs scramble.
Bundy could not reach the President, but he expected that Kennedy would call when he arrived at Hyannisport.
Bundy suggested Ball proceed and promised to call after talking to the President.
Bundy thought it would be too complicated, and Ball agreed it would be ""unrealistic"" to try to get neutral observers on board Soviet ships.
BallWhat we should do is to get back to the Russians and this is what Gilpatric is being told to get in touch with you about and since these things are going out of there we want to arrange to get these things photographed at close range and look at them.
Ball-Let me put Alex Johnson on because he wrote this long damn thing from the Department today.
This thing-5-requires a verification at sea and a loading time which we don't have.
If this was to be the verification mode, then the guidelines in this telegram suggested that all offensive equipment had to be on deck and uncrated.
BallWhat we really need is this-what we really need to see are the missiles.
The photographs we have indicate that they are in the proc-ess of loading the 26 out of the 42.
We have to tell them we have to see all the missiles and if we can pull along side and see the missiles and make sure they are not dummies.
First, have a ship pull along side these ships and we will photograph from the ship or helicopter, or something like that, but at close range so that we can count for each missile; and have the tarpaulin pulled back so that we can see there are missiles under there.
Ball-Plus the instructions that the ships-we pull a ship along side and the right to take the picture from a helicopter.
Ball-No, we just want to make sure that enough of it is going on board.
We are not going to try to take an inventory or count it on a piece-by-piece basis.
This thing got so vicious last night/5/we have got to pull our wits together.
If I can't get some instructions pretty soon on the guaranty they are going to clam up.
BallWe are going to have a meeting this afternoon/6/ and we will try to get something out.
Stevenson-I wish they would talk to me before they send these instructions out.
The other thing we are going to have to take up again is this warhead business.
I think you should sit down and talk to him and see what you ought to recommend and get back here and I will see if I can clear it out.
Stevenson-Telling them that our ship so and so will come by at a certain time.
I am going to have to proceed in writing or God knows where we will be.
Ball-I think you should talk to Gilpatric about that and he can work it out directly with the Navy people and Defense.
StevensonThey say they haven't any except their commitment that they would remove from the island anything that is offensive.
I gather, by some small modification, you could use a missile warhead on an airplane.
We can't go on this way, George, it is intolerable, by having a lot of ambiguous talk.
Yesterday they insisted that McCloy had agreed to the Soviet ship on Sunday and bitter accusations of bad faith.
I think all McCloy said was he didn't personally care if it was a Soviet ship or not but that he couldn't commit the Government.
They are going to stall on this ground verification because they can't get it.
They were insistent on bringing it up last night and I am sure they are going to say we have a few things you know about.
I can ask questions like where will the warheads be and on what missiles and can we work out some scheme of identifying them above deck.
In all events we have to make up our minds and I think on the removal of the IL-28's and that raises the question of airing nuclear bombs and how to get removal and also whether conventional bombs are going to be removed.
I think all of these things I have to have some broad general sort of objective to obtain they are realistic.
If we could just disregard that and get the record clear then we could concentrate on the thing which we can insist on more legitimately.
I would think if we are going to do anything about this we should move on this promptly.
Ball— I think on this one point of these arrangements on these ships that you and Ros should go to work on that right away.
We have to button up on the Red Cross coming in, which is nonsense anyway, we will have to reach an agreement actually within hours as to if it will be a Swedish ship or a Soviet ship.
We opened that one up again last night and any remarks that McCloy made about a Soviet ship have been erased.
The negotiators are waiting here to see what they are to negotiate about.
I would tie it to the invasion and to the commitments in the interAmerican agreement and then let me present it along with a demand for a reciprocal promise from them that they won't reintroduce these weapons into Cuba.
We have never let any doubt but that we were not going to make any guaranty at all.
We want some verification of not introducing these then we can make one kind of a guaranty.
Johnson-Some arrangement in Cuba on missiles-something to verify that these weapons are not being reintroduced.
That would mean inspection of the United States and on intervening countries.
Stevenson-I think it would be helpful if we could proceed on the assumption that mutual inspection is something that will have to be worked out over a period of time by the Caribbean Defense Committee.
We will guaranty against invasion by the United States in exchange for Soviet guaranty that they will not reintroduce these weapons in Cuba.
Let's get this transaction completed first and then we will sit down and negotiate what we can do and undertake with Cuba on all of these things.
Unless we have some very clear line that we ought to pursue right now it is difficult to deal with this.
We can say if you don't give us grounds and verification then we must ask for this.
If you do and I don't know what that could be, I don't think they will ever buy it.
They will say we have introduced new matter and we will have another bad time.
I do think that probably we should separate two things-one is the immediate deal with the Russians and the other is future arrangements with Cuba.
On the one with the Russians if we settle with a simple guaranty now and then assume we will run our air reconnaissance, this will present a very serious problem.
It will be asserted into the Security Council over and over, regardless of what we promised.
What we could do is for the future we will have to preserve the line to run reconnaissance flights to assure these weapons will not be reintroduced.
Johnson-Isn't it very difficult for us to give-it seems to me it is very difficult for us to give that guaranty without Cuba in turn having done something.
Stevenson-I think we could ask Cuba to give us a guaranty that she won't introduce these weapons.
I don't want to get in a position where they now want to trade off Guantanamo for something more.
It is the sort of thing we should get some of your views on as promptly as possible.
Somehow we have been able to go through these meetings by saying you will get your guarantees; and then they get into the subject of protocol and a registered agreement.
JohnsonWe hope to get to this at the meeting this afternoon, then we will get something to you.
Stevenson— That is only one verification for compliance it doesn't take care of the future.
McCloy has come to the conclusion that the ground verification is a lot of nonsense and he is against doing it.
Stevenson-I have one other point— this business of the press stories that come from Washington, when we manage to keep this place silent, has caused us grief for two weeks.
Every day there is a new story in the newspapers coming from Washington.
I must have some knowledge in advance of what they are putting out down there, in the State Department, the Defense Department and the White House.
It goes to the Secretary General and we have to unwrap it, it goes to the Russians and we have to clear it up with them.
StevensonWe are at the point here where no one sees anything but Yost and me and our own Mission doesn't know what is going on.
Ball— This is an old problem and we were able to solve it for a week and we have not been able to solve it since.
Stevenson— I would like for you to take it up with Kennedy or Rusk or some one.
Maybe we could do some backgrounding here and leaking of the right stuff to come out.
Maybe we could get some of our stories planted and have the right thing come out at the right time.
I don't like to do it, but we did it years ago when we didn't have any control.
The meeting was opened by the Vice President at the President's request.
Secretary Rusk summarized a draft reply to Khrushchev (copy attached, as well as a copy of the final outgoing letter)./l/ The letter was revised, approved and later delivered to the Soviet Ambassador here.
Secretary Rusk said that Khrushchev had not mentioned IL-28 bombers but referred to a list of weapons which we considered offensive.
If in Finland, or even Sweden, there had developed a government increasingly hostile to you and if then, during a very short period of time-while public and private reassurances were being given-there had been secretly sent to Finland a whole variety of dangerous means of destruction which were discovered only at the last moment, I am sure you know how the Soviet Government and people would have reacted.
At this point the discussion was interrupted and the President brought into the Cabinet Room Mr Aramburu, the former President of Argentina, and introduced him to those present.
The President interrupted to call attention to a news report prominently displayed on page one of the Washington Evening Star alleging that Soviet missiles were being hidden in caves in Cuba.
Mr McCone said the source of this story has been interviewed, but is unwilling or unable to say anything more than he told the press.
The President suggested that Mr McCloy talk to Mr McKelway of the Star and other editors in an effort to persuade responsible editors to check such stories with the government before they print them and to include in the story a statement to the effect that the government has no information to substantiate the report, if such is the case.
The President then began reading the revised draft reply to Khrushchev.
In commenting on the reference to a shift in the balance of power, the President said this statement was not persuasive unless the IL-28 bombers were linked to the entire Soviet action.
He suggested that the reference in the first paragraph to the IL-28 bombers was not obnoxious.
Others said that the Finland paragraph should be saved and used, if necessary, in the next letter.
Secretary Rusk said that we did not have a good contract with Khrushchev but we have to get everything out of their language that we possibly can.
The President commented that the situation was capable of becoming dangerous very quickly.
He thought reference should be made to Soviet military personnel in Cuba and he again stated his support of the reference to Finland.
Both Mr Nitze and Ambassador Thompson disagreed and the Finland paragraph was finally deleted.
There followed a discussion as to whether the public should be informed of our efforts to induce the Russians to take out the IL-28 bombers.
Some felt that our public posture should be calm and not one which would hot things up.
Others felt that we should tell the public of the instructions we had sent last Saturday in an effort to get the Russians to agree to remove the bombers.
Mr Bundy thought we should say publicly that we were discussing the removal of the IL-28 bombers.
Secretary Rusk recommended that we say nothing about the bombers until all the missiles were out.
The President decided that no official comment on the bombers should be made tonight.
The President was informed that Soviet missiles are actually being removed by Soviet ships.
He commented that it was more important to get positive proof of the missiles leaving than it was to get the Soviet bombers out now.
Mr Ball reported that the Russians are permitting us to take pictures of the departing missile ships from helicopters or from United States ships which come along side the Soviet ships.
The Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, Mr Minow, joined the group to discuss the use of two 50watt medium-wave radio stations, one operated by the USIA and the other by the Navy, to broadcast to Cuba.
Acting Director Wilson of USIA reported that nine commercial stations have been broadcasting nightly to Cuba.
The radio time has been purchased by the United States These stations are now anxious to return to their regular programs.
Mr Wilson joined Mr Minow in recommending that the two government-owned stations begin broadcasting this week end under the umbrella of the existing broadcasting of the commercial stations.
Mr Minow said the standard radio band had never before been used by United States -owned stations but there was a compelling need to go ahead as recommended.
There followed a discussion about the feasibility of using airborne television to get through to the Cubans.
Mr Wilson reported that the plane carrying equipment would have to fly within thirty miles from Havana.
In about three weeks after the first telecast, the Cubans could jam the programs so that they could not be received.
Mr Wilson recommended that the airborne television be saved for an emergency.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended ten low-level missions, four over the Port of Havana, two over the IL-28 bomber bases, two over the Port of Isabella, and two over Guantanamo and Santiago.
Secretary McNamara suggested that the President turn down the request for low-level missions over Havana.
General Taylor reported on an abort of a U-2 reconnaissance plane which was half way through its mission when a Soviet radar locked on.
It is not possible to obtain good pictures from planes flying outside the territorial limits of Cuba even from a U-2.
The President asked what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot down.
General Taylor said we would halt further missions and try to find out if the Soviets ordered the shoot-down.
Secretary Rusk urged that we do nothing which would upset the Castro/Mikoyan negotiations now under way in Havana.
Secretary McNamara said we really did not need the low-level missions over Havana because we were checking on the ships as they move out of Cuba.
All Soviet missiles must go as deck cargo because no missile-carrying ships are available to the Russians as of now.
The President returned to his question as to what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot at or shot down.
Mr McNamara reminded the President that we had told the Russians that they were responsible if any of our planes were shot at or shot down.
The President asked the group to remain subject to call and suggested that we try to get the press to act more responsibly by playing down unsubstantiated reports from Cuban refugees about Soviet missiles being hidden in Cuban caves.
But there is really only one major item on the list, beyond the missiles and their equipment, and that is the light bombers with their equipment.
The solution of the Cuban affair was established by my letter to you of October twenty-seventh and your reply of October twenty-eighth.
Finally, my proclamation of October twenty-third entitled ""Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba""/4/ specifically listed bomber aircraft.
These facts were all known at the time of our exchange of letters on Cuba, and so it seems clear to me that our exchange of letters covers the IL-28s, since your undertaking was to remove the weapons we described as offensive.
Your letter says-and I agree-that we should not complicate the situation by minor things.
But I assure you that this matter of IL-28s is not a minor matter for us at all.
It is true, of course, that these bombers are not the most modern of weapons, but they are distinctly capable of offensive use against the United States and other Western Hemispheric countries, and I am sure your own military men would inform you that the continued existence of such bombers in Cuba would require substantial measures of military defense in response by the United States.
These bombers could carry nuclear weapons for long distances, and they are clearly not needed, any more than missiles, for purely defensive purposes on the island of Cuba.
Thus in the present context their continued presence would sustain the grave tension that has been created, and their removal, in my view, is necessary to a good start on ending the recent crisis.
I am not clear as to what items you object to on the list which Ambassador Stevenson handed to Mr Kuznetsov.
I entirely agree with your statement that we should wind up the immediate crisis promptly, and I assure you that on our side we are insisting only on what is immediately essential for progress in this matter.
In order to make our position clear, I think I should go on to give you a full sense of the very strong feelings we have about this whole affair here in the United States.
These recent events have given a profound shock to relations between our two countries.
It may be said, as Mr Kuznetsov said the other day to Mr McCloy, that the Soviet Union was under no obligation to inform us of any activities it was carrying on in a third country.
I cannot accept this view; not only did this action threaten the whole safety of this hemisphere, but it was, in a broader sense, a dangerous attempt to change the world-wide status quo.
But however one may judge that argument, what actually happened in this case was not simply that the action of your side was secret.
Your Government repeatedly gave us assurances of what it was not doing; these assurances were announced as coming from the highest levels, and they proved inaccurate.
I do not refer here only to the TASS article of September, but also to communications which were addressed to the highest levels of our Government through channels which heretofore had been used for confidential messages from the highest levels of your Government.
Through these channels we were specifically informed that no missiles would be placed in Cuba which would have a range capable of reaching the United States.
In reliance upon these assurances I attempted, as you know, to restrain those who were giving warnings in this country about the trend of events in Cuba.
Thus undeniable photographic evidence that offensive weapons were being installed was a deep and dangerous shock, first to this Government and then to our whole people.
In the aftermath of this shock, to which we replied with a measured but necessary response, I believe it is vital that we should re-establish some degree of confidence in communication between the two of us.
If the leaders of the two great nuclear powers cannot judge with some accuracy the intentions of each other, we shall find ourselves in a period of gravely increasing danger-not only for our two countries but for the whole world.
I therefore hope that you will promptly recognize that when we speak of the need to remove missiles and bombers, with their immediate supporting equipment, we are not trying to complicate the situation but simply stating what was clearly included in our understanding of October twentyseventh and twenty-eighth.
This undertaking has already come under attack here and is likely to become increasingly an object of criticism by a great many of my countrymen.
And the very minimum that is necessary in regard to these assurances is, as we agreed, the verified removal of the missile and bomber systems, together with real safeguards against their reintroduction.
I should emphasize to you directly, Mr Chairman, that in this respect there is another problem immediately ahead of us which could become very serious indeed, and that is the problem of continuing verification in Cuba.
Your representatives have spoken as if this were entirely a problem for the Castro regime to settle, but the continuing verification of the absence of offensive weapons in Cuba is an essential safeguard for the United States and the other countries of this hemisphere, and is an explicit condition for the undertakings which we in our turn have agreed to.
The need for this verification is, I regret to say, convincingly demonstrated by what happened in Cuba in the months of September and October.
For the present we are having to rely on our own methods of surveillance, and this surveillance will surely have to be continued unless, as we much prefer, a better and durable method can be found.
We believe that it is a serious responsibility of your Government to insure that weapons which you have provided to Cuba are not employed to interfere with this surveillance which is so important to us all in obtaining reliable information on which improvements in the situation can be based.
It was of great importance, for example, for me last week to be able to announce with confidence that dismantling of missiles has begun.
I think we must both recognize that it will be very difficult for any of us in this hemisphere to look forward to any real improvement in our relations with Cuba if it continues to be a military outpost of the Soviet Union.
We have limited our action at present to the problem of offensive weapons, but I do think it may be important for you to consider whether a real normalization of the Cuba problem can be envisaged while there remains in Cuba large numbers of Soviet military technicians, and major weapons systems and communications complexes under Soviet control, all with the recurrent possibility that offensive weapons might be secretly and rapidly reintroduced.
That is why I think there is much wisdom in the conclusion expressed in your letter of October 26th, that when our undertakings against invasion are effective the need for your military specialists in Cuba will disappear.
And in this connection in particular, I hope you will understand that we must attach the greatest importance to the personal assurances you have given that submarine bases will not be established in Cuba.
I believe that Cuba can never have normal relations with the other nations of this hemisphere unless it ceases to appear to be a foreign military base and adopts a peaceful course of non-interference in the affairs of its sister nations.
These wider considerations may belong to a later phase of the problem, but I hope that you will give them careful thought.
In the immediate situation, however, I repeat that it is the withdrawal of the missiles and bombers, with their supporting equipment, under adequate verification, and with a proper system for continued safeguards in the future, that is essential.
This is the first necessary step away from the crisis to open the door through which we can move to restore confidence and give attention to other problems which ought to be resolved in the interest of peace.
It was drafted the evening of November 6, but not sent until early the following day.
Stevenson, Gilpatric and Yost had a five and half hour mtg with Kuznetsov, Zorin and Mendelevich today.
Fol summary based on uncleared memcon./l/ /1/A 38-page memorandum of conversation of this meeting, which lasted from 4-9:30m., is ibid., 1A October/November meetings.
Stevenson informed Sovs United States not prepared agree to employment Sov ship and preferred UN chartered neutral ship,e., Swedish vessel available in Carribean area.
Noted ICRC would verify all Sov flag ships, Sov chartered ships, bloc ships, and bloc chartered ships.
Kuznetsov argued at length Sovs could speak only for their own ships and perhaps Sov chartered ships, but could not speak for any other country, since that would be violation sovereignty those countries.
Claimed United States approach this problem at variance with Pres's Oct 23 message,/2/ which spoke of ""your""e., Sov ships only.
Stevenson explained quarantine against offensive weapons imposed on all shipping to Cuba regardless of nationality and United States willing replace quarantine temporarily ICRC verification.
Kuznetsov claimed quarantine illegal and USSR could not be expected assist United States in making arrangements which would be substitution for it.
Discussion this subject concluded with Stevenson saying if Sovs refused apply ICRC verification to all vessels with bloc cargoes, United States would have to continue use quarantine with respect all ships other than Sov.
Kuznetsov responded USSR agreed to ICRC ""observation"" Sov Cuba-bound ships and if United States wished use quarantine for other ships, that its own business.
After further exchange re nationality ship to carry ICRC team, Kuznetsov admitted Sov original proposal had been to use either Sov or neutral ship.
Finally indicated neutral ship would probably be satisfactory and agreed give USUN final word shortly.
Stevenson suggested Sovs give United States schedule shipment 42 missiles Kuznetsov had told had been or were in Cuba, as well as time and place for rendezvous with United States Navy ships for verification purposes.
Depending upon operational conditions, presence of missiles on board Sov ships would be verified either from United States vessel or unarmed helicopter through visual observation and photography; one or two missiles should be sufficiently exposed so as to identify them as such but without revealing technical specifications.
Photography necessary for purpose of verifying number outgoing missiles.
Kuznetsov referred to list outgoing Sov ships he had given Stevenson yesterday/3/ and said his understanding was those ships were carrying what United States called offensive arms, including missiles.
Re use of helicopters, observed this new point but said it would be communicated to Sov Govt.
Promised prompt reply 74/ Gilpatric and Kuznetsov agreed exchange call signals both Sov ships and United States Navy vessels concerned, and masters would arrange between themselves time and place rendezvous.
Labinsk would sail on November 6, and Bratsk, Lenin Komsomol, Kurchatov, Anosov, Divnogosk, Volgoles, Polzunov, and Alapaevsk would depart on November 7.
Masters of the Soviet ships had been instructed to inform the United States ships that came along side of the number of missiles they were carrying.
If the United States insisted upon using helicopters in case of bad weather, the Soviet Union had no objection.
Stevenson suggested Sovs furnish number of warheads and schedule their removal, following pattern envisaged for missiles.
Said verification procedure for missiles could be applied to warheads as well, with one difference,e., Geiger counters should be placed close enough to warhead containers to detect radio active material therein.
Gilpatric noted we assumed warheads would be transported in such containers as would not reveal nature of their contents, and we did not ask that they be opened.
Kuznetsov replied he could only repeat what he had said yesterday on subject of warheads, and went on rehashing arguments he had advanced yesterday, stressing that United States complicating matters by raising additional questions while USSR honestly conducting negots and intended scrupulously fulfill its obligations with respect removal what Pres called offensive weapons and all equipment related thereto.
In response to further pressing by Stevenson and Gilpatric, Kuznetsov said he regretted say Sov and United States views on question warheads entirely different.
Stevenson and Gilpatric stressed vital importance question removal warheads, which essential element offensive weapons, and need revert to it at first opportunity.
Protested such interference with conduct our aerial surveillance, which we obliged conduct in absence ground verification to monitor removal of weapons.
Requested Sovs ensure non-recurrence such interference during completion of agreements.
Gilpatric noted this very important matter and if SAM sites continued be deactivated as they had been during past ten days, that would avoid need for United States taking other measures to make its aerial surveillance effective.
Kuznetsov agreed this major question, but claimed it merely demonstrated United States pursuing policy of gross violation sovereignty other states.
Reiterated this and similar arguments which he had used in conversation on this subject with McCloy last week.
Suggested United States stop over-flights now because ""so-called"" offensive weapons now removed and would be shipped out in couple of days; thus no need for over-flights existed.
Refused accept United States statement USSR must take steps to prevent recurrence, on grounds Cuba sovereign state.
Claimed that all this would promote friendly US-Cuban relations and prevent another crisis.
Said if such obligations were assumed, UN presence in Carribean, including territory of US, Cuba and other Latin American countries, should be instituted as proposed by U Thant, for purpose of verifying compliance.
Stevenson and Gilpatric reverted to question over-flights and emphasized extreme gravity with which United States regard any interference over-flights and that we would hold USSR accountable for whatever occurred.
Kuznetsov replied USSR could not take any responsibility; United States would be responsible.
Stevenson recalled yesterday's conversation this subject and quoted relevant portions Pres's and own statements to prove jet bombers had always been included in category offensive weapons.
Stated question IL-28 aircraft was being taken up by Pres with Khrushchev today.
Noted all other matters on which Sovs negative would also have to be taken up in Moscow unless they could be resolved here.
Kuznetsov denied Pres-Khrushchev correspondence referred to IL-28 aircraft and contended United States and USSR had been talking about IRBMs and MRBMs.
While United States had made certain declarations and submitted lists of items, they were unilateral documents and could not be regarded as part of agreement.
Reiterated arguments re obsolescence and non-offensive nature IL-28, and contended only reason why United States raising these additional questions was to complicate matters and protract situation of crisis.
Appealed United States be reasonable and take into account fact steps taken by USSR clearly showed it wished implement agreement.
Stevenson and Gilpatric asked Sovs reflect on unresolved problems so that they could be settled; otherwise sharp, profound and grave disagreement would exist which would have to be referred to higher authority.
Kuznetsov concluded by stating USSR's most sincere desire was not to sharpen US-USSR relations but to take any possible measures to resolve problems and eliminate tensions.
Regretted he had failed convince Stevenson and Gilpatric position correct and expressed hope they would consider Sov views so as to find such solutions as were in interests both sides.
Drafted by Thompson; cleared by Cleveland, U Alexis Johnson, and Rusk; and approved by Thompson.
Dobrynin in conversation with Thompson last night repeated arguments advanced by Kuznetsov on IL-28's.
He said Soviets considered that agreement between President and Khrushchev concerned only missiles.
He said IL-28 was fifteen-year-old model incapable of being sent on long-range mission and would be sitting duck for modern air defense system.
He stated Soviets considered quarantine proclamation illegal and therefore could not take into consideration its list of prohibited weapons.
Thompson pointed out we did not agree with their appraisal of offensive capabilities IL-28's and observed that most Latin American countries did not have modern air defenses.
Dobrynin said Soviets had the feeling they were moving promptly to carry out agreement.
He understood removal of MRBM's had started November second and was expected to be completed by November tenth.
The United States had not only done nothing to carry out agreement but was endeavoring to expand its scope.
Dobrynin asked when and in what form non-invasion guarantee would be made.
Thompson drew attention to fact that invasion had not taken place, and that we had facilitated Soviet ships in quarantine area proceeding to Cuba.
The agreement specifically provided for verification of removal of offensive weapons and Cuban Government appeared to be blocking any UN effort to carry this out.
He pointed out that there appeared to be at least two phases to the problem.
The first was the dismantling and removal of the weapons and the second was assurances against their reintroduction.
Dobrynin asked whether United States guarantee would be given at the end of phase one.
Thompson replied that the Soviets could be sure that we would not invade but he did not see how any formal action on a guarantee of indefinite duration could be taken until longer-range arrangements could be agreed upon.
In this connection, he inquired whether Dobrynin thought some regional arrangement such as an atom-free Latin America or a Caribbean agreement would facilitate Cuban acceptance to verification and control measures, stress-ing that he was speaking personally and had no information on what United States policy would be on such matters.
Dobrynin replied this possibility had been raised by U Thant when he was in Cuba and he personally thought this was hopeful approach.
He inquired whether it would be possible to include Florida or part of Southeastern United States in a Caribbean arrangement.
Thompson replied that while this might raise a number of problems, we had nothing to hide and he would not exclude such possibility.
We will have pictures certainly of missiles aboard six outgoing Soviet ships.
About 90 percent of the missile erectors have been moved to Cuban ports.
The President asked whether we should say something tonight about the outgoing missiles.
The President authorized the Defense Department to say that ships with missiles are leaving Cuba.
Secretary McNamara reported there had been no reaction to today's aerial reconnaissance mission.
A request was made and permission granted to fly five U-2 flights and twelve low-level flights, some to photograph cave areas.
Secretary Rusk said we were heading toward a UN Security Council meeting during which the Russians would announce that there are no Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Secretary General U Thant has put forward a suggestion that the five Latin American Ambassadors in Havana be named as inspectors and travel throughout Cuba.
The President replied that we have a little time now and we should play out our negotiations slowly.
We might make a formal commitment not to invade when the Soviets comply fully by removing the IL-28 bombers and we have assurances that there will be no reintroduction of strategic missiles.
We must continue aerial reconnaissance until a UN substitute is in place or until we have ground inspection.
He asked State to draft a statement covering our plans for continuing inspection.
He said our posture with the Soviets should be such as to avoid the appearance of holding back in the light of the rapid withdrawal of Soviet missiles.
Mr Bundy said the only weapons in the proclaimed list which we must really get out are the IL-28 bombers.
But we must make clear to the Russians that if they retaliate against our surveillance planes they will be held responsible.
The UN is discussing a proposal to send teams to carry out on-the-ground inspection in Cuba.
If we get the IL-28 bombers out we might be prepared to lift the quarantine.
The President then asked for a memorandum spelling out what the Russians had agreed to and what we had agreed to.
Secretary Rusk said the proposal to use the Latin American Ambassadors in Havana as inspectors is a help but it is not complete.
The President said these Ambassadors could look at caves and inspect possible Soviet submarine base sites.
The problem is how we can hurt Castro without a quarantine which stops Soviet ships.
Secretary Rusk said we might ask the Latin American States to break relations and we might tell our allies to get their ships out of the Cuban trade.
Mr Nitze circulated a Defense Department paper on what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot down.
We have a choice of hitting the offending source or if the shoot-down were deliberate, an air attack destroying the IL-28 bombers and the SAM sites.
The President asked at what point we would give up low-level reconnaissance missions.
He asked for a surveillance plan adequate to meet our interests on the assumption that the bombers remain and on the assumption that the bombers are taken out.
He asked the group to meet again tomorrow/6/ to decide whether we should go to the mat on the IL-28 bombers or whether we should say the Soviets have now completed their agreement to remove the missiles and move on to other problems.
Drafted by Thompson and U Alexis Johnson; cleared by Cleveland, Gilpatric, Bundy, and Rusk; and approved by Johnson.
The Soviets take position that KennedyKhrushchev agreement related only to missiles.
They also consider quarantine proclamation an illegal act and that they will ignore list of offensive weapons in that document.
Our primary purpose is to get the MRBM's and IL-28 bombers out and we would be prepared to go far in reducing the list of offensive weapons in order to achieve this purpose.
Any nuclear warheads for missiles, nuclear bombs for aircraft, or any other type nuclear weapon.
With regard to the Komar-class torpedo boats you might, however, inquire whether Soviets intend to furnish any additional craft of this kind.
What we are concerned about are the missiles and bombers with their immediate supporting equipment, and you could explain that point five in your letter to Mikoyan was included to prevent setting up of bases complete except for missiles which could quickly and secretly be brought in.
On submarines you should take the position that we are relying on Soviet assurances against the establishment of submarine bases in Cuba and our assumption that they did not intend to furnish such offensive weapons system to Cuba.
Ball told Bundy about the call from Stevenson saying he was concerned they have not seen the President's reply to Mr K./l/ Ball knows it was agreed it not be sent up to them.
Someone will have to placate him because he is upset about the fact they can't conduct their business unless they at least know what the exchanges are at all levels.
Bundy thought they were too leaky and Ball said he couldn't say that to him because his answer would be they haven't leaked anything and Washington has leaked everything.
Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations-Cuba) Bundy said he knew the substance of what was in the message.
Bundy was afraid if it were sent to him it would be all over the place.
Ball suggested we send it up to him with someone who could show it to him and bring it back.
Ball told him we should do something because he was upset about it, and he is a member of the Cabinet.
Bundy suggested it for his eyes only/2/ and Ball should explain to him the reason we are being edgy about this is the very existence of secret correspondence with K has been a nuisance in the past; the moment anyone says there is a message, we have to show it to Alphand; then we are in trouble-as the message of the 26th shows.
That is the reason for the absolute rigid rule; they don't go anywhere but to people working in Washington and Moscow on the list approved by the President personally.
Stevenson said that unless the Mission knew what was being said at other levels, they could not operate.
In general, it can be stated that our continuing aerial surveillance requirement is to obtain complete high level coverage of Cuba and of the Isle of Pines each thirty days, plus a sufficient number of low-level flights or on site ground inspections to check out specific locations which may appear, from high-level photography or from other intelligence, to be suspicious.
It is estimated that a schedule providing complete higher level coverage of Cuba once every thirty days would allow elasticity in the scheduling of overflights.
This should permit selecting days for flight when the weather was relatively good and therefore should lead to a requirement for no more than approximately six flights per month to produce complete coverage of the island.
In perfect weather conditions, complete coverage of the island could be obtained in one day by four U-2 aircraft.
We do not yet have the capability to provide search coverage of Cuba by oblique photography.
There is a shortage of cameras for this purpose, and for the foreseeable future the oblique technique will not provide adequate coverage of interior locations.
The number of flights required for low-level photography would depend almost entirely on the extent to which suspicions about specific locations arise as a result of high level surveillance or other intelligence and the adequacy of on site ground inspection.
In the absence of reliable ground inspection, low-level surveillance would be required as needed to check suspicious locations.
The minimum requirement would seem to be to schedule a sufficient number of such low-level flights to protect the ""right"" to them even if no suspicious locations were indicated by U-2 photography of other intelligence.
This political consideration would indicate a requirement for perhaps two such overflights a month.
In addition to aerial, and such on site inspection as may be available, we would plan to continue all other avenues of intelligence including continuing surveillance at sea of shipping bound for Cuba.
Any unexplained increase in such shipping would be a ground for increased suspicion.
The missiles are out and we obtain satisfactory on-the-ground inspection.
The missiles are out but we do not obtain satisfaction on ground inspection.
There followed discussion on how pressure could be kept on Cuba without continuing the quarantine.
A proposal was made to ask the allies to put the maximum pressure on Castro so as to avoid a situation in which we would be retaliating for a shoot-down of one of our reconnaissance planes.
Ambassador Thompson urged that we keep the maximum amount of flexibility until Khrushchev replies to our last letter/3/ and until the Mikoyan talks with Castro in Havana are completed.
The President said the key issue is whether we lift the quarantine if the IL-28 bombers don't come out.
He thought we would know more in twenty-four hours about what we should do.
He was inclined not to reimpose the quarantine, but he did favor pressure on our allies to keep their ships out of Cuba.
The first, reimposition of the quarantine, and the second, covert actions against Castro.
Five U-2 flights and ten low-level flights were authorized for tomorrow.
Secretary McNamara reported that there was no reaction to today's flights, but the weather had been bad,e., clouds had obscured the targets.
Fol is summary of this evening's meeting of Stevenson, McCloy, and Yost with Kuznetsov, Zorin and Mendelevich.
Full report follows:/l/ /1/An 18-page memorandum of conversation of this meeting, which took place at the Soviet Mission from 5 to 8:30m., is ibid., 1-A October/November meetings.
Sovs gave us position as of today of nine vessels leaving Cuba carrying 42 missiles.
They pointed out vessels, while commencing voyage in Florida Strait, in fact turning eastward and proceeding through Bahama Strait by Crooked Island.
They said masters of vessels have been given instructions concerning uncovering some missiles and concerning use of helicopters.
Kuznetsov, after declaring Sovs have complied with their commitment to withdraw offensive weapons and that it is now up to us to comply with its commitments of guarantees to Cuba, read list of seven points which he felt should be embodied in our commitment.
These seven points were elaboration of Castro's five points/2/ supplemented by United States acceptance of what Kuznetsov described as U Thant's plan for UN presence in Caribbean, including US, Cuba, and other LA states, to observe carrying out of obligations by all parties.
Stevenson made clear guarantees we envisaged are those defined in exchange of letters between Pres and Khrushchev.
In reply to Stevenson's repeated inquiries about IL-28s and rehearsal of record defining bomber aircraft as offensive weapons, Kuznetsov rigidly maintained Sov position that these were never included in definition of offensive weapons and that Sovs had now fully complied with their commitments to remove offensive weapons from Cuba.
As to warheads Kuznetsov said that Khrushchev's statement that all offensive weapons will be removed from Cuba means that there will be on Cuba no warheads related to such weapons.
He went on to specify that ""such weapons"" means those loaded on vessels and now proceeding to the Soviet Union.
He added that in fact warheads were loaded on board ship and carried out of Cuba immediately after decision to remove missiles had been taken.
This being the case any further talk about verification of removal of warheads is pointless.
Moreover it would be absurd to suggest warheads might be left behind after missiles removed since warheads without missiles are not weapons and cannot be used.
When Stevenson pointed out Sovs had not kept commitments made by Khrushchev for UN verification of dismantling of sites in Cuba Kuznetsov replied that implementation of this verification of course depended on Cuban agreement, which had not been forthcoming.
Guarantee is clear and conditions are clear, he concluded, but transaction is not yet complete.
If Soviet Union would help to complete transaction by removal of bombers and by enabling United States to verify removals of all nuclear components, then we will give guarantees pursuant to exchange of correspondence, in form of declaration in the SC if that appears to be most suitable means.
I thought I would get together with Alex over the weekend,/l/ and we will try to figure out something.
Are we going to want to do more this weekend or do we want to let this thing sit a few days.
This business of reimposition of a quarantine is much too brutal and much too hazardous.
This is the last resort of solution because it would have to be undertaken in an atmosphere where we would be really going it alone, I think.
But there are other things; I wasn't at all satisfied with what we came up with yesterday.
The raw materials are in these papers, but someone has to go work and actually develop the scenario.
One of the immediate questions is how soon do we begin to say in a relatively disagreeable tone that if the bombers don't go the deal is off.
Our view is it is not only off but pressure needs to be applied on this.
Furthermore I think we have to have a fairly definite philosophy about where we are going to aim our barrage-whether we are going to try to let the Russians off the hook to some extent and concentrate on the Cubans, or whether we are going to try to hold their nose strictly to it with whatever consequence there may be.
It might be better— one could just make a shift-OK, we are now going to treat this as a Cuban problem.
As a matter of fact this is what I put forward with McNamara before you came in the meeting yesterday.
Now the Russians are helping it this way, and particularly the Cuban assertion yesterday in the UN which was reported that the bombers were theirs; if we could build up this kind of a set of documentation, then we would be in a position to say we appreciate the Soviet Union had done what it could; that the Cubans are being recalcitrant, and we couldn't possibly give assurances.
Furthermore, since the Soviet Union has indicated that they are not in control of the situation, we must have freedom of action.
But leave the second stage business; then we would start in on pressures on the Cubans.
In the meantime, with a kind of tacit understanding with the SU, this may be the best course.
I think we would do better not to try to do contingency planning; although the President wants work to go on, he won't sit still for the thing that he doesn't know and what I would say to him today is what I would like to do is to ask the Department, let your office be the center, to be the center of production of a respectable plan for a situation in which these things become Cuban property and we react accordingly.
If they say they will get them out, our whole planning problem changes.
I think the President's view is that he would buy this if it doesn't lead him to a nose-to-nose with the Soviets, and he would want the strongest program that doesn't do that.
I think we will probably have to have an Executive Committee meeting later this afternoon,/5/ for news and wrap up for the weekend the best we can.
I think he would probably want to get the thing organized this afternoon if he can.
The President does not want to take a weekend, I am sure, in any way that would complicate process, but the UN isn't going to be a lively forum, and Mikoyan hasn't come back, etc.
The report was sketchy on it./l/ They started off by trying to inject right away at the outset the guarantees and wanted to know why we evaded the subject, etc.
Then we brought it around to the IL-28s and the other items we were interested in, and they keep pulling it back to the guarantee and set forth all of Castro's points in their language.
Now they have asked for an emergency meeting for 1:3072/ I think we are at a point where unless something breaks in Havana or Moscow, or unless they have something new to present today (it might be Mikoyan's return or something from Moscow, I don't know), we are at the point that they have said all the warheads relating to the missiles have been withdrawn.
Whether we are willing to accept a certification that all warheads from planes have been withdrawn and won't be reintroduced, or whether we have to take a position later on the IL-28s; and then do we have another problem in the post-facto verification.
I think that here it is certainly not accepted that we could simply take their word for it because of the fact that in the President's letter itself he specified as one of the conditions some continuing safeguards.
I think what the real posture probably is that unless they are willing to provide for some kind of continuing inspection on the ground which, with Cuban cooperation, might be worked out under the UN arrangement, that we would have to continue to assure ourselves of the situation through the closest kind of surveillance, which would mean continued aerial reconnaissance, etc.
I think we would continue the surveillance without arguing and announce publicly.
I think that is probably right, as far as any specifications of the surveillance is concerned, but I think that we reserve the point on safeguards on the assumption that they have to be some kind of arrangements or something of the sort on the ground.
On this one, I would avoid getting into any specification on the thing.
The reason why they are pressing so hard on Castro's five points, etc. is to make a record for the negotiations in Cuba that they want to be able to go back and tell Castro that they fought his battle to the bitter end, but that there is no give on our side.
I think the way to get a clear definition of position here, which we are going to try to do later this afternoon, but certainly our tentative strategic direction is to say that as far as the Russians are concerned they are doing what they can subject to their being able to control Castro.
We have the option of accepting their arguments that they can't control Castro or trying to take the position that Castro is, after all, just a creature of theirs and holding them to the performance themselves.
We should insist that we still have to have the safeguards provided in the arrangement, which means some form of ground inspection and some form of being able to satisfy ourselves against reintroduction.
But since the guarantees are for the benefit of Castro, without Castro's cooperation in these things, we couldn't possibly give securities.
The advantage of this course is that it permits the Russians to disengage if they want to which would leave us free to pursue other subjects with them without the embarrassment of the Cuban problem, while reserving freedom of action on our own part to deal with Castro.
One is how we liquidate our deal with the Russians as to ground inspection.
What we have to say to them is that we obviously cannot give assurances as long as Castro is in position on the IL-28s which are an offensive weapon and could be used against the other LA countries and against us, nor can we give such assurances unless we have some ability to safeguard ourselves against the reintroduction of weapons into Cuba.
If we are unable to work these things out with Castro, then there is really a problem if the decision is in Castro's hands and it leaves the problem between Castro and ourselves.
I think we have to wait to see what they say at 1:30, whether there has been any reflection from the exchange.
I wonder if you think the time has come that we talk about the alternative of verification of warheads by ship inspection as we proposed and the aerial bombs, or whether we would be inclined to take their certification.
If we get the IL-28 question resolved, then we might consider what is fact-that you have no way of verification.
Gilpatric said AES wanted him to tell Ball that the emergency meeting Kuznetsov called was simply for the purpose of registering a protest about the way three naval ships were acting in intercepting the Russian ships.
They were trying to stop the ships, and one ship wasn't even on the list— Alexandraska.
There was no word about Mikoyan's return, and the Russian Ambassador made a fine speech about Mrs.
Ball asked if they pulled the tarps off and Gilpatric said they have been pulling the tarps off, getting down to what they call the rubber pants, which is enough to get an identification.
Ball asked if the picture looked good enough to be persuasive and Gilpatric replied they thought so; they haven't received them yet.
They show, for example, fins and they show where the conduits were run.
He thought they would correspond with the Red Square pictures sufficiently.
I wonder if you would care to submit this afternoon at the meeting/1/ a suggestion which I could dictate.
It seems to me highly desirable to liquidate-this is all pending, no developments from Moscow or from Castro, I mean Havana.
If this continues this way indefinitely, we are going to start to lose ground here; talks are going to start, and it will reverberate around the country.
Just chew on that for a while and extricate us from the deadlock we are in now.
This would give them their five Castro points in the forum where we can handle it bestin the OAS, and meanwhile get the munitions out of there and the only verification we will ever get on the warheads anyway.
The thing about that is it leaves Castro in an extremely favorable position, doesn't it.
He has lost his aircraft, his missiles, his nuclear striking capability; he has a guarantee against invasion by the United States and nothing else.
He still has his SAM sites and the missiles he never really thought were his anyway.
We are never going to get them, I don't think, without knocking them out.
What disturbs me is from the point of view of the whole American state system, he has come out in a good position.
No, he has given us a guarantee he won't reintroduce these weapons into Cuba and the Soviets have given guarantee that they won't reinstitute.
The point is the problem of verification at the completion of the present transaction is in Castro hands and he isn't playing ball.
Now, mind you this is only contingency planning in the event we don't get any break from Moscow now or ever.
Let me say the majority view here is in favor of doing what you are trying to do which is to draw a line under the Russian undertakings and say we are prepared to accept at face value your statement that you have gone as far as you can go.
First, are we prepared to give him any undertakings at all until he does something himself which would be, I think, from the point of view of most of the people in Washington, which would require more than simply mutual undertakings.
He would really have to provide for some kind of on the spot inspection or something of the sort of continuing presence that would provide some real safeguards or at least the appearance of safeguards.
The alternative approach is maybe the thing to do is to let the Russians disengage along the line that you suggest and say to them you have done everything you can do and thanks very much; we still have the problem of dealing with Castro because our guarantee is with Castro and we may have to deal with him by ourselves and see if the Russians would not be prepared to let it go at that.
As to the future safeguards, the only thing we will get is a promise the Russians won't reintroduce unless we get ground inspection from Castro and Castro will put that on a reciprocal basis.
Therefore tying to liquidate the Russian deal and if we come off with everything we anticipated, then that leaves us with dealing directly with Castro on any future assurances beyond his promise not to reintroduce.
I think you will find there is a great deal of accord on the first part.
You can't impose on Castro obligations to do things because the Russians didn't comply.
Well, but the whole business of giving him an assurance was conditioned upon certain things being done, some of which are in his behalf.
You can withhold the assurance on invasion and cut off now and say we didn't get strict compliance and therefore we are not ground inspection, and the people will say over here they have had virtual support of everything they expect and they are now reneging on their promise.
I just don't want to get in the position of anybody charging us with bad faith or nonperformance on our part.
No intimation from your friend as to when Mikoyan might have something.
No, I think we are stuck here for the present and I think he has got down there and they are just going to work us over on these five points and we won't really achieve anything.
The Department of State sent this memorandum to the White House on November 14.
Unless there is some break from Moscow or Havana-I think the situation is deadlocked, and I suggest trying to conclude the transaction with the Russians to enable us to get into contact with Cuba through the OAS or directly.
If the Soviets will remove the IL-28 bombers and give us some means of verification and formal assurance that all nuclear warheads for missiles and air nuclear bombs have been removed, and 2.
If the Soviets will give us some means (through the five Latin countries having diplomatic relations, for example) verify compliances above ex post facto (I assume our reconnaissance will also verify without any agreement by the Soviets or Cubans), and 3.
If the Soviets and Cuba will give us a formal public promise not to reintroduce these weapons into Cuba, 4.
We will call off the quarantine and give Cuba the formal guarantee against invasion and ask other Latin States to do likewise.
This should be worked out through the OAS, if the other Latin states think it worthwhile.
Adlai E Stevenson/5/ /5/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
Ball told Bundy he hoped to get over to him by 10m. tomorrow a memorandum/1/ which is a general kind of planning memo which incorporates some views of the DOD which came out of their meeting this afternoon.
It amounts to a consideration of direct military action to achieve it or a continued system of surveillance with the expectation of Cuba drawing fire and then taking some action on that.
He is attaching a proposal of Stevenson,/3/ which Ball does not endorse, but which he wanted the President to see on negotiating with Castro.
A note on the source text indicates that it was part of the President's weekend reading for November 10.
He noted that it ""was hastily prepared at the request of the White House"" and that it had been slightly revised since submission to the President.
Ball also noted that the memorandum created the impression that the optional courses of action were mutually exclusive.
Assumption A That the USSR will remove the IL-28s and will arrange adequate ground inspection.
If the removal of the bombers is sufficiently assured and the inspection arrangements adequate, we could presumably regard the incident as closed and give some form of guaranty regarding the invasion of Cuba.
These arrangements would, of course, need to include more than a provision for Second-Phase inspection by the five Ambassadors.
But even that limited progress might indicate a sufficiently forthcoming attitude to make possible some Third-Phase solution through a nuclear-free zone or otherwise.
Assumption B That the USSR will arrange ground inspection, but will refuse to remove the IL-28s on the ground that these are Cuban property.
If the Cubans should agree to yield on the question of adequate ground inspection, then it is hardly likely that they would insist upon the retention of the IL-28s.
Assumption C That the USSR will agree to withdraw the IL-28s, but will assert that they are unable to arrange ground inspection because of alleged Cuban objections.
Assumption D That the USSR will neither remove the IL-28s nor provide arrangements for ground inspection and continuing safeguards.
Khrushchev will excuse his non-performance on the ground that Cuba is a sovereign country, the IL-28s belong to the Cubans, and Castro is unwilling to permit any form of ground inspection.
First, we might take the position that Cuba is effectively a puppet of the Soviet Union since it is economically dependent on Moscow; therefore, regardless of Cuban intransigence, we would continue to look to the Soviet Union to enforce the Kennedy-Khrushchev undertakings.
Or second, we might take at face value the Soviet assertion that Russia cannot control Castro.
In that event we would tacitly or explicitly accept the fact or fiction that Khrushchev had complied to the extent of his ability and thereafter concentrate our pressure on Cuba.
In that event, not only would we refuse to give any assurance of noninvasion, but we would make it clear that we could not tolerate-for reasons not only of our own security but of the security of the Hemisphere— that Castro be left in the possession of offensive weapons.
The shifting of the burden of responsibility would minimize the dangers of a direct confrontation with the USSR, which might escalate into a larger conflict.
It would assist Khrushchev in extricating the USSR from an involvement in Cuba which is proving progressively more costly and less profitable.
It would eliminate the Cuban question from the US-USSR dialogue and thus permit progress on other major issues.
It would provide freedom of action for the United States to deal with Castro directly, both on its own behalf and on behalf of the other American states.
It should be consistent with our position that the United States cannot accept either the continuance of offensive weapons in Cuba or the absence of adequate safeguards against the introduction of new offensive weapons.
It should be designed to undermine the authority and prestige of Castro, both in Cuba and in the eyes of the world.
It should be directed towards setting in motion a train of events that would progressively enhance the American ability to deal decisively with Castro.
Continued systematic aerial surveillance with the strong possibility of provoking interference that might lead to limited or general military action.
I-Direct Military Action As contemplated in a paper prepared by the Department of Defense, direct military action would be taken against the IL-28s.
At the present time it is estimated that such action within the next few days would require attacks on San Mien Air Base with 16 F101 strike aircraft armed with napalm, 2.75"" rockets and 20mm ammunition, accompanied by 8 F-104/F8U aircraft equipped with GAR 8 missile to fly low level CAP, on Holguin Air Base with 8A4D aircraft armed with napalm and Zuni rockets and 8F8U-2/F4H aircraft as CAP equipped with Sidewinder/Sparrow missiles and 20mm ammunition (with suppression provided by 8F8Us armed with Zuni rockets and 20mm). ""b.
If the attack is delayed beyond the next 48 hours, dispersal of IL28s may require attack on additional airfields.
In the absence of air counter action, the attack should be strictly confined to the destruction or serious damaging of the IL-28 aircraft by the most precise air attack means available.
With its preponderant military strength the United States could promptly deal with any Cuban reaction.
Arguments Against Direct Military Action It would be regarded as a direct attack against Cuba and the Soviet Union might feel compelled to intervene on Cuba's behalf in order to save face, or react elsewhere.
In the absence of any direct Cuban attack on the United States or any other OAS country, world opinion might tend to regard the United States action as excessive-particularly in view of our own maintenance of bomber bases around the world and the disparity in size and resources between the United States and Cuba.
The UN has been frustrated in its attempt to establish adequate inspection of incoming ships.
The UN has been frustrated in its attempts to establish adequate on-site inspections.
The United States will maintain the present quarantine until the bombers are removed and adequate on-site inspections, including appropriate long term agreements, are achieved.
The United States supports the Brazilian Resolution and believes that it may offer an adequate long term solution, not only to the present crisis, but to future crises of this kind.
If the Cubans fail to comply, the United States will have to consider taking additional steps.
If no steps are taken to remove the bombers as a result of this statement, then the United States should extend the quarantine to petroleum, reiterating our position that we will lift the quarantine if the bombers are removed and adequate inspection is permitted.
The Cubans are estimated to have 60 days' supply of gas and diesel fuel oil, and approximately 1 10 days' supply for power and industrial use.
Arguments for Quarantine At the present time not only the OAS but the NATO countries strongly support our insistence on adequate inspection— and, perhaps to a lesser extent, on the removal of the IL-28s.
The Soviet Union might be willing to withhold the further supply to Cuba of items on the proscribed list in order to reduce its investment in a rapidly wasting asset; for this reason it might secretly welcome a United States blockade.
The quarantine might result in the strangulation of the Castro regime without any direct loss of life.
The imposition of a quarantine on shipments of POL would be directly relevant to the immobilization of the IL-28s.
Arguments Against Quarantine The renewed quarantine would be a direct challenge to the Soviet right of free sea transit.
It would thus fail to meet one of the criteria listed earlier-an action directly operating only on Cuba.
Khrushchev yielded to the threat of our quarantine once by turning his ships around.
He could not afford the humiliation of doing so a second time— especially after the missiles have been removed and he has claimed to have complied fully with his undertakings.
Khrushchev was willing to pull back his ships carrying sophisticated weapons to safeguard USSR technology.
The USSR could not stand idly by while the economy of a Socialist state was slowly strangled; the loss of face and appearance of impotence would be too high a price for it to pay.
The quarantine would be resented by several of our NATO friends, including the UK, which never acknowledged its legality.
They acquiesced before because the limited quarantine did not affect their trade; they might well refuse to recognize a blockade which cut off valuable shipping of POL-particularly since there is a fairly widespread feeling that we have already won our point by expelling the missiles.
III— Enforced Aerial Surveillance It is suggested that, instead of reimposing the blockade, we should undertake a systematic and unremitting air reconnaissance over Cuba, both high and low until such time as Castro yielded on inspection and the removal of the IL-28's; Castro was overthrown; or The reconnaissance provoked an armed response that justified our taking direct military action enabling us, at least, to eliminate the IL-28's.
Arguments for Reconnaissance This course could be justified under the authority of OAS action.
It would be thoroughly consistent with our position that we could not tolerate a situation in which we neither had safeguards against the introduction of offensive weapons nor adequate observation to insure that offensive weapons presently in Cuban hands would not be used.
No Government can permit national air space to be constantly invaded without demonstrating its weakness, both at home and abroad.
Castro could not continue for very long to stand down his planes and restrain his anti-aircraft fire without publicly acknowledging his own weakness.
The result would be that sooner or later he would almost certainly attack our planes, which would permit an escalating scale of reprisal and counter-reprisal that could permit us to deal conclusively with the problem of Castro.
IVSolution Through Security Council Arrangements This course of action is explained and recommended in the attached memorandum of Governor Stevenson.
CONCLUSION The Problem of Choice Direct action against Cuba on the basis suggested in Section I can probably be ruled out.
Such a course of action would probably be regarded by world opinion as excessive, and it would involve grave risks of provoking retaliation elsewhere in the world.
The decision between these alternative lines of policy turns in large part on a judgment as to the extent to which Khrushchev might in fact be prepared and able to disengage from Cuba.
If, as a result of Castro's obduracy, he could cut his investment and leave Cuba without specific security commitments, he might be willing to turn his back while the United States took advantage of the opportunities provided by Castro's response to continued-and necessarily harassing-low and high level surveillance.
On the other hand, if it is felt that Khrushchev could not sit idly by while we forcibly eliminated the IL-28's and wiped out the SAM sites, the surveillance course might appear too dangerous.
If the quarantine route is followed no military action need be taken directly against Cuba; therefore, Khrushchev would not be called upon to respond to what he must necessarily denounce as imperialist aggression.
Under these circumstances Khrushchev might be prepared to see Cuba go down the drain through the slow strangulation of a blockade.
But the vice of the blockade is that it directly engaged the prestige of the USSR since it interferes with the freedom of movement of the Soviet merchant fleet.
Khrushchev would have to denounce the United States for piracy-as he has already done-and for seeking to starve a small country whose only fault is its allegiance to Communism, and his supine acquiescence in that piracy would be read by all the world as a humiliating confession of impotence.
The existence of substantial doubt regarding the answer to this question suggests that before a quarantine were reimposed some effort might be made to sound out Soviet reactions.
In response to the President's question, General Taylor said that SAC is still on DEFCON 2.
The President suggested that the level of alert might be reduced toward the end of the week, but he did not wish to make a decision now.
Secretary McNamara said any reduction in the state of readiness of United States forces would be a sign to the Soviet Union.
However, SAC should stand down as soon as possible because the present alert involves burning out large amounts of spare parts.
The air defense units should also stand down, but this could not be done without giving a signal to the Russians.
Secretary McNamara said he would recommend later this week when the reserve air defense units called up last month should be returned to civilian life.
McCone noted that assembly of IL-28s was continuing, that the Soviet Union had given Cuba $550 million in military equipment and spare parts since August 1, 1962, and therefore Castro had the ability to support subversion all over Central America and the Caribbean as well as in the northern tier of South American countries.
Secretary Rusk reported there had been no change over the week end on the political side.
We had received no reply from the Russians on the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers from Cuba.
U Thant's proposal to name five Latin American Ambassadors as inspectors has encountered Cuban objections.
An effort is being made to sell the idea of choosing any five Ambassadors agreeable to the parties concerned.
The Soviets are refusing to give in on the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers and are insisting on the five points which Castro put forward some time ago.
Ambassador Stevenson said his proposal was aimed at ending the negotiations.
Before presenting it to the Russians we would consult the major Latin American states to see if it was acceptable to them.
If they came back with counterproposals, we might have to add to the package such things as an agreement to allow inspection of Cuban camps in the United States If it is rejected, we should avoid unilateral action as is proposed in the State Department papers 74/ We should make every effort to go with the Latin American states and keep them unified with us.
Secretary Rusk said he agreed we should continue to follow a policy of seeking multilateral actions.
He urged that we stay on our original course until we get a reply from Khrushchev.
He preferred this course to Stevenson's suggestion of putting forward a new proposal now.
The President asked whether we should give a guarantee against invading Cuba if the Russians refused to withdraw the IL-28 bombers.
If the Soviets refused to withdraw the bombers, we should make a full statement in the UN Security Council.
Mr McCloy, who has been taking an active part in the negotiations, recommended that we make the following offer to Kuznetsov.
If the Russians would agree to take out the IL-28 bombers by fixed future date, we would lift our quarantine at once.
He said he believed Khrushchev was under real pressure and urged that we deal with the Cuban problem from a world point of view and with regard to United States /USSR relations rather than as a United States /Cuba problem.
He suggested that we talk about normalization in the Caribbean and offer to talk to the Russians about other problems.
We should make an informal approach to him now before he comes down very hard in opposition to further measures necessary to resolve the Cuban crisis.
Ambassador Stevenson again urged that we put our final position to the Russians before they put their final position to us.
Secretary Dillon asked how the United States could give an assurance not to invade Cuba without some safeguard covering the reintroduction of strategic missiles to Cuba.
Ambassador Stevenson replied that we could rely on aerial reconnaissance plus promises from the Cubans and the Russians.
Secretary Rusk asked whether we should lift the quarantine if the Russians promised to withdraw the IL-28 bombers.
He felt we should maintain our insistence on aerial surveillance and on on-site inspection but lift the quarantine if the Russians promise to take out the IL-28s.
Mr McCloy suggested that we tell the Russians we would give a guarantee if they took certain actions.
The President said he did not want any assurances we might give to be included in any document more formal than a letter.
In response to the President's comment that the ideal arrangement would be a monthly on-site inspection, Ambassador Stevenson said we can't get on-site inspection.
Our only hope is to reach some mutual understanding about inspection, such as counting the missiles as they go out on Soviet ships.
Secretary Rusk said we must have some way in which to answer the waves of reports that offensive missiles are still being put into Cuba by the Russians.
Mr McCloy suggested that we could hold the Russians to the commitment made in the October 26th Khrushchev letter ,151e., that the Russians would not bring in any weapons.
The Attorney General raised again the question of how we could prove that the Russians are not delivering new arms to Cuba.
Referring to the TV Today show,/6/ the President asked that within twenty-four hours our officials interrogate every Cuban refugee who was making statements about arms going to Cuba.
The refugees are naturally trying to build up their story in an effort to get us to invade.
We must get to the people the fact that the refugees have no evidence which we do not have.
Such refugee statements, if they continue, could make the problem almost unmanageable.
He suggested again that we arrange to check every press, radio and TV report made by a refugee and promptly report back to the media involved if there was no evidence behind the refugee allegations.
General Taylor raised the question of how we ensure the continuation of necessary aerial reconnaissance in the long range.
Mr McCone pointed out that if the SAM sites are operational, we cannot ensure the continuance of aerial reconnaissance with U-2s.
The President said we should conduct the aerial reconnaissance we consider necessary.
He asked whether we should tell the Cubans we are continuing reconnaissance or just go ahead and do it.
Ambassador Stevenson replied that we cannot tell the Cubans because they would oppose our reconnaissance.
The President said our reconnaissance can be based on the OAS resolution/7/ if no other position is acceptable to the Russians.
Secretary Rusk commented that no secrecy is possible in this hemisphere.
Ambassador Stevenson said ex post facto verification of the removal of the Soviet missiles is one problem.
Continuing verification that missiles are not being reintroduced is another problem.
The Attorney General pointed out that these two problems were not separable.
He wanted to know what we tell the American people we are doing to prevent the reintroduction into Cuba of Soviet strategic missiles.
We must have an acceptable guarantee that there will be no reintroduction of missiles.
We can't live without taking some action which ensures us that we know whether or not he is complying with a statement on non-reintroduction of missiles.
The President suggested that we say we are taking every means to ensure that there is no reintroduction of missiles.
Ambassador Stevenson agreed that we should just overfly Cuba and not say we were doing so.
We should get the OAS to say that this hemisphere cannot live with a Cuba which is promoting subversion and action will be taken, if necessary, to prevent Cuban subversion.
The President commented that an assurance covering invasion does not ban covert actions or an economic blockade or tie our hands completely.
Secretary Rusk said we cannot unilaterally amend the Rio Treaty 78/ Any assurance which we would give does not affect the provision in the Rio Treaty which allows invasion under certain circumstances.
Ambassador Stevenson said we had to decide whether to give the Soviets a package proposal before hearing from Khrushchev or hold off until we had the Russian reply.
If we decide on making a package proposal we must decide whether it is a full package or a partial package.
The President read the proposed wording of an assurance we would give against invasion.
He suggested that any assurance which is made should appear as a restatement of undertakings in the UN Charter and the Rio Treaty rather than as a new commitment.
Secretary Rusk suggested that no formal statement be given to the press today.
The President asked that a short statement be prepared for him to look at at a 4:00 meeting which would say we are waiting for a Russian reply to our demand that they remove the IL-28 bombers.
Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, November 12, 1962.
PRESIDENT, I would like to express my satisfaction that the mutual obligations taken in accordance with the exchange of messages between us are being carried out both by your side and our side.
One can say that certain favourable results are already seen at this time.
We appreciate your understanding of the situation and your cooperation in carrying out the obligations taken by our side.
And I would like to inform you that our obligations with regard to dismantling and removal of both missiles and warheads have already been fulfilled.
We appreciate that we must come to an agreement with you regarding the mutually acceptable means for your side to ascertain that we really carry out our obligations.
What has already been achieved in the course of negotiations between our reprsentatives-Kuznetsov, McCloy and Stevenson-and the cooperation reached in the process of these negotiations is a good thing.
The same should be said about the cooperation between captains of our ships, which were taking our missiles from Cuba, and corresponding United States ships.
This is very good, this has created an impression that your side also wishes to cooperate, eliminating the remnants of the tension which only yesterday were very dangerous both for our two peoples and for the peoples of the whole world.
Thus, if we proceed from our understanding which was expressed in your message of October 27/1/ and in our reply of October 28,/2/ then we, the Soviet side, have carried out our obligations and thereby have created possibility for complete elimination of tension in the Caribbean.
Consequently, now it is your turn, it is for your side to carry out precisely your obligations.
We have in mind that apart from the long term obligations that the United States itself will not attack Cuba and will restrain other countries of the Western Hemisphere from doing that, the most important thing which is required today is to give moral satisfaction to world public opinion and tranquility to peoples.
And what is required from your side to that end is to lift the so-called quarantine and of course to stop violating the territorial waters and air space of Cuba.
If this continues confidence in your obligations will thus be undermined which can only grieve world public and throw us back to the positions to which we must not return after the liquidation of such a dangerous situation.
At present, we must-and we are convinced in that-look forward and draw necessary conclusions from what has happened up till now and from the good which followed due to the efforts of both sides.
Therefore, we believe that conditions are emerging now for reaching an agreement on the prohibition of nuclear weapons, cessation of all types of nuclear weapons tests and on all other questions which are ripe and require solution.
You have already ended your tests and we shall probably also end our tests in November or at least before the end of this year.
Now it is also necessary to think of some real measures with regard to the question of ensuring more stable security in the world.
In this connection we attach great importance to your statement that the United States is ready to support idea of a non-aggression pact between NATO and the Warsaw treaty countries.
But the basic question, of course, remains that of disarmament, of destroying the whole war machine of states.
To give more assurance on the first stage it might be expedient to return to the proposals forwarded by us some time ago on the establishment of observation posts on mutual basis at airfields, in major sea-ports, at railway junctions, on highways.
This would exclude a possibility of a surprise attack if any side does not behave honestly, if it wants to concentrate military equipment and its troops for an attack.
It goes without saying that the question of a German peace treaty still remains and we can not escape from solving it.
Moreover what we and you have lived through makes a speediest solution of this question still more imperative.
I do not name other unresolved questions, we have plenty of them, I name only the main problems, on the solution of which the destinies of the world largely depend.
Now about the matter that, as you state, worries you today-about the IL-28 planes which you call an offensive weapon.
We have already given you our clarification on this point and I think you can not but agree with us.
However, if you do not agree-and this is your right-ask your intelligence after all and let it give you an answer based not on guesswork but on facts.
If it really knows anything it must tell you the truth and namely that it is long since the IL-28's have been taken out of production and out of use in our armed forces.
And if some planes still remain now-and a certain number of them have been brought by us to Cuba— that was done as a result of your action last year when you increased the budget and called up reservists.
We on our part had to take measures in response at that time, having postponed taking those planes out of use as well.
Had there been no such action on your part we would not have IL-28's in existence because they would have been used for scrap.
If your intelligence is objective it must give a correct appraisal of these 12-year-old planes and report to you that they are incapable of offensive actions.
We brought them to Cuba only because they can be used as a mobile means of coastal defense under the cover of anti-aircraft fire from their own territory.
They can not however fly beyond the limits of that cover since they will be immediately destroyed either by modern anti-aircraft means or by simple conventional artillery; not to speak of interceptors before which they are entirely defenseless.
But all this must be known not only to the intelligence but to all engaged in military matters.
Nevertheless we regard your concern with understanding, though on our part we share the desire of the Government of Cuba to possess defensive weapons which would permit to defend the territorial integrity of its country.
Therefore if you meet this with understanding and if we agreed with you on solving other questions in implementing the mutually assumed obligations then the question of IL-28 bombers would be solved without difficulties.
Consequently you should not have any fears that they can be used to do harm to the United States or other neighboring countries in Western Hemisphere.
And since you and your allies in Western Hemisphere have taken an obligation not to invade Cuba then it would seem this weapon should not pose any threat for you.
If the enemy were threatening us with such weapon we would ignore that threat completely for it would cause us no anxiety whatsoever.
But because you express apprehension that this weapon can be some sort of a threat to the United States or other countries of Western Hemisphere which do not possess adequate defensive means we state to you as a guarantee that those planes are piloted by our fliers and therefore there should be no misgivings that they could be used to the detriment of any state.
As you ascertained yourself we have removed the missiles, we also removed everything else related to missiles, all the equipment necessary for their use and recalled the personnel manning those missiles.
Now that the missiles are removed the question of IL-28's is an incomprehensible argument because that weapon as I have already said is of no value as a combat weapon at present, to say nothing of the future.
Let us come to an agreement on this question as well, let us do away with tension, let us fulfill the mutual pledges made in our messages.
Therefore we give a gentleman's word that we will remove the IL-28 planes with all the personnel and equipment related to those planes, although not now but later.
We would like to do that some time later when we determine that the conditions are ripe to remove them.
I think that an agreement on such basis will enable us to complete the elimination of all the tension that existed and will create conditions for life to resume its normal course, that is the blockade would be immediately removed; the pledges of the sides would be registered in the appropriate documents in the United Nations Organization; non-invasion of Cuba and strict observance of her sovereignty guaranteed; the UN posts established in the countries of the Caribbean so that neither one nor the other side would indeed undertake any unexpected actions to the detriment of another state.
This would be the best solution which can be anticipated especially having in mind the tension that we lived through and the abyss we came to.
And I believe, Mr President, that you yourself understand that we were very close to that abyss.
But you and we soberly and wisely appraised the situation and maintained self-control.
What happened should now prompt us to make new great efforts so that no repetition of such events should be allowed because if we succeeded in finding a way out of a dangerous situation this time, next time we might not safely untie the tightly made knot.
And the knot that we are now untying has been tied rather tightly, almost to the limit.
We displayed an understanding with regard to the positions of each other and came out of a critical situation through mutual concessions to the satisfaction of all peoples of the world.
Let us now give joy to all peoples of the world and show that this conflict really became a matter of yesterday, let us normalize the situation.
And it would be good if on your part efforts were made to make the normalization a complete, real normalization and it is necessary to do this in the interests of all peoples and this is within our power.
Mr Bundy summarized Khrushchev's reply/1/ to the President's message of November 6th.
The IL-28 bombers might come out at some point, but would be removed under Soviet control.
There was a discussion of the McCloy offer which involved lifting the quarantine in return for the Russian promise to take out the IL-28 bombers.
The question of safeguards against the reintroduction of strategic weapons would not be raised now because we have a limited set of unilateral safeguards to use which we do not want to lose.
Secretary Rusk said that there was an issue over whether the Soviet commitment on missiles and warheads was to be public or private.
The President said we could live for two weeks with no public knowledge of the Soviet commitment.
Mr Bundy commented that the IL-28 bombers appear not to be a sticking point.
The President said we still have the questions of continued surveillance and the form of an assurance against invasion.
We could set the IL-28s off against the quarantine and our assurances against invasion off against safeguards covering reintroduction of missiles.
Ambassador Stevenson referred to the words in Khrushchev's reply ""at some point"" and commented that this was not a specific time but meant that the bombers would come out when Khrushchev gets what he wants, such as assurances against an invasion.
Ambassador Thompson said that the timing of our commitment not to invade was important to Khrushchev because the Communist Central Committee will be meeting in Moscow soon.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we concentrate on a deal involving the quarantine offset against withdrawal of the bombers, but that we add that to the other subjects to be discussed.
Mr Bundy suggested we might tell Khrushchev that he should give the order to remove the bombers, that we would then check on their removal, and verifying that the bombers had left, we would lift the quarantine.
There was a discussion of the alternatives which consist of a public announcement that the bombers are coming out or verifiable proof that the bombers are being recrated, plus private assurances that they will be removed.
The question of whether we should ask the Russians to remove them within thirty days was raised.
The consensus was that Khrushchev should be told that he should give the order to remove the bombers, and when we observe the crated bombers leaving Cuba on Soviet ships, we will lift the quarantine.
The public reason a second meeting had been held today was because the group's business had not been finished in the morning.
The President approved up to five U-2 flights and ten low-level sorties for tomorrow.
Editorial Note At 8:30m., on November 12, 1962, Robert F Kennedy went to the Soviet Embassy's reception for the Bolshoi Ballet.
Khrushchev and the President agree in principle that the IL-28 aircraft shall be withdrawn within a certain period of time.
Following this agreement the United States will immediately, even tomorrow, lift all quarantine, without waiting for the completion of the aircraft pullout.
The United States side would, of course, prefer that the agreed time period for withdrawing the IL-28 aircraft were made public.
However, if the Soviet side has any objections to making it public, the President will not insist.
Arthur M Scheslinger, Jr., in Robert Kennedy and His Times, writes an account of the Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting, page 549.
This was not one of the official numbered Executive Committee meetings.
Purpose of the meeting was to crystalize policy concerning procedures to be followed in view of information received on November 12th concerning the disposition of IL 28s and other matters.
Kuznetsov requested meeting with McCloy at 3:00 o'clock;/l/ it was expected that this meeting might reveal Soviet position.
In view of this, no firm policy position was developed, although there was an extended discussion of our position with regard to the IL 28s and also the question of inspection.
It was agreed that the IL 28s must be removed, and if they were removed, we could remove the quarantine.
If the IL 28s are not removed, then it was felt we could take several steps to exert more pressure on Castro and the Soviets, and these would involve a meeting of the OAS to restate their policy, a statement by the President indicating non-compliance on the part of the Soviets, economic measures by the OAS, and a tightening of the quarantine.
It was felt that one or several of these steps could be taken to extract a commitment to remove the bombers.
However, we should not make a ""no invasion"" commitment unless appropriate measures for inspection were agreed upon by the Soviets and Castro.
McCone took a strong position covering the points outlined in attached memorandum of November 13th, warning against the serious long term outlook for Cuba and indicating that he felt the Soviets were trading on Castro's position and they in effect, could dictate Castro's terms if they so desired.
Meeting did not seem disposed to go as far as McCone recommended, although the Vice President strongly supported this position.
Also at a meeting on Monday, November the 12th at 5:30 in the White House with all present,/3/ Mr Bundy outlined the substance of a communication which had been received, expressing Khrushchev's views in response to the exchange of letters of November 5th and 6th.
It was decided that the communication needed study and hence its receipt was noted and a meeting arranged for the following day.
It can be said that through the removal of the missiles (and we must assume but do not know positively that all are removed) and the removal of the IL 28 s the threat to the security of the United States and the Latin American states from a nuclear strike is removed.
One, no means have been established to reasonably guarantee that offensive missiles will not be reintroduced or, if offensive missiles remain on the island, that they will not be secretly placed in operational status.
Aerial surveillance will help, but will not guarantee our ability to detect such an activity.
Ground inspection would if properly organized and granted freedom of movement.
But this has been denied by Castro and the denial is now supported by Mikoyan.
Furthermore, the SAM sites if operating can effectively deny aerial inspection.
There can be no explanation for Soviet insistence on leaving the SAM sites except to shield future clandestine emplacement of offensive weapons such as MRBMs and IRBMs if the Soviets choose at some future time to reintroduce these weapons systems.
A combination of aerial inspection and properly organized ground inspection would give an effective guarantee against reintroduction of missile systems.
The ground inspectors would have to have freedom of action so that they could make on-site checks of the ever increasing refugee and agent reports of the storing of missiles and their equipment in caves, which cannot be totally dismissed.
Therefore prior to a ""no invasion"" commitment we must have complete arrangements for inspections and they cannot be frustrated by either the Soviets or Castro.
He also now has amphibious equipment capable of supporting insurgency movements against any of the Caribbean, Central American states or states in the northern tier of South America.
Castro has never changed in his determined effort to subvert these states.
He has trained insurgents by the thousands; there are large numbers, they are in Cuba now in training.
His insurgents are directed against a number of Central and South American states.
He repeatedly expresses violent intentions against the organized governments of these states.
Therefore one can only conclude that he would use his newly acquired amphibious lift and a substantial part of his excess arms to support insurgents who can readily overthrow neighboring governments.
Our policy should anticipate this and should be designed to take action regardless of how extreme to remove this threat if the eventualities mentioned above materialize.
There is no time on the dateline of the memorandum, but the call had to have taken place after 6:40m. when the meeting between Stevenson and Kuznetsov concluded.
Stevenson-Kuznetsov started by saying that he had a very serious protest against the over-flights over Cuba./l/ They were unlawful in that they violated Cuban airspace, and they would only make negotiations more difficult.
The Soviets understood the categorical objections of the Cubans, and these were a violation of the feelings and integrity of the Cubans.
The Americans have no convincing arguments for continuing such over-flights which only injure the feelings of the Cubans and increase tension.
He hopes the United States will consider this protest with due attention.
Our answer was that the President's letter provides for UN observation and supervision of the fulfillment of this agreement.
That has not been possible because the Soviet Union was unable to make such arrangements; we have had to use this means of reassuring ourselves that there was in fact compliance.
They have enabled us to detect what went, what was going on in Cuba, and we must continue to use these over-flights until the IL-28's are removed and any suggestion that they should be ended is most disquieting.
There is also a 25-page memorandum of conversation of the meeting, which lasted from 3:15 to 6:40m., in USUN airgram 24, November 14, 2:30m.
Ball-But you didn't say that we would have to continue until the IL-28's were removed.
Kuznetsov said regarding on-site inspection by the UN and the allegations that the Soviets did not fulfill its obligation, the obligation stated in Khruschev's letters of Oct. and 28/2/ on which they base their position.
In the letter of the 27th he spoke of agreement in principal for verification and stressed that it could be done only by agreement of the Cubans.
On Oct., he referred to the letter of the 27th, and then he went on to say that he believes that the Soviets have made many efforts to prove that they are doing everything to come to an agreement with the United States in order to assure us that the obligations would be fulfilled.
They permitted ship-side verification of the removal of the missiles, and that he is here to explain our position and settle this problem.
He believes that all conditions have been created to solve all of our questions in a spirit of mutual confidence in order to normalize the situation in the Caribbean.
They had gone further than the agreement in the letter in fact by removing the missiles when the President had only asked for them to be rendered inoperative and the sites dismantled.
Then he started off on the usual say about the IL-28's not being offensive, but only defensive, and he volunteered to tell us in detail why they could not be included, were not included, in the agreement between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
They are over foreign territories; they create indignation and disrespect for the sovereignty and are a violation of the Charter and international law.
If the parties could come to an agreement, all people would be relieved.
As to the proposition that the U-2 had prevented war, what had prevented war was the patience and understanding of K and K, and that they had noted that the leaders could come to agreement quickly, so all questions could be decided if there was a desire to settle them on both sides.
They don't think that the U-2 violation of air-space eases tensions; it only aggravates them.
He recalled the incident of May, 1960 and the increased tensions resulting from the failure of the Summit Conference in Paris.
Also, the recent U-2 flights over the Soviet Union didn't make the situation more favorable.
Also the low altitude planes before the eyes of the Cubans are a source of great irritation.
Continued flights indicate that the United States does not recognize international law and that they are not in the interest of peace or settlement about Cuba.
In answer we said, we quoted the letters of Oct. and 28 on the agreement for UN observation and supervision to verify compliance.
McCloy referred again to the fact that these photos had helped stability; they disclosed facts that had been denied and the secrecy with which these weapons had been placed, and suggested that they now be stopped before other assurances contemplated by the agreement were completed would be very disquieting.
I said that the way to stop these aggravations of Cuba is to conclude this agreement to remove the weapons as quickly as possible.
We had tried to accommodate the realities of the situation to help conclude it, and that we expected them to do the same.
The best hope for an improved climate is to end this episode as quickly as possible, and to let us hear the Soviet proposals for safeguards against reintroduction of these weapons in the future.
Kuznetsov said that he agreed on desirability of prompt solution; that they were making every effort to solve; if the matter were still prolonged, it was the United States that doesn't show the same approach to the desirability of the solution that they did.
I referred to the President's letter of Oct. with regard to the removal of the quarantine without delay and as to the UN, that they had agreed to stop building the bases and to dismantle them, and that he had gone even further, that they had actually withdrawn the weapons, the missiles from Cuba.
That that could have been done only on a final settlement after verification by the UN, had they chosen to interpret the agreement that way.
In other words, the Soviet Union has done everything possible to complete the agreement.
The United States had fulfilled obligations in some document to be presented to the Security Council.
That they too could put forward many questions to prolong the agony if they wanted to.
The time has come to agree on all matters and draft a document for the Security Council.
They said they wanted to clarify the position of the Soviets on other questions.
They discussed McCloy's thing that there should be no secrecy and that to achieve this we have to complete disarmament.
The United States had refused to accept their proposals to start such observation over some parts of the United States and the SU; also the Soviet proposal to establish observation posts together with certain disarmament measures.
They said that Mr McCloy said that flights over the Caribbean clarified the situation.
That the way to do it was that we would engage in no recriminations about who was responsible to the prolongation of the discussion.
That if they didn't know how to do it, we could only repeat what we have said before on many occasions.
That was to remove the IL-28s and give assurances with respect to removal of all nuclear components, obtain from Cuba its cooperation for observation, verification, give us their assurances against reintroduction of such weapons and their suggestions for the safeguards for the future.
As to what we, the United States, would do-as the agreement says, we would lift the quarantine and then we would give assurances regarding no invasion.
Then I went on to say indeed we would lift the quarantine now if the Soviet Union would give us the promise that it was going to remove the IL-28 bombers within, say, three weeks-and the warheads.
AES-That I would defer any discussions of the open skies until some other time as we had all we could manage to resolve this problem at the present.
Jack enlarged on the ending of the quarantine on the assurances of the removal of the IL-28s now.
This was a further concession on our part and meanwhile we would have to continue the reconnaissance flights to confirm the fact of removal of the 28s.
Then Kuznetsov came back and said regarding the 28s you know our position— that they are defensive weapons and can't be regarded otherwise.
We must be trying to delay working out the final guarantees; that we should be talking about a document containing all of our obligations to be presented to the Security Council.
That the United States should say to them how we envision working out such a document contemplated by the letter.
Regarding the reintroduction of these weapons into Cuba that they would obey strictly the letter of Chairman Khrushchev.
Now as to the IL-28 s they will study and they will consider the United States suggestion, but they want us to know that the Soviet position ""as it now stands"" is clear.
In response I listed the things that we expected the Soviet Union to do; that the quarantine was already lifted; that we had only one remaining obligation and that was the declaration of the SC regarding the assurances on invasion.
As to the language on assurances and safeguards we would refer the matter to Washington and we would be glad to discuss our language along with theirs.
Kuznetsov said he was not going to deal with the previous questions which had been reviewed during the afternoon but regarding the IL-28s that he must make a further clarification.
He wished the United States to understand that they reaffirm their position; that the IL-28s are defensive but that he would report the consideration advanced by the United States to his Government and then we adjourned.
We got the impression today for the first time it looked as though Mikoyan might be waiting to hear from Kuznetsov on what he could get on the overflights and on the guarantees.
I thought on the whole it was a more constructive meeting than we had had since the beginning.
He obviously had been fully briefed on the letter and knew it by heart.
He spoke again from documents much of the time rather than just free style.
I rather think they are going to go along on the ILs but we will have arguments on the form of assurance and probably they will never be able to concede the aerial surveillance.
GWB-They are probably doing this so that they can tell Mikoyan they made a protest.
It did occur to me that while they were making this protest that depending on what other considerations may be involved that I am not clear about that if we can slow up a little for a day and run high instead of low it might be a good thing— to see if we can bring them along on agreement on the ILs.
It seems to me that maybe this is the time when they might be in a crisis there with Castro and that anything that would help there to get agreement on the ILs.
If they don't feel that they have to, then it would be a good idea to ease up a bit.
Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, November 14, 1962.
At 4:35m., Ball telephoned McGeorge Bundy to say that ""Bobby has an answer , which is not too encouraging.
Bundy told Ball that the President wanted the Under Secretary and Thompson to come to the White House to look over Khrushchev's message with the President and Rusk.
Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations— Cuba) I have read with great satisfaction the reply of the President of the United States/1/ and I agree with the considerations expressed by the President.
It is of particular pleasure to me that we seem to have the same desire to liquidate as soon as possible the state of tension and normalize the situation so that to untie our hands for normal work and for solving those questions that are awaiting their solution.
And this depends in the main on agreement between us-the two greatest powers in the world with whom special responsibility for ensuring peace lies to a greater degree than with other countries.
The question of the withdrawal of the IL-28's within mentioned 30 days does not constitute any complicated question.
As I already said in my oral message/2/ 1 can assure the President that those planes will be removed from Cuba with all the equipment and flying personnel.
But for me, for our country, it would be a great relief if the state of tension that evolved in the Caribbean were liquidated as soon as possible.
You understand that when we say that it is necessary to announce now the withdrawal of the IL-28's at the time when your planes are flying over Cuba it creates for us no small difficulties.
I have no doubt that you will understand-and the Cuban Government understands this-that such actions constitute violation of sovereignty of the Cuban state.
Therefore it would be a reasonable step to create in this respect also conditions for the normalization of the situation and this in a great degree would make it easier to meet your wish of expediting the withdrawal of the IL-28 planes from Cuba.
If we attained all that now and if this were announced, then more favourable conditions would be created for our country to solve the question of time table for the withdrawal of IL-28 planes.
It is difficult for us to give explanations to such unjustifiable state of affairs.
It is hard to say for me what specific agreement is possible on the question of UN observation posts.
But we as well as the Government of Cuba have already expressed a desire to come to terms on this question.
If the question of the observation posts is of interest to the US— and I think it must be of interest— then I consider it wise to come to an agreement on this.
I think that the Government of Cuba will not object to the UN posts, of course on the condition of respect for the sovereignty of Cuba, on the condition of treating her as equal which must mean that on the territory of other countries of the Caribbean and in a corresponding region of the United States there will be also set up similar UN posts, that is on the condition that reciprocity will be observed in this question.
You understand, Mr President, that no country can assume unilateral commitments, and it would be wise to make them mutual.
I have already said that perhaps it will be necessary for us in the negotiations on disarmament between our countries at the first stage to return to our proposals providing for the establishment of posts at airfields, in major sea-ports, at railway junctions, on highways in order to give guarantees to all the countries of the world that no country will be able to secretly concentrate troops and get prepared for an attack against or invasion of another country.
If you would give your representatives-McCloy, Stevenson and others-appropriate instructions on the question of UN posts in the Caribbean region and adjoining regions of the US-and our representatives have such instructions-and if they would come to an agreement then all this could be made public.
Then there would be removed the difficulties connected with making a public announcement on the withdrawal of IL-28 planes and we would name then specific dates.
These dates will be probably much closer than those which I name and maybe even closer than those which were named by you.
Then we would really cut the knot which was tied tightly enough and having cut it we would create normal relations between our countries to which our people aspire and which your people, we are sure of that, also want.
I will allow myself to express some other considerations and I believe you will not take offense and will not consider that I intrude too much into the sphere of our internal affairs.
Voting in the elections to the Senate, the House of Representatives and in gubernatorial elections which just took place has resulted in the defeat of your former rival who was clearly preparing again for the next presidential elections.
It is significant that as a result of the elections precisely those candidates were defeated who, if I may use such an expression, were making most frenzied bellicose speeches.
This indicates that the American people already begin to feel that if the arms race continues further, if a reasonable solution is not found and an understanding is not achieved between our countries then our peoples will feel still more strongly the threat of the dreadful catastrophe of a thermo-nuclear war.
Let us then not keep people of peace all over the world in suspense, let us give them joyous satisfaction.
Having cut the knot in the Caribbean we would thereby immediately create better conditions and would reinforce people's hope for coping with other questions which are now awaiting their solution.
Of course our two states can not do everything, but all that depends on us in the sense of reaching an understanding will be of decisive importance.
And he who was especially displeased will have to agree after this understanding is reached that there is no other way of meeting the aspirations of all states, all peoples.
In the first place on the overflights, I haven't been quite able to make up my mind whether it was just a formal protest or whether it is something we have to look rather seriously at.
Ball-It is possible that it is something they had to do to help Mikoyan out.
But they are going to put that in as a condition of their taking out the IL-28's.
McCloy-But this is what is coming and it perfectly clear to me, after reading that full message from K the other day,/2/ together with this thing here, that they are going to take the IL-28's out but they want to take them out now at the end of the road rather than immediately.
Respond to that, don't talk to us any more about your having done everything and we have done nothing.
McCloy-But I would do that on a sort of another walk basis rather than on one of these damn meetings at which Zorin is present and the whole damn works are present.
McCloy-You all get tensed up and the hell with this feeling of dignity.
This is just an oil-it is just a different approach that may very well bring the thing about.
And then the second thing I have got in mind is I am damn sure that we are going to be faced with the necessity of drafting something on the guaranty or the assurances.
McCloy-Because we are trying to get it very shortly from the Soviets and it is going to be a pretty elaborate document.
McCloy-Get it crystallized if you can, as soon as you can because I think that is going to be the first order of business.
I would just say no, and fortunately we have got the UN with us on it and we will hold out on that.
In the last analysis I would suppose-I don't know what you mean by protocol-the form of the thing doesn't make a great deal of difference, but I think we are going to get away with a declaration.
The only difference is if you get into a highly formal argument then the amount of comments is going to be terrific.
McCloy-Yes, and moreover I got a letter from Herman Phleger/3/ that caused me a little concern.
He said you know if you make a pledge of non-invasion that that has to take the form of a treaty because it is the impairment of the Congress' authority to declare war and that this has to be approved by the Senate.
McCloy-You know Phleger is a pretty good lawyer and he was very serious about this because he didn't see how we could get around it, in view of Congress' authority to declare war.
There is one thought that they all take comfort in, they say well all we are doing is what we have already done under the Rio Pact and the UN Charter.
But that may not be so because we are in an awkward position there because under the UN Charter and the Rio Pact we still supported an invasion from the Bay of Pigs and we defended it.
NEGOTIATION FOR THE RELEASE OF THE CUBAN PRISONERS The meeting took place at the residence of the Attorney General at 10:30m., on Thursday, November 14, at the DCI's request.
Mr Foley stated that the Industry had no clear understanding of the Government's position, most particularly in view of Cuban developments of the last three weeks.
After explaining to Foley the background of the transaction I told him that Mr Donovan had been told to do absolutely nothing in this matter and expressed great surprise that the subject was a topic of current discussion among members of the Industry.
In the meeting with the Attorney General I expressed grave concern over the situation, pointing out that CIA had 20 million dollars on covert deposit and that two letters of credit had been issued one in the amount of 10 million dollars to Pfizer, and one for seven million dollars to Merck.
As long as this money was on deposit and the letters outstanding, there was a danger of publicity emanating from either Donovan or the drug industry, or both.
Despite the fact that no official government connection had ever been admitted, publicity would implicate the Administration and CIA in the negotiation because of recent press stories identifying Administration and CIA activities and citing the exact amount of 17 million dollars as representing the Government cost of the drugs.
I pointed out that certain elements of competition between the members of the drug industry made it almost a certainty that ""leaks"" would come from industry sources as long as the letter of credit were outstanding, regardless of Mr Donovan's denials.
Furthermore, consummation of the transaction seemed totally unrealistic in view of current difficulties with Castro and if an article appeared indicating we were still pursuing this transaction, the American public and a great many others would be confused and disenchanted.
Also advise Mr Donovan that the pursuit of this effort must await a better climate although our interest remained constant.
The Attorney General, after some discussion involving an exploration of possible alternatives, agreed with the course of action.
We agreed that we should carefully explain to the Families Committee and possibly to Miro Cardona that we were in no way abandoning our intention to secure the release of the prisoners but were forced because of circumstances beyond our control to set the negotiation aside pending further developments on other important problems involving our Cuban relationship.
McCone discussed the above with Mr Bundy who personally approved the action and, in turn, received approval from higher authority.
John A McCone/ 1/ /l /Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
McCloy told Ball he thought he would call the fellow/1/ for lunch if it is the desirable thing to do.
He asked if Ball had anything new over night that might have some effect on it.
If McCloy did this it would be mainly on a contact basis, but he is not so sure he would offer what Ball had suggested yesterday.
He would simply tell him he was disturbed by his continuous talk that they have done everything and we have done nothing.
Ball agreed this would be the thing to do and might be helpful at this time.
McCloy asked about the Fowler Hamilton business and Ball told him some time when he sees him he will give him a sketch of what he has in mind there.
McCloy said he had invited the fellow/1/ to lunch but he told McCloy he had a date he could not cancel.
He invited McCloy to come out to his place on Long Island some time during the weekend, and it was left that way.
Ball asked if this would imply that Mikoyan might be there and McCloy said he didn't know; that he could not get anything out of him about Mikoyan.
Message From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev Washington, November 15, 1962.
This message was considered an ""oral"" exchange, but a written copy was given to Dobrynin.
I am glad to learn of your assurance of agreement that the IL-28s should be withdrawn./l/ All that remains is to reach understanding on the timing.
Let me review the undertakings in my letter of October twenty-seventh and your letter of October twenty-eighth.
On our side, we undertook to agree to remove the quarantine measures in effect and to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
I cannot agree with your statement that you have fulfilled your commitments and that we have not fulfilled ours.
You have removed a certain number of missiles from Cuba-not under United Nations supervision-but you did cooperate in arrangements which enabled us to be reasonably sure that forty-two missiles were in fact taken out of Cuba.
There has been no United Nations verification that other missiles were not left behind and, in fact, there have been many reports of their being concealed in caves and elsewhere, and we have no way of satisfying those who are concerned about these reports.
The IL-28's are still in Cuba and are of deep concern to the people of our entire Hemisphere.
Thus, three major parts of the undertakings on your side-the removal of the IL-28's, the arrangements for verification, and safeguards against introduction-have not yet been carried out.
The Secretary General of the United Nations was not allowed to make arrangements for the experts he took with him to Cuba to verify removal of the offensive weapons; the Cuban Government did not agree to international Red Cross inspection at ports; they have refused the Secretary General's suggestion that the Latin American Ambassadors in Havana undertake this verification; they have rejected a further suggestion of the Secretary General concerning the use of various non-aligned Chiefs of Mission in Havana for this purpose.
It is difficult for me to understand why the Cubans are so resistant to the series of reasonable proposals that have been made to them by U Thant unless, for reasons of their own, they are determined to see the crisis prolonged and worsened.
We both have means of influencing the Cuban Government and I do not believe that we can allow that Government to frustrate the clear understandings our two governments have reached in the interests of peace.
In these circumstances we have so far been patient and careful, as we have been, indeed, at every stage.
As you know from your own reports, we have always applied the quarantine with care and with regard for the position of others, and in recent days we have relied on the oral assurances of the masters of your ships and other ships.
Moreover I myself held back orders for more forceful action right to the limit of possibility during the week of October 27th and 28th.
But we cannot make progress from here-or avoid a return of danger to this situation-if your side now should fall into the mistake of claiming that it has met all its commitments, and refusing to help with the real business of carrying out our purpose of untying the Cuban knot.
We are entitled to insist on removal of the IL-28's and on safeguards against reintroduction of offensive weapons before we lift the quarantine or give assurances of any sort.
That is more than we agreed to on October twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth, but we wish to end this crisis promptly.
We believe, again, that these matters should follow the removal of offensive weapons systems, but just as we have been able to discuss other matters while a number of missiles were leaving, we believe the urgently needed talks can and should go forward while the bombers are leaving.
We do not insist that everything wait its exact turn-but only that the essential first steps be clearly going forward.
But what is most urgent, after we can agree that offensive weapons are leaving, and after the quarantine is lifted, is to make some real progress on continuing observations and verification.
It will be essential to have such arrangements-and this again is clear in the letters of October 27 and 28-before our assurances can be more formally stated.
Our undertaking on this point remains firm and clear, and we want nothing better than to be able to give our assurances, just as we said we would, when the necessary conditions exist.
In the absence of any arrangements under the United Nations or otherwise for international verification or safeguards, we have of course been obliged to rely upon our own resources for surveillance of the situation in Cuba, although this course is unsatisfactory.
Just today we learned of new threats by Castro against this necessary surveillance.
I should make it very clear that if there is any interference with this surveillance, we shall have to take the necessary action in reply, and it is for just this reason that it is so urgent to obtain better safeguards.
We note with interest that in your last message the arrangement of observation and verification is enlarged from Cuba to include certain other areas.
This is a substantial change from the terms of our exchange of messages, and as we see it any such wider arrangements would necessarily require careful discussion.
For example, if we move outside Cuba to observe what is happening in other countries which have been involved in the recent tensions, there might have to be observation posts at the appropriate ports in the Soviet Union from which weapons could be shipped to Cuba, as well as in appropriate places in the United States.
This is a matter which deserves close study and it may offer a chance of real progress in the long run, but for the immediate future it seems to us better to work within the framework of our understanding of October 27 and 28.
We also think that the Brazilian proposal for a verified Denuclearized Zone in Latin America/3/ could, with the cooperation of Cuba and if acceptable to the other Latin American countries, in the long run offer an acceptable means for a broader approach.
However, the immediate problem is, I repeat, the carrying out of our understanding with regard to verification that offensive weapons have in fact been removed from Cuba and the establishing of safeguards against their reintroduction pending the coming into effect of longer-term arrangements.
Even apart from our understanding, given the history of this matter, I am sure, Mr Chairman, that you can understand that this is a real necessity if we are to move to the settlement of other matters.
But the first step is to get the bombers started out, and the quarantine lifted-for both are sources of tension.
Macmillan quotes from the November 14 telephone call in At the End of the Day, 1961-1963, 215.
Yes, except that he still wants us to make a ""no invasion"" pledge and there can be no agreement on how to maintain surveillance.
The other question, the IL-28's must be removed before we make an agreement on invasion.
We must have some type of inspection of sites, even though it won't mean much with all the caves and cellars in Cuba.
It would be bad if Souvanna left because Laos is an example of something negotiated with the Russians.
So what about your going to him and pointing out that if fighting breaks out and we have partition, everyone will say that no agreement with the Russians will last more than a few months.
Well, I thought if we got Cuba settled and if Laos will stay together, then we may have a good chance on Berlin.
If he will agree to have the IL-28's out before Christmas or New Year's, and will give some type of on-site inspection for the record and understand that we will continue overflights, we will lift the quarantine and make a ""no invasion"" pledge.
If we can keep Laos together, go ahead on Berlin, we can look at Laos again six months from now.
Also stated that offensive weapons will not be reintroduced and that USSR was prepared cooperate in seeking suitable formula and to speak about guarantees about their non-reintroduction.
At outset of meeting, before Kuznetsov spoke, Stevenson expressed vigorous reaction to Castro letter to SYG/2/ threatening to shoot down United States observation planes.
Stevenson said this would be very serious matter with predictable consequences.
Aerial surveillance was only means we had to assure ourselves in light Soviet failure produce verification in Cuba.
He was certain we would issue counter-protest to Cuban protest and hoped this would end issue because consequences would not be our responsibility.
Kuznetsov said he had nothing to add to previous Soviet position on overflights.
Reading originally from typewritten text, and frequently reiterating point throughout conversation, Kuznetsov took firm position that time had come to deal with entire settlement of Cuban problem, maintaining all remaining questions must be dealt with together and would then be more easily resolved.
He referred to suggestion for UN Caribbean presence as means verification these obligations as proposal from U Thant and stated Cuban Government was prepared to support UN presence in Caribbean including parts of United States and Western Hemisphere with corresponding control of Cuban territory.
Noting this was at present scheme only in principle, Kuznetsov maintained that its spelling out would not be difficult for U Thant to arrange on basis equal rights, obligations and verification.
Kuznetsov also suggested that Cuba should be brought into discussions inasmuch as they affected Cuba and dealt with obligations of three governments.
We did not agree to idea of a protocol and had said on many occasions we were prepared to have mutual declarations in SC in accordance with correspondence.
Stevenson noted Kuznetsov had said nothing about most important question— withdrawal of IL-28's.
Throughout rest of conversation he stressed that this was key issue which now needed to be resolved.
Stevenson reiterated we were prepared to lift quarantine when Kuznetsov assured us IL-28's would be taken out within limited period of time.
In response to repeated Kuznetsov position that USSR had fulfilled its obligations and time had come for United States to do something Stevenson said that we had made accommodations to Soviets on ship-side inspection and were prepared to lift quarantine when Soviets promised to take IL-28's out.
When all offensive weapons were out and appropriate inspection arranged we would make declaration on invasion.
We would also be prepared to recommend in OAS that LA states restore status quo prior October 22 by repealing resolution authorizing quarantine.
This would mean all rights and obligations under Rio Pact would apply, including obligations with respect to attack of one state against another.
Kuznetsov said USSR did not recognize OAS decisions and was not interested in being involved in how we obtain LA adherence to President's letter; if United States stated it and LA's would not invade Cuba that would be in accord with spirit of President's letter.
Kuznetsov took note of this reply and he said he would expect to hear from us further on this point.
Re on-site inspection in Cuba, Kuznetsov reiterated that USSR did not object but agreement of Government of Cuba was required.
Seeking cooperation of other LA states with respect to assurances against invasion.
Stevenson concluded with statement that United States had assumed no other obligations either to USSR or to Cuba.
At conclusion of meeting Kuznetsov said that their draft protocol contained provisions which should be in any document but that he would appreciate our opinion on their protocol and other suggestions, adding that if all issues were dealt with simultaneously we could reach agreement on form and wording.
Stevenson said we would be glad to prepare and show them statement we would be willing make in SC re assurances against invasion Cuba when USSR had fulfilled its obligations; he hoped we would be able to do so tomorrow.
Stressed however no final conclusion could be reached before IL-28's removed and verification of transaction worked out.
Stevenson also reiterated toward end of conversation that USSR should take careful note of our protest on Cuban threat to shoot at United States planes.
The Soviets say that they will take the IL-28's out, not now but at some later point, and the offer so far appears to be tied to a series of prior actions on our part: lifting of the blockade, registering assurances, etc.
Our view is that the first step must be a Soviet order to remove the IL-28's within a period of 30 days.
We have said that when that order is given, we are willing to announce the lifting of the quarantine.
These exchanges with Moscow have included reiteration of our position on the present urgent need for surveillance, and they have produced on the Russian side support for UN observation posts in the Caribbean area, including the United States We have replied to this last proposal by indicating that any reciprocal inspection which included the United States should logically include appropriate ports of the Soviet Union.
We have strongly attacked the Soviet claim that its part of the bargain has been fulfilled.
The one piece of information not on the Washington-Moscow channel, which is some novelty, is the statement of Kuznetsov to Stevenson last night that he was instructed to report that ""all nuclear weapons have been removed from Cuba.
Upon being informed that Castro's letter to the UN Acting Secretary General had been released to the press,/l/ the President authorized the immediate release of a statement covering our continuing aerial surveillance of Cuba.
The President asked how we would prove that strategic missiles would not be reintroduced into Cuba.
Secretary Rusk said we could watch the Russian ships with big hatches and monitor the unloading of Russian ships.
As to a Latin American nuclear-free zone, the President said Ambassador Stevenson had predicted that the UN would not accept this idea.
If inspection of the United States were to be allowed, we would have to insist on inspecting Russian ports from which the missile ships could sail.
The question was asked whether we would be prepared to accept inspection of Guantanamo Base, of Cuban camps in the United States and of Puerto Rico.
Secretary Rusk said that the short-term problem of inspection of offensive missiles related only to Cuba.
The long-term problem of inspecting to prevent the reintroduction of missiles might be done by a UN commission charged with maintaining peace in the Caribbean.
This commission might look at all complaints that peace in the area was being disturbed.
Thus, the commission would not be limited geographically to Cuba but could inspect in the United States and in Latin American countries.
The President said that it appeared the Soviets were offering inspection in Cuba in return for inspection in Florida.
Mr Bundy said we might discuss some reciprocal inspection which we would not be prepared to implement as long as Castro was in Cuba.
The Attorney General commented that aerial reconnaissance upsets both the Russians and Castro.
The President repeated his view that we should not give a pledge not to invade Cuba until we have adequate assurances protecting us against the reintroduction of strategic missiles.
The Attorney General said he did not think that we could sell to the American people an inspection of Florida.
Any adequate inspection must include not only Cuba but also two or three Soviet ports.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we not try to spell out the geographical limitations of the inspection.
The President responded that we would have to limit inspection to Florida in any proposal that we might consider.
Mr McCone expressed his concern that the Soviet military base would remain in Cuba.
He considered this a more important consideration than the IL-28 bombers.
If we allow a continuing Soviet military presence in Cuba we must have an inspection system.
The SAM sites could ensure that we could not use U-2s to tell us of any military buildup.
Without the U-2s, the Russians could secretly build up their forces in the interior of Cuba.
Mr McCloy expressed his view that the Soviet military presence in Cuba will die on the vine.
With the missiles and the IL-28 bombers removed, the remainder of the Soviet forces would then be withdrawn.
The best Russian equipment now in Cuba will gradually be withdrawn because it was put there to guard the strategic missiles.
Mr McCone expressed a reservation by pointing out that the Russians may have decided to use Cuba as a staging area for subversion in Latin America.
The President said we had the alternative of making a realistic proposal or a proposal which we know in advance they would reject and therefore provide grounds for us to hold back on any assurance against invasion.
Ambassador Thompson replied that Khrushchev must decide shortly which road to go down.
He needs to get the Cuban problem buttoned down and go on to other problems in order to continue along the existing coexistence line.
Secretary Rusk argued that we should stay put on our present position of lifting the quarantine in return for getting the IL-28 bombers out of Cuba.
He would hold off on proposals covering the long-term inspection problem.
He pointed out that a UN presence in Cuba had been turned down, that the proposal to have the International Red Cross conduct the inspection had been turned down, that the UN proposal to name five Latin American Ambassadors as inspectors, and later any five Ambassadors as inspectors, had also been rejected.
He urged that we stay where we are and felt that we should continue to support an arrangement based on reciprocity rather than on geography.
The President pointed out that our policy of not giving an invasion assurance until we have acceptable inspection arrangements puts Khrushchev under heavy pressure.
Secretary Rusk replied that we should be in no hurry to work out long-range arrangements.
We should keep the situation fluid in the event that the Soviets come to favor a coup in Cuba.
In such event they would want assurances that we would not interfere with their staged coup.
The President said it would be all right to wait unless Khrushchev is blocked on negotiations on other problems and if he is not further pushed by the Communist Chinese.
Secretary Dillon doubted that our negotiations with the Russians over Cuba would affect the Russians' worldwide policy.
The Soviets can't deliver arrangements for on-site inspection because of Castro's opposition, and hence, we can't give assurances against invasion.
We can give a conditional assurance if the Soviets continue to behave,e., take out the missiles, move to take out the IL-28 bombers, and assure us there are no nuclear warheads in Cuba.
There has been considerable talk about a nuclear-free zone, but if we choose to support this idea, we will have to go through the OAS and this will take a considerable amount of time.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the difficulty of formulating any statement about our not invading Cuba.
If we put in the conditions which we must, the statement comes out sounding as if we were all ready to invade.
The President asked that a statement covering our policy toward invasion be prepared for his use at his Tuesday press conference.
The President said that we would understand privately that such a position would cover only the next two years.
Reference should be made to the President's September 13th statement which said that pending arms verification arrangements in Cuba, we would continue our overflights unobtrusively.
The President suggested that we give to Kuznetsov the evidence we have of the Soviet military presence in Cuba.
He asked that the State Department spell out exactly what we would accept as verification of Soviet arms in Cuba.
Mr McCloy said we scared the Russians off their insistence on a protocol containing our invasion assurances by telling them that a protocol would require Congressional approval.
The President said he did not want any protocol on the invasion guarantee but merely a statement of our position.
He asked that by Tuesday there be a detailed response to accusations that Soviet missiles are being hidden in Cuban caves.
He also said we needed to be in a position to respond to a Brazilian proposal for an atom-free zone.
The President asked for an analysis of the Soviet-Chinese differences including an estimate of the effect of the split on Khrushchev's authority and on Communist parties worldwide.
Secretary McNamara requested authority for high-level flights but said he did not favor flying low-level missions.
General Taylor reported that the Chiefs wanted to continue low-level missions.
Secretary McNamara said the decision should be made on political grounds rather than military.
The President decided to suspend low-level flights planned for tomorrow in the expectation that we might receive a reply from Khrushchev today.
These strikes would be followed by massive attacks on Cuban hostile aircraft and other offensive weapons including, after their presence was discovered and until they were withdrawn, MRBMs and IRBMs.
Subsequent attacks would target troop concentrations, artillery, and armor.
SAC is maintaining 1/8 airborne alert and has implemented its force dispersal plan.
Special defensive measures have been taken to protect the Southeast, with particular attention to Florida.
Utilization of the increased Army and Marine forces will require an additional 16 transports, 68 cargo ships, and 11 LSTs.
The LSTs and 15 transports would come from the Reserve Fleet, would require approximately 45 days to activate and assemble on the east coast, and would cost an estimated $28 million.
For the total shipping requirements of the augmented Plan, chartering, requisitioning, and prepositioning of 60 cargo ships must be accomplished well in advance of execution of the Plan.
The 5th MEB , at approximately 9,000 strength, has transited the Panama Canal, is in the Caribbean and has been added to the assault force.
The advanced alert levels, if maintained for a protracted period, can reduce the over-all capability of the force because of maintenance and training short-falls.
The current status of alert can be maintained for about 30 more days without adverse effect.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend staying in the present posture for the immediate future.
The Chiefs appreciate the opportunity to discuss some aspects of the current negotiations bearing on the IL-28's and other matters related to Cuba.
To lead-off, they would like to express their unqualified support for the insistence of our government upon the withdrawal of the IL-28's.
While these aircraft are of less military significance than the IRBM's and MRBM's which have withdrawn, their continued presence in Cuba would present a long-term threat to the continental United States, would consequently require a higher level of air defense of our southeastern states and would give deep concern to many parts of Latin America.
These factors added to the public statements of our Government on the need for their withdrawal convince the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the IL-28's must go.
The Chiefs are aware of the offer to exchange a lifting of the quarantine for Khrushchev's removal of the IL-28's and will regret the possible loss of this useful naval tool if the offer is accepted.
If the Soviets decline the offer, the quarantine will provide an immediate means to apply pressure both on Khrushchev and on Castro not only to remove the IL-28's but also to obtain other ends such as the withdrawal of Soviet technicians and the acceptance of an inspection system.
After appropriate warning to Khrushchev of our intentions, the Chiefs would favor a general extension of the quarantine to include a complete blockade of POL products.
Concurrently, we should continue air surveillance and withhold any assurance against the invasion of Cuba.
If the expanded quarantine did not succeed in obtaining the withdrawal of the IL-28s, we should be prepared to take them out by air attack.
Even if the IL-28's are negotiated out of Cuba, there will remain weapons systems of significant military importance; the MIG's, the SAM's, the air defense control system, and the large stocks of modern Army equipment which we have seen in our recent photography.
The air defense weapons will be a constant threat to our surveillance of Cuba while the Army weapons may be used against Guantanamo or against any invasion attempt.
But more important than this equipment are the thousands of Soviet military personnel who remain in Cuba to man it.
The Soviet presence in Cuba poses a particularly sensitive problem to the United States.
When the extent of this presence is known and the weapons systems remaining in Soviet hands are thoroughly appreciated, it will be clear to the Western Hemisphere that it has indeed been invaded and remains invaded by the Soviet Union.
Under these conditions, we may anticipate a loud popular demand in the United States and in Latin America for the removal of the Soviet personnel and neutralization of their weapons.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff feel that the United States should generate now all the pressure possible to get the Soviet personnel out, feeling that their eviction is far more important than that of the equipment.
The Chiefs are very much interested in the terms in which any assurance to Castro may eventually be couched, feeling that it would be damaging to our national interest and to the sense of security of our Latin American allies to create the impression of underwriting Castro for an indefinite period without careful qualification.
If it is considered necessary to give Castro any assurance, the Chiefs feel that it should be tied to Khrushchev's proposal in his 26 October letter to withdraw Soviet forces from Cuba, and to cease giving military aid to Castro.
Also the assurance should be given without affecting our commitments under the Rio Pact and should be linked to concurrent good behavior on the part of Castro and to acceptance by the Castro government of continued air surveillance.
The Chiefs recognize both the importance and the difficulty of obtaining an adequate verification system in Cuba.
While sympathetic with their purpose, the Chiefs do not like two of the current proposals for inspection and verification.
The first is the proposal from Ambassador Stevenson for a UN inspection system of the Caribbean or Central America.
The Chiefs do not favor it because of its reciprocal features, its doubtful effectiveness and the danger of having it regarded as a substitute for effective aerial surveillance.
The second is the Brazilian suggestion for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in Latin America.
Apart from objections to the precedent of supporting such a proposal for any part of the world, and the divided opinion among our allies on this subject, we do not see any way to obtain from the proposal a satisfactory verification system for Cuba.
That the IL-28's be removed from Cuba, preferably by negotiation-otherwise by blockade followed, if need be, by military action.
That any assurance to Castro be hedged by conditions protecting our obligations under the Rio Pact and linking the duration of the assurance to good behavior by Castro and the acceptance of air surveillance.
That in seeking a means of long-term verification and inspection, which we consider essential, we oppose the proposals for a reciprocal UN inspection of the Caribbean and for a nuclear free zone in Latin America.
OTHERS PRESENT General Taylor General Wheeler Admiral Anderson General LeMay General Shoup General Clifton The meeting opened by General Taylor presenting three papers to the President in response to some of the President's inquiries.
One paper concerned the level of readiness that we have achieved and the ability to hold this level./l/ All the Chiefs reported that they could maintain this readiness without any hardship for another month, and so recommended.
General Taylor and General LeMay reported that they had altered the SAC readiness so that each crew is getting one training sortie per week.
The President asked several questions about leave and rest policies for men away from home, and the Air Force reserves that had been called up recently.
There was a lengthy discussion of shipping and LSTs, and the President approved a recommendation that they get the LSTs out and maintain them.
Admiral Anderson reported on a meeting between the head of MSTS and shipowners and labor unions.
General Taylor summarized the views of the Joint Chiefs on the present situation, and each Chief in turn spoke about his particular zone of interest.
The President read to the Chiefs the letter from Chairman Khrushchev and the President's reply which went out this morning.
The meeting was arranged as a result of a decision reached between K and E at Mrs.
Roosevelt's funeral, that they should meet at an early date and the meeting should be with me present, but under circumstances in which there would be no Press or public recognition that the meeting had taken place./l/ /1/Kennedy and Eisenhower were attending the inauguration of Dulles Airport.
President explained to E the present status of the Cuban situation and the problems attendant to the removal of the IL 28s, the inspection to verify that all offensive missiles had gone, and inspection arrangements against reintroduction.
Kennedy reviewed all of the various proposals that had been made, each one of which had been rejected by Castro, and concluded, stating that as matters stood at the present time, we would have to depend for the immediate future on aerial surveillance.
The President throughout the conversation expressed the thought that while it was possible there was some deception in connection with the 42 missiles removed, the probability was strong that this number were actually removed, that having had to withdraw it would be probably most unlikely that the Soviets would make a further attempt to introduce offensive missiles.
General Eisenhower raised the question of deception and the possibility, however remote, that what we looked at were sections of large diameter pipe and that the missiles were actually retained.
McCone made the point that the examination of the photography gave reasonable assurance that what we were looking at was missiles and furthermore there were accompanying the shipments of missiles, which were stored on deck, large quantities of clearly identifiable related equipment as well as personnel and hence it was reasonable to conclude that missiles had actually been taken away.
The conversation then turned to the rumors and reports which were disturbing to the American public of missiles being hidden in caves, etc.
It was Eisenhower's very strong recommendation that the President at an early opportunity make a very positive statement that we were taking actions which would guarantee insofar as possible our knowledge of what was going on in Cuba and that he was going to insist that these actions, which included aerial surveillance, be continued and that he can give the American public some confidence in assurances that their security was not being endangered by clandestine Soviet activities.
The President responded that he intended to make such a statement on Tuesday 72/ It was agreed that this statement should reflect initiative on the part of the President and the Administration.
Both President Kennedy and General Eisenhower expressed their appreciation to me and their desire to continue communication one with the other in about the same form and in the manner of this meeting.
During the conversation General Eisenhower stated with some emphasis that he did not believe that our actions in Cuba would necessarily cause the Soviets to react in a retaliatory manner in some other tense location: Eisenhower presented many examples.
He pointed out for instance that many Soviet experts predicted that his initiative in Lebanon would be met by Soviet actions in Berlin or elsewhere, however the reverse was true.
Eisenhower therefore urged the President not to permit his course of action in Cuba to be dictated by fear of Soviet action elsewhere or an attempt to appraise in advance the type of actions Soviets might take elsewhere.
This point appealed to me as being particularly significant because it is the direct opposite of the advice that the President has been given by Ambassador Thompson and others who are presumably Soviet experts.
The meeting, which took place in Secretary Rusk's conference room in the Department of State, lasted until 4:08, although Rusk continued to meet with Cleveland, Bundy, Johnson, and Ball for the rest of the afternoon until 5:40m.
Rusk, Thompson, A Johnson, Cleveland, Bundy, Murrow, Nitze, Taylor, McNamara, Gilpatric, Dillon, McCone 1.
The members revised and recommended to the President a press statement to be made Tuesday/1/ in the event the Russians have agreed to withdraw the IL-28 bombers within the next 3-4 weeks.
The members discussed and revised a draft letter and declaration /2/ but decided not to send it to Kuznetsov now or to authorize McCloy to inform Kuznetsov tomorrow of its contents.
A decision as to when to give the Russians the letter is to be made Monday.
Secretary Rusk will inform McCloy that in his talk with Kuznetsov tomorrow he is to stay within the limits of our last two letters to Khrushchev and not discuss a package proposal.
McCloy may discuss the situation which will exist Tuesday if we have not received a favorable decision on the IL-28 bombers before the President makes a statement to the American people on the Cuban crisis.
There was a prolonged discussion as to whether low-level reconnaissance flights should be made tomorrow and Monday.
McCone noted that he, Bundy, and Thompson advocated high-level flights, but the decision was made not to fly on Sunday, November 18.
If many more days go by without low-level flights, the Cubans and others might think that the Cuban threat to shoot down our reconnaissance planes has scared us away from further missions.
The effect of reconnaissance missions on the IL-28 negotiations -some believe this keeps pressure on; others believe we should tell the Russians we are not flying low-level missions in order to avoid complicating the IL-28 decision.
Missions could be flown over heavily fortified areas with some risk of being shot down by Cuban antiaircraft fire or could be flown over rural areas where risk of hostile Cuban action would be very low but the Cubans and the Soviets would know we were flying low-level missions.
State Department circulated a paper for later consideration on Caribbean security arrangements 75/ /5/Not found.
Arrived at Soviet residence, old George Pratt Estate at Locust Valley, accompanied by Mrs.
After lunch in presence of Kuznetsov, Zorin, Mendelevich and translator we had coffee and talk, which was conducted entirely in English.
Kuznetsov said he thought we were stalling in our negotiations; that they felt they had done all that could be expected of them and we had done very little to bring about rapid solution of Cuban problem.
Then Kuznetsov said he would like to ask McCloy his impression of where we stood.
McCloy said that he was glad to have opportunity to tell Kuznetsov just where he thought we stood.
In first place, we were getting nowhere by constant repetition on their part that they had done everything and we had done nothing.
In spite of assurances we had received directly from highest levels of Soviet Government no offensive weapons in Cuba and more specifically no weapons there capable of reaching targets in United States Soviet nuclear weapons had been secretly introduced into Cuba at same time we were receiving these assurances.
Yet President, who was shocked by this revelation, did not thereupon take direct action against these weapons as we had full capacity to do.
Instead President, although misled by these assurances, determined upon action which gave both sides time to work matter out.
Next, we had advised Kuznetsov that on temporary basis and in order to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships we had worked out hail and pass arrangement in connection with quarantine on Soviet assurance that no more weapons were being introduced into Cuba from Soviet Union.
President had done this to relieve tensions and we were glad to note that Soviet Premier had responded in kind by prompt action in taking out 42 missiles which Soviets stated they had introduced into Cuba, as well as providing for reasonable means checkout at sea.
Next, President, in spite of fact that Soviet Premier had committed himself to removal of jet bombers as weapons that we considered offensive, offered to raise quarantine on assurance from Soviet Premier that orders had been given to remove bombers within limited period.
Soviet Premier had stated that weapons were to be removed under UN observation but no steps leading to this observation had been accomplished due large part to obduracy of Cuban Government.
Although we felt Soviet Union in position to compel Cuba to permit such observation we aware irresponsibility of Castro and have sincerely attempted to cooperate with Soviet Union pending such time as verification worked out.
This problem related to Soviet commitment to provide adequate arrangements to guard against reintroduction of weapons.
We aware this not easy problem but must be solved and does no good to pretend that problem does not exist or that one can act as if prior conditions had already been fulfilled.
Removal of bombers cannot be indefinitely postponed based on accomplishment of some vague future event.
Offer to lift quarantine very difficult step for President to take inasmuch as he had announced to nation that lifting of quarantine was dependent upon UN observation and upon receipt of adequate assurance against reintroduction of weapons.
In other words, President was prepared to waive one of preconditions even though public opinion throughout United States demanding that no relief from quarantine be given until all conditions met.
President had taken this action largely in response to Soviet Premier's prompt and effective action largely in regard to missiles.
This action shows we are neither trying to starve out Cubans nor to be unresponsive to any constructive action taken by Soviet Union.
If this offer does not result in removal of bombers President will have no choice but to reimpose quarantine in fully effective form.
Effort to relate removal of bombers to some final conclusions regarding verification and arrangements for guaranteeing against reintroduction is no more appropriate than it would have been to delay removal of missiles.
McCloy suggested though he could not commit his government it might be possible to work arrangements out for checking out bombers without stopping Soviet ships as had been arrangement with missiles.
McCloy then stated that President was going to have a press conference this Tuesday;/1/ that he had postponed it in the interest of giving Soviets ample opportunity to respond to his request regarding IL-28's but on Tuesday he will have to say something about bombers.
President will be placed in very difficult position if not able to say that Soviets have agreed to get bombers out without further conditions.
If he cannot do this it will put in question whether in fact we have an agreement with Soviet Union in regard to removal of offensive weapons from Cuba.
McCloy next referred to assurances that we were prepared to give in regard to invasion.
We will not sign any document embodying these or any other such conditions.
We prepared to give our solemn declaration in UN based upon Soviet declaration and fulfillment of conditions precedented that have so often been specifically stated.
Cubans can make any declarations they see fit in UN or elsewhere but we will not be a party to them.
Castro has defied Soviet Union, United States and UN and any proposal to conform to his wishes in return for this defiance is out of the question.
It will be not to invade, assuming fulfillment of conditions and we will be prepared to recommend to or use our good offices in connection with other Western Hemisphere countries to take same position as we do assuming Cuba does not institute aggression against them.
We should not have much trouble in dealing with wording of declaration but are only wasting time in talking about any such document as has been presented to United States by Kuznetsov.
McCloy also referred to fact that any suggestion of document with two or three signatories appended to it such as was suggested by Soviet Union would take on character of treaty which might well require consent of two-thirds of Senate and it might be years before such consent could be obtained.
Moreover, in McCloy's judgment would never be recommended to Senate by President.
Way to proceed is to get IL-28 issue settled and they would find United States quick to give our best thought to next steps to wind up whole transaction.
No inspection of United States would be reciprocal without inspection also of Soviet Union.
At this point McCloy said that one of reasons that caused United States to look carefully at assurances regarding reintroduction of weapons into Cuba was full development now of our information in regard to extent of Soviet military presence in Cuba.
We were not introducing any new conditions but we were pointing out that military presence there so far transcended any technician status that we had to be cautious about this matter of reintroduction.
We had confirmed presence of Soviet combat command and presence of number of fully manned Soviet combat teams organized in precisely same manner as army units in Soviet Union.
We have identified units and at proper time we would be prepared to give evidence of this military command before UN or elsewhere.
We were convinced that introduction of these units and formation of this command was component of whole attempt to change nuclear balance by introduction of nuclear weapons into Cuba.
They bore no relation to the defense of Cuba as such but were part of defense of Soviet missile batteries that have been installed in Cuba.
There could be no hope of ""normalization"" of conditions in Caribbean as long as these units were there in this form and quantity.
As long as they were there possibility of another surreptitious reintroduction of nuclear weapons into Cuba which these units would again be in position to defend, exists.
Soviet Union must therefore understand our caution in regard to assurance against reintroduction of these weapons and giving of our own assurance against invasion.
McCloy emphasized we were not introducing any new conditions but were simply pointing out emphasis which we had to place on presence of these units and their relation to matter of reintroduction of nuclear weapons.
We are quite as anxious as Soviet Union to wind up this transaction for there are number of things we ought to be discussing in order to keep this situation from arising again.
Today it is Cuba and combination of this bearded figure who is dictator in Cuba and certain miscalculation on part of Soviet Union that almost brought us to war.
In this connection McCloy said he was concerned about Chinese-Indian war.
It could easily develop into something that would cause both of us trouble in future and he wondered what thinking of Soviet Union was in regard to this.
It may not be too soon for us to exchange some thoughts about it so that we would not have to act hastily and without careful prior thought if we were faced with some development there that again challenged peace of the world.
To this Kuznetsov responded that this situation caused them some concern.
That was problem that troubled them and perhaps at some time some discussion could be undertaken about it.
Said that this was his view but he could not speak for his government at this point.
He added, however, that it was situations such as this that pointed to necessity for concluding Cuban affair promptly so that other matters and problems of concern to us both could be faced with benefit of successful solution of Cuban problem behind us.
Kuznetsov then repeated position of Soviet Union; namely, that they were prepared to consider removal of IL-28's but that this must be done in connection with solution of other problems relating to Cuba.
He repeated that they had impression that we were merely putting up one obstacle after another and if IL-28 matter were solved we would have another precondition.
At this point he said that we should undertake at time IL-28's were removed to stop our overflights.
McCloy said he was disappointed Soviets were still attempting to postpone dealing with bombers until all problems connected with verification and reintroduction were settled.
This would take some time and we would have to have some consultation with other countries in this hemisphere before we could give all assurances against invasion that Soviet Union was seeking.
McCloy again referred to need for clearing up this matter before President's Tuesday press conference.
Though it was clear that Kuznetsov had no authority to accept proposal in regard to IL-28's which had been offered, he did ask McCloy to repeat just what offer consisted of, which was done.
Kuznetsov came back to U Thant's proposal for reciprocal UN observation and each time he did McCloy said he found great difficulties with it and stressed necessity if there was to be UN observation in United States there had also to be reciprocity UN observation in Soviet Union.
Kuznetsov said in regard to assurance against reintroduction he did not know what Soviet Union could do except to solemnly declare it was not going to reintroduce weapons and asked what other guarantees we had in mind.
Kuznetsov also said he wanted to repeat at this time that he was now authorized to say that no nuclear weapons whatsoever were any longer on territory of Cuba.
Please, he said, do not complicate situation by insisting upon interminable inspection on ground.
It would be impossible to go all over Cuba turning over every stone, looking into every cave and into every bathroom to determine whether nuclear weapons still existed there.
They were going to reaffirm that all nuclear weapons had been removed and that they were not going to reintroduce them.
McCloy said he wanted to have it clear that we were not in any way contemplating stopping of overflights in Cuba unless and until we were sure that there was not going to be any reintroduction of these weapons.
We are doing utmost to keep overflights to minimum but in absence of any adequate verification this was only thing we could do and he repeated that overflights had probably saved us from war and they might do so again.
McCloy made it clear that we would return fire if our planes were shot at; that we were going to do as we had been doing in past,e., keep overflights to minimum necessary to protect ourselves and hemisphere.
At end Kuznetsov said that he was glad to have had this frank discussion of our position; that he was troubled about our position in regard to verification and assurances against reintroduction as he could see how discussions in regard to these might go on interminably with our putting up obstacles to giving our assurance against invasion.
We left with no understanding in regard to future meeting and with no indication from Kuznetsov that they would give way in regard to IL-28's other than to say that they would consider removal of IL-28's in connection with solution of verification and reintroduction problems.
Kuznetsov said he still had no definite word as to when he was coming back.
Director McCone summarized the week-end intelligence/ 1/ and commented on orders issued to Cuban anti-aircraft units to fire on reconnaissance planes.
Secretary Rusk initiated a general discussion of the need for overflights and the effect of such flights on the Cubans and the Russians.
Secretary McNamara commented that the overflight problem is primarily a political one.
General Taylor recommended that there be six low-level sorties, some over the harbor of Mantanzas in order to watch incoming Soviet ships.
The planes would be over Cuba less than eight minutes and would fly at tree-top level.
The President said the decision on flying low-level today is political.
Our intelligence on the orders to the Cubans to fire on United States reconnaissance planes is hard.
Secretary Rusk, however, was concerned by the effect on the OAS and on NATO if it becomes public knowledge that the United States has flown no low-level mission since Castro threatened to shoot down our reconnaissance planes.
He asked that we examine, possibly next week, those military actions to be taken in retaliation for a shootdown.
General Taylor said existing plans call for an armed air reconnaissance and then an attack on the offending anti-aircraft site.
Secretary McNamara noted that our plans call for two hours' advance notice before we attack Cuban territory.
The President made a comment, which was not clear, about photographs taken of our airfields by United States reconnaissance planes.
The President asked what was the impact on Khrushchev of the Indo-Chinese fighting.
Ambassador Thompson, reverting to an earlier question, said we should keep the way open to a coexistence line.
The imposition of the quarantine would be very hard for the Russians to take.
Mr Bundy noted that we have given Khrushchev every escape hatch for the IL-28 bombers.
If he does not now give in and remove them, there will be another serious Soviet miscalculation.
Mr Nitze commented that the Russians wanted us to attack the Cuban anti-aircraft sites.
Either the IL-28s will come out and we will continue to fly high-level missions, or if the Russians refuse to withdraw the bombers, we are heading for a new showdown on Thursday or Friday 74/ We will wait today on the low-level flights and we will fly only when we believe it necessary for intelligence reasons, not as harassment.
Mr Bundy said the scenario called for no action until tomorrow when, if we received no answer, we would seek to obtain OAS support for our demand that the IL-28 bombers be withdrawn.
Under Secretary Ball commented on his recent briefing of the NATO Council in Paris.
He said our European allies would support us in finishing the job and that there would be no objection to putting pressure on the Russians again via a blockade.
The President said he was not sure that a quarantine is the right response to the shooting down of a plan or the refusal to pull out the IL-28 bombers.
Secretary Dillon responded that Khrushchev could take the quarantine more easily than a United States attack on Cuba.
Mr Nitze said that under Communist doctrine a Communist state can back down in the face of the superior position of an enemy.
Mr Bundy pointed out that we would be acting not against the Soviets by hitting Cuba.
The President was given a paper on proposed actions in the OAS involving conversations in advance with OAS powers with respect to our air surveillance.
The President said in the UN we could stress verification and in the OAS we could concentrate on the demand that the Russians withdraw the IL-28 bombers which are dangerous to other Latin American states.
In summarizing the present situation, the President said we now have no inspection and no safeguards on the reintroduction of offensive weapons.
Castro has rejected UN inspection and now he has concentrated his opposition on arrangements for national inspection.
He asked that a statement be prepared for his use on the assumption that we have no Russian response to our IL-28 bomber withdrawal demand.
We should emphasize Castro's rejection of ground inspection, thus requiring the continuance of air surveillance.
We should seek to get the OAS to re-enforce our right to continue air surveillance.
Mr Murrow commented that the Latin Americans are of the view that we are not doing enough against Castro.
The President requested that later in the day he be given a paper containing recommended courses of political and military actions which may have to be taken this week if we have no reply on the IL-28 bombers.
Ball told McCloy the general conclusion was that until tomorrow afternoon the President has to be in a position to say something in the way of a fairly full report to the American people.
If he is not able to say the IL-28 s have been promised by that time, that obviously this going to make the pressure increased for some kind of drastic action.
What we are doing, for McCloy's information-not to tell them-is we are going to get our telegrams this afternoon to bring both the NATO and OAS countries up to date on this situation and to tell them the thing may get considerably heated up to the point where there may be substantial action as a result of Cuban interference with our reconnaissance on the one hand or a continued refusal of the SU to come to grips with the IL-28 thing would be the reimposition of the quarantine perhaps on an extended basis.
We are putting the governments on notice so that they can't say that they are not consulted and also with the idea that if anything leaks out of the European capitals.
Gilpatric said we were preparing for armed reconnaissance on Wednesday and following because we have now been clearly warned that we will draw some fire and we will be prepared in one way or another to return the fire.
This will be at the low-level flights so that we won't counter any fire but go on tomorrow at high level.
Our story is we are continuing reconnaissance, high and low level, as required.
We would try, pending resumption of low level, not to be put in any public position of having stood down the low level in response to the threats from Castro, although in fact Bob feels strongly we ought to wait until after the President's statement tomorrow before we put ourselves in a position where we may have to return fire.
McCloy told Gilpatric that if he ran into these people he would indicate that we have to take more drastic action than we have taken in the past.
Ball suggested that he simply say the President is going to have to make a statement to the American people.
He hasn't made any kind of comprehensive statement for some time because he wanted to keep things as quiet as possible; but out of obligation to the public opinion, he has to say something.
He has set a press conference tomorrow afternoon/1/ where he will have to say there has been no indication of movement on the IL-28s, if there has been no progress on this.
The result of this could very well be to increase American pressure for some kind of strong action.
McCloy said he had gone over that three or four times yesterday and he feels he has put them on enough notice in this regard.
Unless he should bump into them he would be inclined to think it would be weakness to call them.
If he should want another talk this afternoon McCloy will say that again.
McCloy said regarding the President's statement, this has to be worked on.
Ball reported Sorensen and Johnson and Nitze were now working on that in another group.
Editorial Note On the afternoon of November 19, 1962, Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Georgi Bolshakov, ostensibly Press Attache of the Soviet Union but reputedly one of the leading KGB officials in Washington and a direct link to Chairman Khrushchev.
The Attorney General warned Bolshakov that unless the Soviet Union withdrew its IL-28 bombers from Cuba, the United States was prepared to resume low-level reconnaissance of Cuba.
President Kennedy, Robert Kennedy insisted, required an answer before his press conference on November 20 at 6m.
According to a typed note on this memorandum, Fomin requested this meeting on November 16.
Soviets are willing to allow the same kind of verification for exit of bombers as they allow for home shipment of missiles./l/ /1/The following handwritten sentence appears in parentheses at this point.
Further on-the-spot inspection depends on United States negotiations with Cubans, not with negotiations with Soviets, because Cuban ""sovereignty"" is involved now.
He claimed all technicians connected with missiles already have gone home.
He professed to be ignorant of continuing stay of any missile technicians, particularly those whose past role has been to guard missile installations.
Kennedy, he said, will lift the blockade today and is now drafting text of non-aggression pledge he promised to make.
Khrushchev has carried out all his undertakings with the President and is anxious for further progress in detente.
He repeatedly asked what was next in President's priority, specifically returning to nuclear test agreement and non-aggression pact between Warsaw and Atlantic pact powers.
He implied repeatedly ""progress could be made"" in nuclear test agreement with compromise between number of on-site inspections suggested by West, which he put at 12, and number proposed by Soviets which he said was 3.
Nothing now seems to stand in way, he said, of Warsaw pactAtlantic pact non-aggression treaty.
I replied that if I remembered correctly zone proposed at that time was pretty lopsided in favor of Soviet Union.
He replied this whole area could be discussed again, perhaps with better results.
Russia wants to concentrate on building up its economy and thus is in great need for prolonged period of peace.
But there must be reasonable concessions on both sides, not on just Soviet side.
Russia is unhappy about this but at the present time can't do anything to stop it because the Chinese are being difficult.
They don't approve of Soviet agreement with Kennedy because Chinese have been observers at all Soviet nuclear tests and they know power Soviets have.
Soviets realize Kennedy administration is much more reasonable, flexible and imaginative than Eisenhower administration was.
Thus, Soviets realize there is now opportunity for reasonable agreements.
But President mustn't push what he believes to be his present advantage too far, lest it encourage ""hard-line"" group in Moscow.
Russia has to agree to effective on site inspection in Cuba; must also agree to pull all technicians out connected with missiles and bombers, and give satisfactory pledge not to reintroduce weapons or technicians.
Only after this settled would there be any reasonable prospects for successful negotiations on testing, disarmament, and Warsaw-Atlantic pact agreements.
I also said it wasn't true that Kennedy had agreed to Adenauer's alleged suggestion that all negotiations with Soviets over Berlin be broken off.
On contrary, I said, President believed close brush with war over Cuba made it incumbent on both Soviets and Americans to seize opportunity for at least limited start toward responsible eastwest agreements.
For Robert Kennedy's account of how this message was delivered by Dobrynin, see Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times, 550.
I have studied attentively your considerations which were forwarded through our Ambassador in Washington in the evening of November 15./1/ 1 wish first of all to express satisfaction with regard to your statement that the United States is also interested in the achievement of a rapid progress in untying the Cuban knot.
It is good that you have confirmed once again that the United States commitment to give assurance of non-invasion of Cuba, which was agreed upon in the exchange of messages on October 27 and 28 remains firm and clear.
I fully share also the thought expressed by you about the necessity to act with caution, to take into consideration the position of others.
Now when we speak of eliminating the remnants of the crisis this is as important as at any of its past stages.
I always believed and believe now that both of us are guided by the realization of the immense responsibility for the peaceful settlement of the crisis over Cuba being completed.
The Soviet Union removes from Cuba rocket weapons which you called offensive and gives a possibility to ascertain this.
The United States of America promptly removes the quarantine and gives assurances that there will be no invasion of Cuba, not only by the United States but also by other countries of the Western Hemisphere.
Now, of course, there may appear those who would wish to rummage in the wordings and to interpret them in different ways.
But you and we do know well what kind of weapons they were that set the forest on fire, they were missiles.
It was not accidental, indeed, that in our and your message of October 27 and 28 there was not a single mention of bomber planes and specifically of IL-28's.
At the same time those messages have direct reference to rocket weapons.
I informed you that the IL-28 planes are twelve years old and by their combat characteristics they at present cannot be classified as offensive types of weapons.
We took into consideration that you made certain statements and therefore the question of removal of IL-28 planes assumed for you as President a certain significance and probably created certain difficulties.
Since you might really have your difficulties in this question we moved in your direction having informed you of our consent to remove these planes from Cuba.
We have dismantled and removed from Cuba all the medium range ballistic missiles to the last with nuclear warheads for them.
The Soviet personnel who were servicing the rocket installations have also been withdrawn.
Moreover, we expressed our readiness to remove also the IL-28 planes from Cuba.
I inform you that we intend to remove them within a month term and may be even sooner since the term for the removal of these planes is not a matter of principle for us.
We are prepared to remove simultaneously with the IL-28 planes all the Soviet personnel connected with the servicing of these planes.
Proper consideration through the UN of the commitment not to invade Cuba-and it is the main commitment of your side-so far is being delayed.
Permit me to express the hope that with receipt of this communication of mine you will issue instructions to the effect that the quarantine be lifted immediately with the withdrawal of your naval and other military units from the Caribbean area.
Furthermore, your planes still continue to fly over the Cuban territory.
And all this is taking place at the time when we have removed the missiles from Cuba, have given you the possibility to ascertain it through appropriate observation and when we declare our intention to remove the IL-28 planes from Cuba.
I will not conceal that lately I have to hear more and more often that we are too trustful with regard to the statements of the United States readiness to carry out its part of the agreement on Cuba and that the American side will under various pretexts evade the fulfillment of the obligations which it assumed.
But in such an acute and delicate question which we face there cannot but exist the limits beyond which the trust begins losing its value if it is not being strengthened with practical steps towards each other.
All this should be mutually taken into consideration to sooner crown with success our efforts in settling the conflict.
I understand, of course, that some time is needed to formalize through the United Nations the agreement on the settlement of the conflict in the Caribbean area, including commitments of non-invasion of Cuba.
But this time should be measured by days, not by weeks and, of course, not by months.
Of all the commitments based on the agreement achieved between us in the course of the exchange of messages you declare of your readiness to remove the quarantine immediately as soon as we agree on the term for the removal of IL-28's, without waiting for their removal.
Moving in your direction and taking the decision on the removal of IL-28 planes from Cuba we presume that we have grounds to count on similar understanding on your part also in the questions of the flights of American planes over Cuba and in promptest formalizing through the UN of the United States commitments.
As for the discontinuance of flights of American planes over Cuba you yourself can see better how this should be done.
In my opinion, actual discontinuance of such flights over Cuba would already be a major step forward and would bring about a great easing in the situation, the more so that our missiles have been removed and your side has ascertained this.
They say that so far as it is a matter of formalizing the commitments through the UN it is difficult for the American side to accept the form of a protocol we are suggesting in which the commitments of the sides are to be fixed.
It is the content of the document which is important and also that the commitments of the sides be formalize through the UN without delay.
This is a good rule and if it is observed this promises a prompt settlement of the Cuban conflict.
Now about the conditions which you set forth with regard to carrying out the verification and measures of further observation.
Yes, we really agreed to the effect that UN representatives could ascertain the removal from Cuba of rocket weapons which you called offensive.
But we stipulated however that this question can be solved only with the consent of the Government of Cuba.
We could not take an obligation for the Government of Cuba and your reference, Mr President, that we allegedly took such an obligation, of course, does not reflect the real situation.
The main thing is that under agreement with you we gave you the possibility to carry out verification of the removal of our rockets in the open sea.
You will agree that we took this step in the circumstances when no promise had been made by us with regard to this matter in our messages.
We did something more in comparison with what had been said by us in the message with regard to verification.
It is clear that the said verification of the removal of the missiles conducted in accordance with the arrangement between us substitutes the verification of which you spoke in your message and I would say, in a more effective form at that, because the American side was observing the missiles we were shipping out, so to say, at the final stage of their removal.
While even verification of the dismantling would mean observing only the first stage of their removal from Cuba.
As a result the American side, as it itself so declared, had every opportunity to count the missiles put on our ships, to photograph them and to ascertain their removal.
Thus a way out was found and not a bad one, and the question of the verification must, of course, belong to the past.
Now no one can doubt that we have carried out our commitment with regard to the dismantling and shipping of the missiles from Cuba which were a subject in our correspondence.
The fact of the removal of those missiles has been officially confirmed also by the United States Department of Defense.
As for the rumors alleging that the missiles may have been left in Cuba somewhere in the caves, one can say that we do not live in the cave-man age to attach great significance to the rumors of this sort.
If someone is spreading rumors of this kind he is doing that deliberately to create difficulties in the negotiations.
As far as the question of the American side ascertaining our removing the IL-28 planes from Cuba is concerned, we do not see any problem here.
In this respect you and we have the paved way and let us take that way.
We have no objections against applying also to this case the procedure agreed upon between us for observation of the removal of the missiles though, speaking frankly, one could do without it.
But if you want your naval vessels and helicopters to spend several hundred tons of fuel sailing and somersaulting around our ships carrying the IL-28 planes, let us then consider that such possibility exists.
I will tell you frankly that it was part of our plans, and we believe that we will do it at a proper time, to ship out of Cuba those groups of our military personnel which although were not directly involved in servicing the rocket weapons now removed, still had something to do with guarding those installations.
But I must say that the strength of those groups in Cuba is not significant.
You raise the question as to what to do next, how to ensure that those types of weapons on the removal of which we have agreed are not brought back to Cuba.
I believe that with respect to non-introduction of such weapons in the future you and I do not have any differences.
You now want some permanent supervision to be established, in Cuba or over Cuba.
If we are to show serious concern that no unexpected steps are taken on either side to the detriment of each other, then as I already said, the proposal of the United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant on the so-called ""presence of the U.N."",e. on establishing United Nations posts in the countries of the Caribbean area would meet this task.
This proposal of U Thant was also supported as is known by the Government of the Republic of Cuba.
We believe it to be a reasonable basis on which it is possible to come to an agreement.
And it would be good if that idea was accepted by you and put into life.
To tell the truth, I am somewhat surprised that in connection with the idea of ""presence of the U.N."" in the Caribbean area you are talking for some reason about setting up observation posts at the ports of the Soviet Union.
May be you have in mind the proposals which we submitted during the negotiations on the problem of disarmament and on the problem of prevention of surprise attack in 1955 and 1958.
But those proposals had nothing to do and cannot have anything to do with the question of Cuba since that question simply did not exist at that time.
Incidentally, I have already told you that in our opinion it would be useful to get back to considering the proposals to set up on a mutual basis the observation posts at airfields, major sea-ports, railway junctions and auto routes.
We have given our representatives at the negotiation on disarmament in Geneva the necessary instructions.
I repeatwe would like to come to an agreement on this question and if you give such instructions to your representatives at the negotiations on disarmament we will only greet that.
The Government of the USA in view of the agreement reached on the IL-28 planes should immediately remove the quarantine which corresponds to your own statement as well.
It is necessary to stick to generally recognized international norms and rules fixed in the UN Charter— not to violate the territorial waters and air space of sovereign states and stop the flights of American aircraft over Cuba.
I will tell you frankly, Mr President, that I met with some relief the report that during the last one-two days the flights of American planes over Cuba did not take place.
It is good if it promises maintaining of such wise decision in the future as well.
As we see the matter this will require only a few days if, of course, all the sides want to have speediest liquidation of the aftermath of a tense and dangerous situation evolved in the Caribbean area, the situation that really brought humanity to the brink of thermonuclear war.
I have read V Kuznetsov's report on his talk with A Stevenson from which I learned that the American side is going to give us a draft of its document stating the United States commitments of non-invasion of Cuba.
Let us hope that as a result of the negotiations we will manage to formalize the achieved agreement so that it satisfies all the sides.
In conclusion I wish to stress that much time has already passed since an agreement was reached between us and it is not in the interests of our countries, not in the interests of peace to delay the fulfillment of the agreement that has been reached and the final settlement of the Cuban crisis.
As far as we know F Castro wants also to make a statement today concerning the settlement of the Cuban question.
Khrushchev believes that it would be good if the President in his statements at the news conference did not introduce elements of aggravation and did not make any statements hurting the national feelings of the Cubans.
Now it is especially important that the positive which has begun to show in the settling of the conflict be by all means supported and encouraged.
It seems to us that the present state of affairs demands that each side display caution and restraint to avoid creating needless obstacles to the final elimination of the crisis which developed around Cuba.
If Mr President could take this into account while conducting his news conference it would have a positive significance and would correspond to our mutual efforts to come more promptly to a solution acceptable to all sides.
Khrushchev's reply/1/ was read to the group, the President not having yet arrived.
A statement to be made by the President at his 6:00 PM press conference was discussed and approved.
The quarantine is to be lifted immediately and a proclamation revoking it is to be prepared.
United States naval forces in the Caribbean will remain there for the time being and carry out normal exercises.
Ships in the area will not be removed because it is normal for some to be always on station in the Caribbean.
Latin American ships which are in the quarantine force will be asked to stay and participate in exercises.
Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President agreed, that there would be no low-level reconnaissance missions flown tomorrow.
High-level flights averaging not more than one a day will continue intermittently because of the importance of knowing that the IL-28 bombers are actually being removed.
The SAC air alert will be terminated and all other military forces will be put on a reduced alert basis.
Secretary McNamara recommended that within forty-eight hours we announce that the air reserves called up for the Cuban crisis would be released before Christmas.
The State Department will call in the Latin American Ambassadors before the President's press conference to brief them on the Russian reply.
Attention was called to the reference in the reply to Soviet ground forces.
The President asked where the question of our no-invasion assurance stands.
In the light of what Khrushchev has agreed to do, if he does not get our assurances he will have very little.
Alexis Johnson returned to the meeting to report that ABC reporter John Scali had been given the substance of Khrushchev's reply by a Russian source.
No clear decision was reached, some of the group believing we should insist on the shipside inspection and others saying this was not necessary.
The Attorney General expressed his opposition to giving the assurance informally.
We would be giving away a bargaining counter because Khrushchev is not insisting on having formal assurances.
The President restated his view that Khrushchev would be in a difficult position if he gave us something and got nothing in return.
We do not want to convey to him that we are going back on what he considers our bargain.
An instruction to McCloy and Stevenson/5/ is to be drafted which says that we will make no formal no-invasion assurance and explained why we declined to do so.
The text was provided by the Russian Foreign Ministry and is an unofficial translation.
I have a feeling we have to do something now on our own and we can't stall much longer.
Well, I think he was all right on that, but he was angry over the passage of words between him and Adlai yesterday.
We weren't talking SAM-sites, we were talking about getting all the troops out.
They were wrangling down at the end of the table; I was at the other end of the table and couldn't intervene.
Now he called me up this morning and said ""I'm going to call for a meeting right away"", and I said ""Don't do that.
I believe that the time has come to expedite the conclusion of this thing and we ought to pretty quickly have a SC meeting.
I would hope we could have another similar meeting to that which we had at Stamford and Glen Cove.
If there is any further exploratory business, I'm inclined to think that it isn't wise to have one of those formal meetings.
My feeling is if you can only get off this on-site inspection you are better off than if you keep talking about verification instead.
A memorandum that is coming down to you, the first one, was dictated by Stevenson and company, and the second one is the one that I did that I showed Rusk last night.
I think you ought to sit down at this stage and draft the thing that we can say in the declaration and don't pussy foot on that any longer.
Let's see what it looks like and send it up here so that we can get to work on it.
A memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk, November 22, contains three drafts including the McCloy version as revised by Rusk.
We've got a meeting at 4m./6/ scheduled to go over some instructions and we might have some conversations on the phone in the meantime about what those instructions should be.
Mind you, if the President goes off for the weekend it is going to be hard to hold Kuznetsov, and I think we should tell him something today.
I think the Pentagon agrees with me on the general best safeguard business-removal of those troops, and I would push that ahead as something we ought to do and then draft the statement and get it up quickly as you can.
I'll get hold of Dean and see if we can get something so that we can at least work something out with you on the phone to get approved at 4m.
I have a feeling that we may be running down two somewhat divergent tracks here.
I wonder if we shouldn't get Jack down here for 4m. and try to resolve this before we head into a long week where there can be no resolution.
He says the Latins will die; they will come to a very bad conclusion-that we shouldn't give any kind of pledge except on a condition of adequate verification and safeguards which of course we are never going to get.
What we did was to reiterate our existing policy in return for which we got 30 bombers and 40 missiles out of there, etc.
Those who aren't going to be satisfied with anything short of an invasion of Cuba aren't going to have their views changed by the character of the noises we make while we're not invading Cuba, either.
I don't think there is any doubt what the USUN thinks; if we ask them without Stevenson, we create trouble.
I don't think we would have difficulty with him on this, but I am not sure.
I think the President would like to or be prepared to trade a certain thickening of our assurance against a certain thickening of their affirmation that they are leaving.
That is the sort of thing we could give to Kuznetsov to chew on at the end of the day today.
Then there would be a hassle in which it is clear that we say to him ""Look, we can do this better if your people would do what you haven't been able to get them to do.
I am sure he would want the alternative because I think they have really given up on the first one.
That's right and it seems to me a question of if you spend a day on that or not.
I know McNamara if, in fact, the trend line of Soviet presence in Cuba is downward, he doesn't see much point in trying to bargain for something we are never going to get and would be perfectly willing to give something that perhaps went a shade beyond what the President actually gave yesterday.
Three draft instructions, one written by McCloy, another by Stevenson, and a third by the State Department, were discussed./l/ The State draft was largely a restatement of the President's press conference statement.
It made the point that we cannot ignore the necessity of ensuring the peace and security of the hemisphere.
Mr Ball said that McCloy's view is that we got from the Russians more than we expected.
Therefore, we should not put so much stress on ground inspection now that if we don't get it it is a defeat for us.
The President agreed that we could abandon insistence on ground inspection, but he felt that the proposed no-invasion assurances were too hard.
He said our objective is to preserve our right to invade Cuba in the event of civil war, if there were guerrilla activities in other Latin American countries or if offensive weapons were reintroduced into Cuba.
The pertinent sentence in the declaration which we would make to the UN Security Council was revised.
Secretary McNamara said he would be recommending to the President an aerial reconnaissance plan for the next few weeks.
Low-level flights would be authorized only with Presidential approval, but he doubted that many such flights would be necessary.
High-level flights, two per day accumulatively but not more than five in any one day, would be recommended.
Secretary McNamara said that in the coming days we are going to have insufficient information out of Cuba but we can live with this rather than risk having one of our planes shot down and then having to retaliate.
I have been glad to get your letter of November 20/1/ which arrived in good time yesterday.
As you will have seen, I was able to announce the lifting of our quarantine promptly at my press conference, on the basis of your welcome assurance that the IL-28 bombers will be removed within a month.
I do not wish to confuse the discussion by trying to state our present position in detail in this message, but I do want you to know that I continue to believe that it is important to settle this matter promptly and on reasonable terms, so that we may move on to other issues.
I regret that you have been unable to persuade Mr Castro to accept a suitable form of inspection or verification in Cuba, and that in consequence we must continue to rely upon our own means of information.
But, as I said yesterday ,121 there need be no fear of any invasion of Cuba while matters take their present favorable course.
Stevenson is prepared to go along on a draft that we worked out over the phone./l/ Jack has still got some reservations, and he wants to think it over overnight and then talk again in the morning.
He wants to get out of it any reservation with regard to our right to overfly or protect ourselves, and I think that we really can't do it.
He has a feeling that actually we shouldn't insist on any kind of reservation of that kind; that we tell them orally we are going to have to do it, but that we don't put anything in any document because he thinks this doesn't give them enough, and that if we want to close this thing up we have to give them something.
It is really a question of where we start in this thing and where we come out.
My own feeling is that we probably ought to start with something not much different from what we arrived at tonight, and Stevenson himself agreed to that.
I think Jack will in the morning, but he wanted to think it over a little further.
The main crux of the argument is this business whether to include some such phrase as ""and the United States is in position to be satisfied on these points"" which is really a reservation of our right to overfly which it seems to me is essential if we are not going to get ourselves in a position where we may lose a U-2 and not be still feeling committed in the eyes of the world to a non-invasion guaranty, which I don't think we can be.
You see, if you say ""is assured"" then the interpretation is that this means that the Russians have given them this assurance.
Yes, the only question in my mind is whether your statement really is too limiting to us.
But the problem with McCloy is that he just doesn't want any reference to the fact that we're protecting the right to overfly as a condition to the non-invasion assurance, and I really think we have to have it.
So that he is going to think it over overnight and the idea is that we talk the first thing in the morning.
But we would like to get something in the Russian hands say toward noon tomorrow.
It is a nagging business as far as Khrushchev is concerned in that he would like to get it behind him.
I do think there is some value in not letting it drag out too long because I think the American people are never happy with a long, drawn-out negotiation, and that gives the newspapers a chance to build up all the suspicions and doubts, etc.
The only thing is, I say, we don't want to get . . . the wording of that is going to be important to us in the next two years.
There's nothing . . . you seemed to have more ""whereases"" in the meeting this afternoon.
No, I tell you, the only difference is that instead of saying ""if and so long as"" we say ""provided""— that's not really anything.
And when we say ""and the United States is in position to be satisfied"" what we have said before was ""and the United States and the other states of the hemisphere are in position to be fully satisfied""-but that's not a significant change.
Well, the reason we have written it this way, of course, is to bury it and to make it appear as subsidiary as possible.
Well, if they shoot down our planes, then you see under the language we have here, then we would say the whole deal is off, because they have frustrated us from being in position to be satisfied.
It gives freedom of action because it is based on the assumption that a presence outside the western hemisphere is incompatible with the American system, you see.
By reserving our rights under the Rio Pact, it really permits us to do pretty much what we please.
If he will go along with this draft, then he will deliver this draft to the Russians by noon.
Well, I think what we can say is that this is the best we can possibly do for you.
Now, the fact is that there is a reservation of our right to be satisfied.
I think you ought to say that constitutionally the President cannot make a comment that cuts across the Rio Pact.
I think you might get up a background sheet some time so that if we get assaulted we can show all the examples of where we can move.
If I can get McCloy and Stevenson to agree with this in the morning I won't bother you.
Attachment/2/ DRAFT ASSURANCE TO THE SOVIET UNION Provided no nuclear weapons or/3/ weapon systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba, and the United States is in position to be satisfied on these points; and provided Cuba does not invade or support an invasion of any other country, the United States declares that it will not invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba.
This declaration/4/ does not alter any of the rights or obligations/5/ set forth in the UN Charter and the Rio Pact.
A note in Ball's handwriting indicated that this was agreed to by Stevenson, read to the President at 8m., and McCloy would provide an answer on the morning of November 22.
Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland; cleared with the Executive Committee and Ball, and approved by Cleveland.
On Soviet side, on-site UN-supervised verification of removal of offensive weapons, and longer-term safeguards against their reintroduction.
Our interest lies in speeding the disengagement process, while avoiding the kind of commitment that unduly ties our hands in dealing with the Castro regime while it lasts.
On verification and safeguards, The Soviets have given no indication that they are prepared to press Castro regime as hard as would be necessary to get Cubans to agree to any acceptable inspection system; Cubans have consistently been adamant in objecting to ground inspection of any kind, and have rejected several progressively softer proposals by SYG on verification; Both Soviets and Cubans have stressed need for reciprocal arrangements involving inspection of other Caribbean areas, probably including US, as price for inspection of Cuba.
Therefore it is not going to be possible in the short run to get a UN system of short-term verification or long-term safeguards on offensive weapons in the Caribbean.
Assuming that it would be possible to develop a satisfactory arrangement for adequate long-term safeguards on basis of mutuality in the Caribbean area, it is not to our interest to have the Soviets involved in creating, sponsoring, or administering such safeguards.
Absence of inspection arrangements, while leaving part of original deal unfulfilled, does provide rationale for continued United States photographic reconnaissance over Cuba, operating under existing OAS resolution, and the tough conditions on our non-invasion assurances.
There are distinct advantages to closing out this phase of the negotiations with the Soviets without delay.
The Soviets would have the opportunity to disengage themselves from major military involvement in Cuba.
We would be enabled to deal with Cuba largely as a Hemispheric problem and to consider next steps on long-range safeguards in a Caribbean Latin American context, without the intrusion of the Soviet Union.
This would permit us to seek progress with the Soviet Union on wider subjects, such as nuclear testing, Berlin, disarmament and the election of the Secretary General.
To accomplish a speedy wrap-up of current phase of negotiations, Soviets evidently have in mind a Security Council meeting at which agreed declarations would be made by the United States and the USSR, a report would be made by SYG, and an agreed summation would be made by Chairman or in simple procedural resolution adopted by the Council.
Soviets are not insisting on a formal protocol, nor do they seem to be insisting that Cubans be parties to this accord at this stage.
The United States is quite prepared to work toward such a wrap-up meeting of Security Council.
In view of the non-fulfillment of important aspects of the original understanding, we cannot and should not declare the understanding fulfilled.
However, we can adopt a procedure which enables a ""line to be drawn under"" the US-Soviet crisis over Cuba, while leaving open questions that must be sorted out with Cuba in hemispheric context over longer span of time.
In the course of negotiations during this next phase, we would have to make clear, both to Soviets and to general public, that KennedyKhrushchev understanding was never properly fulfilled, and the absence of on-site verification and of longer-term safeguards against reintroduction makes it necessary for OAS to retain full freedom of action as regards aerial surveillance and other means of keeping a close eye on Cuban behavior and any evidence of renewed Soviet intrusion into Hemisphere.
We would continue to remind world that declaration of intention must be independently checked in a world still so full of international mistrust, which has just been treated to a classic example of large-scale duplicity.
However, until after SC meeting we would avoid making our intentions on continued air surveillance manifest in a form or forum that would require Soviets to raise the issue of violation of Cuban air space.
In the circumstances we will have to place conditions on our non-invasion assurance which are justified by absence of Cuban cooperation with the United Nations and the inability of the Soviets to induce the Cubans to cooperate.
This will leave the door open for regional arrangements for longer-term safeguards if Cubans cooperate, and for continued OAS air surveillance of Cuba, and military response to any Cuban aggression, if they do not.
The Secretary-General would report on the steps he has taken, and in particular his series of unsuccessful efforts to secure Cuban agreement to UN on-site inspection to verify withdrawal and dismantling of offensive weapons and to safeguard against future reintroduction.
The Soviet Union would make a declaration indicating steps it has taken pursuant to the United States -USSR understanding and containing assurances that all missiles and nuclear components have been removed, that the IL-28's would come out within four weeks, that military units and personnel intended for the protection of these weapons systems will be removed in time, and that no offensive weapons would be reintroduced in Cuba in the future.
These declarations would be noted by the Security Council President in a ""summation"" which would have to be agreed ahead of time.
Alternatively a brief procedural resolution noting the declaration might be less difficult to achieve than getting UAR to agree to an acceptable summation.
If a resolution is used, it should contain no substantive elements and should establish no continuing machinery.
Drafted by Cleveland, Sisco, and Ball; cleared by Ball; and approved by Cleveland.
In letters of President Kennedy on October 27 and of Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy on October 28, 1962/2/ firm undertakings were made regarding the settlement of the Cuban crisis.
The USSR would agree to remove from Cuba, under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision, all weapons systems capable of offensive use and would undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba.
The United States would agree-upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments— to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect, and to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
The President also expressed his confidence that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise.
The United States notes the statement made by the Soviet Union that all medium and intermediate range missiles, all nuclear weapons and components have been removed from Cuba, that all IL-28 bomber aircraft will be removed by December 20th, and that all sites for medium range and intermediate range missiles have been dismantled.
It notes also that the USSR has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel placed there for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems.
The United States notes further the statements of the USSR that no weapons capable of offensive use will be introduced into Cuba in the future.
The undertakings in the President's letter of October 27, that the United Nations would be enabled to verify the removal of missiles and bombers and the destruction of sites, and that United Nations safeguards would be agreed upon to ensure against further introduction into Cuba of weapons systems capable of offensive use, have not been fulfilled.
A minimum inspection procedure was, however, arranged in cooperation with the USSR, under which United States naval vessels have verified that Soviet vessels leaving Cuba have carried out a number of missiles which the USSR had certified to the United States as having been in Cuba.
The Soviet Union has also agreed to similar verification of the imminent withdrawal of all IL-28 bomber aircraft.
In the absence of Cuban agreement to United Nations verification and safeguards, the nations of the Organization of American States have no choice but to continue to be alert through their own resources to any possibility that offensive weapons systems remain or are reintroduced into Cuba.
In consideration of the steps that have been taken by the Soviet Union to date, the quarantine instituted on October 23, 1962, has been lifted on November 20, 1962.
Provided no nuclear weapons or weapons systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba, and the United States is in position to be satisfied on these points, and provided Cuba does not invade or support an invasion of any other country, the United States declares that it will not invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba.
This declaration is made on the representation of the Soviet Union here in the Security Council and does not alter any of the rights or obligations set forth in the UN Charter and the Rio Pact.
Dear Mr President, I have received your message./l/ I express great satisfaction.
I fully trust the statement made in that message too that the United States confirms its commitment not to invade Cuba which you also confirmed in your statement at the news conference.
In my confidential messages to you I have already laid down our understanding of the questions and of those steps which are needed to normalize the situation in the Caribbean area after the great and dangerous tension we and you have lived through.
No less important questions are facing us now, that must be solved to avoid recurrence of the situation which has just been eliminated through our mutual efforts.
You say that I was not able to convince Prime-Minister Fidel Castro about something.
But it should be taken into consideration that Cuba is a young republic the Cuban leaders being very able and devoted to their people are however young, expansive people-Spaniards in a word, to use it far from pejorative sense.
But one should understand the position they are in as the leaders of Cuba.
The Republic of Cuba is a small country having for its neighbor a big and powerful state-the United States of America, a state which has been unfriendly to her since the first day the Cuban revolution was born.
Moreover, one should not forget either that there was an invasion of Cuba.
That is what has to be taken into consideration in order to correctly assess and understand the situation and, if you wish,the state of mind of the leaders of Cuba.
I even think that Prime-Minister Fidel Castro may have looked upon some questions with a great sense of understanding but he probably also correlated his steps with the feelings of the Cuban people who are taken by a great patriotic upsurge and desire to defend their independence.
Of course, you and we have a different appraisal of the Cuban revolution and of the events which developed around Cuba and of the position of the Cuban leaders.
The different appraisal must not after all prevent us from finding agreed solutions in the interests of peace.
One should treat both sides with understanding and take into account the actual state of things-in this case the situation in Cuba which has chosen the way for its development in accordance with the will of its people.
We have been doing with understanding and patience everything that was needed and that was within our power to ensure the achievement of agreement on the elimination of the remnants of the crisis.
Incidentally, he will come back soon because we have given him appropriate instructions to this effect.
I understood your message in a sense that you yourself regard with understanding the difficulties that still remain.
I would wish that we having accomplished the main thing, having given relief to the world public and having given orders to the armed forces contributing to the normalization of the situation-and we gave such order at once as soon as we learned that analogous steps were taken on your side-that we would take speedy measures to complete the settlement of the questions that would crown all our efforts.
It would be necessary that appropriate instructions be also given to your representative, Mr McCloy for whom we and I personally, after my meeting with him in Pitsunde last year have respect, despite the fact that he, as I told him half seriously and half-jokingly, is a representative of Wall Street.
True, he tried to convince me that Wall Street was not so terrible a thing as I imagined.
I do not lose hope that one fine day Mr McCloy will fulfil his promise, that is, will take me to Wall Street.
We consider these proposals to be constructive, and we were guided by a desire to facilitate the completion of our agreement.
The main thing has been achieved indeed and at the final stage it would be necessary to create good, reliable relations so that, relying on common sense, on reason and on the understanding of all the responsibility that lies upon you and us, to reach a final solution on a firm reasonable basis and thus to create conditions for a good, stable situation in the Caribbean area.
In this message of mine I do not raise any questions of substance since the questions that must be completed are known to you.
Let us then make a joint effort to complete the remaining questions as well.
This may serve as a good omen for both our sides in working out an approach for the solution of other not less important questions that we face.
After all the question that you and we are struggling with is, though important, but a particular one.
Meanwhile there are questions the solution of which is extremely important for destinies of peace and they must be solved in order to really stabilize the situation and secure lasting peace on earth.
Sincerely yours, N Khrushchev/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
Bundy told Ball that ""the President is prepared to fall back from this but he does not see any reason not to try it out.
The President asked Bundy, and Bundy gave him assurances, on the point whether we thought McCloy had it clear in his mind that we don't want to haggle it to a dead end up there ; that we would do anything else.
He [the President] even suggested an exchange of private messages with the Chairman.
Bundy told him he did not think the Secretary was ready to recommend this.
You should begin by emphasizing our desire that this be wound up very promptly, a desire Chairman Khrushchev evidently shares.
Ways and means of ending matter should be governed by this requirement.
You should present SC scenario contained Deptel 1338/2/ give Kuznetsov our draft declaration (revised text of final paragraphs in next message),/3/ and explain it to him as the most we can do-and more than was originally promised— in the light of Cuban refusal to permit UN verification or safeguards.
At the same time you should indicate that we do not want a long and fruitless haggle in the UN over differences which undoubtedly exist between what they would like and what we would like, particularly since some of these differences may wither away over time if things go well.
If our statement is one which they could not live with in UN, we believe a satisfactory wind-up can be obtained by use of a Presidential statement, as in last press conference, which Soviets can readily interpret as promised assurance against invasion.
We note with interest Chairman's last message/4/ which does indeed interpret President's last press conference in this way.
You should emphasize that there is in fact no present danger of invasion of Cuba, but that we cannot be put in position of giving a blanket guarantee to a man who has refused to cooperate with UN to fulfill understanding of October 27 and 28.
We anticipate that these matters can well be discussed at Geneva in connection with negotiation on surprise attack.
This is obviously a complex problem going well beyond initial understanding and requiring long discussion.
Therefore we should not hold up all exchanges of assurances pending such an agreement but should promptly do the best we can in the light of Castro's position and move on to other issues.
We of course have confidence in your ability to persuade Kuznetsov that our draft declaration is an ideal solution.
This statement is made on the understanding that by reason of the refusal of Cuba to permit arrangements contemplated to assure the carrying out and continuation of the commitments in regard to the maintenance and introduction of such weapon systems in Cuba, the United States will, until such time as such arrangements can be effected, continue to employ such other means of observation and verification as may be necessary.
A note on the memorandum indicates that this was part of the President's weekend reading, November 25.
I talked to Jack McCloy about his conversation with General Eisenhower and have done the attached memorandum as a result.
I have sent him a copy and have asked him to make any amendment or correction so that the record will be accurate.
I have also taken the precaution of sending a copy of the draft declaration to John McCone over CIA wires to his retreat in the Caribbean./l/ 1 do not think he will raise objections, but I do think it is as well to have him signed on.
The overtones of McCloy's report suggest that McCone may be in even closer touch with General Eisenhower than I, at least, have supposed.
SUBJECT Proposed Declaration on Cuba I talked to Mr McCloy about the language of the proposed declaration on Cuba and he agrees to stick with the wording which you approved yesterday on the first round.
Mr McCloy also told me that he had had an entirely satisfactory conversation with General Eisenhower and that General Eisenhower seemed to share McCloy's view that we have a victory in hand and should now wind the matter up promptly.
General Eisenhower also agreed that United States overflights and intelligence collection were a much better means of reassurance than some undefined UN inspection, and he expressed the view that he had been worried that we might get tied on too hard to this kind of thing.
He said that the declaration McCloy was planning to negotiate might meet with some criticism in the country but that he, General Eisenhower, would not only not criticize it, but would support it.
He suggested that Mr McCloy might want to check the proposed language with John McCone, and Mr McCloy later tried to do so but found that McCone was not available.
Mr McCloy told General Eisenhower that he had the feeling that McCone would not really be satisfied with anything short of an invasion of Cuba.
General Eisenhower said that he himself had no such view, but thought McCone might have useful comments.
General Eisenhower did remark that a solution of this kind would still leave us with the Castro problem, but Mr McCloy and he agreed that nonetheless this seemed the best course available right now.
Mr McCloy reported that General Eisenhower plainly shared his view that a quick wind-up of the immediate negotiations was highly desirable.
First McCloy paraphrased instructions, emphasizing desire for prompt windup and real efforts which had been made to present Kuznetsov with draft declaration carrying out spirit of October 27/28 letters, despite fact full compliance not possible due largely Cuban recalcitrance.
Also suggested possibility avoiding long wrangle at UN by Presidential declaration if this seemed more compatible with their interests.
Kuznetsov immediately replied he was disappointed in it as it did not contain any suggestion of thinking which he felt we should have been prompted to include as result of great Soviet concessions, etc/1/ Nothing in document embodied matters that Chairman had brought up in correspondence with President such as stabilization and normalization of conditions in Caribbean.
When McCloy asked Kuznetsov specifically what he had in mind, Kuznetsov then referred to paragraphs in his protocol which are mainly rehash of Castro conditions.
Kuznetsov argued at some length but McCloy thought rather perfunctorily on this point.
Kuznetsov seemed seek some comments from us on willingness discuss outstanding issues with Cubans.
McCloy replied that we always prepared discuss things with Cuba if they wanted but no such conditions could be part of this transaction.
Believe may hear again on this after Mikoyan arrives but believe it only matter of record.
Next Kuznetsov objected to long statement of Soviet concessions sounding as if Soviets compelled to treat for ignoble peace.
McCloy replied simply evidenced clear effort put things right with no inference of indignity involved.
Moreover showed United States moved substantially from original position, particularly in abandoning quarantine before all conditions met.
Kuznetsov's real objection was to overflight reservation, stating this simply put us back to where we had started from.
Referred to our same old insistence on-site inspection, which should now be discarded in light of their display of good faith.
They had felt that if they agreed to take out their military units all further need for overflight would have passed.
This clause defeats Kuznetsov's hopes for rapid settlement and did not know how to put his failure on this to his government.
Overflights which pinpointed missile bases played large part in avoiding war.
Inconceivable abandon them without thorough verification on ground though we prepared to seek more satisfactory method verification.
Simply stating in all honesty we intended reserve this precaution and wanted world know our commitments made in light of this fact, etc.
Was certain they probably have number comments but sure overflight paragraph considered unsatisfactory and objectionable.
Complained about references to unfulfilled obligations of Soviet Union.
McCloy agreed use phrase ""had not been capable of fulfillment"" in place of language of draft.
Kuznetsov also stated withdrawal military units not part of original agreement.
McCloy admitted this arguable but at any rate was to their as well as our interest to have it stated.
Indicated this might not be point of issue if we agreed on other things and so long as they got military units out soon as possible.
Overflights however were essential and fundamental element of our position.
Kuznetsov kept coming back to this clause, pointing out its difficulties for them.
Suggested we accept what he called latest U Thant proposal which had some element reciprocity in it so Castro would have basis for giving us some on-site inspection.
Thing was to get on with declaration and move on to other important matters.
Further talk by Kuznetsov about United States not doing its share to which McCloy made usual reactions.
Declaration not easy for United States local and hemispheric objections to thought United States providing sanctuary for Castro subversion of continent.
We had made deal and prepared to live up to it and adopt all reasonable compromises necessary.
Conditions were clear and overflight paragraph though understandably difficult for them was necessary for us and essential for us to make it clear.
Finally Kuznetsov almost pleaded with McCloy to take out this overflight clause, stating that we could made some reservation outside UN 72/ McCloy told him he had no authority modify it and personally did not see how position adequately covered unless we did state understanding on this in UN, pointing out they did not have to agree to it.
Kuznetsov strongly requested United States give some further thought to this clause.
In essence he kept asking us to find a way to maintain our position without rubbing their noses in it.
McCloy made clear United States not refusing go to UN, but were merely suggesting some alternative.
In so doing insisted United States would not sign any protocol or agreement such as Sovs had in mind but would make declaration on basis of their declaration with thought SYG would note declaration had been made, perhaps congratulating leaders involved for statesmanship in avoiding disaster, and no more.
Kuznetsov seemed feel no resolution of SC other than noting declarations necessary.
McCloy repeated possible advantages declaration outside SC but gathered Kuznetsov inclined toward UN record and anxious confirm United States not refusing UN record.
Kuznetsov repeated would in due course give us their draft and their comments on our draft.
Then we discuss both together, but Kuznetsov sure overflight clause unsatisfactory.
Kuznetsov did not object specifically to use of word ""intend"" but Mendelevich picked it up.
McCloy argued that constitutionally this best way for us handle it and Kuznetsov did not carry argument further.
McCloy believes it will come up again when we receive their full comments as will ""threat to peace and security"" phrase.
McCloy senses Sovs want declaration badly but overflight clause is bone in throat.
McCloy suggested that at appropriate time it might be well for Kuznetsov see President, perhaps with Mikoyan.
Left that Kuznetsov would not get in touch with McCloy at least until Monday, that Mikoyan due back on Monday but Kuznetsov did not know for how long a stay.
Kuznetsov said he would very much appreciate opportunity of paying respects to President at appropriate time.
Message From the Director of Central Intelligence to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Washington, November 25, 1962.
A covering note to Bundy indicates that this message was received from McCone, who was on vacation in the Caribbean, at 10:45m., November 25.
Believe the proposed declaration/ 1/ satisfactorily meets condition for continuing surveillance of Cuba in the absence of latter's agreement for United Nations inspection.
Therefore feel such a declaration should not disturb those who view the total Castro problem as most serious.
If this declaration acceptable to USSR then door should be open to informal discussion with Kuznetsov as to future of SAM installations which we know are now under Soviet control.
Same applies to large amounts sophisticated ground equipment and missile launching boats.
Assume references to OAS Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance would give us necessary latitude for action if Soviets replace Castro and his regime with their own people thus producing a true satellite from where the Soviets could effectively operate against established governments in Latin America.
Drafted by Sisco, cleared by U Alexis Johnson and with Rusk in substance, and approved by Cleveland.
We understand further you preparing some textual changes for our consideration.
While concurring in your acceptance of phrase ""had not been capable of fulfillment,"" we strongly believe that at your meeting with Mikoyan tonight you should continue to press Soviets on basis Deptel 1359/3/ and urtel 1941.
Mikoyan has well deserved reputation of being hardest bargainer in Kremlin's stable of tough negotiators.
We should not consider any textual changes at least until Soviets have received a considered reaction from Moscow to our declaration, and we have been presented with draft of Soviet declaration.
We assume that for bargaining purposes at least Soviets will submit draft declaration which includes some or all of Castro's demands and other unacceptable elements drawn from their protocol.
We prepared for prompt wind-up in Security Council; Draft declaration is most we can do-and more than was originally promised-in light of Cuban refusal to permit UN verification or safeguards.
Soviet protocol categorically unacceptable; Question of discussing outstanding issues with Cuba is outside framework US-USSR transaction pursuant to KennedyKhrushchev correspondence; In absence of agreement on UN verification, reservation re use our own resources to check compliance absolutely essential.
We are concerned, for example, that he might include proposal he made to us on Caribbean security zone which he gave to Soviets, although it was unacceptable to us.
Believe Yost should discuss this with Narasimhan with view making appropriate arrangements.
Drafted by Cleveland, copies sent to Thompson, Tyler, Martin, and McGeorge Bundy.
SUBJECT Conversation with Mr McCloy on Cuba Mr McCloy called in at 2:15m. to summarize the results of the meeting which he and Ambassadors Stevenson and Yost had just completed with Mikoyan, Kuznetsov, Zorin, and Mendelevich.
These two motivations produced many references to the ""normalization"" of relations with Cuba.
Mikoyan said our declaration was unsatisfactory, and represented a retreat from correspondences between the President and Khrushchev.
He particularly objected to making the non-invasion assurances an intention rather than an unequivocal commitment as it seemed to be in the President's letter of October 27th.
Mikoyan also jumped on our overflights and objected to United States subversive activities in Cuba.
Mikoyan went back to the idea of a protocol signed by all three countries, and seemed to attach a good deal of significance to Cuba being one of the signatories.
He would like to have a resolution, not merely a collection of unilateral declarations, in the Security Council.
Mikoyan's plea for Castro's conditions seemed more determined and comprehensive than in any of the Kuznetsov-McCloy discussions.
Mr McCloy's guess is that this is still pro forma, but it was spelled out at great length and will undoubtedly be spelled out once again for the President.
On inspection, the emphasis was on reciprocity, and Mikoyan lectured the American group on the importance of not being obstinate on this point.
Mikoyan did not address himself to the United States gambit that inspection in the United States would require inspection in the Soviet Union, even though this gambit was used again on this occasion.
The Soviets mentioned Puerto Rico specifically, but the American negotiators said flatly that the inspection of any part of the United States was not in the cards, as a matter of reciprocity with Cuba alone.
Cuba, Mikoyan said, could not possibly accept a ""one-sided inspection""; he said he had told Castro that his position was right on this point.
Mikoyan mentioned Guantanamo, indicating he did not expect us to withdraw right away but thought it would be reasonable for us to set a time at which we would begin to negotiate about withdrawal.
Mikoyan pressed hard on the United States commitment to bring the other members of the Western Hemisphere into line.
The United States representative emphasized that it came with bad grace from the Soviets to put any emphasis on this point, since they hadn't even been able to bring into line the one Western Hemisphere country with whom they presumably had especially friendly relations.
He said he had read the Rio Pact (Mr McCloy got the impression that perhaps he had read it for the first time) and did not like it.
The Americans said that it was absolutely necessary to refer to the Rio Pact, since it was the basic document of Western Hemisphere security and we owed it to our co-signers to make clear that we were not, in our arrangements with the Soviets, watering down our commitments under the Rio Pact.
There was no detailed discussion of our draft declaration as such; Mikoyan said he would leave that to the negotiators.
The Americans did indicate that we were not wedded to the reference in the declaration to U Thant; but no other concessions were made.
Mr McCloy's prediction is that Mikoyan will rehearse for the President the Soviet position on the non-invasion pledge, on overflights, and on the need for a reciprocal form of inspection, and that it will not be possible to make any final arrangements with the Soviets in the course of Mikoyan's short visit to Washington.
It is, indeed, not clear that Mikoyan expects to wrap this up personally, in which case they might look forward to a somewhat longer negotiation than we had previously assumed they wanted.
That there is a considerable record of conciliation and perform-ance on both sides, and that the Soviets should not take this moment to turn unreasonable just because they are having difficulty with the unreasonable Mr Castro.
We can't think of giving up overflights, which everybody in the Hemisphere now knows have played such an important role in maintaining the security of the Hemisphere.
That the kind of non-invasion statement that is contained in our draft declaration is really the most that the President can constitutionally do, especially in the absence of the arrangements for verification and safeguards that were agreed to in the correspondence between the President and Khrushchev.
That it would be useful on both sides to wind the matter up quickly and with maximum good will, without trying to make a bargain out of every word.
The Cuban problem will remain; if the Cubans want to normalize relations we are ready and willing to talk with them about it.
On the basis of today's conversation, it does not appear that there will be a quick wrap-up of the matter in the present negotiating framework.
We will want to consider the possible alternative of sawing off the negotiations unilaterally if the Soviets stick to their intention to draw the Cubans into the windup arrangements.
With benefit of hindsight, we have examined the timing of movements of various types of Soviet units to Cuba.
We now believe that the primary purpose of the deployment of ground and surface-to-air units was to defend Cuba as a whole as a strategic base.
From our preliminary analysis, we also conclude that there was some apparent relationship in time between the deployment of these units and the MRBM and IRBM units.
In other words, the MRBM and IRBM units at least had priority for protection.
It should be noted that our dates are approximate and the timespan overall is quite short.
The Cuban operation began with the movement of SAM regiments and armored groups.
The deployment of the SAM battalions began with their departure from the USSR in midJuly and continued through August.
The deployment of the armored groups began in late July and continued through the first weeks of September.
The timing of arrival and the subsequent positioning of these units appear to have been phased with the closely following deployment of MRBM and IRBM units.
SAM units and armored groups were first deployed to western Cuba, including the ports of Havana and Matanzas; construction of SAM sites began in early August, while the armor arrived at its site about the middle of the month.
The initial deployment of MRBM and IRBM units was also to western Cuba , with construction equipment arrivals beginning in midAugust for the IRBM sites, and in mid-September for the missile equipment associated with the MRBM units.
The second section of the SAM and armored group deployment was to central Cuba, where the units were in place during the first week in September.
The second group of MRBM and IRBM units also went to central Cuba , with equipment arriving at the sites in the last two weeks of September.
A third group of SAM sites and an armored unit were established in eastern Cuba toward the end of September.
Finally, a fourth increment of SAM units was deployed two to three weeks later to fill in gaps, thereby providing full coverage of the island.
Three of the four Soviet armored groups known to be in Cuba were positioned where they could give rapid ground protection to IRBM and MRBM sites.
The fourth was located at Holguin, an IL-28 base within the third group of SAM sites.
It should be noted that the deliberately phased west-to-east sequence is consistent with the orderly military development of a base in the presence of the enemy.
The detected deployment of strategic missile units, however, was asymmetric.
We have found no evidence to suggest that additional units were programmed, except for the missing IRBM site at Remedios, but we are reexamining available evidence to see if any indications can be found of preliminary work for such installations.
We are not able to determine whether the USSR intended to establish a submarine base.
We do know that four Soviet ""F"" class long range conventional submarines, which left Northern Fleet bases about 1 October, were in waters south of Bermuda by about 22 October.
Eastern Cuba: Date: 1-5 August Western Cuba: Construction begins on SAM sites at Matanzas, Havana, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Santa Lucia, San Julian, & La Coloma.
Construction begins on SAM sites at Sagua la Grande, Caibarien, & Sancti Spiritus.
Date: 5-10 September Western Cuba: Central Cuba: Soviet armored group arrives at Remedios.
Upsurge of Soviet arms shipments begins arriving in eastern Cuban ports.
Construction of the remaining SAM sites, which apparently were considered less vital than those listed above to the protection of offensive missile bases in Cuba, began in late September or early October.
Following the announcement made by the President on 20 November 1962 with regard to the lifting of the maritime quarantine of Cuba in response to the Soviet agreement to remove the IL-28s from Cuba within a period of about 30 days, we are entering a new phase of the Cuban situation.
The new phase has been highlighted by the termination of the 1/8 airborne alert; the return of B-47 aircraft to home bases, except for those in Florida; authorization for the commands to return to DEFCON 5 status except where specific situations dictate otherwise; the release of the Air Force Reserve Troop Carrier units; and the authority for the return to normal operations of United States naval ships and air squadrons associated with the maritime quarantine.
In this new situation, we must recognize the need for highand low-level aerial reconnaissance over Cuba and over Soviet shipping in order to ascertain whether the Soviet commitments are in fact fulfilled.
At the same time, we must recognize the maintenance needs of our forces and the personnel hardships which high alert levels have imposed.
Overflight reconnaissance: High-Level: Alert posture which will permit an average of two U-2 flights per day in any 10-day period and not more than a maximum of five U-2 flights on any one day.
Resume normal posture except for those units which may be needed to increase the air defense of the Southeastern United States on a permanent basis.
CINCLANT and component headquarters: CINCLANT and the component commanders will maintain the presently activated communications net.
CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT headquarters elements can be returned to home stations except for reduced staffs maintained at Homestead.
The reaction times provided permit the return of all units, less those required for conduct of and combat support to reconnaissance missions, to home bases and resumption of normal training.
War reserve materiel and selected support and control personnel will remain at Florida bases.
All West Coast units less 3d LAAM Battalion will be returned to home stations at once.
The FMF Atlantic units which are presently part of the recent Guantanamo defense augmentation will remain as presently deployed with a goal of returning these units to home stations by 20 December 1962. 5th MEB shipping should be utilized insofar as practicable in returning the 2d Battalion, 1st Marines, to the West Coast.
All Army units can be returned to home stations except those required to meet the provisions of subparagraph 5a above, and the 159th Boat Battalion, which will remain temporarily at Fort Lauderdale pending completion of studies to determine a suitable location that will enable it to meet the required reaction time.
One CVA Group will be retained temporarily in the Guantanamo sea area to support the defense of Guantanamo until 20 December 1962.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff propose to review the situation on a continuing basis in order to determine whether the criteria of paragraph 4, above, should be relaxed to permit a continuing phase-down to an approximately normal posture by about 20 December 1962.
Should continued phase-down be warranted, the remaining units can be returned to home stations, and dependents can begin to be returned to Guantanamo prior to Christmas.
An immediate reduction should be effected to the readiness levels reflected in paragraph 4, above, proceeding at a rate commensurate with optimum administrative efficiency.
A reassessment of the situation should be conducted on a continuing basis in order to ascertain whether IL-28 withdrawal warrants continued relaxation to approximately normal readiness levels prior to Christmas.
Your approval of the foregoing program is requested as a basis for further action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
There followed a discussion of reports appearing in the press quoting Cuban refugees on the existence of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
The President asked again how we can control such reports and how we can deal with them publicly.
He asked that further efforts be made with news media to relate the refugee reports to the hard evidence available to us.
Mr Helms and Mr Salinger were to be asked to see if some system could be worked out to deal with this problem.
The President commented that the Russians won't take out their ground forces until we give a no-invasion assurance.
It is better for us to have the Soviet units in Cuba than to give a formal no-invasion assurance.
Secretary Rusk said that the Soviet troops were there not to defend Cuba but to guard the Soviet strategic missiles.
So long as the Soviet forces are there, we must be suspicious about what weapons are on the island and what weapons might be introduced.
Secretary McNamara raised the question of overflights and recommended that in general low-level flights should only be flown when necessary to clarify high-level pictures revealing suspicious activity.
He said that high-level photography was very good and there was no need at present to fly low for several days.
There are five types of wicked looking Soviet defensive missiles and the presence in Cuba of probably one thousand of such missiles undoubtedly gave rise to some of the refugee reports.
General Taylor and Secretary Rusk agreed that no low-level flights were necessary for a few days, but thereafter suspicious sites should be photographed at low level.
The Attorney General called attention to the reference in the Khrushchev letter to the cave rumors.
The President asked the State Department to prepare a plan which would keep the heat on Castro and bolster other regimes in the Caribbean.
A recommendation should also be made as to when the plan should be implemented.
He recommended implementation of the plan be delayed as long as Soviet bombers and Soviet personnel are moving out of Cuba.
The President called attention to the Knabel post mortem of the Cuban crisis and another by Daniels of Reader's Digest.
He mentioned Senator Keating's line,e., he has details of Soviet offensive missiles being hidden in Cuba which the Government does not have.
The importance of limiting discussion of the Cuban crisis was reemphasized by the President who reminded the group that press contacts should be strictly restricted to authorized White House sources.
DCI emphasized in discussion that it was quite impossible to prove that offensive missiles had not been in caves, however all intelligence of every kind-photographic, agent reports, refugee reports, etc. -convinced DCI that this was most improbable.
DCI and McNamara both commented on the various types of missiles remaining in Cuba and stated that without doubt some of them are in caves.
Rusk reported on the Mikoyan attitude as covered by the attached memo addressed to the Secretary of State/5/ and indicated that State felt that Mikoyan would take about the same position with the President in the afternoon.
McNamara requested Committee authorization of two high-level flights per day.
Rusk argued for low-level, principally for political reasons and fear that failure to fly would give Castro an opportunity for propaganda.
McNamara indicated that the COMOR paper passed by USIB on November 21st/6/ demanded excessive coverage in the light of conditions which have developed in the last week or ten days.
Bundy proposed to write a memorandum expressing the Committee's requirements for reconnaissance and then the DCI would use this as a directive to the COMOR Committee and USIB for guidance in developing a new reconnaissance program designed to meet Executive Committee needs.
DCI suggested to General Carter that CIA study this problem and develop a draft of an Executive Committee Directive and a reconnaissance program which would meet the directive and submit both to me for discussion by Bundy and others.
State indicated that such papers had been prepared and would be put in form for submission to the Executive Committee.
The President then brought up the question of publicity and various articles which are being written on the Cuban episode, referring particularly to an article in Reader's Digest by Mr Daniels and in Look Magazine by Mr Knebel.
Apparently both of these writers, particularly Daniels, is following the Keating line that considerable volume of information was in the hands of the Administration prior to October 22nd and that the Administration refused to accept positive information on offensive missiles.
There followed a discussion of the over-flight policies in Cuba and an emphatic denial was expressed by various members of the Executive Committee that any flight requested by CIA or NRO during September had been denied.
This caused CIA and COMOR Committee to program September flights so that planes would not be engaged by operational SAM sites.
McCone stated that this was, in his opinion, an error as those responsible for planning reconnaissance should have insisted upon over-flying areas protected by SAMs in order to determine what was going on.
He stated this was not done during September and, indeed, was not finally agreed upon until after a rather heated discussion at Special Group meeting on October 4th which was followed by a further meeting on October 9th, at which time the October 14th flight was authorized.
DCI stated that he had had some trouble defending our September program before the Killian Board and sharp questioning by Mr Clark Clifford had brought out the difficulty of explaining the lapse of 40 days in programming an aerial photography which would produce a complete mosaic of Cuba.
It was decided that all press contact with feature writers should be confined to Mr Bundy and the Attorney General and that our respective organizations should be advised not to discuss any details of Administration activity in August, September and October with such feature writers.
DCI stated he felt future activity should be restricted to intelligence gathering but this should be carried on in a most intense manner and that CIA was prepared to present an operational plan which would involve refugee interrogation at Opa Laka, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and elsewhere, and an intense program with infiltrated agents, the use of Cuban in-place defectors and very active operation with third country liaison.
It was decided that Mr Helms should present this program at the earliest moment and DCI was asked to call the meeting.
DCI also stated that the form of Mongoose organization should be modified and this was agreed, but no new organization form was discussed.
Department of State, S/S Presidential Memoranda of Conversations: Lot 66 D 149.
Drafted by Edmund S Glenn of Language Services and approved by the White House on December 13.
The Department of State prepared a briefing paper with seven attachments for the President in anticipation of this conversation.
Anastas I Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin Mr Yuriy N Vino-Gradov, Soviet Delegation to XVII General Assembly Mr Igor D Bubnov, Third Secretary, Soviet Embassy After a few brief remarks about lung cancer, the President asked Mr Mikoyan how he had enjoyed his stay in Cuba.
There is also an older brother who was at one time against the Cuban revolution but who now approves of it.
As a matter of fact, he told his brother Fidel that if he had known how history would develop he would have joined the revolutionary cause sooner.
Their mother has retained one-half of her holdings to pursue the family tradition but has given up the other half.
At the time of the first visit of Mr Mikoyan, Fidel Castro was not yet a Marxist and the flag under which he waged his revolution was that of liberalism.
He became a Marxist more recently under the influence of the wishes and thoughts ot the Cuban people.
Raoul Castro, Che Guevara, and the eldest Castro brother /l/ were Marxists already before the revolution.
Not so Fidel, who was moved towards Marxism by the play of the revolution itself.
Castro is doing a lot personally to mechanize agriculture and he is personally known by most of the farmers.
He also saw a national cattle breeding farm with 12,000 cattle and 65 pure-bred bulls.
Within five years this farm expects to increase the cattle herd to 70,000.
Mr Mikoyan also saw rural schools; one of these has 1,000 students fully supported by the government and expects within three years to increase the number of students to 20,000.
There are in Cuba 70,000 students fully supported by the government and the enthusiasm of Cuban youth is impressive.
The mansions of capitalists who have left Cubawhich the Cuban Government permits them to do-have been made into youth hostels.
During the recent events the militia has been mobilized though on an entirely voluntary basis.
The places of the men on the jobs were taken by the women who managed to fulfill their work quotas in all cases.
The President said that now he understood why Mr Mikoyan had liked his travels in Cuba.
Mikoyan said that indeed his visit to Cuba reminded him of his youth when he also was working for the cause of the revolution.
He also made speeches at several universities and felt that the students greatly distrusted the United States.
Since, however, it is expected that the exchange of correspondence between Chairman Khrushchev and President is to be registered with the United Nations, it is possible that the fears of the young Cubans will be calmed by the very fact of such a recording of this memorable correspondence.
The President said that the relations between the United States and Cuba are bad.
What Mr Mikoyan said about Cuban internal developments may be quite interesting; however, this is not the part of Cuban events which is of primary concern to us.
What we are concerned with is the use of Cuba as a springboard for subversion, meaning both Soviet subversion and Castro's own efforts in that direction.
Yet this is hardly necessary since it is obvious that the United States could have invaded Cuba any number of times beginning with April 1960 but did not do so.
While this was going on the President, trusting official statements by the Soviet Union, continued to affirm that there was no danger to the United States from an arms build-up in Cuba.
It is difficult for the President to say at the present moment that the situation with Cuba is in any way satisfactory, since it is not known what will happen next month or what the Chinese will do.
Maybe the Chinese Communists will start an arms build-up in Cuba in January, or maybe the Soviet Union itself will start again such a build-up.
After all, what the Soviets did once they could do again and no one could blame a certain feeling of mistrust on the part of the United States after what had happened.
Mr Mikoyan stated that what the President had said presents an extremely serious matter.
It had, in fact, been decided as early as June, by Chairman Khrushchev and his colleagues, of whom Mr Mikoyan was one, that the United States would be told about the arms build-up, in every detail, by the Soviet Union at an appropriate moment.
Of course, this was something which the Soviet Union was not obligated to do since after all, the United States does not inform the Soviet Union of its military moves.
The decision had been made to inform the United States after the elections so as to avoid influencing in any way the political campaign in the United States.
Of course on the 22nd of October no intimation of the build-up was made by the Soviet Union but even if a disclosure had not taken place the Soviet Union would have brought the entire build-up to the attention of the United States on November 8th or 10th, immediately after the elections.
The President said that the problem was not due to the fact that the Soviet Union did not make a statement to the United States about the arms build-up-as it obviously has the right to proceed with any such measures without announcing them to the United States— but on the contrary that the Soviet Union had made a statement according to which no offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba or were going to be sent there.
Mr Mikoyan said that obviously the two speakers had a different interpretation of the recent events.
The fact remains that the purpose of the arms build-up in Cuba was defensive and not offensive.
They were sent there to defend the island against invasion and for no other purpose.
On the other hand, the President had spoken in his exchange with Chairman Khrushchev of a United States pledge of non-invasion.
Now, when the United States is making this pledge conditional on the conduct of Cuba it is departing from its previous position.
Mr Mikoyan said he was reminded of conversations he had with President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles.
Secretary Dulles had replied that he did not think that the Government of the Soviet Union in power at that time wanted to attack.
Secretary Dulles then asked Mr Mikoyan whether the latter thought that the United States wanted to attack the Soviet Union.
Mr Mikoyan replied that he did not think so but that he had some doubts in the matter.
Now the United States says that the Soviet tried to establish an offensive base in Cuba.
Mr Mikoyan would like to ask once more whether the President thinks that the Soviet Union wishes to attack the United States.
There were no indications whatsoever at the time when, in June, Mr Mikoyan said a decision had been taken by the Soviet Union, that any aggressive moves by the United States were contemplated.
Had the question been addressed to the President by Chairman Khrushchev at that time, the President would have been glad to say then as he says now that no invasion of Cuba is intended.
Mr Mikoyan said that a statement about the build-up would have been made in November.
The entire episode cannot be interpreted in any other way than as a major attack against the present Administration and the Government of the United States.
The question is now how the lack of understanding between the two governments can be transformed into mutual understanding.
Already in the recent past in the question of Laos and then again in that of Cuba, the two countries have come very close to the edge of the abyss.
Mr Mikoyan said that he would first speak about the President's concluding remarks.
In regard to the President's concluding remarks he wished to say that he fully agrees that agreement is necessary for peace and that lack of agreement between the two great Powers may well lead to disaster.
As to the President's first remarks, he must emphasize that the Soviet move into Cuba had for a purpose only defense and deterrence.
The Soviet Union acted in order to facilitate an agreement leading to peace.
After all, it is well known that counter-revolutionary gangs were being trained in camps in the United States and on the territories of other countries of the Western Hemisphere allied with the United States.
Mr Nixon spoke in favor of an invasion of Cuba, so did Pentagon generals.
Under such circumstances, there was good reason to prepare deterrents and defense.
It is quite clear that such was the purpose of the Soviet Union, which was going to inform the United States that what it intended through the build-up in Cuba was the defense of that island and not an aggression against the United States.
After all, the Soviet Union has more than enough long-range missiles emplaced on its own territory to need anything else.
Moreover, these missiles remained in the hands of the Soviet military and could not have been used without signal authorization from Moscow.
Mr Mikoyan would like to mention to the President in confidence that there exists Soviet legislation which makes it illegal to place nuclear or thermonuclear weapons under non-Soviet control.
Mr Mikoyan also feels that the threat of war is not Cuba but the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union and therefore misunderstandings and threats must be eliminated from those relations.
Mr Mikoyan remembers a conversation with that very wise man, Secretary Cordell Hull, back in 1936.
At that time, Secretary Hull had said that German fascism and Japanese militarism were preparing for war.
Only the United States and the Soviet Union were in a position to defend peace.
Both countries have terrible weapons and therefore both have an overwhelming responsibility before the entire world.
An understanding and agreement between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy must be obtained in order to prevent war.
The President said that he did not know what exactly Mr Nixon had said.
What is clear is that during the period to which Mr Mikoyan alluded Mr Nixon was not in a policy making position.
As for Pentagon generals, they are under the control of the Administration and there certainly had been no statements on their part calling for aggression.
Once again, if the United States had wanted to invade Cuba it could have done so much earlier.
There were no United States forces at the time of the hopeless attempt at landing made by Cuban patriots.
There were no statements by any people in positions of responsibility in the United States which might have led to the belief that an invasion was being contemplated.
After all, the Soviet Government does not like the present Government of Albania.
This does not mean that the Soviet Union will invade Albania, as in such a case as well as in that of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba, international consequences could be very grave.
What he is interested in, once again, is the attitude of the Soviet Government.
The President hopes that some day the Soviet Government will understand that its main duty should be the defense of the interests of the Soviet Union and not pushing the world from one small crisis to another one at the risk of catastrophe which would engulf everything.
Mr Mikoyan said that Chairman Khrushchev shared the President's opinion that an understanding between the two governments is necessary for peace.
Much was done in that direction, but unfortunately, no final situation has been yet achieved.
Once the Cuban crisis is resolved, the next steps might well be a non-aggression pact between the Warsaw Pact organization and NATO, the cessation of nuclear tests, disarmament, and Berlin.
As the President himself has noted, the fact that the Cuban crisis has been largely resolved proves the necessity of talks and negotiations between the two governments.
The exchange of correspondence between the two heads of state provides a basis for such a solution.
A good way to carry it out would be to place this exchange of correspondence within an agreed protocol.
Such a draft protocol, which would also include the position of the Cuban Government, was drafted by the Soviets.
The President asked whether Mr Mikoyan meant an approval by the Security Council or a recording of the declarations with the Secretary General.
After all, the United States representative in the Security Council cannot be expected to vote in favor of Mr Castro's declaration.
Mr Mikoyan said that after all, the Cuban question is on the agenda of the United Nations and, therefore, must be discussed there.
The latter, however, cannot be avoided, and the lack of an agreement would amount to keeping alive an international dispute.
As for such points which are not agreed, they might be the object of separate statements.
The President said that the Cuban Government must be left out of the negotiations.
The problem now may be whether there would be agreement on one or two separate declarations.
Mr Mikoyan said that there should be two declarations, one by each Government, however, that the texts should be agreed upon by the two Governments.
The Security Council could then approve those two declarations and could call on the two Governments to resolve the remaining points of difference.
What is necessary is a preliminary agreement by the two Governments on the texts of two declarations.
Mr Mikoyan said that the President guessed correctly the opinion of the Soviet Government.
The President said that Soviet missiles have been removed from Cuba and that he expects that the Soviet bombers will likewise be taken out.
He also hopes that the same thing will apply to the other military units and weapons covered by his correspondence with Chairman Khrushchev.
Mr Mikoyan said that what Mr Khrushchev has promised to do has either been done or is being done.
No other weapons, however, beyond those covered by the correspondence, will be removed.
The President said that the Agreement covered missiles, bombers, and in due course, other units destined to service or guard the strategic offensive weapons.
There is, of course, in Cuba, other military materiel about which, however, the President was not speaking.
Mr Mikoyan said that the correspondence between the two heads of State is clear on that point.
Unfortunately the United States draft declaration also contains a condition which applies to its non-invasion pledge.
This conditional clause gives to the United States the right to judge the actions of another government and in fact to invade Cuba as it pleases.
The President said that it is Mr Castro who is asking for guarantees and not the United States.
Castro's demand that the agreement cut both ways is reasonable and in agreement with international law.
Likewise, his demands for the liquidation of an economic blockade, the abstention from piratical acts, especially by ships belonging to Cuban counter-revolutionaries but based in United States ports and in particular Miami, are reasonable.
So is his wish for a normalization of relations between the two countries.
Even there, however, Mr Castro does not ask for the immediate elimination of the Base but only for the opening of negotiations to determine the time when it would be surrendered.
Such actions are unimportant and only the sporadic exploits of publicity seekers.
Any official written document, however, must be so drafted as to recognize the international responsibilities of the United States.
After all, we can neither forget or disregard the fact that Castro is not a friend of this country.
The only thing that can be done is to make United States surveillance as unobtrusive as possible.
The President showed Mr Mikoyan a press clipping containing a statement that there are Soviet missiles hidden in Cuban caves.
Mr Mikoyan reiterated that the agreement between the two Chiefs of State in regard to weapons has been reached and is being carried out accordingly.
However, articles in the United States press and the attitude of United States military constitute an obstacle to the final resolution of the crisis.
Now the United States is stating that it intends to continue its overflights of Cuban territory.
After all, the United States has aerial cameras which make it possible to photograph Cuba from outside Cuban airspace.
In spite of that the United States insists on violating Cuban airspace.
The President said that there are no such cameras; the angle at which photographs can be taken from outside the three-mile limit makes the photographs untrustworthy.
The United States, however, endeavors to keep its overflights inconspicuous by carrying them out at high altitude and avoiding low altitude flights.
Castro is right when he says that he will have to deal with such overflights by his own means.
The President said that this is not a question of great concern to the United States.
Mr Mikoyan stated that such overflights violate the principles of the United Nations and Cuban sovereignty.
Any country would protest against a state of affairs which hurts the legitimate pride and self-esteem of the Cubans.
He only insists that such a control apply to all the parties concerned and not be strictly onesided.
What makes the situation more difficult is the insistence of the United States to place a statement on this matter in the declaration.
Furthermore, the statement in the declaration that a non-invasion pledge is conditional on Cuba's abstention from subversive activities cannot be reconciled with international law as it in fact gives to the United States the right to determine by itself whether an invasion should take place.
If there are any measures to be taken for the control of the subversion, they should apply equally to Cuba, to the other Caribbean nations and to the United States.
The President quoted the text of the proposed draft stating that ""provided no nuclear weapons or weapons systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba, and the United States is in position to be satisfied on these points, and provided Cuba does not involve or support an invasion of any other country, the United States declares that it will not invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba.
Mr Mikoyan said that it might not be impossible to express the fact that no nuclear weapons should be emplaced in Cuba, though not in the language of the present United States draft.
In this draft it is said that Cuba might ""support"" the invasion of other countries.
The President said that he understands Mr Mikoyan's concern on the latter point.
If nothing were said beyond the point of the exclusion of offensive missiles and nuclear weapons from Cuba, that would mean that Castro would be free to do anything else he chose to do, and that the United States would be prevented from reacting against it.
He is ready to state that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba; the problem is, however, that of avoiding giving Castro a blank check for a number of actions against which retaliation would be prevented by the declaration.
If Castro wants peace, that is fine, because that is what the United States wants and what the United States is saying.
Mr Mikoyan said that the United States declaration means that the United States intends to control the actions of the Government of Cuba.
His position is fully in agreement with the spirit of the exchange of letters between the two Chiefs of State.
On the contrary the President said that Castro is an enemy of the United States and that the United States is going to terminate its blockade only under certain conditions.
This means that the United States is moving back from the position agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence.
It means that the United States is to be free to continue its anti-Cuban policies but that Castro would be prevented from doing anything without the permission of the United States.
Multilateral control can be accepted, but a situation according to which one government would be in a position to judge the actions of another government is not acceptable.
Furthermore, the fact that the United States has responsibilities under the Rio Treaty does not need to be included, as this is of no concern to the Soviet Union and, furthermore, as the United States and its Allies have pushed Cuba out of the Rio Treaty organization.
The President said that Mr Mikoyan had accused the United States of retreating from the position expressed in the exchange of correspond-ence.
It is on the contrary, the Soviet Union which is moving back from its position, as the correspondence specified inspection by the United Nations and that no such inspection was allowed.
Mr Mikoyan had said that the declaration should not contain any suggestion that one government might judge the actions of another.
However, some safeguards are necessary since otherwise the hands of the United States would be tied even while the policy of the Soviet Union would be free to change.
Now, however, Mr Mikoyan suggests that the United States as well as Cuba submit to control, while no control would be exercised over the territory of the Soviet Union.
If the Soviet Union prefers it, however, it may be possible to make the United States intent known in a way which would be quite clear though not imply the same legal complications, for example, through a statement by the President, let us say, a press conference.
If, however, an official declaration is called for it must include references to all the aspects of the problem.
Thus there is a choice between either an official declaration, the precise language of which could be worked out between Messrs.
McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetsov, or a simply verbal statement by the President at a press conference.
If the first alternate is chosen it would have to contain references to the Rio Treaty, of which the United States continues to be a member, and a clause referring to the possibility of the United States satisfying itself that Cuba and the Soviet Union are respecting their side of the bargain; a lack of such a clause would cause an uncontrollable uproar in the United States and throughout the Western Hemisphere.
The other solution might be a simple statement by the President that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba, with the hope that Castro will not undertake any provocative action and that the Soviet Union does not reintroduce a military threat into the Western Hemisphere.
If Mr Castro wishes to carry on the activities described by Mr Mikoyan such as the education of Cuban children and the mechanization of Cuban agriculture, well and fine.
Mr Mikoyan asked if the President's statement at a press conference would be instead of or in addition to the formal declarations.
The President said that if no agreement can be reached on formal declarations, then it might be possible for him to clarify the position of the United States by means of a statement at a press conference express-ing the spirit of the exchange of correspondence between the two Heads of State.
As a matter of fact, already at his last press conference the President had said that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba and that the same applied to the other nations of the Western Hemisphere.
The President also expressed part of what he thinks about Mr Castro, but this is not the same thing as an invasion.
Thus a lot of progress was accomplished on the most difficult and important elements of the crisis.
Let us hope that progress will be possible also on its remaining formal aspect through agreed declarations registered with the United Nations.
If not, the President is ready to make an adequate statement at a press conference.
Either agreed statements registered with the United Nations or a unilateral statement by the President at his press conference.
Mr Khrushchev, of course, can also wish to make a statement in either case.
Mr Mikoyan said that, in fact, what the President wants is merely to cool off a burning situation, while keeping the fire alive, whereas the Soviet Government wants to put the fire out for good before passing on to other questions.
The President said that the interpretations of the two participants in the conversation obviously differ.
Mr Mikoyan suggested that if agreement could be obtained on a part of the items to be included in the declarations, such declarations could be registered officially with the United Nations.
Any points on which there would be no agreement would then be the object of the statements outside of the United Nations.
What should be included in the declarations is what was included in the exchange of correspondence.
The President said that he wished to make it quite clear for the record that the United States is not moving back from any position agreed to in the correspondence.
The President quoted from the exchange of correspondence to the effect that the removal of missiles and other strategic weapons and military units would proceed under the control of the United Nations.
If the Soviet Union can manage to abide by the exchange of correspondence to the letter, then the United States will abide by that exchange to the letter.
If not, the President can only act in the best way the situation permits.
Mr Mikoyan stated that the Soviet Union fully abides by the exchange of correspondence.
The permission of the government on the soil of which the missiles were placed still remained necessary, and this is something over which the Soviet Union has no control.
At the point where the entire deal is about to be finalized, the United States refuses to move forward but takes a step backwards.
The President said that nothing was said in the correspondence about any formal declarations.
The only thing mentioned was an affirmation of United States intent in regard to the question of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba.
This is something which the United States continues to be ready to do, and as a matter of fact, which it has done and is doing again.
As for the draft declaration, it seems that the United States draft is not to the liking of the Soviet Government.
Mr Mikoyan said that Castro has stated that his intentions are peaceful.
Mr Mikoyan said that this pledge of non-invasion is made subject to a condition placed unilaterally on Cuba and to be enforced unilaterally by the United States.
The President said that we cannot be expected to let this assurance stand if someday missiles or other similar weapons are introduced by Communist China, or once more by the Soviet Union or by somebody else, or if other similarly aggressive steps are taken by Castro.
Mr Mikoyan said that the pledge of non-invasion should be stated in the terms in which it appears in the correspondence.
The President would like to suggest to leave questions of precise drafting to Messrs.
McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetsov, with the repeated understanding that the declaration must include references to the obligations of the United States under the Rio Treaty and, in the absence of United Nations inspection, to some alternate system of guarantee and control.
The United States is preparing to consider any draft which the Soviet Union might submit and which would satisfy those points.
Mr Mikoyan said that the Soviet draft protocol contained all the necessary points but was not accepted by the United States.
The United States does not intend to invade Cuba and never intended to invade Cuba.
The only threatening situation was the one created through the introduction of Soviet missiles into Cuba.
If not, a statement on the part of the President may be a step along the way.
Mr Mikoyan said that he fully agreed with the spirit of the President's statement.
He is concerned, however, with the proposal to replace action within the United Nations by a simple statement at a press conference.
In fact, there is no reason to keep it alive as the carrying out of its obligations by the Soviet Union has been verified.
The President said that he had made a statement to that effect already at the preceding week's press conference.
At the present moment the only question that remains is that of formal documents.
The Soviet Government has now come up with a proposal of a formal protocol to be signed with Cuba.
A statement at a press conference would be a simple manner of resolving the question.
An official document signed by all the parties induces legal complexities.
Mr Mikoyan said that he liked what the President said at his last press conference and so did Chairman Khrushchev.
Mr Mikoyan said that he would be able to remain longer if this could help to discuss these questions more fully and obtain a greater degree of agreement on them.
Department of State, S/S Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149.
Anastas I Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin Mr Yuriy N Vino-Gradov, Soviet Delegation to XVII General Assembly Mr Igor D Bubnov, Third Secretary, Soviet Embassy To return to the question of Cuba, it is possible that a solution as to form may be found provided there is no difference as to substance.
What concerns him is that every six months another crisis seems to arise.
The President said that it is strange that there are two countries such as the Soviet Union and the United States which are powerful and wealthy, and which have no direct conflicts of interest to separate them.
In spite of that, they find themselves perpetually in a state bordering on conflict.
At the same time many other parts of the world are facing problems of hunger and underdevelopment.
It would be good if the Soviet Union were to devote its effort to the pursuit of its own interests, in the same way in which the United States devotes its efforts to the pursuit of its own interests, and abandon the belief that it is its job to kindle revolutionary fires all over the world.
It is not the Soviet Union which was the cause of the Cuban revolution; as a matter of fact it knew much less about this revolution than did the United States.
The President said that he did not accuse the Soviet Union of having fomented the Cuban revolution.
Mr Mikoyan said that there will be revolutions regardless of what either the Soviet Union or the United States do.
The President said that this may be true, but that it was still important for the two countries to understand each other better.
Mr Mikoyan said that there are United States missiles in Turkey very close to the Soviet Union.
In spite of that he feels that Soviet citizens may sleep with tranquility, as long as the missiles in question are in American hands.
The President said that he has always been of the opinion that American missile bases such as those in Turkey do not make sense.
This is why the emplacing of Soviet missiles in Cuba has come as such a shock.
This is a type of misjudgment which neither they nor the world can afford.
Mr Mikoyan said that he liked the spirit of what the President just said.
It would be better perhaps if-as in the case of Laos-the Soviet Union would not always insist that it is fulfilling its obligations.
It would be better if it were ready to admit its shortcomings as the United States is ready to admit its own shortcomings, and work harder to correct them.
The President said that in doing so it must be remembered that the two countries have very few genuinely divergent interests, and yet there are many conflicts between them.
The source text is a copy from Moscow and contains no drafting information.
Mikoyan said Soviet government, anxious terminate Cuban matter, believes Soviet draft protocol best form for termination, but since United States doesn't like it, is prepared accept declarations which will be presented to SC for approval.
Argued that according United States draft, if Cuba takes any act which United States considers jeopardizes security of Caribbean, United States obligation against invasion would lapse; that this is direct retreat from statement in President's letter.
Complained that there is no word in declaration about subversive activity against Cuba whereas Castro supported by USSR proposes that subversive activity be stopped by all countries.
Contended that while United States has right to ask for inspection in relation to non-introduction of weapons, Cubans also have right of inspection against invasion preparations.
Said whole of United States would not be inspected but only certain parts, including Puerto Rico, where camps of invasion bands are located; whole territory of Cuba would be subject to inspection as well as certain neighboring countries; one-sided inspection is impossible.
Supporting Castro proposals, argued United States need not at once abandon Guantanamo but should enter into negotiations with Cubans about its disposition.
Also argued that if United States not prepared normalize relations with Cuba at present, at least should say we are prepared negotiate later.
Referred to statement President's letter October 27/1/ not only United States would not invade but was confident other states would give similar assurances.
Stevenson replied United States eager have Cuban affair settled and he hoped receive Soviet draft declaration soonest.
Said it appears principal points outstanding between us are Castro's five points; we cannot discuss them and it is better adhere to US-Soviet terms of agreement.
If new matters introduced into negotiations, doubted they could ever be concluded said we understand Soviets feel obligated to support Cuba's demands but we also have numerous demands from other American republics which we are not introducing into negotiations.
Regarding safeguards against introduction offensive weapons in Cuba, noted that according President's letter October 27 this was to be delegated to UN observers; since such observation in Cuba has not been possible, we have said frankly in our draft declaration that until such safeguards are provided, we must use our own means; we do not ask Soviets to agree to our unilateral means and inspection but simply point out to them we have no other choice.
Pointed out United States has gone further than exchange of correspond-ence by saying not only that we would not invade Cuba ourselves but that we would not support such invasion.
As to assurances other American republics against invasion of Cuba, said President merely expressed opinion they would be willing give such assurances.
If declarations cannot be fully agreed, they could at least be presented separately to Secretary General to be submitted to SC and have Cuban affair concluded in this manner.
McCloy urged should try to finish this crisis promptly and proceed to other problems to avoid other crisis.
Pointed out United States had gone beyond letters of agreement in raising quarantine before safeguards worked out and in demobilizing and sending back to their bases United States forces in Florida.
Emphasized US-Soviet agreement would not involve settlement with Castro.
As to subversion, pointed out other American republics are threatened by Castro's activity in this field, and there are camps in Cuba training men for subversion in Latin America.
Said when Castro eventually ceases to be a threat to the western hemisphere, we are willing to normalize relations with him and help Cuba economically.
Added cannot waste time talking about Castro's conditions when United States and USSR have much important matters of common concern to settle between themselves.
Noted that inspection of United States and Puerto Rico would be comparable to inspection of Soviet ports to detect offensive weapons being dispatched to Cuba.
Meeting concluded with repeated mutual assurances of desire to finish matter quickly and to study points made on both sides.
Ball-I just had a call from McCloy and he is seeing Kuznetsov at 1 1:00 am.
The article claimed that Stevenson wanted to trade Turkish, Italian, and British bases for Cuban bases and that Stevenson advocated a new ""Munich"" appeasement settlement.
A December 2 memorandum from Schlesinger to President Kennedy refutes the assertions of Alsop and Bartlett.
BallJack is against trying to do business on the other fellow's drafting.
He wanted to see what kind of instructions he could get that would enable him to make some progress this morning.
Ball— He says there are only three problems and he thinks if we want to settle we can get a quick deal and on probably plenty good terms.
He should stand on the reasons of the President and Secretary of State and listen hard and we can't give him a mandate.
Ball-I got the impression that he had a kind of telephone conversation on the areas of where the differences lay.
One is on the overflights and there is a question of how we can state it as not to tie Kuznetsov to it.
The second was Kuznetsov's thinking this threat on security language is too rough.
Kuznetsov and McCloy are to meet again at 1 1:00 AM/1/ when it is expected that a Soviet paper will be presented to us.
He noted that Khrushchev had taken a very belligerent position with Canadian Ambassador Roberts on Berlin.
The reference to the Rio Pact can be in or out because the keys to the present negotiation are the no-invasion assurance and the peace and security of the Caribbean reference.
Ambassador Stevenson said present thinking was that there would now be no United States statement made before a Security Council meeting.
The Secretary General could circulate a Russian statement and a United States statement to the UN members.
We could thus reduce the elements of disagreement because two papers would be filed.
The President said we were not going to rat on an agreement with the Russians, but we were not going to tie on to a no-invasion pledge in a way which allowed Castro to operate from an invulnerable base.
Ambassador Stevenson said that as soon as the Cuban problem was settled, the Russians could heat up the Berlin situation.
We would keep the Cuban problem in the UN as long as we possibly could.
In addition, McCloy and Ball discussed the conversation over a secure telephone, December 3, 4:45m.
Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations-Cuba) The memorandum of the Ball-McCloy telephone conversation is in the Supplement.
Sovs took even stronger position than formerly against 3 points in United States declaration: ref to Rio Pact,/2/ ref to overflights, and condition that Cuba does not take action to ""threaten the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere"" attached to our noninvasion assurances.
On other hand he at same time emphasized great importance Sovs attach to presentation to SC of documents agreed on main points, if not in all details, which would lead to action by SC expressing satisfaction with work of parties and asking them continue negots to resolve problems still outstanding.
Kuznetsov favored working rapidly toward conclusion of this kind which he said repeatedly would create more favorable prospects for solution of other international problems.
Kuznetsov said he ""hoped"" to have Sov draft declaration in couple of days and it was left that, unless some new ideas occurred to either delegation, we would await completion that draft before holding another mtg.
On points listed above to which Sovs strongly objected, they claimed ref to Rio Pact is part of United States attempt to give United States commitment conditional character and hence is unacceptable.
It was part of effort to give United States free hand so it will not have to keep its obligations.
It would authorize United States to take action against Cuba under Arts 6 and 8, including use of armed force, by alleging Cuba had undertaken aggression not involving the use of armed force including subversion.
Kuznetsov also claimed Rio Pact violates UN Charter/3/ in that it authorizes armed response against non-armed attack which is not in accord with Art 51, and it authorizes use of armed force without approval of SC as provided in Art 53.
Therefore reference to Rio Pact in United States declaration would be illegal since pact in conflict with UN Charter.
Ref to UN Charter itself in United States declaration should be sufficient for our purposes.
As to overflights Kuznetsov said this ref unacceptable and reiterated usual arguments about unilateral actions violating sovereignty of Cuba, norms of international law and UN Charter.
He claimed United States desires overthrow whole set of legal norms covering relations between states.
Only Sov obligations concerning non-reintroduction defensive weapons and United States obligations concerning non-invasion are outstanding and these both can be met by U Thant plan of observation in Caribbean.
Sovs not opposed this kind of observation but must be in accordance with Charter and on basis of equality applied not only to Cuba but to all parties.
Kuznetsov objected to phrase in United States draft declaration reading ""provided Cuba does not take action to threaten the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere"" on grounds this is new subject not covered in exchange of letters.
President's letter of Oct 27 offered invasion assurance in return solely for actions by Sov Union.
Furthermore this condition would render valueless United States commitment not to invade Cuba since United States or other Western Hemisphere country could easily undertake provocation against Cuba and then claim Cuba had threatened their security.
Kuznetsov reiterated earlier claim that Khrushchev had not agreed to on-site inspection except with consent of Cuba and that moreover dismantling and withdrawal had been fully inspected by agreed shipside procedure.
He also spoke again of guarantees against invasions by other states of Western Hemisphere and quoted Pres' letter on this point.
He claimed United States draft contains no provision for United States implementing this obligation.
He claimed only weapons envisaged in correspondence were those present in Cuba at time of crisis which had been referred to in Khrushchev's letters as weapons you consider offensive.
There were only medium range missiles with nuclear warheads and IL-28's.
These had also been only weapons referred to in Pres' press conference of Nov 20.
Phrase used in United States draft would give grounds for arbitrary and expanding definition in future which could be applied to all sorts of other weapons.
As to withdrawal of Sov military personnel, Kuznetsov asserted this need not be referred to in United States declaration since it had not been covered in original exchange of correspondence.
Sov Govt had mentioned this subsequently as gesture of good will and not part of agreement.
United States side had made clear in negots that it did not consider this to be ""condition"" of final settlement.
Kuznetsov repeated very briefly Sov support of Castro points included in protocol, mentioning specifically only economic blockade and Guantanamo.
He mentioned new point, asserting that, even if agreed declaration made by 2 parties in SC, much would remain outstanding, including reestablishment diplomatic relations and economic relations among countries in Caribbean.
He hoped draft declarations would refer to continuing negot to clear up these matters.
He mentioned United States ref to medium and intermediate range missiles and suggested omission of latter since only former were in Cuba.
He also objected to use of word ""minimum"" applied to shipside inspection procedure since he claimed there had been agreement that this procedure was satisfactory.
Summing up his remarks he said United States had made substantial step backward from exchange of letters and had introduced many new requirements which made it appear United States wishes delay concluding negots.
If one side wished to introduce new questions other side will of course do likewise.
Sovs wish to confine questions to those covered in exchange of letters and hopes United States declaration will be redrafted in this sense.
McCloy replied that there seemed to be very little left in United States draft that was acceptable to Sovs.
He pointed out United States draft designed to move forward and bring about rapid settlement.
He listed numerous steps United States had taken, including limitation of our quarantine, its lifting before all Sov obligations had been met and on basis of mere Sov assurances about removal IL-28's, our acceptance limited method of verification of withdrawal missiles and bombers, and finally and most significant introduction of words ""supporting invasion"" in non-invasion assurance which was substantial and positive change in wording Pres' letter Oct 27.
If we have inserted additional points in declaration it is only in order to clarify matters not foreseen when letters were exchanged.
McCloy said he did not understand distinction between medium and intermediate missiles since we had identified both types on sites but supposed satisfactory nomenclature could be worked out.
He was alarmed by thought Sovs considered as offensive only particular weapons which had been removed from Cuba in this instance.
Obviously other types of missiles such as ICBM's or other types of bombers were equally offensive.
However this might also be matter of language which could be cleared up.
McCloy reiterated that, while we do not suppose either Sov Union or Castro is going to abandon the conditions he has put forward, we repeat once again that we do not accept these conditions and cannot deal with them in any way in our declaration.
As to military personnel, McCloy agreed their withdrawal was not considered condition of settlement and emphasized United States nevertheless very much relieved when Khrushchev indicated they might be considered almost as component of missile complex and hence would be withdrawn.
McCloy also repeated again that in referring to non-invasion assurances which might be given by other Western Hemisphere nations that Pres was merely expressing an opinion, that while we do not believe other LA countries have any intention of attacking Cuba we are not in position to restrain them.
However he emphasized again ref to non-support of invasion in our draft declaration.
McCloy expressed usual objections to so-called U Thant proposal for reciprocal inspection.
He then repeated at length reasons why we must have right to use our own means of inspection in absence of acceptable international arrangements.
This does not amount to any change in international law or norms of relations between nations but is merely statement that we are going to take this precaution until satisfactory international inspection system is set up.
He does not expect Sov Union to agree with what we are doing but we cannot omit mention in our declaration.
This part of price that has to be paid for false assurances which had previously been given to United States Presumably overflights would not continue for all time but would have to continue until certain composure had been restored to area.
As to Rio Pact McCloy recognized there is fundamental difference between us.
If Kuznetsov is correct that proposed United States declaration is incompatible with Rio Pact Pres would have to go to Senate and seek amendment to that pact.
However Rio Pact is principal international instrument dealing with security of Western Hemisphere and it cannot be omitted from our declaration.
McCloy concluded by urging that we not haggle interminably over language but agree to close out this transaction as quickly as possible.
If Sov Union maintains all points Kuznetsov has put forward, McCloy would almost despair of reaching agreement on 2 declarations.
While promising to consider points Kuznetsov had raised he urged him to take less jaundiced look at United States draft.
Yost added that it hardly seemed possible for 2 sides to reach total agreement on 2 declarations.
What was important was that they be compatible and as close together as possible.
A note on this memorandum indicates that McCone took this paper to the White House on December 3 and stopped by the President's office to drop it off after lunch.
This memorandum was attached to McCone's memorandum of the Executive Committee meeting at 10m. on December 3.
Detection of the presence of new and more sophisticated Soviet communications equipment as part of the air defense system.
This would suggest that we soon would face the prospect of operational SAM sites manned by Soviets.
Che Guevara's statement to the London Daily Worker that peace has been assured and that Cuba will pursue the arms struggle already taking place in a number of Latin American countries such as Venezuela, Guatemala, Paraguay and Colombia.
This would indicate no intention to halt Castro subversion in Latin America.
Mikoyan's public statement in Moscow that he had achieved Soviet objective of maintaining a Communist regime in the Western Hemisphere.
These three statements would prompt extreme caution on the part of the United States in any agreement which might give Castro and the Communists a sanctuary.
RE Low Level Reconnaissance Mission Over Cuba The last low level reconnaissance mission was performed on November 15.
Light, scattered ineffective anti-aircraft fire was received, but no damage was sustained by the planes.
Low level missions were also performed on November 11, 12 and 13, although no resistance was encountered.
The record of action of the NSC Executive Committee reflects that the low level missions were author-ized on a day-to-day basis by the President.
In other words, low level reconnaissance was performed on November 11 and November 12 without specific authorization by the President which normally took the form of an action of the NSC Executive Committee.
It is possible and probable that the missions were authorized as a result of personal discussions between Secretary McNamara and Mr Bundy with the President.
Subsequent records of actions of the NSC Executive Committee reflect discussion of high and low level reconnaissance with authorization being granted for high level flights only.
On November 21, Mr McNamara presented a plan for regular high level reconnaissance, but left low level flights to be authorized specifically by the President.
The above pattern of events suggests an evolution of low level reconnaissance in the Cuban operation.
To suspend these flights is to eliminate one principal source of very precise intelligence.
At the same time the provocative and psychological aspects against the Cubans of aircraft at near sonic speeds and tree top height are eliminated.
The risk of loss to conventional anti-aircraft fire is eliminated, although the risk of loss to high flying aircraft from missiles remains.
In this sense, an incident resulting from the loss of aircraft is perhaps proportionate to the number of flights being made.
The basic issue remains the relationship between necessity for surveillanceand on the other hand-our willingness to accept losses in gaining this information.
In this connection, having announced its intention to continue surveillance, the United States must be fully prepared and organized to invoke predetermined countermeasures, and in the aftermath to justify its actions.
Neither the action to be taken if another plane is shot down, nor policies relating to explanation of the action, has yet been clearly delineated.
Mr Bundy reported that Kuznetsov was telling Ambassador Stevenson the numbers and ports out of which the IL-28 bombers were leaving./l/ /1/Transmitted in telegram 2105 from USUN, December 4.
There was a discussion of a Miami news story reporting the presence in Cuba of an armed Soviet division.
In fact, there is merely a mechanized regiment which is part of four Soviet task forces in Cuba.
It was decided that the Defense Department would release to the press factual information about the Soviet troops in Cuba.
Mr McCone reported that the CIA would engage in intense intelligence gathering in Cuba in the next four months, while avoiding provocation until we know whether the Russians are withdrawing their military forces or building them up.
McCloy and Stevenson believe it is very much in United States interest, if possible, to bring US-Sov negots on Cuba to rapid and mutually acceptable conclusion./l/ They have growing impression that effects of victory in public mind are being gradually effaced by prolonged and inconclusive negotiation which gives impression we are still seeking vital objective we have not achieved.
If public presumes this objective is on-site inspection, more and more importance will be attached to such inspection as negotiation continues.
If and when we emerge from negotiation without achieving that objective, even though it may have been otherwise successful, we will risk seeming to have failed rather than to have succeeded.
Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations— Cuba) Second consideration which we have in mind is that there may be some substance in Kuznetsov's frequent reiteration of assertion that whether or not we agree on Cuban settlement will have most important effect on possibility of agreement in other fields.
This may be bluff but there also may be element of sincerity in it and, if so, real effort on our part to reach prompt and agreed settlement could have substantial effect on Berlin, nuclear testing, etc.
We realize proposed Cuban SC declaration/2/ creates new, though not unforeseen complication and that either some way must be found to handle SC mtg harmoniously or alternative of separate declarations outside SC must be pursued.
In any case we think prompt determination should be reached as to what changes could be made in our draft declaration for use as soon as seems appropriate.
We believe fol suggested changes largely verbal rather than substantive, would not in any sense jeopardize or weaken essential United States positions.
They might on other hand provide sufficient accommodation on some of points to which Sovs have most seriously objected so that latter could take amended declaration as basis for agreed settlement.
If we put forward these amendments before receiving Sov draft declaration we would of course have to make clear that unacceptable Sov draft would necessitate withdrawal of our proposed declaration.
However we are inclined to feel that more acceptable proposal on our part might produce less objectionable Sov draft and hence substantially reduce period of negotiation.
In putting forward our amended draft we would certainly state unequivocally that it was as far as we could go and there was no use wasting time in attempting to negotiate our declaration further.
Omit word ""minimum"" in second sentence para 6; In ninth para substitute for ""other weapons capable of offensive use"" more exact and less sweeping language which could not, as is case with present language, be applied to rifles and pistols.
We have several other drafts for this para if the Dept finds above unsatisfactory.
Since there can be no question that the Rio Pact remains in full effect and that our declaration in SC on this occasion does not and cannot impair it, there is some question whether it need be mentioned in declaration.
Alternatively President in subsequent press conference might make statement along lines final para present draft declaration.
I think there is misconception as to what our position is, and it is very serious.
What I would do is tell him, in the first place he didn't like that word ""minimum"" inspection.
We aren't talking about every kind of weapon that is capable of offensive use.
Furthermore, I am ready to strike out ""the Rio Pact"" in this thing, because the Rio Pact exists anyway, and the President could say it on the side.
And of course, nothing he says in connection with this in any way irrigates from the obligations and rights of our existing treaties.
I would say we do have to reserve our intent to use such methods as we feel are necessary by way of observation and verification pending the adoption of other means that are satisfactory to us, and that we can't give way on that, because if we say that we have no intent to invade and the next day we sent a U-2 over there, in some interpretations it is an invasion, an invasion of their aerial territory.
So we just have to reserve the fact that our intent is to continue the ordinary precautions.
Then on the word ""threat"" that Thompson introduced, I would go back to ""attack"" or ""commit aggression"" or something like that, because I do think that with ""threat"" security is rather illusory.
You know, Castro could make a speech and could say we're off the hook then.
I believe it is good tactics to tell him irrespective of his declaration.
His declaration is going to be ... if we don't get something in to indicate that we're compromising, there is still going to be the reputation of Cuba, and then there will be a wrangle.
But if he thinks that we are really trying to meet him, I believe he will come part way.
And we may very well wind this thing up with a something less than transigent wrangle on both our parts, which may very well prejudice Berlin, or something else.
His feeling, and this is I am sure the President's feeling, is that if we were really anxious on our part to close this thing up, what you are suggesting would be the thing to do it.
But quite frankly the President doesn't want to close it up right now, unless it were closed completely on our own terms.
I don't agree . . . what I'm telling you is that I think we can close it out, but we have a chance of closing it out on our terms if we do this.
I think we are petering away the victory, and I believe we have a reasonable chance by giving away nothing in this thing in consolidating the victory, and I'm not in doubt when I am saying that.
I do think we have to hold onto the word ""intend"" and would intend to hold onto those words, but I would also hope that we could put into the operating clauses that there is nothing here in any way interrogates our intention to use all the observation and clarification facilities we have.
If we don't get the on-site inspection, which we don't want, it's going to be thought around the country we're losing.
Yet if we say that pending getting such an inspection as satisfies us we intend to use the facilities we already have.
I would say to Kuznetsov, ""Now, look, if you . . . we've come a long way here toward meeting you on this business.
We have some language up here-it doesn't amount to anything but that, and I think he would take it as being an indication that we were not trying to welch or to introduce new conditions and that we were holding out on one thing that Khrushchev is anxious to get.
I've got to get this back up to the President; because right now the posture of this thing that has come back from the White House cleared out, and I am going to have to let it go tonight with the idea that before you act on them we can have another look at this.
I will see if we can get the Committee together in the morning if we can.
Now, I have spelled this all out to Ros./l/ He tells me he agrees with it.
But naturally we're not going to limit it to merely these weapons that he took out, but we can use some such word as ""major offensive weapons"" or something like.
I do this purely on the conviction that I have that we are not gaining ground now— that I think if we do close it up on that basis the President has nothing to fear.
And I think we may have a better atmos-phere for stuff that may be coming up in the future.
In the meantime, I'll get hold of the WH and see if we can set something up.
I've been postponing meetings with clients of mine for 60 days, so I just have do that then.
At the close of the Executive Committee Meeting last night,/ 1/ I raised the question of courses of action we should follow if the Cuban SAM sites are made operational and a U-2 is shot down.
This question has been considered and the consensus seems to be that in such an eventuality, we will be obliged to take out the SAM site or perhaps several SAM sites.
There appeared no difference of opinion among those in attendance at the meeting last night or previous meetings when I raised this question concerning the policy.
However, as you said, the implementation of the ""policy"" was another matter and perhaps it would be more difficult to ""seize the nettle"" in such assumed circumstances than it is to agree among ourselves as to what should be done.
I continue to be disturbed over this situation as I feel that there is a strong possibility of such a confrontation as soon as the IL-28's are all removed.
In this connection, I find it significant that Mr Kuznetsov advised Governor Stevenson with regard to the number of IL-28's to be shipped on each of several ships, the ports and the dates of departure.
I also reported that we had detected a continual improvement in Soviet-controlled communications systems throughout the Island.
Today the Watch Committee reports more extensively on the communications developments and their report, which appears as an Annex to this week's Watch Committee statement, is attached.
I feel there is a very strong possibility that we will soon face a situation where the Soviets will first warn us against further overflights, indicate that their SAM sites are in operation, and if we persist will destroy one or more U-2's.
Action by us of a type planned and mentioned last night could, therefore, involve a military operation against Soviet soldiers.
It will not be action against ""Cuban forces"" in disguise; it will be action against Soviet forces and this may possibly be announced to us in advance.
I bring this up because I think the possibility must be given serious thought at this time and we might devise diplomatic moves which would either forestall such a confrontation or, alternatively, a pronouncement made now might so indicate our intentions that the confrontation will not occur.
John A McCone/5/ Director /5/Printed from a copy that indicates McCone signed the original.
Director McCone reported that all IL-28 bombers had been located at Cuban ports or on ships leaving Cuba.
He called attention to a buildup of the Soviet communications system in Cuba and referred to the existing SAM sites and to the Soviet air defense capability.
According to that account ""Secretary Rusk reported that Mikoyan had stated he had extreme difficulty in Cuba, that Castro refused to see him for nine days, and when he threatened to leave, Castro immediately stated he was prepared to make an arrangement with the Chinese Communists.
He read the proposed changes in a draft declaration on the Cuban problem which we would make and recommended that we give to the Russians a draft, as revised in his telegram,/3/ before the Soviet delegation received its draft from Moscow.
If our draft was not accepted by the Russians, then we should return to our position of circulating our own original draft declaration to the Security Council.
We cannot haggle too long lest the Russians get tougher on Cuba and insist on discussion of other issues.
The United States has achieved a victory,e., the strategic weapons have been removed.
The longer we prolong the negotiation over minor issues, the closer we come to appearing to have failed.
In addition, the Russians may accept a one-shot inspection scheme which we don't want but which would be difficult for us to oppose.
Senator Russell had already said that we had made a mistake by not invading Cuba.
Mr McCloy said we should stick on our statement about aerial reconnaissance, but he opposed on constitutional grounds any statement of a declaration of our intentions on invasion.
We should not chip away at our statement but wait until the Soviets produce theirs.
The President commented that the hardening of the Soviet posture is not due to our action in Cuba.
Secretary Rusk said we could not allow a Soviet takeover of Cuba similar to that which occurred in Hungary.
He asked whether the Chinese Communists would come into Cuba if the Soviets phased out.
He concluded by saying we should put in a revised draft declaration and tell the Russians they could take it or leave it.
If they decide to leave it, we will rewrite our declaration entirely, taking a tough view.
Secretary McNamara said if we rewrite the declaration we should take a firmer stand on the no-invasion course so that we would not guarantee Castro sanctuary.
Mr Bundy favored rewriting the declaration so that we could back away from a no-invasion guarantee.
Ambassador Stevenson said we should be ready with a revised draft in the event the Russians rejected a new proposal.
There followed a discussion of whether we should tell the Latin American Ambassadors where the negotiations now stand.
Secretary Rusk preferred to inform the OAS representatives here first, but preferred to hold off for a day or two.
The President suggested that we wait until tomorrow to see if we get an agreement from the Russians before we put out our statement.
Mr McCloy pointed out that there would be no time to get an agreement tomorrow.
Secretary Rusk recommended that we do not put out our statement before we get the Russian draft because our statement would cause anxiety.
Mr Murrow stated that if we are going to give up our demand for on-site inspection, then we should make a louder noise about aerial surveillance.
Ambassador Stevenson reported that the status of the proposal to create the nuclear-free zone in Latin America was in doubt because if we could not get the concurrence of all Latin American States we would have difficulty putting the proposal forward.
It noted McCone's intelligence briefing, the recommended revisions to the United States draft declaration, and the President's approval of those revisions.
We agreed that I would send you a summary of the informal comments made on the draft memorandum on ""Future Policy toward Cuba'71/ which was discussed in the Executive Committee on Tuesday, December 4th.
First, it was generally agreed that there should be a reorganization of our machinery for Cuban action.
In particular, there seemed to be general support for the idea of an Office of Cuban Affairs which could be public and above board, and which might do a more effective job with free Cubans and others concerned with the hopes for post-Castro Cuba.
You and I agreed after the meeting that you would explore the availability of a particularly well-qualified individual to head this office.
The memorandum is correct in recommending that no general policy be approved or set in motion until the current discussions with the Soviets on Cuba have developed somewhat further.
The proposed action in the OAS should not be framed sharply until we know more clearly what kind of resolution is likely to obtain unanimous or nearly unanimous support.
Our current posture in the OAS is so strong that we should not weaken it for marginal advantages.
Paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the draft statement seemed approximately correct; paragraph 7 needed further development in order to distinguish desirable from undesirable travel to Cuba; paragraph 8 should make it clearer that it is Cuban funds whose transfer needs to be surveyed and controlled if possible; paragraphs 9 and 10 need to be spelled out carefully in cooperation with the other agencies primarily concerned.
The covert annex was considered only very briefly, but the preliminary sense of the meeting was that covert activities should be concentrated upon improvement in the collection of intelligence for the immediate future, and that we should not plan early sabotage activities.
SUBJECT Future Policy toward Cuba Policy Our ultimate objective with respect to Cuba remains the overthrow of the Castro regime and its replacement by one sharing the aims of the Free World.
A policy of containing, undermining, discrediting and isolating the Castro regime through the exercise of all feasible diplomatic economic, psychological and other pressures will achieve these immediate objectives and could create propitious conditions in Cuba for further advance toward our ultimate objective.
Establishment of Caribbean security arrangements through ministerial level meetings of the Caribbean countries for the purposes of reaching agreement on increasing the intensity of surveillance of coastal and international waters; increased surveillance and control of land boundaries; increased control over subversive activities within national boundaries; systematic exchange of intelligence information; and, development of procedures for coordination of military contingency planning for emergencies.
Inclusion by NATO of Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items is prohibited.
Discussion of Free World industrial nations from shipping crucial spare parts and equipment to Cuba, not on the COCOM list.
Persuasion of non-Bloc nations to limit their airlines service to Cuba and to withhold transit rights to Soviet aircraft serving Cuba.
Persuasion of Latin American nations to limit the travel of their nationals to Cuba and to intensify measures to prevent agents and groups of international communism from carrying on their subversive activities.
Persuasion of appropriate OAS organs to study urgently the transfer of funds to the other American Republics for subversive purposes, the plan of subversive propaganda and the utilization of Cuba as a base for training in subversive techniques; and to make recommendations to the member states regarding counter-measures.
Maintenance of currently enhanced VOA medium wave facilities beamed to Cuba and adoption by VOA of a more aggressive line toward Cuba.
Facilitation of Cuban exiles' entry into the United States Armed Forces for training, and formation of reserve units thereafter.
Timing We should surface our program of isolating and weakening Cuba when it becomes clear that our discussions on Cuba with the Soviets are unlikely to be fruitful.
Actions with respect to Cuba which may contribute substantially to creating a situation calling for United States military action should be withheld until the Soviet combat units have been removed from Cuba or efforts to persuade the USSR to remove them have failed.
Continue to support the Cuban Revolutionary Council in its efforts to maintain a degree of order and unity in the Cuban exile community.
Assist selected Cuban exile groups to encourage the Cuban people to engage in minor acts of sabotage.
Utilize selected Cuban exiles to sabotage key Cuban installations in such a manner that the action can plausibly be attributed to Cubans in Cuba.
Sabotage Cuban cargo and shipping, and Bloc cargo and shipping to Cuba.
Encourage the defection of Cuban diplomats, officials and delegates abroad.
Continue to assist and guide Cuban exiles in their radio broadcasts to Cuba.
Encourage and assist Cuban exiles in developing a capability to launch balloons carrying leaflets and other propaganda materials from international waters to Cuba.
Develop more fully a clandestine ""Voice of Free Cuba"" radio capability either in Cuba or from a submarine in international waters.
Develop more fully a capability for covertly intruding upon Cuban television broadcasts.
Assist, through subsidy if necessary, non-Bloc importers of Cuban sugar to find alternative sources of supply.
Information copies were sent to the other members of the Executive Committee.
TO The Director of Central Intelligence SUBJECT Cuban Overflights The President has approved the attached Guidelines for the Planning of the Cuban Overflights and would like to have an estimate of the adequacy of such a system of intelligence collection to meet the criteria set forth, on the assumption that it is supplemented by energetic collection of information by all other available means.
The United States has a priority need for continuing and reliable information with respect to the general order of magnitude, deployment and state of readiness of Soviet military units and installations in Cuba.
A note on the source text indicates it was passed to the White House at 10:15m.
Sovs presented drafts their short declaration and SC res, text of which being transmitted immediately fol tel.
At outset of mtg McCloy referred briefly to complications caused by Cuban declaration/3/ and probability acrimonious squabble in SC resulting therefrom.
He then said in attempting to meet points in United States draft declaration that Sovs had raised and to reach more or less agreed position we had some new language to propose.
He emphasized however that, if Sov declaration which we had not received proves unacceptable, we would have to withdraw our new proposals and simply content ourselves with two separate statements drafted as we thought fit.
He then went over changes authorized first five numbered paras Deptel 1511.
Sovs continued to object strongly to phrase ""offensive weapons systems"", claiming that it was as loose and as subject to expansion and misinterpretation as original phrase had been.
He insisted that weapons concerned were only those about which agreement had been reached in exchange of letters between Pres and Khrushchev.
McCloy replied that this was impossible since there are four types of missiles and of bombers as well as submarines, for example, which are clearly offensive weapons systems the introduction of which into Cuba would cause us gravest concern.
It finally appeared Sovs might accept some language referring to other weapons ""similar"" or ""comparable"" to weapons agreed upon between Pres and Khrushchev, but they continued to maintain new United States language was unacceptable.
As to overflights, while recognizing McCloy's statement that new text removed any implication Sovs are approving overflights, Kuznetsov nevertheless declared it maintains same idea and is not acceptable.
Moreover in connection with clause commencing ""pending such time"", he claimed United States does not want any arrangements for international safeguards since it has turned down U Thant plan.
He objected strongly to any reference to overflights in declaration and declared it was also unacceptable.
McCloy countered with clear exposition why it was essential in United States point of view that this reference be maintained.
As to proviso that ""Cuba does not commit aggressive acts against any nation in the Western Hemisphere"" Kuznetsov said this proviso is not in exchange of letters.
McCloy replied Pres could not possibly say he would stand by if Cuba attacked another country with which we have a treaty obligating us to come to its defense.
Kuznetsov replied Cuba has offered in protocol not to attack anyone else and that moreover threat is not from but against Cuba, citing Dec 4 attack on Cuban soil by boat containing exiles.
After inquiring whether we really had to put it in, Kuznetsov did not object seriously to new language in regard to United States treaty rights.
Concluding discussion on changes in United States draft Kuznetsov said that they had not removed main obstacles.
McCloy thought we had sincerely tried to meet Sovs half way but that this is best we can do and if we cannot agree on this we must agree to disagree.
Kuznetsov thereupon put forward new suggestion reported in opening para this message.
He proposed we make our declarations very brief and limit them to agreed points.
He then went over United States draft suggesting what might be omitted to make it acceptable to Sovs if we adopted suggestion of shorter form.
Kuznetsov reiterated argument that new procedure he proposed would raise both sides of difficulties in reaching agreement which had emerged from discussion United States draft.
This procedure would also take care of Cuban declaration which he understood would not be agreed.
McCloy concluded by saying he was disappointed in response to our new proposals.
He emphasized again that they were in any case dependent on our reaching agreement and would have to be withdrawn if there is no agreement.
He pointed out we were going far in giving our assurance against invasion without any arrangements for on-site inspection.
Also in conclusion Kuznetsov indicated that new Sov suggestion had been put forward by Khrushchev with view to making settlement easier for both sides.
He thought however SC should adopt res and that mere consensus statement by Chairman would not be enough.
It was important for peace of world that we go as far as possible in settlement of Cuban question and that parties therefore continue negotiations normalize situation.
McCloy remarked again that we do not intend to negotiate with Castro in framework this transaction though of course would negotiate willingly with him if he showed signs of wishing to live in peace in this hemisphere.
He noted however United States and Sovs had achieved good momentum in these negotiations and urged it be maintained and carried forward to other problems.
All weapons, regarding the dismantling and withdrawal of which from the Cuban territory an agreement was reached between the Government of the USSR and the Government of the United States with the consent of the Government of the Republic of Cuba, have by this time been removed from the territory of Cuba and returned to the Soviet Union.
Such weapons shall not be introduced by the USSR in the territory of the Republic of Cuba.
The USSR Government proceeds from the premise that negotiations will continue between parties concerned on the questions connected with further normalization of the situation in the Caribbean with the purpose of working out mutually acceptable solutions.
While new Soviet texts need important revisions, we believe basic idea of short agreed declarations by United States and USSR in SC plus fuller unagreed statements, either in SC or outside, has much to commend it.
We do not believe, however, we should agree to Cuba making an agreed declaration since this would complicate negotiations greatly and provide status as third party which we have refused for good reasons so far.
We should ask USSR to provide United States copy in advance to assure it will not be too obnoxious.
This procedure would meet objective of closing up transaction on relatively harmonious note, and thus maintaining momentum for possible subsequent agreements on other subjects, while at same time giving us freedom of action to say what needs be said on matters which are not agreed.
Since Cubans, and, we suspect, Soviets, will be making their unagreed statements in SC rather than outside, United States should be prepared to do likewise.
What would seem to us at first reading to be most important to correct in Soviet draft declaration would be too narrow definition of weapons which will not be reintroduced, and indications that ""parties concerned"", including both Soviets and Cuba, will continue negots for ""normalizing"" situation in Caribbean and lack ref to Khrushchev-Kennedy letters.
We would much prefer end SC exercise with consensus statement by SC Pres, though Soviets have so far insisted this is not enough.
Believe we should argue this point, possibly being willing concede to res in last analysis, trading this for satisfactory substance.
If we accept short declaration idea, we could presumably relegate to our separate unagreed statement in SC some of points to which Sovs object, such as references to overflights and Sov military personnel.
However others, such as provisos attached to non-invasion assurance, as well as ref to treaty obligations, would have to be retained in our agreed declaration.
Repeated to the Commander of the Atlantic Fleet, Commander of the Air Forces, Atlantic, and Commander of Army, Atlantic.
CINCLANT message DTG 021702Z Nov 6271/ /1/This telegram, not found, was apparently a request for planning for the use of nuclear weapons.
The JCS concur that planning should proceed for employment of nuclear weapons for limited war operations in the Cuban area.
In developing these plans the application of force must be selective and discriminating in relation to the objective to be achieved.
Collateral damage to nonmilitary facilities and population casualties will be held to a minimum consistent with military necessity.
In view of the above, the recommendations contained in paragraph 3 of reference message are approved for planning purposes.
Request the JCS be advised promptly of any case where these limitations with respect to weapon yield or height of burst prevent the accomplishment of the military objectives.
Following are preliminary United States draft declaration, revised Sov declaration, elements of supplementary United States statement including essentially sections taken out of present text United States declaration, and draft consensus statement by SC Pres in accordance mytel 2183.
To achieve these purposes they suppress references to exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev in preference for references to subsequent agreements worked out in negotiations, thus eliminating all reference in their statement to verification; they also seek to revise our declaration to imply that verification has been complied with.
They also are seeking to write Cuba into picture as much as possible, including support for future negotiations on ""normalization"" of Caribbean.
Sov draft res, by approving declarations, but with no notice taken of supplemental statements would leave us in difficult future situation on overflights, Sov military personnel in Cuba and other problems.
It seems to us our objective should continue to be to draw line under current crisis but only on contingent basis, and retain statement in our declaration that USSR has not fulfilled all undertakings which is justification for our continued overflights and for qualifications we place on no invasion assurance.
Draft consensus statement we have prepared therefore is only expression of attitude of SC and not of approval or decision.
We have also deleted references in Sov declaration and in res to continued negotiations to normalize situation in Caribbean.
We have done this on assumption USSR means Castro's five points and that negotiations on political settlement in Caribbean is unacceptable either with Russians or with Cubans.
In light size and sophistication Sov military presence, which apparently will continue in Cuba even after present crisis is settled, however, we may want to consider whether further negotiations of some sort around this issue might be foreshadowed.
United States draft declaration In letters of President Kennedy on October 27 and of Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy on October 28, 1962/2/ firm undertakings were made regarding the settlement of the Cuban crisis.
In connection therewith the United States notes the declaration of the Soviet Union today that all weapons, on which agreement was reached in accordance with the undertaking, have been removed from Cuba and returned to the Soviet Union and that the sites have been dismantled.
The United States notes further the declaration of the USSR that no weapons of this nature, that is, offensive weapons systems, will be introduced by the USSR in the territory of the Republic of Cuba.
While the undertakings that the United Nations would be enabled to verify the removal of missiles and bombers and the destruction of sites and that suitable United Nations safeguards would be agreed upon to ensure against further introduction into Cuba of weapons systems capable of offensive use have not been capable of being fulfilled, a procedure was arranged in cooperation with the USSR, under which the United States has verified that Soviet vessels leaving Cuba have carried away the number of missiles and IL-28 bombers which the USSR certified as having been in Cuba.
The United States on its part, as of November 20, 1962, lifted the quarantine instituted on October 23, 1962, and the United States further gives assurance that, provided no nuclear weapons and no offensive weapons systems are present in or re-introduced into Cuba, and provided Cuba does not commit aggressive acts against any nation of the Western Hemisphere, it does not intend, as the President made clear at this press conference on November 20, to invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba.
The undertakings stated herein do not alter or impair the rights and obligations under all existing treaties to which the United States is a party.
All weapons regarding the dismantling and withdrawal of which from Cuba agreement was reached in accordance with the undertakings between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev, have, with the consent of the Government of the Republic of Cuba, by this time been removed from Cuba and returned to the Soviet Union, and all the sites dismantled.
Weapons of this nature shall not in the future be introduced by the USSR into Cuba.
The United States would agree-upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments-to remove promptly the quarantine measure now in effect, and to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
In addition to the removal of those weapons systems capable of offensive use to which I have already referred, the United States takes note of the stated intention of the USSR to withdraw all military units and personnel placed in Cuba for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems.
The United States regrets that the undertakings for United Nations verification of the removal of missiles and bombers and destruction of sites, and for suitable United Nations safeguards against further introduction into Cuba of weapons systems capable of offensive use have not been capable of being fulfilled.
In the absence of such fulfillment the United States will employ such other means of observation and verification as may be necessary to ensure that no such weapons are present or introduced into Cuba.
We earnestly trust that this session of the Security Council marks the achievement of a peaceful solution of the crisis caused by the introduction of offensive weapons systems into Cuba, and that the door to a solution of other outstanding problems might now be opened.
Members will have taken note of the declaration and statements made by the representatives of the United States of America, and of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics with respect to the Cuban crisis which gave rise to the Security Council meeting of October 23, 1962, as well as the statements of the Secretary General, and by members of the Council and Cuba.
I am confident that all members of the Council will join me in an expression of satisfaction that the crisis the world has recently faced in the Caribbean has been terminated through direct negotiations with the active participation of the Secretary General, and of earnest hope that the door is now open to the solution of other outstanding problems.
It seems to me they have gone directly contrary to what we agreed at the Ex Com meeting also.
As a matter of fact, there is a message in from the President to that effect-which Brom Smith was going to pass on to you.
He had already drawn up over here, even before we got these messages down, some instructions/3/ which attempted, based on our conversation with McCloy, that said in effect since the Soviet Union is taking this line which means watering down what we feel are essential reservations and trying to get them out in a way where they wouldn't be nearly effective that we just can't buy this and that a move ought to be made now to fold this up as quickly as possible on a basis of unagreed statements, preferably filed with the Security Council.
I would take one and three against two, because the meeting of the SC would almost certainly mean the Cubans would come in and it would be out of control.
I would propose to try to get out this afternoon to the Ex-Com some suggested draft instructions in the hope that those could be the subject for the discussion at the meeting Monday afternoon.
I don't think McCloy will be here; but I think we just have to go ahead.
I was rather surprised, because I thought Jack was so clear that no matter what happened to put in the proviso about overflights and that if we couldn't make any progress with the Soviets on restatement with the changes he had in mind, we would go on other basis.
I know he is getting impatient and wants to get back into law practice.
I can well understand his feeling, and I think he would like to feel he had folded the thing up now.
We all like to draw lines under things, but this is one where I don't think we're doing any good for ourselves.
And this is the line which Dean and I are prepared to take, and if it meets with your and Bob's approval, then we will try to circulate something so that you will get it Monday morning.
It emerges clearly that Soviets will not agree to procedure in Security Council which would associate them in any way with our determination continue overflights in absence acceptable international verification arrangements to assure against reintroduction of offensive weapons into Cuba.
Numerous Soviet objections to our declaration, unacceptable Cuban declaration, and Soviet rejection our final position on United States declaration all attest to this.
We believe there is no further advantage to us in attempting reach for 'agreed' statements by further modification of our position, or by prolonging further an essentially sterile negotiating process.
Soviet tactics seem clearly designed to obtain formal United States and Security Council acceptance of concept that Khrushchev has fully discharged his obligations under agreement reached in exchange of letters with President October 27, which of course he has not.
In addition Soviets obviously hope to squeeze out one more drop of blood from us in form of elaboration of non-invasion guarantee.
As far as we are concerned, the bargain on Cuba has already been struck on the basis defined in the President's November 20 press conference statement.
In return for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles and IL-28's, we have lifted the quarantine.
We have also made the declaration of non-invasion in President's press conference of November 20.
We do not intend to go any further on substance without acceptable safeguards arrangements assuring compliance with Soviet promise not to reintroduce offensive weapons systems into Cuba, which have not been obtained and may be unobtainable.
If differentiation between two kinds of declarations, agreed and disagreed, is designed to be a matter of substance— that is, if agreed declarations thereby acquire more standing than the disagreed declarations-then it would obviously be very bad from United States standpoint to declare our intention to continue air surveillance in a manner which accords it only second-class dignity.
If, on other hand, the split into two different kinds of declarations is intended to be merely matter of form, then there is no point in having two different kinds of declarations.
Accordingly, you should seek meeting with Kuznetsov with a view to settling on one of the following procedures for wrap-up.
Unagreed statements are filed by United States and USSR with SYG, who will distribute them to members of SC for information.
Unagreed statements are made by United States and USSR separately in whatever public manner they choose.
In none of these cases should a Cuban declaration be a part of the scenario.
Disadvantage of SC meeting is that it would be impossible not to seat Cuba or to permit Cuban Representative to be heard, presumably at length, on all sorts of matters that are not germane to understanding between the President and Khrushchev.
If SC route were taken, Soviets would have to agree at minimum not to take up cudgels on behalf Cuba.
This would enable Cuban speech to be made, but not other member of SC would comment on it and it would not be regarded as part of IR-USSR discussion.
If we are sufficiently sure Soviets would turn down proposal in urtel 2189, it has been suggested that it be given to Soviets on take-it-or-leave-it basis, in order to demonstrate that reasonable terms for agreed declarations are not obtainable.
We should soon reach a decision regarding the use of Cuban exiles in broadcasts beamed to Cuba.
On the assumption that United States policy toward Cuba will continue to be one of exerting economic pressures and making Soviet support as expensive as possible, it is recommended that Cuban exile broadcasts urging economic sabotage and passive resistance could play a valuable role.
This recommendation also assumes that CIA can exercise a certain guidance and control over these broadcasts.
The Cuban individuals and groups doing the speaking should be carefully selected for their reputation and credibility with the people in Cuba.
Students should do the speaking to students; labor leaders to labor, teachers to teachers, etc.
The Cuban audience should be urged to act with care and cautioned against open rebellion.
The program would be based upon work slowdowns, purposeful inefficiency, purposeful waste, and relatively safe forms of sabotage.
Specific examples of the activities urged would be putting glass and nails on the highways, leaving water running in public buildings, putting sand in machinery, wasting electricity, taking sick leave from work, damaging sugar stalks during the harvest, etc.
The program would be strictly attributable to the Cuban exiles with no open participation by USIA or other government agencies.
If real results were achieved, the Voice of America could report these as evidence of opposition to the Castro regime through interviews with refugees and extracts from letters.
Ambassador Stevenson reported that the Soviet proposals had been put in at the same time as ours.
He handed to the President a paper listing the advantages and disadvantages of several courses of action.
The President said the key part of any statement is the no-invasion assurance.
If we could put in no more than a reference to the November 20th press conference statement, this would be acceptable.
Secretary Rusk suggested that both sides make a full statement in the Security Council, revealing their differences, and then introduce a separate paper containing agreed sentences.
Under Secretary Ball argued that we were not anxious to end the Cuban affair because the Cuban problem will continue to be with us.
He thought an agreement would make it easier for Khrushchev to remove the remaining Soviet troops.
Secretary Rusk noted that all we were doing was ending the offensive weapons phase of the problem.
The President asked why we had to take the overflights problem into the Security Council.
Mr McCloy replied that we must cover our no-invasion pledge by stating the exception,e., our continuance of overflights.
Secretary Rusk noted that the Rio Treaty makes our overflights legal, as spelled out in the OAS Resolution.
Ambassador Stevenson predicted that the Russians would reject our statement, but we should go back to them again and discuss it.
If the Russians again rejected our position, then we could go the route of filing separate statements.
Secretary Rusk said it was important to us in Latin America and for our domestic public to get out our full statement.
Once we have done this the Soviets could point out what they disagree with.
Ambassador Stevenson read the statement which the Security Council President hoped we and the Russians could accept.
Mr Bundy said that if the Soviet presence in Cuba was important to us, we do not want to draw a line under the crisis.
The President said we do not want to have the Soviets restating our no-invasion statement.
Secretary Rusk said we should be careful not to paper over our disagreement.
Mr Ball noted that if a Security Council meeting were held, the Cubans would be given a chance to voice their complaints.
We should avoid a Security Council meeting and we should abandon any attempt to get a consensus in the Security Council because this would be misleading.
Secretary Rusk said that others might try to force us into the Security Council, but they might not if they know we will be unable to agree with the Russians.
The President said our best position is to go for separate statements filing it with the UN, but without a Security Council meeting.
We could live with agreed/disagreed statements without a Council meeting.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we do not break up the negotiations this week during the plenary session of the Communist Presidium in Moscow.
Mr McCloy hoped that we could record an agreement and Ambassador Stevenson said that if we told the Russians we could not agree on a statement with them, the Russians would not want a Security Council meeting.
The President expressed his concern that the OAS States and the domestic public opinion, including Congressional opinion, will exert great pressure on the Government in the next few months.
Ambassador Stevenson summarized his view again and Secretary Rusk made clear that our position was to discuss our proposal as well as theirs.
The President concluded the discussion by saying we could discuss the Russian plan but we should keep the negotiations out of the Security Council.
In response to a request by Mr Murrow, the President authorized CIA, in coordination with USIA on policy matters, to resume broadcasts by Cuban refugees on transmitters under Agency contract.
Such broadcasts had been forbidden during the earlier phase of the missile crisis.
All Present plus Stevenson and McCloy McCone covered most recent intelligence, indicating no developments, intense study of photography was continuing and then reported on the telegram covering the interview with Ricardo Nunez ,/l/ reading and emphasizing the underlined portions.
We should consider ways and means of playing this up on radio and further news media.
There followed a long discussion which involved a sharp difference between Rusk, Ball, Johnson and Martin on one hand and Stevenson and McCloy on the other as to negotiating procedures to be followed in attempting to reach a sign-off arrangement with Kuznetsov.
Stevenson and McCloy wished to take our statement and the Soviets' and attempt to draft a statement in which the areas of agreement were pointed out, and in a second chapter, the areas of disagreement would be set forth.
The consensus was that this would be a wrong procedure; that it would down-grade the importance of on-site inspection and continued aerial inspection and it would be misunderstood by the public and Latin American states and therefore was undesirable.
The President expressed himself as favoring a presentation of our position with a unilateral presentation by the Soviets with their position (there was some indication that an attempt would be made to reach agreement on these two statements in advance of their publication), and let the Secretary General or the public reach their own conclusions as to where the areas of agreement and disagreement lie.
At the end of almost two hours of discussion the disagreement seemed to prevail and, although attempts were made to reconcile the differing opinion, it was my conclusion that in the actual execution of the agreement or the talks with Kuznetsov in the next couple of days there will evolve a procedure favored by Stevenson and McCloy and opposed by the Secretary of State.
Mr Murrow brought up the question of resuming the clandestine radio broadcasts which had been sponsored by CIA and carried on by the Cuban refugee community.
He pointed out to the President that these efforts had been ""stood down"" following the October 22nd speech and during the complicated negotiations.
The President and the Executive Committee approved and instructed CIA to reinstitute the broadcasts or to permit the Cuban refugee groups to go right ahead.
CIA should act upon this question at once and should report to me as to the actions taken so that I in turn can report to the President.
In the evening at the White House I discussed the meeting with the President and the Attorney General.
Both were amused by the argument but obviously somewhat disturbed that such a difference should be brought before the Executive Committee.
Undoubtedly the President ""heard"" Stevenson because of recent publicity.
I continue to be concerned over the danger of placing undue reliance on photography.
We seem to be drifting into a frame of mind that high-level photography is all we need, that it will show everything that must be seen, that it is preferable to on-site inspection, that really on-site inspection is undesirable because it would be impartially conducted and the institution of it would automatically end over-flights and that there is little to be gained from low over-flights.
I wish General Carter and appropriate members of the staff to consider this very seriously and to discuss it at the level of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and NRO to be sure that we are not becoming overly dependent upon aerial photography and so run the risk of making a serious error.
I would like this taken up at once and reported back not later than Monday, December 17th.
Also I would like to personally discuss this with the Joint Chiefs and the President prior to leaving for the West Coast on December 21st.
Drafted and approved by U Alexis Johnson and cleared by McGeorge Bundy.
The Soviet Union, in cooperation with the United States, arranged a procedure whereby substantial verification was afforded the United States of the fact that 42 missiles, which the Soviet Union declared was the total number of such missiles introduced into Cuba, have in fact been removed from that island.
The Soviet Union likewise has stated that it has removed 42 IL-28 bombers from Cuba, that being the total of such bombers which the Soviet Union states it introduced into Cuba, and the Soviet Union has made possible a similar means of identification by the United States of the fact that 42 such bombers were in fact removed.
The Soviet Union has also stated that it has removed all nuclear weapons which it previously introduced into Cuba, as well as the components of such weapons.
In connection with the removal of the above-mentioned missiles, bombers, and nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union has stated that it will not reintroduce into Cuba those or other weapons systems of a similar or comparable offensive character.
The United States has, as of November 20, 1962, lifted the quarantine which it imposed around the island of Cuba on October 24, 1962.
This has been done upon the basis of the statements and acts of the Soviet Union above referred to.
It was contemplated by the above mentioned exchange of letters between the President and the Chairman that there would be created an effective system of international inspection on the island of Cuba so as to verify the dismantling of the sites and the removal of the above-mentioned weapons, as well as to provide safeguards against the further maintenance and introduction of such weapons in Cuba.
Apart from the verification procedures above mentioned, it has not been possible thus far to effect an international verification system on the ground, particularly one such as would provide the safeguards against the future maintenance and introduction of such weapons in the island of Cuba.
The President of the United States has stated in his press conference of November 20 that it was not the intention of the United States to invade Cuba provided all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of the hemisphere in future, and provided Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere.
The President of the United States reaffirms his previous statement in this regard and repeats his assurances that the United States has no intention either to invade or support an invasion of Cuba on the above conditions.
In reaffirming the President's statement and the assurances referred to above, the United States wishes to make it clear, however, that, pending the installation of an adequate system of international or other effective verification on the island of Cuba to insure against the maintenance and reintroduction of such weapons and weapons systems into Cuba, it intends to employ all necessary means of observation and verification of its own in order to insure against this eventuality.
The Soviet Union, believing that it has substantially complied with the spirit of the exchange of communications between the President and the Chairman above referred to, believes that any further inspection, observation or verification is unnecessary and unjustified, but with this position the United States cannot agree.
Nothing herein contained in any way affects the rights and obligations of any treaty or existing agreements to which either the United States of America or the Soviet Union is a party.
It is hoped that, in negotiating this, it would be possible for you to obtain affirmation, even though not expressed in the above text, of the Soviet intention to remove all Soviet military units from Cuba.
It informed the mission the United States could not agree to a Security Council resolution and would prefer to avoid a consensus statement, and that Stevenson and McCloy should not agree to a consensus statement without further instructions.
Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, December 11, 1962.
No classification marking, but the Department of State classified the message Top Secret and Eyes Only.
A note on the source text indicated that copies were sent to Ball, Thompson, Robert Kennedy, and U Alexis Johnson.
This document was sent to the Soviet Embassy at 2:15 Moscow time, December 10.
Our relations are already entering now their formal course since all those means placed by us on the Cuban territory which you considered offensive are withdrawn and you ascertained that to which effect a statement was already made by your side.
We appreciate that you just as we approached not dogmatically the solution of the question of eliminating the tension which evolved and this enabled us under existing conditions to find also a more flexible form of verification of the withdrawal of the above mentioned means.
Understanding and flexibility displayed by you in this matter are highly appreciated by us though our criticism of American imperialism remains in force because that conflict was indeed created by the policy of the United States with regard to Cuba.
I believe that you already had an opportunity to familiarize yourself with the text proposed by us/1/ of a brief declaration of the Soviet Government in which the Soviet Union's main commitments resulting from the exchange of messages between us are formulated.
But notwithstanding what the agreement on the concrete texts of our declarations at this concluding stage will be, anyway the basic goal has been achieved and tension removed.
I will tell you frankly that we have removed our means from Cuba relying on your assurance that the United States and its allies will not invade Cuba.
I already told you at one time that our friends especially those of them who regard us with certain lack of understanding are trying to convince us that imperialism cannot be trusted, that is that you cannot be trusted, as a representative of such capitalist state as the United States of America.
It goes without saying that you and I have different understanding of these questions.
I shall not go into details as to what my understanding is because in this regard you and I cannot have common opinion since we are people representing different political poles.
But there are things that require common understanding on both sides and such common understanding is possible and even necessary.
Within a short period of time we and you have lived through a rather acute crisis.
The acuteness of it was that we and you were already prepared to fight and this would lead to a thermonuclear war.
We took it into account and, being convinced that mankind would never forgive the statesmen who would not exhaust all possibilities to prevent catastrophe, agreed to a compromise although we understood-and we state it now-that your claims had no grounds whatsoever, had no legal basis and represented a manifestation of sheer arbitrariness in international affairs.
We agreed to a compromise because our main purpose was to extend a helping hand to the Cuban people in order to exclude the possibility of invasion of Cuba so that Cuba could exist and develop as a free sovereign state.
This is our main purpose today, it remains to be our main purpose for tomorrow and we did not and do not pursue any other purposes.
Therefore, Mr President, everything-the stability in this area and not only in this area but in the entire world-depends on how you will now fulfill the commitments taken by you.
Furthermore, it will be now a sort of litmus paper, an indicator whether it is possible to trust if similar difficulties arise in other geographical areas.
I think you will agree that if our arrangement for settling the Cuban crisis fails it will undermine a possibility for manoeuvre which you and we would resort to for elimination of danger, a possibility for compromise in the future if similar difficulties arise in other areas of the world, and they really can arise.
You, Mr President, do not want to agree with the five conditions put forward by Prime Minister of the Republic of Cuba Fidel Castro.
But, Mr President, we who occupy such responsible position in the world and who are endowed with high trust, have to overcome those difficulties.
The peoples will appreciate that because for them it means insuring lasting peace on earth.
We read now various articles by your columnists and correspondents and we are concerned that in those articles they are widely commenting on the confidential exchange of opinion and it is being done by the people who as it would seem have no relation to confidential channels set up between us.
Judging by the contents of these articles it is clear that their authors are well informed and we get an impression that this is not a result of an accidental leak of the confidential information but a result of benevolence for those people into whose hands gets the information they make public.
This evidently is done for the purpose of informing the public in a one-sided way.
Frankly speaking, if we use the confidential communications this way, it will be far from facilitating confidence in those channels.
You yourself realize that if your side begins to act in the way that our exchange of opinion by way of confidential channels will leak through fingers these channels will cease to be of use and may even cause harm.
If you consider that those channels have outlived themselves and are of no use any longer, then we also will draw appropriate conclusions in this respect.
I tell you this straightforwardly and I would like to know your opinion on this matter.
But on the other hand I consider it useful for us to continue to maintain the possibility of confidential exchange of opinion because a minimum of personal trust is necessary for leading statesmen of both countries and this corresponds to the interests of our countries and peoples, to the interests of peace all over the world.
Let us, Mr President, eliminate promptly the consequences of the Cuban crisis and get down to solving other questions, and we have them in number.
Please, excuse me for my straightforwardness and frankness but I believe as before that a frank and straightforward exchange of opinion is needed to avoid the worst.
Please, convey to your wife and your whole family wishes of good health from myself, my wife and my entire family 73/ /3/Printed from an unsigned copy.
Fol is report of three-hour mtg this afternoon Stevenson, McCloy and Yost with Kuznetsov, Mendelevich and Counselor of Sov Emb in Washington.
Our impression was that Sovs firmly rejected single joint document on grounds that it contains certain elements, particularly provisos on our no-invasion assurance and reference to overflights, to which they cannot in any form lend their name, and that Cubans would not be participants in this declaration.
Stevenson opened meeting by saying that he thought it was in interest of both sides to reach maximum possible agreement and to demonstrate to public that we are doing so.
To this end it seemed preferable to us, after further consideration, to present single agreed declaration signed by both parties than separate declarations.
It also seemed decidedly preferable to us to submit such declaration to SYG for transmittal to SC Pres rather than to present declarations at SC mtg.
It seemed to us inevitable that latter would result in controversy and recriminations and would tend to destroy the effects of partial agreements which we had reached.
McCloy continued by saying that he had just discussed problem thoroughly with President and Secretary and that it is President's desire to end this affair by stressing note of agreement rather than of disagreement.
Therefore we have drawn up single document in which agreements and disagreements are equally frankly stated though fact that there is but one document strengthens impression of overall agreement.
If there were too many documents, one or two Sov, one or two United States and a Cuban, chance of misinterpretation and confusion in public mind would be great.
He too stressed dangers involved in SC meeting which we might not be able to control and in which Cubans as well as some SC members would become involved in acrimonious controversy.
Indication agreement between President and Khrushchev on verification and future safeguards have not been fulfilled, provisos attached to our non-invasion assurance, and our determination to apply own means of verification pending agreement on international arrangements.
He also rejected implication in Sov drafts that we are entering into an agreement with Cubans to normalize our relations with them.
He then went over draft joint declaration transmitted Deptel 1593 modified as indicated ourtel 2291/2/ emphasizing that, while this draft based on instructions from Washington, it is informal document prepared here and was passed to Sovs at this time as illustrative rather than final text.
McCloy emphasized President's strong feeling that agreed and disagreed elements of our position must have same status and adduced this as further reason for single, joint document or at least single document on each side.
If there should however be SC meeting in which Cubans spoke there would almost certainly be LA and probably United States replies, Sovs would support Cuba, whole history of Cuban crisis would be rehashed and atmosphere of agreement would be destroyed.
Kuznetsov replied that he would of course report our new proposal to his govt but that he was convinced idea of single document would not be acceptable.
You have your problems, he said, but you should also take ours into account.
If there is joint declaration without Cuba, this will not be understood.
If there is to be joint declaration it must be on behalf of all three govts.
Kuznetsov continued by stating that, though our joint draft contained some changes in wording and some new paragraphs, it still contains many points with which Soviet Union does not agree.
It would be impossible for Sovs to put their signature on this document since our viewpoints on certain elements differ radically.
He claimed sentence commending ""it was contemplated by the above-mentioned exchange of letters"" was inaccurate insofar as Sovs concerned since Khrushchev in his letter of Oct 27 had made on-site inspection dependent on Cuban agreement.
This point had been made many times, Kuznetsov said, issue is closed and he hopes we will not have to come back to it.
As to verification for future, Soviet Union is not opposed provided obligations are reciprocal and has therefore supported U Thant plan for inspection throughout Caribbean.
Kuznetsov also repeated at length his objections to provisos attached to non-invasion assurance, claiming that they would give us excuse for violating this assurance whenever we desired.
As to overflights, he said Sov Union cannot agree to statement of this kind being presented to SC for approval in Soviet Union's name.
He claimed paragraph in which it is stated that Sov Union believes any further inspection, observation or verification unnecessary and unjustified does not represent Sov position.
Kuznetsov then returned to Sov draft declaration and resolution submitted to us Dec 6/3/ and asked why these were not acceptable.
There would be agreement, he said, on short drafts and supplementary disagreed statements could be shown by each side to other in order to minimize SC debate.
His govt feels it more expedient that declarations be presented to SC rather than to SYG since subject was raised with SC at beginning of crisis.
He was disturbed at McCloy's statement that, if we cannot agree on joint declaration, United States will go back to earlier and worse wording in separate declarations.
He urged negotiations be carried on sincerely and on the basis of the greatest possible degree of mutual agreement.
Our two countries face many important international problems on solution of which destiny of peace depends and manner in which we deal with Cuban problem will affect solution of all others.
President and Khrushchev have shown wisdom and patience in solution of this dangerous crisis and it is most important it be wound up in same spirit.
If we should go to SC he foresaw great difficulty of working out res acceptable to both sides and suggested consensus statement would be decidedly preferable.
Kuznetsov reiterated his objection to joint declaration and argued in favor of two separate declarations as closely agreed as possible.
He agreed to consider again whether SC meeting or more filing of declarations with SYG would be preferable.
McCloy emphasized Sovs had no need to worry about United States not fulfilling its obligations.
It would certainly do so and that was why it was insisting on citing them fully and clearly.
It was impossible for United States to give assurance against invasion without provisos which we had included.
As to going back to earlier language in case there is no agreement on this document he pointed out he had been authorized to modify our language in some cases in order to obtain agreement, but that if no agreement were reached and separate disagreed declarations were filed, he had previously made it clear we would feel free to revert to some of our earlier language.
McCloy said he would consider whether the word ""offensive"" could be dropped leaving the words ""similar or comparable"" but said he could make no commitment on this score.
McCloy also referred at some length to dangers of aggressive acts by Castro, recent Che Guevara interview in London Daily Worker/4/ which underlined necessity for second of our provisos on non-invasion assurances.
Sovs continued to express preference for SC meeting but were less strong on this point.
United States side made it clear that if there were SC mtg it could only end in consensus statement more or less along lines of that proposal shown to them.
Meeting concluded with understanding that Soviets would get in touch with us when they had obtained Moscow reaction to our latest proposals.
McCone said that the negotiation of Donovan seems to be coming to a head.
The President wants the Attorney General to go down because he now has commitments to cover the Castro list.
McCone further said that this raises a problem of how to get down there because there is no transportation.
McCone suggested, last night, that his Sanchez, head of the Family Committee, call Beratta, a close adviser of Castro's-that woman who has been described in various reports as being his advisor, his secretary or his mistress-can arrange for him to come down.
McCone said that if he comes down, they would allow him in and then we would have him charter a Pan American plane and fly down there.
McCone doesn't know how this will work out, but it is about the only way to do it.
McCone said that he thinks this should be done rather overtly; last time it was done very secretly, and Ball had no objection to it being done overtly.
McCone said the reason he thinks it ought to be done overtly is because there is no government involvement here.
The second thing is that we have been freezing the three Cuban defectors, and there have been some very significant reports.
McCone said that an appraisal of Soviet intentions had been made which he would like Ball to take a look at.
McCone thinks that some place along the line, they are either going to take a shot at one of our birds or threaten to do so.
It might be that we might be able to prevent it by some kind of a leak or statement at Ball's level or at the President's level that we have to carry this on and if they take a shot at one of those birds, we are going to have to take such action as is appropriate.
Message From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev Washington, December 14, 1962.
I was glad to have your message of December 1 1/1/ and to know that you believe, as we do, that we have come to the final stage of the Cuban affair between us, the settlement of which will have significance for our future relations and for our ability to overcome other difficulties.
I wish to thank you for your expression of appreciation of the understanding and flexibility we have tried to display.
In these negotiations we have tried to understand your position and I am glad to note that Mr Kuznetsov has also shown effort to understand our problems.
It is clearly in the interest of both sides that we reach agreement on how finally to dispose of the Cuban crisis.
To this end, Ambassador Stevenson and Mr McCloy presented on Wednesday a new draft of a joint statement which by now has certainly reached you./2/ 1 wish to assure you that it is our purpose to end this affair as simply and clearly as possible.
You refer to the importance of my statements on an invasion of Cuba and of our intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts are sown from the very start.
I quite agree with you that the larger part of the crisis has now been ended and we should not permit others to stand in the way of promptly settling the rest without further acrimony.
With regard to your reference to the confidential channels set up between us, I can assure you that I value them.
I have not concealed from you that it was a serious disappointment to me that dangerously misleading information should have come through these channels before the recent crisis.
You may also wish to know that by an accident or misunderstanding one of your diplomats appears to have used a representative of a private television network as a channel to us.
This is always unwise in our country, where the members of the press often insist on printing at some later time what they may learn privately.
Because our systems are so different, you may not be fully familiar with the practices of the American press.
A number of the competitors are not great admirers of my Administration, and perhaps an even larger number are not wholly friendly to yours.
Here in Washington we have 1200 reporters accredited to the White House alone, and thousands more in other assignments.
It would be a great mistake to think that what appears in newspapers and magazines necessarily has anything to do with the policy and purpose of this government.
I am glad to say that I have some friends among newspapermen, but no spokesmen.
But let me emphasize again that we do indeed value these confidential channels.
I entirely share your view that some trust is necessary for leading statesmen of our two countries; I believe that it is important to build the area of trust wherever possible.
I shall of course continue to hold and to express my convictions about the relative merits of our systems of government, and I will not be surprised if you do the same.
In particular, we have been very glad to have opportunities for private exchanges with and through Mr Bolshakov, and I am sorry to learn that he is returning to Moscow.
It is our impression that he has made a real effort to improve communications and understanding between our two governments, and we shall miss him very much.
I appreciate your writing me so frankly, and in return I have tried to be as straightforward, for I agree with you that only through such frank exchanges can we better understand our respective points of view.
We also are hopeful that once the Cuban crisis is behind us, we shall be able to tackle the other problems confronting us and to find the path to their solution.
Thank you for your expressions of good wishes to me and my family, and let me in turn send you and your wife and family our personal good wishes for the coming year.
On December 6, 1 wrote to you/2/ stating that I was of the opinion that two regularly scheduled U-2 missions per day would reasonably satisfy the requirements, with the understanding that postponed flights, because of weather, would be flown when weather permitted, and with the further understanding that low-level flights would be requested if considered necessary because of a special interest in targets or protracted postponement of the high level missions.
With reference to the assumption expressed in NSAM #208 that an energetic program for the collection of information by all other available means would be used to supplement photography, the United States Intelligence Board has considered these carefully.
CIA is increasing its effort in a variety of ways, including an expanded use of agents, legal travellers, refugee interrogations both in this country and in other countries, and through liaison arrangements with third countries.
In addition, CIA is prepared to endeavor to insert additional intelligence collecting teams as soon as policy decisions are reached in this respect.
NSA will continue an intensive program in the SIGINT field which has during recent weeks added materially to all other intelligence.
I think the combination of the photography and other measures can give us a reasonably satisfactory body of intelligence.
However, it will not, in my opinion, be totally satisfactory nor as dependable as an arrangement for well organized on-site inspection, which is politically not attainable at the present time.
The repeated warning is to be done as a reminder of our position, not as if we were making a new point.
He asked whether there was anything that could be done about this but was told that the price was set by the world market and was not easily affected.
The conclusions of the memorandum were that sugar market was tight and Cuba would benefit economically.
Secretary Rusk summarized his recent meeting with the NATO Council in Paris.
He said the NATO powers expressed great satisfaction with the way the Cuban missile crisis had been handled.
With respect to NATO problems, Secretary Rusk said he had stressed the need for increased European continental forces.
NATO is marking time on organization problems and on nuclear questions pending the completion of the Common Market negotiations.
The NATO meeting was so placid that reporters had to resort to sensationalized stories.
We appeared to be heading toward separate statements on the Cuban crisis.
The remainder of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of a Congo plan and policy recommendations of the Subcommittee on South Asia.
Editorial Note The 37th meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council was held at 3:45m., December 17, 1962.
Following is approved text of statement United States would make in event Soviets prefer two separate statements rather than one joint statement that includes both agreed and disagreed points.
This text reflects changes suggested by McCloy to Cleveland December 16/1/ and changes agreed with Stevenson in Washington December 17.
The United States takes note of the statement of the USSR that it has dismantled all of the missile sites and that it has removed from Cuba all of the missiles, all of the IL-28 bombers, and all nuclear weapons, missile components, and launching apparatus.
It also takes note of the statement of the USSR that it will not reintroduce into Cuba those or other weapons systems of similar or comparable character.
The United States also notes that in connection with the removal of the above-mentioned weapons, the Soviet Union has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel placed in Cuba for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems.
The United States wishes to inform the Secretary General that on the basis of such statements and acts the United States on November 20, 1962 lifted the quarantine which it had imposed around the Island of Cuba on October 24, 1962.
It was contemplated by the above-mentioned exchange of letters between the President and the Chairman that there would be created an effective system of international inspection in Cuba to verify the dismantling of the missile sites and the removal of the weapons, and to provide suitable safeguards against the further maintenance and introduction of such weapons in Cuba.
A procedure was arranged between the USSR and the United States for verification at sea of the removal of the missiles and bombers which the Soviet Union declared it had introduced into Cuba.
However, it has not been possible thus far to effect on the ground the contemplated international system of verification and safeguards.
Pending the installation of such a system to insure against the maintenance and reintroduction of such weapons and weapons systems into Cuba, the United States is compelled to continue to employ the means of observation and verification it has found necessary.
The President of the United States stated at a press conference on November 20 that provided all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of the hemisphere in future, and provided Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere, it was not the intention of the United States to invade Cuba.
The President of the United States reaffirms his previous statement and repeats his assurance that, subject to the above conditions, the United States has no intention either to invade or support an invasion of Cuba.
The President of the United States expresses the hope that the action taken by the United States and the Soviet Union following the above-mentioned exchange of communications to avert the threat of war arising from the Cuban situation will lead to further constructive negotiations between the two countries to adjust the differences existing between them and generally lessen the tensions which might induce further danger of war.
Drafted and approved by U Alexis Johnson and cleared in substance with the President.
At a suitable occasion in our negotiations with Kuznetsov and in connection with any discussion with him on the question of our continued reconnaissance, you should express to Kuznetsov our growing concern over fact Soviets are continuing work at and improve anti-aircraft arsenal in Cuba.
We are concerned that someone might have the motive of interfering with our reconnaissance.
We have made it amply clear to the Soviets that, in the absence of other safeguards, we must and will continue that reconnaissance.
We have no desire to return to the days of late October and assume this is also shared by the Soviets.
The Soviets must recognize that destruction of American aircraft and loss of American life arising from this deliberate activity of the Soviet Union could well have such consequences.
We hope Kuznetsov will understand that our motive in bringing this to his attention is simply to make sure that there is no misunderstanding on this point.
In short, we feel it would be unwise continue this buildup in view of the non-belligerent and non-provocative character and intent of our reconnaissance.
At meeting this morning Stevenson, McCloy and YostKuznetsov, Mendelevich and Counselor of Sov Emb in Wash, Kuznetsov presented new Sov proposal./l/ Gist of it was that four letters, two from President dated Oct 27 and 28 and two from Khrushchev dated Oct 27 and 28, be registered at UN and passed to SC Pres for distribution to SC members as official UN documents.
Cuban Rep would follow same procedure and separately submit statement from his Govt.
No SC meeting would be held and no further action would be required or taken.
Kuznetsov opened meeting by recapitulating history of attempts to work out draft declarations, emphasizing that United States drafts of both separate and joint declarations had contained ""completely unacceptable"" condition to non-invasion assurance which were not contained in exchange of letters between Pres and Khrushchev and that Sovs could not approve in any form statement implying that United States has right to overfly Cuba.
Noting that United States does not favor SC mtg, Kuznetsov then put forward proposal summarized above.
First, he pointed out it was Khrushchev's letter of Oct 26, not his letter of Oct 27, which was referred to in President's letter of Oct 27 and formed basis of agreement.
Second, he asked whether Sovs had draft of joint letter to SYG or whether it was purely letter of transmittal.
McCloy noted that Sov proposal omitted any recitation of progress since exchange of letters, such as dismantling and removing of missiles and bombers, lifting of blockade and assurances in Pres's Nov 20 press conference, as well as omitting any reference to points on which agreement not achieved, such as UN verification system and need for United States to use own means of verification in absence of system.
Kuznetsov replied that President's Oct 27 letter does refer to Khrushchev's Oct 26 letter but also refers to its fifth para to Khrushchev's Oct 27 letter.
Moreover he claimed President's letter of Oct 27 in its substance dealt with points made in Khrushchev's letter of Oct 27 rather than in his Oct 26 letter.
As to joint letter of transmittal, he said it should be brief and formal and not set forth differences between us.
They ask SYG to send letters to SC Pres for distribution to SC members as UN documents.
If United States accepts proposal Sovs can then within one day prepare draft letter of transmittal for discussion.
As to McCloy's remarks, Kuznetsov said that if we attempt to include in letter of declarations points which have not been agreed, such as that United States will continue overflights, then we would be starting negotiations all over again.
Sovs cannot be party to any document containing such provision or give impression they approve it.
They cannot also agree in any way to making non-invasion assurance condition of Cuba's not threatening other states.
New Sov proposal does not mean that all questions concerning Cuba will be settled.
Some points we would like to include and some points they would like to include would be omitted.
Stevenson emphasized we had always understood agreement between us rested essentially on two letters, Khrushchev's of Oct 26 and President's of Oct 27 which says Khrushchev's Oct 26 letter provides basis of agreement.
It would be inappropriate to include in group of letters constituting our agreement Oct 27 letter to which United States never adverted except in connection with future disarmament.
Moreover Khrushchev's Oct 27 letter deals with proposal on concurrent action relating to Cuba and Turkey, which was never adopted and which was irrelevant.
Moreover Sov proposal omits all account of what has transpired since exchange of letters.
He welcomed efforts to end negotiations quickly but said his first reaction was to be troubled by difficulties he had mentioned.
McCloy added that if only letters proposed were submitted there would be irresistible pressure to publish also Khrushchev Oct 26 letter which was referred to in President's Oct 27 letter.
Moreover there is so much discussion in Khrushchev's Oct 27 letter of weapons in Turkey that inclusion of this letter would disturb rather than tranquilize atmosphere.
He also repeated his difficulty with the omission of any statement of what has been accomplished on both sides.
He pointed out that United States has in fact, taking into account President's Nov 20 press conference, carried out all its obligations even though we have not had benefit of on-site inspection.
Also if we register with UN our intent not to invade we must also register in document of equal dignity our intent continue observation by our own means until other means of verification can be established.
He also pointed out that assurance we had offered in various drafts ""not to support invasion"" goes beyond what is set forth in exchange of letters and was offered in order to meet objections Sovs had raised.
Kuznetsov replied that he had listened attentively to objections but hopes United Nations will carefully study new proposal with view to reaching final solution.
We have negotiated for weeks and if we seek to include in documents all points United States wants and all points Sovs want, it will be very difficult ever to conclude.
Sov idea is not to raise in these documents points on which we cannot agree but to limit ourselves to letters which are already known to world as basis for settlement which has been achieved.
They had selected only four letters which were concerned with settlement and which have been published.
If United States thinks Khrushchev Oct 26 letter should also be published they would consult their govt whether do so.
As to references to Turkey in Oct 27 letter, these are nothing new and Sov views in regard to foreign military bases around its borders are well known.
Sovs, as concession to United States viewpoint, have given up idea of SC meeting and res.
Essence of their proposal is to avoid stirring up all of the moot questions we have been discussing for a long time and on which no agreement has been reached.
World is already aware of what has been done since letters were exchanged and is reasonably well satisfied.
Sovs are still much interested in all of points covered in protocol, normalization of situation in Caribbean, but are not going to insist on inserting them in these documents.
As to overflights, United States creates vicious circle by repeating it will continue them until international arrangements are established, while at same time it does not state what sort of international system it contemplates and rejects that which has been put forward by U Thant.
In conclusion he repeated his appeal that United States think seriously about latest proposal.
There has been attempt on each side to understand position of other side.
However, if United States insists on putting in documents reference to overflights and conditions as to assurances, we will be once again at very beginning of our negotiations and solution will be far away.
However he would not want to give impression through this procedure that we have reached full agreement when in fact we have not.
If the documents prove to be inadequate we might find ourselves in position of seeking SC meeting to expound our point of view more fully there.
SUBJECT Cuba Mr McCloy called to report on his luncheon with Kuznetsov today.
A 12-page memorandum of conversation of this meeting indicates that the discussion lasted from 11:15m. to 1:30m. and was held in Stevenson's office.
Kuznetsov was ""intrigued"" with the general idea of separate submissions to the Secretary General of the documents in the public record on Cuba since the last Security Council meeting, which was October 25.
Mr McCloy got the impression that Kuznetsov would favorably recommend our proposal to Moscow.
Assuming there are two separate submissions to the Secretary General, they would presumably use the word ""register"" in theirs, but we would be free to use any word we wanted to describe our submission.
The problem is that the ""Prime Minister"" used the term ""register"" in ""his"" correspondence.
Kuznetsov ""winced"" at the idea of the President's November 20 Press Conference being included in our package of documents.
He conceded that there was much in the Presidential statement that was good from the Soviet point of view but said that ""25% of it is bad"", notably the reference to overflights and the provisos on the President's non-invasion assurance.
Kuznetsov said that he didn't know whether the Soviet Government would want to publish the October 26 letter.
He had reread it and saw nothing discreditable in it, but as we could probably tell, it had a rather special style and was in fact written by Khrushchev himself.
Mr McCloy explained we would have to show this letter to the Congression-al leaders on request, since it is referred to in the President's letter of October 27.
But, McCloy added, we would not ourselves publish it unless the Soviet Government wants it published.
He referred vaguely to an early statement by Castro (which might be his long television speech answering the President's original October 22 address) and to a document dated November 13 which we are still trying to identify here.
Kuznetsov said he appreciated that we were trying to wind this negotiation up without delay, and that this was also the desire of the Soviets.
Assurances to deliver $53,000,000 pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and foodstuffs and possibly some related products such as insecticides.
Delivery of goods in Habana amounting to 20% of above value before prisoners released.
American Red Cross acting in collaboration Cuban Families Committee has vessel now loading which together with air cargo now being prepared will deliver the 20% by December 23 in order begin airlift prisoners Miami area dawn December 23.
Three Cuban Red Cross representatives arrived Miami last night to inspect cargo being loaded.
Goods donated by United States private companies to ARC now total about $45,000,000; contributions continue to be made.
If necessary United States prepared to make available upon ARC request powdered skim milk from surplus stocks in amount not to exceed about $10,000,000 which represents less than 10% existing surplus this commodity.
These donations by private companies allowable under current tax legislation.
Rulings rendered by Internal Revenue re these donations conform to existing regulations and precedent.
Private companies have choice under the law between paying taxes on this amount or making charitable contributions for tax deduction purposes.
Inland and overseas freight, insurance, handling costs and labor have been donated by railroads, airlines, steamship lines, trucking companies, insurance companies and labor unions.
Government role has been essentially to cut red tape in order expedite transaction.
Since capture none has defected or publicly condemned United States despite offers to reward them for doing so.
While difficult assess precisely, Department does not believe transaction will materially affect stability Castro regime.
Reports indicate veteran Cuban communists opposed transaction while 26 July group favored.
Cuban normal annual imports pharmaceuticals alone over $60,000,000 hence transaction involves substantially less than year's supply any commodity.
Castro regime had budgeted approximately $1,000,000 in foreign exchange for purchase pharmaceuticals; inclusion pharmaceuticals therefore releases only that amount foreign exchange for other purposes.
Donovan reports Castro prepared review cases of twenty-four United States citizens now imprisoned with view clemency or amnesty provided current transaction consummated good faith.
Bearing in mind that last minute snags may upset transaction, you authorized draw on foregoing except FYI portions in reply inquiries.
McCloy and Yost met this morning two and half hours with Kuznetsov, Zorin, and Mendelevich.
Sovs stood adamantly on their last proposal that only four letters exchanged between President and Khrushchev October 27 and 28 without any other documents be transmitted to UN./l/ No progress whatsoever was made.
McCloy had impression from earlier conversations that Kuznetsov personally might have favored accepting our proposal that two sets of documents chosen separately be submitted but that Moscow had overruled him.
Kuznetsov opened meeting with long statement commencing with assertion that United States proposal to transmit along with President's letters of October 27 and 28 White House press statement of October 27 and President's press statement of November 20 was entirely unacceptable.
After careful thought Sovs see no need for additional documents since basic agreement between United States and USSR is embodied in four letters of October 27 and 28.
Reservations which United States put forward in unilateral fashion are after agreement between President and Khrushchev.
White House statement October 27 and President's press statement November 20 contain same reservations as in various United States draft declarations which Sovs had pronounced unacceptable.
US, Kuznetsov claimed, is trying to undermine value of non-invasion assurances given in President's letters October 27 and 28 by introducing new conditions.
After Sovs have removed offensive weapons, given United States chance to verify, and stated readiness to give assurances re reintroducing weapons, United States changing its position in trying not to reaffirm its obligations.
It would appear United States wishes to get rid of these obligations and have its hands free not to observe non-invasion guarantee on pretext Cuba committing aggression against United States or some other country.
Furthermore, from sentence in November 20 statement commencing, ""We will not, of course, abandon . . .""it is clear United States seeking overthrow Cuban Govt and install old system.
This is dangerous policy and pursuing this course could bring heavy consequences.
Sovs cannot appear to agree in any form, directly or indirectly, to United States carrying on such policy.
Kuznetsov touched lightly on October 27 White House statement, merely saying it was never considered basic document on settlement Cuban crisis and need not be included.
He asked why United States so reluctant adopt UN system of inspection proposed by U Thant, either observation groups in Caribbean area or observation groups stationed in NY with authority visit Caribbean from time to time.
United States blandly rejects this proposal without even discussing it.
Yet at same time United States maintains that, since there is no international system, it must continue observation by its own means.
United States has said Soviet Union is not obliged to agree with what was said in October 27 and November 20 press statements.
However, even if documents are transmitted to SYG separately by two sides, it might appear Soviet Union had no objection to United States documents and had even agreed to them to certain extent.
In summing up, Kuznetsov said position of United States side in negotiations in no way strengthens confidence between our govts and is inconsistent with expressed desire of United States Govt to strengthen confidence.
He urged United States reconsider its position and accept Soviet proposal to submit to SYG four letters exchanged between President and Khrushchev October 27 and 28 and indicated these could be transmitted to SYG in either joint or separate covering letters.
McCloy replied had hoped we were close to agreement today but it appears that we have gone backward.
He had described previously how United States had in fact already done or offered more than was required by exchange letters between President and Khrushchev and said he saw no use going over arguments once again.
Perhaps best we can do is for each side transmit SYG whatever documents it wishes without disclosing in advance what it is submitting and thereby not implying there is any approval by other side.
It is still getting numerous reports from exiles of heavy Cuban armament, of strong Soviet military presence, and camps for training guerrillas.
Satisfactory inspection system would have to be elaborate and it would at best take months to work out.
We do not think Cuban people are free and do not like Castro's social system but that does not mean we are gong to invade Cuba.
If Sovs include Turkey letter with all its emphasis on Turkish bases we would have to include October 27 press statement.
United States is sincerely desirous of carrying out its obligations and believes it in vital interest both parties terminate this affair.
Separate declarations but ours would have to include what we are going to do in our own defense; 3.
Separate unagreed statement outside UN by chiefs of state, Foreign Ministers or UN Reps, simply summing up, stating it had not been possible to reach full agreement but that crisis is terminated, and both sides hope for progress in future.
McCloy concluded by expressing regret that situation cannot be terminated before reconvening of Congress when whole question likely subject of Congressional debate.
Kuznetsov expressed his govt's sincere desire reach agreement and show two govts can do something together.
He then however reiterated that only document Sovs believed it necessary submit are four letters October 27 and 28.
McCloy emphasized we are not asking Sovs to agree to documents we submit.
Yost suggested that there might in separate letters transmittal be clear disclaimer by each party that it did not necessarily approve all documents submitted by other party.
McCloy made it perfectly clear that, while he would of course report Soviet views to Washington, he was convinced United States could not accept their proposal to submit four letters alone.
It was agreed that, while there appeared to be total impasse, both parties would reflect and communicate with each other later.
At conclusion of meeting Zorin announced that for reasons of health he is leaving his UN post and returning to Moscow to resume his duties as Deputy FonMin.
Kuzentsov mentioned that Zorin's successor is present Soviet Amb to Japan, has spent more than ten years in China, and is outstanding expert on Chinese affairs.
Following is text of new joint draft letters of transmittal proposed by Sovs.
Khrushchev and the President of the United States of America John F Kennedy of October 27 and 28, 1962 which contain the obligations assumed by the Govts of the USSR and the United States for the settlement of the crisis that arose in the Caribbean area.
It is requested to transmit them to the President of the Security Council for circulating these messages as documents of the Council.
Respectfully, Representative of the USSR Representative of the United States"" Stevenson 257.
McCloy said that during the course of the conversation Kuznetsov said that Khrushchev himself placed great emphasis on inclusion of his October 27 Turkish Jupiter letter, explaining that he needed this domestically as he had used his position on this in defense of his action in Cuba.
Kuznetsov also reiterated their objections to the inclusion of the President's November 20 press conference.
McCloy said he made it clear that he was at the ""end of his string"" and had no further suggestions to offer.
He said he also made it clear that we could not agree to any of the proposed Soviet procedures.
McCloy said that he did not recommend or propose to take any new initiatives and would wait for Kuznetsov to get in touch with him.
Drafted and approved by U Alexis Johnson, cleared by Martin, Cleveland, Thompson, Rusk, and in substance with President Kennedy.
In this connection, for the Council's record, I am transmitting true copies of the President's letters of October 27 and October 28.
Other statements relating to the United States position in this matter are contained in a White House press statement dated October 27, and in the President's opening remarks at his press conference on November 20, 1962.
The President of the United States has asked me to express to you his hope that the steps taken by the two governments in this matter may lead to further constructive efforts on the part of the United States and the Soviet Union to adjust the differences between them.
My Government is also grateful to you for your own part in assisting both parties to find the means to avert the serious threat to the peace which the Cuban situation then entailed.
Alternatively, the substance of the foregoing joint letter could be incorporated into separate letters by United States and Soviet representatives.
McCloy gave Soviets following draft of suggested separate letter to be given to SYG by US, on assumption Soviets would also give SYG a separate letter in form previously submitted to US, presumably accompanied by copies of Khrushchev's letters of Oct 27 and 28 and reference to any other documents Soviets want.
McCloy pointed out United States draft merely referred to White House press statement Oct 27 and Presidential news conference statement Nov 20, and did not submit them as UN docs, thus moving toward Soviet position.
Kuznetsov asked why the reference in the letter could not be limited only to the Presidential letters of Oct 27 and 28 since the White House press statement and news conference were matters of public record, and since the basic obligations of the two parties were contained in the four letters of Oct 27 and Oct 28.
McCloy said this was impossible and that he had gone as far as he possibly could in eliminating the submission to the UN of the press statement and news conference statement and merely referring to them.
Kuznetsov said the letter was not acceptable, and that the Soviets could not agree to or approve either openly or tacitly any reference to any qualifications or reservations to the United States obligations under the October 27 and October 28 letters.
McCloy pointed out that Soviets were not being asked to approve or agree to anything, and that the Soviet separate letter would presumably not contain any such intimation.
Kuznetsov repeated that Soviets could not approve any reference to over-flights over Cuba or intrusion into Cuban territorial waters or to Cuban behavior.
None of foregoing had been referred to in Oct 27 and 28 letters or negotiations incident thereto.
Presidential news conference Nov 20 was first reference to Cuban behavior as a qualification of United States obligation not to invade, and qualifying references to subversion, export of communism, Cuban aggression, etc., so vague as to weaken and vitiate United States obligation.
McCloy said that these were familiar Soviet arguments, and that he would not repeat United States counter-arguments, and that neither United States nor any other country could unqualifiedly and unconditionally agree not to invade another country.
Kuznetsov also objected to word ""offensive"" as applied to weapons in United States draft.
Khrushchev and the President of the United States John F Kennedy of October 27 and 28, 1962 which contain the obligations assumed by the Govts of the USSR and of the United States on settling the recent crisis in the Caribbean area.
It is requested to transmit them to the President of the Security Council for circulation as documents of the Council.
The Government of the USSR and the Government of the United States express the hope that the action taken to avert war arising from the crisis in the Caribbean area will lead to further constructive efforts by the parties concerned to settle differences existing between them and generally to lessen the tensions which might induce further threat of war.
On the instructions of our respective governments we express gratitude to you, Mr Secretary General, for your efforts in the cause of a peaceful settlement of the crisis in the Caribbean area.
Respectfully, The Representative of the USSR The Representative of the United States End verbatim text.
McCloy said he had done his best to meet the Soviet position in that the last United States draft merely referred to the White House press statement and Presidential news conference without submitting them, thus making them of less dignity than the Oct 27 and 28 letters, but that no country could give an absolute guarantee against invasion if it or its allies were attacked, and that the United States did not intend to make Cuba a sanctuary for Castro.
He also pointed out that the Nov 20 press conference statement contained many provisions favorable to the Soviets, going beyond the Oct 27 and 28 letters.
He also pointed out that the Nov 20 statement was made before the weapons were all removed, and that Khrushchev had publicly thanked the President for that statement.
Kuznetsov said that Soviets had hoped that there could be an agreed text evidencing an agreement between the Soviets and the United States which would have provided a favorable atmosphere for the future composition of differences, but that the raising by the United States of new conditions, new points made the matter more complicated and gave the impression that the United States did not want to finish the matter and that it would have been in the interest of the whole world to have a full agreement reached.
He further referred to the United States responsibility for the Bay of Pigs affair and that recent statements by United States officials gave the impression that the United States was continuing to do its utmost to overthrow the Castro regime mentioning great TV emphasis on returned prisoners and their statements that they would go back.
He also referred to supposed United States support ever since World War II of reactionary groups such as Nationalist Chinese, South Koreans, etc., and to United States unwillingness to consider U Thant's suggested reciprocal inspection plan.
McCloy, after appropriate rejoinder to Kuznetsov propaganda, said that perhaps new negotiations should be initiated for proper inspection of US, the Soviet Union and Cuba, but that time was limited and that perhaps the best thing for Soviets and United States to do was to send joint letter to SYG to effect that they express their thanks to him for his efforts, that they had made progress but had not completely agreed as to the matter, and that they saw no need for further SC meeting.
McCloy said it might be possible to incorporate in such joint draft letter some of the language contained in the Soviet draft joint letter just submitted by Kuznetsov, but that any joint letter must indicate that there had not been complete agreement between the parties.
Kuznetsov said he could not make a comment on the new draft, but would consider it and report it to his govt.
We would like to think this meant we had scored a goal at basketball, but realize he thought the game was tennis.
Kuznetsov gave impression he had firm, explicit instructions not to agree to any reference to White House press statement of Oct 27 or Presidential press conference statement of Nov 20.
Kuznetsov said that he gave ""sincere examination"" to the first United States draft letter submitted to him on December 28, but it was still unacceptable.
The two sides discussed the second joint letter, Kuznetsov suggested some minor changes, but neither side came to any final decision.
SUBJECT Cuban Focal Point in the Miami Area During the Joint Chiefs of Staff meeting at Palm Beach,/1/ the question came up of the future use and employment of the Cuban brigade/2/ trainees.
For the military, the question was how many of these brigade officers could be used at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, in helping to train the Cuban trainees, how many of the Cuban officers might need a special officers' course for updating and retraining as officers, and finally, how many of the Cuban refugee prisoners would actually go in for a 20week retraining course.
There were no numbers involved, but it was agreed by all that certainly some of them would end up at Fort Jackson.
The next question raised was whether this Cuban brigade would be a focal point for a new political groupment.
The President pointed out that one of the tough problems in dealing with the 100,000 Cuban refugees in the Miami area is their lack of formalized party-he stated that there are four major parties and about one hundred splinter groups— and he thinks that the Cuban brigade might become a fifth rallying point, possibly a rather heavily emotionally charged one.
The Chiefs brought up the future political problems in connection with future military plans for Cuba, and it was stated that what we actually need is the establishment of a government-in-exile.
This was in response to the President's directive that in their future planning the political preparations would have to be carefully organized.
With all this as background, the question came up about how our government is going to deal with this 100,000 nucleus in the future.
It was suggested that whatever we do in Washington it was essential that we establish a ""focal point"" in the Miami area.
Right now these various groups sit down there, stew in their own juice, elect committees, become emotionally upset, and then finally call upon somebody in Washington to let off their steam.
If we are to get any benefit for future operations with this large group of people, it was suggested that we have a continuing office down in that area so that these committees could be guided and they would have a place to put in their requests and let off steam before they get to such an emotional pitch.
General Wheeler and Secretary Vance both want to sit in on any meeting that you hold to formulate recommendations for the President on this matter; Mr Katzenbach says that the Department of Justice's future interest is primarily one of the immigration authorities and he would very much like to have immigration represented, both in Washington and in Miami in anything that is established, including preliminary discussions.
Mr McCone has some deep feelings about the whole process, and especially his future relationships with the Cubans, and he would like to have General Carter sit in on any deliberations.
He feels that if we establish a Miami ""focal point,"" the Agency certainly would have to work in coordination with them.
The President then asked especially that I get the matter to your attention and he will await your early recommendations, including the advice of the Department of State.
All concerned felt that the Department of State should be the chief agency for the focal point, if it were established.
There are 100,000 Cuban refugees down there and 60,000 of them draw money from the Cuban refugee relief program.
They obviously would be very important in the Miami area and are going to be continuously involved as long as they are paying money out to these refugees.
It was his suggestion that any headquarters set up in the Miami area be set up at this location because the Cubans are already used to dealing with the government at that location.
SUBJECT Further organization of the Government for dealing with Cuba On your oral instructions conveyed by General Clifton, I have met with an interdepartmental group to try to work out an improved arrangement for our handling of Cuban policy and action in 1963.
Vance, Yarmolinksy and General Wheeler as delegates for McNamara and Gilpatric; Nick Katzenbach as a delegate of Bobby; Pat Carter from CIA; and Alexis Johnson and Ed Martin from State Department.
The following paragraphs represent my personal sense of what we have worked out together, and while there may be some small differences of point of view or need for revision, I think they are ripe for your consideration.
The first guiding principle is that final policy responsibility should remain with you, working with the Executive Committee when necessary.
There is no point pretending that major Cuban policy decisions can be made anywhere else than in the White House, and your own executive role, supplemented by the Executive Committee when there are major policy issues or interdepartmental difficulties, is indispensable.
The more complicated matter is where to put day-to-day coordinating responsibility.
After considerable discussion, the unanimous consensus is that we should locate this responsibility in a Coordinator of Cuban Affairs, working as a deputy to Ed Martin in the State Department and acting as chairman of an interdepartmental group on Cuba.
The Coordinator would be responsible to Dean Rusk and Ed Martin for departmental business, and, under their guidance, to you and the Executive Committee for interdepartmental coordination.
Nothing in his authority would supplant the responsibility of other operating departments for management of their own assigned tasks, or their right to be consulted before their resources are committed; but it would be clear that you and the Executive Committee were looking to the Coordinator and his interdepartmental committee for effective execution of your policy decisions.
In ordinary circumstances, the necessary coordination will be carried out effectively by good will and good sense on all sides.
When there is an honest difference that cannot be resolved it will, of course, have to come upstairs one way or another.
The key to this administrative organization is, of course, the individual appointed as coordinator.
The recommendation of the State Department is that Sterling Cottrell should be given this job.
He has been doing a very solid and constructive job as head of the Vietnamese Task Force, and he is due for reassignment to Latin American Affairs, which turns out to be his preferred professional field, both by experience and by interest.
He has the necessary professional seniority in the Department, and high interdepartmental acceptance.
If this arrangement should be approved, the Cuban desk of the Department would be absorbed in a new, higher level Office of Cuban Affairs under Cottrell, with Bob Hurwitch as his deputy.
Hurwitch has done a very able job within the Department, but he is a little junior for a major job of interdepartmental coordination.
At the same time, Cottrell would be expected to find and appoint a deputy coordinator, to be based in Miami, to handle day-to-day relations with Cuban refugees and with interested agencies of Government on the spot.
Bob Orrick has been asked to expedite effective interdepartmental administrative support, as necessary, for both the Coordinator and the Miami office.
If a Coordinator for Cuban Affairs is established, then we think the Mongoose office should be disbanded and responsibility for covert operations should be a part of the work of the Coordinator and his associates from other departments, reporting on covert activities to the Special Group in the normal way.
The Special Group would in turn be guided by broader policy as established by you through the Executive Committee.
The covert aspects of our Cuban enterprise are not the most important ones, at present, and they need to be handled in the wider context of an open Cuban policy, centered in a visible office of Cuban Affairs.
Such a change would liberate General Lansdale for many other tasks in which his services are uniquely valuable.
The shipping orders and the broader question of economic pressure on Cuba are still unsettled.
Executive Orders have been prepared along the lines of your press conference statement, but they are being held up, as I think Dean Rusk has explained to you, pending discussion with OAS and other Allies.
We need a much more open and continuous communication with refugee leaders, and we need clarification of the opportunities to be offered to Cuban volunteers, whether or not they are veterans of the brigade.
If we can manage it, we need to get a stronger process of representation of free Cubans.
We should intensify our investigation of ways and means of communicating with possibly dissident members of the Castro regime, perhaps including even Fidel himself.
Donovan, for example, has an invitation to be Castro's guest at the beach of Veradero, and there is work to be done also in our relations with men like Manolo Ray.
We do not want Cuba to be a hemispheric training ground for Communists, and we have not exhausted our weapons here.
We need to keep up a continuous and high-level barrage of public statements explicitly defending our rights of surveillance.
You said on television that the camera will be our best inspector and this position should be energetically sustained.
My own view, which Ed Martin shares, is that it is probably to our advantage to have such flights, and that Juan Trippe should not be allowed to get away with poor-mouthing on the cost to Pan American.
Over the long run this franchise is of the highest importance to Pan American, and nothing I have heard about their marginal losses is very impressive.
It would help to have your general reaction to these matters by Monday./l/ If you approve, we could put the organization into effect at once and have a preliminary discussion of the substantive issues by Cottrell's people with the Executive Committee before the end of next week.
SUBJECT Meeting with the President in Palm Beach, Florida-9:45m.— Saturday-5 January 1963 The meeting was brief.
Secretary Rusk was present during the latter half which involved Cuban program.
McCone generally reviewed the Killian report,/l/ stated it was a good report, indicating that it ""called the glass of water half full, not half empty,"" the report was well received but only a part of the total review being made by the Killian Board and that the DCI could not forecast a final Killian Board position.
McCone stated that he personally felt the Intelligence Community had done a good job but looking back in retrospect he felt that they could have done better.
Failure to press aggressively overflight program between August 29th and October 14th and this was due to timidity throughout the government, including the Intelligence Community for fear of a ""U-2 incident"" once SAM sites were detected in Cuba.
This foreclosed earlier detection of the existence of offensive missiles.
A conviction on the part of government officials and intelligence estimators that the Soviets would not accept the responsibility of a confrontation which would result from placing of offensive missiles in Cuba and Because of this conviction the estimators and others in Government failed to fully evaluate many indicators which, if carefully analyzed, would lead to the conclusion that something more than defensive armament was going into Cuba.
The President seemed inclined to believe estimators should not be criticized for their judgment as it was reasonable to assume the Soviets would not place themselves in an indefensible position militarily, they would assume we would find out and would respond and this would place them in a difficult position, which it did.
Furthermore he felt the SAM sites placed the Soviets in an awkward position for if they used them against one of our airplanes we would be inclined to respond militarily and they could not defend the SAM sites.
In general the President agreed with Sherman Kent's position that the Soviets made a bad guess as to our response.
The President questioned me concerning refugee reports and I responded substantially as summarized in the Killian report, indicating the only refugee or agent reports dealing significantly with offensive missiles came in on or after September 20th and at most there were only 8 or 10 out of a total of some 1200 reports.
The President asked if the 5412 Committee reviewed raw intelligence of this type and I responded that their doing was not within their province, that raw intelligence was circulated to the Intelligence Community and that matters of significance should be brought to the members of the 5412 Committee through their respective intelligence officers and, if necessary, such matters should be considered by the United States Intelligence Board.
I maintained that handling of raw intelligence was not a problem for 5412 Committee.
In view of the importance placed on the 5412 Committee by the President, we should insist that the Committee meet regularly and for a sufficient time for review of their responsibilities (and not be crowded off the calendar by the Special Group CI) and furthermore that action papers be sent to the members of the 5412 Committee not later than Tuesday morning for consideration the following Thursday.
With respect to Cuban policy, the President expressed concern over the welfare of the prisoners, urged that arrangements be made to barracks them at Opa Locka or elsewhere in order to avoid growing distress and criticism.
There followed an extended discussion of policy with respect to Pan American flights.
The President wished them resumed but did not feel doing so should be in response to a demand by Castro.
It was therefore agreed that DCI would meet with Donovan and arrange for him to go to Havana and work out suitable considerations for the resumption of flights which would specifically avoid the appearance of responding to a Castro demand.
The President spoke favorably of the Cuban Task Force outlined in the recent Bundy memorandum/2/ which would be chaired by State with departmental representation.
The President also recognized the need for CIA to complete liaison arrangements with free countries, indicating that this should be pursued aggressively even if it required DCI to visit several countries personally to work out these arrangements.
DCI reported proposed meetings with the Chairmen of CIA Congressional Committees and later with the Committees themselves.
Both McCone and the President felt that DCI line should not be defensive but rather should indicate that a substantial intelligence success occurred.
The President suggested that McCone prepare a briefing for the Leadership meeting on Tuesday afternoon.
McCone answered that he had no verification of this and that he was convinced that Keating information had come from refugee sources.
In answer to a question McCone stated that he had concluded that the first offensive missiles reached Cuba between the 2nd and 9th of September.
The material McCone used for the briefing of the Congressional leadership is in the Supplement.
McCone advised the President that he expected an investigation by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee which would probably be initiated by a demand from Senator Lausche.
Kuznetsov handed McCloy a revised joint letter of which the second paragraph was substantially different from the United States draft.
Plimpton met with Kuznetsov and Mendelevich, Kuznetsov's assistant, at the Soviet Mission at 5m. on January 3.
Kuznetsov deplored the omission of the reference to ""understanding"" in the new United States draft's second paragraph.
Kuznetsov maintained there was an understanding and it was in the interests of both sides to include the word.
Kuznetsov pointed out that the Soviet draft closely followed the United States draft.
McCloy countered that he was disappointed that the Soviet Union did not accept the United States draft.
Both men agreed to minor stylistic revisions in the third paragraph of the letter.
McCloy told Kuznetsov that he would consider the Soviet draft and let Kuznetsov know his answer.
On the afternoon of January 5 the Soviets accepted the United States draft as conveyed to Kuznetsov by McCloy in the January 4 telephone call.
The two sides agreed to sign and release the joint letter on January 7.
Copies were sent to the Secretary of Defense; the Attorney General; the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare; the Director of Central Intelligence; and the Director of the United States Information Agency.
TO The Secretary of State SUBJECT Interdepartmental Organization for Cuban Affairs The President has approved the following organizational arrangements to facilitate the coordinated management of all aspects of our current policy toward Cuba; final policy responsibility of course remains with the President, working with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council when necessary.
Day-to-day coordinating responsibility will be vested in a Coordinator of Cuban Affairs in the Department of State, acting as Chairman of an Interdepartmental Committee on Cuba.
The Coordinator will be responsible to the Secretary of State for State Department business, and under his guidance to the President and the Executive Committee for interdepartmental coordination.
The Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee shall consist of the Coordinator and representatives of the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Representatives of other departments will be associated with the work of this committee as necessary in particular cases.
Other departments and agencies may be requested to participate in the work of the Interdepartmental Committee and in the work of the Coordinator's Office as appropriate.
A White House officer will maintain liaison with the Coordinator and with his Interdepartmental Committee.
The President and the Executive Committee will look to the Coordinator for effective coordination of the execution of policy decisions, and for timely recommendations on new courses of action.
The Coordinator will work through his assigned officers and with the Interdepartmental Committee in meeting these responsibilities.
The Coordinator's authority will not supplant the responsibility of other operating departments or agencies for the management of their assigned tasks or their right to be consulted before their resources are committed.
Differences which arise will be promptly referred to higher levels of resolution.
The Coordinator will assume the same responsibility for covert operations as he does for overt actions.
However, he will report on covert matters to the Special Group which will be guided by broader policy established by the President through the Executive Committee.
Editorial Note On January 8, 1963, President Kennedy, Vice President Johnson, Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense McNamara, and Director of Central Intelligence McCone met with the bipartisan Congressional leadership from 5:30 to 6:35m.
Attending were Senators Mike Mansfield, Hubert H Humphrey, George Smathers, Richard Russell, Everett Dirkson, Thomas Kuchel, Leverett Saltonstall and Bourke Hickenlooper and from the House of Representatives were Speaker John McCormack, Representatives Carl Albert, Hale Boggs, Carl Vinson, Thomas Morgan, Charles Halleck, Leslie Arends, and Frances Bolton.
McCone drafted a brief memorandum for the record of the meeting, noting that McNamara gave a briefing on South Vietnam ""expressing an optimistic point of view""; Rusk briefed the Congressional leaders on the Cuban negotiations at the United Nations and on the Congo; and McCone briefed them on Cuba.
McCone noted that there were ""no significant questions"" from the Congressional leadership.
McCone's January 8 briefing statement was attached to his January 9 memorandum for the record.
In it he stated that the Soviet Union had withdrawn 42 strategic missiles, 42 jet bombers and their related equipment and about four or five thousand military personnel associated with the maintenance and operation of this equipment-leaving approximately 17,000 Soviet troops still in Cuba.
McCone noted that the Intelligence community believed, but could not prove by aerial reconnaissance, that these withdrawals represent all the strategic weapons placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union.
Aerial reconnaissance would reveal if strategic missiles were reintroduced or reactivated.
McCone stressed that there was still a substantial Soviet military presence in Cuba.
McCone finished his briefing with an overview of the current areas in Latin America in danger of subversion directed by Moscow and Havana.
Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149.
Drafted by Guthrie, cleared in draft by Thompson, and approved by the White House on January 14.
SUBJECT Cuba PARTICIPANTS United States The President Llewellyn E Thompson, Ambassador at Large John C Guthrie, Director, SOV USSR Vasiliy Vasilyevich Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy F Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador Lev Isaakovich Mendelevich, Assistant to Kuznetsov Viktor Pavlovich Karpov, First Secretary of Embassy Kuznetsov thanked the President for receiving him, saying that he considered this an honor, particularly in view of how busy the President is.
The Soviet Government considered that this part of the negotiation has been completed and that it would therefore be useful to meet the President and pay his respects.
Everyone in the USSR understands that Khrushchev's instructions played a crucial role in the troubled days of crisis in the Caribbean and that as a result the danger of a thermonuclear war had been averted.
And so he had been instructed by his Government to make certain observations on the situation and related matters.
The atmosphere of the talks had been business-like and they had clearly expressed the United States viewpoint.
He agreed with the President that the results had not been everything that had been hoped for.
He said that under instructions he wished to comment on the results of the situation in the Caribbean.
The Soviet Government and people are constantly working to improve relations with the United States In Moscow great significance is attached to the fact that throughout the Caribbean crisis the United States and the U.S.S.R. acted on the basis of trust and mutual understanding.
Whether this basis can be maintained, including that personally between the President and Chairman Khrushchev, and whether the clear and definite commitments made during the negotiations and exchange of letters can be maintained would determine whether other international problems could be settled in the future.
The fulfillment by both sides of these agreements will be a touchstone of the ability of the two powers to trust each other's word and to avert a military conflict.
The crisis in the Caribbean demonstrated with great clarity that both countries should act in accordance with the United Nations Charter concerning relations between all nations, large and small.
Without this, there could be no guarantee that the United States and the U.S.S.R., which possess powerful armaments, will not confront each other again.
Furthermore, the demonstrative welcome by the President of the Cuban refugees could not but be noted in Moscow; demonstrations like this revive the shadows of the past and leave their mark on the present.
Chairman Khrushchev spoke of this in messages to the President and in public speeches.
Two main problems to be solved are the question of the German peace treaty and the question of general and complete disarmament.
Without eliminating the remnants of World War II it will be impossible to achieve normal relations and without the trust such relations engender general and complete disarmament would be impossible.
The Soviet Government will make every effort to move the 18 Nation Disarmament Committee ahead and is prepared to do everything that would contribute to the success of these negotiations.
The President said that he thought Kuznetsov knew from his talks with McCloy and Stevenson of the particular sensitivity in the United States to anything involving Cuba.
This is a delicate nerve in the United States stretching back to the beginning of our country.
On the other hand, the President said, he was anxious to maintain good relations with the Soviet Union.
He had noted before that these two most powerful countries have no national interests which bring them into collision.
The President had spent a good deal of time defending this viewpoint prior to the Cuban crisis.
Now that the matter had quieted down he saw no reason why the United States and the U.S.S.R. should be involved again in the same way.
He asked Kuznetsov to explain to his principals American sensitivity over Cuba.
The President said the Soviet Government could understand how the United States felt about this if they could imagine a similar situation in Finland.
He was hopeful that Soviet policies toward Cuba, including the personnel and armaments there, would lead to a further relaxation of the situation.
As to the question of the Bay of Pigs prisoners, the President said he had put them on the beach and he felt responsible for them.
He had not said in his address to them that the United States would invade Cuba, though he had expressed the hope for a change in the situation there.
All the United States forces which had been mobilized during the crisis were back in their camps.
If the Soviet Union can comprehend the sensitivity and difficult nature of the problems the United States faces in the Caribbean, this can lead to a solution of other problems.
In reply, Kuznetsov said that the Soviet Government will fulfill all of the obligations it undertook with the exchange of letters between Khrushchev and the President.
As for the Soviet military personnel in Cuba, it seemed to him that all the agreements in the exchange of letters had been carried out.
This problem had been dealt with in the course of the exchange and there was a clear understanding on both sides concerning this matter.
The Soviet Government will abide by all its agreements so there is nothing new in this problem.
He recognized that the latter was not the same kind of commitment since no time was specified.
Nevertheless, he wanted to mention this matter which occupied attention in the United States.
Kuznetsov reiterated that he thought that there was no misunderstanding on this point.
However, he had no instructions on this point and said that the U.S.S.R. is not raising the question at this time.
The President replied that the United States had not introduced a new major base in any country such as Finland.
He repeated that Cuba was a matter of great sensitivity to the American people and again asked Kuznetsov to communicate this to his Government.
Good relations between our two countries, the President said, will be made easier if the Soviet Government understands this.
Kuznetsov reverted to the question of the President's reception of the Cuban brigade in Florida./l/ He said this had created the opinion in Moscow that this brigade will be maintained, that others will be created and that then there would be a fresh invasion of Cuba.
In a backgrounder which he had given in Florida he had said that the United States had no intention of invading Cuba and noted that our position remained that which he had set forth in his press conference of November 20.
Nevertheless, it would be easier for the United States if there were a reduction of the Soviet military presence in Cuba.
The President noted that Castro makes many more speeches than the President does and in them calls for revolution in Latin America.
The relations between the United States and the U.S.S.R. are more important and the President was anxious to lessen areas of disagreement between the two countries.
However, normalization of relations required that something else should be done.
No one can agree that a situation is normal when a great power threatens a small one, and officially expresses a desire to strangle and overthrow the government of the smaller one.
The President reiterated that the United States was not concerned with Cuba but with the Soviet military presence there.
He noted a number of speeches which Castro and Che Guevara had made during the last two months calling for armed struggle in Latin America, saying that small bands of guerrillas would act as a catalyst in the process of taking power from the hands of the Yankee imperialists and insisting that this must be done in a large number of Latin American countries.
Kuznetsov replied that he was not at all sure the quotes which the President had made from the Cuban speeches were exact.
It seemed to him that the Cubans had far more reasons to fear and worry than the United States.
Ever since the beginning of the 1959 revolution, Cuba had been under various undermining pressures.
The Cuban Government and Castro had made quite clear their willingness to negotiate with the United States concerning all points awaiting solution.
The United States could respond to these Cuban proposals in order to normalize relations.
SUBJECT Meeting with the President— Cuba Aerial Reconnaissance OTHERS PRESENT Vice President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, General Taylor, Director McCone, Assistant Secretary Nitze, Assistant Secretary Tyler, Mr McGeorge Bundy, Mr Jeffrey Kitchen, Mr John McNaughton Mr Bundy said that we had evidence of greater participation of Cuban nationals in the air defense system of Cuba which raised the possibility of an attack on one of our reconnaissance planes.
The President asked why a plane should abort in the event of a radar lockon.
Mr Bundy replied that if the plane continued on its flight, it is possible it would be shot down.
Secretary McNamara said he did not think we should permit ourselves to get into a situation where we would have lost a plane and not yet have decided how we would respond to such hostile action.
We could fly a reconnaissance mission, have a plane shot down, and then decide how we would react.
We could fly missions equipped with our most sophisticated electronic countermeasures equipment.
The cost of using the ECM equipment would be the possibility of compromising highly advanced and highly classified instruments.
In response to the President's question, Secretary McNamara said we did not have yet positive proof of a radar lockon on any of our planes although we had evidence indicating radar tracking.
The President said that he thought the Defense Department should decide whether or not to use our sophisticated ECM equipment.
He said he intended to believe that if it appeared that the Cubans were taking actions with a view to shooting down one of our planes, the plane should abort the first time this happened and we could then prepare ourselves for prompt reprisals in the event the circumstances were repeated.
Mr Bundy said that during this week there would be no change in the present rules regarding aborts by reconnaissance planes.
Director McCone said he favored using the U-2 in good weather, but if the weather were bad, he thought we should fly low-level missions.
Secretary McNamara said that he did not agree with low-level aerial reconnaissance in bad weather because the loss of a United States plane or the controversy arising out of low-level flights would be all out of proportion to the value of the information obtained from pictures taken at a low-level.
He said that the cargo of the Soviet ship/1/ probably did not consist of missiles and that certain knowledge about it was not worth the complications arising out of low-level flights.
In it he indicated that the ship being referred to was the Simferopol and that the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance had recommended it be subjected to round-the-clock photography at 4-hour intervals.
According to a January 17 memorandum from Chase to McGeorge Bundy on the advice of Rusk and McNamara, the President authorized only high-level surveillance of the Simferopol.
Ill) Director McCone said that CIA was trying to find out what was in the cargo and would continue to do so during the time the cargo was being unloaded, but he was not certain that they would be able to obtain the information we wanted.
He expressed a view that the cargo might contain armaments dangerous to us.
Mr Bundy said there were political problems immediately ahead of us, such as Donovan's proposed visit to Havana in connection with the remaining prisoners in Cuba and Kuznetsov's visit this week.
He said the group would return to the President at a later time when more information was available.
Secretary McNamara said the Defense Department would be prepared to carry out low-level missions on very short notice if the President so decided.
Kennedy Library, Countries Series, Cuba, Intelligence Material, 1/62-9/62.
The President has mentioned again his interest in maximizing the information we get from Cuba by other sources than air surveillance, and has asked me to report this interest to you.
He would like to know what we are now doing to encourage visits to Cuba by knowledgeable and friendly observers of other nationalities, and also whether our arrangements with friendly countries having embassies in Havana are as effective in this respect as they should be.
He would like to know what additional measures are being taken in this respect.
He believes that we should be able to arrange for regular visits to Cuba of visitors of a rank and sophistication which would give them access to high authorities of the Cuban government, and make their reports correspondingly valuable.
The Cuban economy during 1963 probably will not decline further in total output and may show some improvement in comparison with 1962.
Cuban GNP in 1962, measured in 1958 prices, is estimated to be 25 percent below the 1958 level.
The total supply of available goods, however, was only about 20 percent lower than in 1958 because Cuba ran a trade deficit in 1962 that was substantially higher than the deficit in 1958.
Total agricultural output will not increase much during 1963, for the sugar harvest probably will decline slightly from last year, largely offsetting moderate gains in other crops.
Industrial production will increase to some extent as Cuba's new managerial class gains experience and the economy begins to regain some of its lost efficiency.
Investment also probably will expand as a number of new industrial projects are started during the year.
The dynamic upward improvement of prices in the world sugar market probably will raise Cuba's export earnings in 1963 above the 1962 level.
The increase will not be enough, however, to finance the required volume of imports, and Cuba will still require large balance-of-payments credits from the Sino-Soviet Bloc.
It appears probable that the Cuban economy will continue to improve during 1964 and 1965.
The government is making vigorous efforts to expand agricultural production.
The traditional failure of most Communist regimes to achieve satisfactory results in agriculture, however, precludes the prediction of any dramatic successes for Castro in this sphere during 1964-65.
Continuing improvement at the managerial level may well yield further increases in industrial production.
Finally, the outlook for export earnings suggests that Cuba will remain dependent on the Bloc for large industrial and balance-of-payment credits.
Ill In presenting the paper to the Committee, Secretary Vance made it abundantly clear that while he had identified an alternate course of action, the identification did not include an endorsement— he had not yet reached a decision on that question.
While, on the surface, Bob Hurwitch seems to have accepted the consideration of an alternative course of action in the policy paper, he undoubtedly views it coldly.
He believes strongly that such factors as our hope to act with full OAS support, and Presidential statements about our non-aggressive intentions, necessarily limit our policy to one of applying pressures as opportunities present themselves; this is neither a ""hard"" nor ""soft"" policy but the only politically realistic policy.
Deep down, I think he regards the consideration of the so-called ""active policy,"" at best, as a useless exercise and waste of time and, at worst, as an insidious attempt by DOD dreamers to bring to life a policy which will earn battlefield promotions at the expense of United States national interest.
If they are to be really effective in their new roles, it seems worthwhile that they think through basic courses of action which may appear to others to be unattractive.
The process need not turn out to be either very time-consuming or dangerous.
After you received the phone call from Secretary Vance,/3/ I passed your message to Mr Cottrell.
He and Mr Vance planned to meet late Saturday/4/ afternoon to thrash out the policy paper.
CIA vis-a-vis the Miami Office -I mentioned to you in a previous memorandum that at one meeting, , the CIA representative, viewed the work of the Miami office in a narrow sense; he obviously was reluctant to see Mr Crimmins getting involved in CIA business.
He said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had simply not gotten the word, that Mr FitzGerald and others in CIA do have the word, and that there is no need at present to make an issue of this point.
Monday, 2:00 PM-Cuban Coordinating Committee at State Wednesday, 10:30 AM-Mr Cottrell, Secretary Vance, Mr Helms, Mr Dungan, with you in your office Thursday, 10:00 AM-ExCom/5/ /5/January 21, January 23, and January 24.
Gordon Chase/7/ /7/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
Notes of President Kennedy's Remarks at the 508th Meeting of the National Security Council Washington, January 22, 1963.
McGeorge Bundy prepared a briefing memorandum, January 21, for the President for this meeting.
Notes on Remarks by President Kennedy before the National Security Council Tuesday, January 22, 1963 I will start by reviewing areas of policy which will be before us in the coming months and indicate the general attitude which I have toward them and to emphasize where we might put our emphasis in the next few months.
The responsibilities of the United States are worldwide and the United States is the only country which is recognizing its wide responsibilities.
We are part of NATO, SEATO, etc. and support other pacts even though we are not a part of them.
It was a very close thing whether we would engage in a quarantine or an air strike.
In looking back, it was really that it presented us with an immediate crisis and the USSR had to make their judgment and come to a decision to act in twelve hours.
In looking back over that four or five day period, we all changed our views somewhat, or at least appreciated the advantages and disadvantages of alternate courses of action.
That is what we should do in any other struggle with the Soviet Union-and I believe we will be in one in the future.
You could see that the Russians had a good deal of debate in a 48 hour period.
If they had only to act in an hour or two, their actions would have been spasmodic and might have resulted in nuclear war.
We should continue our policy even though we do not get Europe to go along with us.
Cuba might be our response in some future situation-the same way the Russians have used Berlin.
We may decide that Cuba might be a more satisfactory response than a nuclear response.
We should be prepared to move on Cuba if it should be in our national interest.
The planning by the US, by the Military, in the direction of our effort should be advanced always keeping Cuba in mind in the coming months and to be ready to move with all possible speed.
We can use Cuba to limit their actions just as they have had Berlin to limit our actions.
SUBJECT United States Policy Toward Cuba There are submitted for your consideration two alternative statements of policy and related courses of action with respect to Cuba.
The Coordinator's Recommendation that Alternative I be approved, and the Department of Defense non-concurrence, appear at the end of this paper.
Protecting the security of the United States and the other states of the Organization of American States by assuring that offensive weapons are not reintroduced into Cuba; 2.
Preventing Cuba from taking any aggressive military action against other Caribbean states; 4.
Reducing the capabilities of the Castro regime to direct and support subversion and insurrection within the other OAS states; 5.
Encouraging and supporting any developments within Cuba that offer the possibility of divorcing the Cuban Government from its support of Sino-Soviet Communist purposes or replacing the Government with a regime which would accomplish this purpose; 6.
Maximizing the cost to the Soviet Union of supporting the Castro regime; 7.
Maximizing the political isolation of the Castro regime from other free world states, and especially from states of the OAS; 8.
Being prepared to meet, with the employment of appropriate United States combat elements and/or logistical support, the wide variety of military contingencies that may arise from pursuit of the foregoing objectives; and 9.
Await results of Mr Donovan's imminent negotiation with Fidel Castro for freeing the 20-odd American prisoners.
Inform NATO and OAS twelve hours in advance of the proclamation of the four point shipping orders.
After obtaining the maximum possible support of the key countries of Mexico, Chile and Brazil, the other OAS members will be approached in Washington and in their respective capitals, simultaneously.
It should be possible for this consultation and OAS action on the resolutions to be completed within ten days.
Prior to formal CO AS approval of the resolutions, we will inform our NATO allies of the impending OAS action.
At the first NATO meeting after formal OAS action on the resolutions, we will request that NATO include Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items is prohibited.
After NATO decision on our COCOM request, we will seek to get agreement from Free World industrial nations to prevent shipping of critical spare parts and equipment to Cuba, not on the COCOM list.
Launch propaganda balloons after an operational capability has been established.
Our ultimate objective with respect to Cuba is the overthrow of the Castro/Communist regime and its replacement by one compatible with the objectives of the United States and, where possible, sharing the aims of the Free World.
Our immediate objectives are to isolate the Castro/Communist regime from the Free World and from the Bloc; weaken it economically; promote internal dissension; erode its domestic political support; frustrate its subversive activities, negate its influence in the hemisphere; increase the cost to the Bloc of sustaining the regime; and obtain the withdrawal of Russian troops from Cuba.
Isolating, undermining and discrediting the Castro/Communist regime through the exercise of all feasible diplomatic, economic, psychological and covert actions may achieve the immediate objectives and could create propitious conditions in Cuba for further advance toward our ultimate objective.
We should be in a position to respond with open military support (to include such items as materiel, advisors, training, and Special Forces support and, if necessary, up to the full range of military forces), to a request for assistance from any anti-Castro/Communist group or groups in Cuba which demonstrate an ability to survive, which threaten the present regime, and whose aims are compatible with those of the United States 5.
Invasion of Cuba by United States military forces, as distinguished from military support upon request of indigenous forces, should not be undertaken in the absence of aggression or other Castro/Communist and/or Soviet actions that threaten the peace or security of the hemisphere.
This does not preclude appropriate United States retaliation for isolated hostile acts by the Castro/Communist or Soviet forces.
To the extent feasible, United States military forces employed against Cuba should be accompanied by United States militarily-trained free Cubans and by the armed forces of those Latin American nations desirous of participating in the United States effort.
Intensive, comprehensive and continuing intelligence gathering in depth on Cuba should be identified as a primary objective of the national intelligence effort.
Whenever possible, United States actions against Cuba should be multilateral, preferably based upon the Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance or on resolutions adopted by the Organization of American States.
The newlywon hemispheric solidarity on the Cuban issue should not be jeopardized by seeking OAS actions of marginal value and which might split the hemisphere.
Overt and covert annexes of specific actions in support of this policy will be prepared.
Discussion The active pursuit of our ultimate objective involves a phased and controlled series of political, economic, psychological and military actions.
In addition, this course of action would involve a broad gamut of carefully timed political, economic, psychological and covert actions, such as OAS sanctions, Caribbean security arrangements, intensified surveillance of and publicity concerning Castro/Communist subversive activities in Latin America, application of four point shipping restrictions and other economic sanctions, and a series of actions designed to obtain, to the greatest extent possible, multilateral approval of and participation in the campaign to unseat the Castro/Communist regime.
This course of action has the advantage of attaining the objective more rapidly and under more controlled conditions than the alternative stated by the Coordinator.
Indeed, this may be the only course of action that will accomplish the ultimate objective.
It involves greater risks; and, in the short run, a greater expenditure of money and material and far greater numbers of personnel.
From the standpoint of international politics, the United States will probably be subjected to criticism for aggression from the uncommitted nations.
It is difficult to predict the reaction of the Latin American governments.
To a large extent, the reaction of the nations throughout the world, and particularly the Latin American nations, will depend how adroitly these actions are handled.
For example, there may even be advantages to the fact that our active policy and the courses of action under it may eventually become impossible to conceal.
If properly handled, the overt aspects of this policy may serve not only to mitigate any unfavorable reactions from other countries, but also to gain, particularly in Latin America, increasing appreciation of the threat of Castro/Communist Cuba.
The active pursuit of our objective will make it clear that the United States will not permit the maintenance of a Communist base in the hemisphere.
From the standpoint of military posture, the more active approach may be subjected to counteractions from the Sino-Soviet Bloc elsewhere.
As we increase the pressures of Castro/Communist Cuba and the extent of our commitment to overthrow the regime, United States prestige becomes more deeply involved.
The further we progress along this route, the more significant will be the loss of United States prestige if we alter or abandon it.
The successful execution of this policy will require careful timing and coordination of our actions and the development of detailed plans.
While such plans would be designed to bring about the overthrow of the Castro regime within a given time frame for planning purposes, they would have to be sufficiently flexible to accommodate changes to the international situation.
In any case, at crucial points along the way, it will be necessary for the highest levels of our Government to review the actions already taken and those contemplated and to assess the advantages of continued and escalated activity against the disadvantages and dangers of such activity.
Commitment to this course of action does not exclude the possibility of actively pursuing the isolation of the Castro regime from the Bloc.
Coordinator's Recommendation I recommend approval of Alternative I Statement of DOD Representative I do not concur in the policy recommended by the Coordinator.
Alternative I does not make the overthrow of the Castro/Communist regime an objective of the United States In addition, Alternative I does not sufficiently contemplate the creation of opportunities to effect the downfall of that regime.
The specific actions recommended in Alternative I are consistent with the policy recommended in Alternative II and, in many cases, would be among the initial steps that would be taken in executing that policy.
Also attached is a new page 8 for the paper entitled ""United States Policy Toward the Cuban Brigade.
Being prepared to meet, with the employment of appropriate United States combat elements and/or logistical support, the wide variety of military contingencies that may arise from pursuit of the foregoing objectives; and Producing comprehensive intelligence related to the above objectives.
They include the four point shipping regulations, OAS sanctions, NATO action to include Cuba on the COCOM list, and approaches to Free World industrial nations to eliminate sale and shipment of critical items from their Cuban trade.
Existing programs will be reviewed and further recommendations made as necessary.
Planning for the variety of contingencies related to Cuba will be undertaken at once.
It should be noted that approval of the foregoing actions may impair our ability to accomplish objective because taking these actions could provide the U.S.S.R. with rationale for maintaining its forces in Cuba.
Cuban Brigade Brigade leaders should be induced to accept a specially tailored civilian and military program for Brigade members.
The Brigade should be disbanded as a military unit and individual members urged to accept civilian training or to enlist in the existing United States military program for Cubans and join a Brigade reserve unit thereafter.
Our moral obligation would be discharged to the Brigade members and creation of a privileged class in the exile community would be avoided.
The actions listed below are those requiring immediate approval and would be initiated in the sequence set forth below.
Recommendations for further actions based upon the re-examination of existing programs and upon the development of new programs related to the foregoing objectives will be forthcoming.
With respect to the actions listed below, the results of Mr Donovan's imminent negotiations with Fidel Castro for freeing the 20-odd American prisoners should first be ascertained.
If these actions were taken before the conclusion of the negotiations they could jeopardize the release of the Americans.
Inform NATO and OAS 24 hours in advance of the proclamation of the four point shipping orders.
At the first NATO meeting after formal OAS action on the resolutions, we will request that NATO include Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items prohibited.
B Contingency Planning New opportunities for accomplishing our objectives may arise either as a result of Bloc action in other parts of the world; as a result of aggressive moves by the Castro-Communist regime itself; or as a result of uprisings of internal conflict within Cuba.
Prior to the arrival of the President, Secretary Rusk asked Ambassador Thompson to explain why he did not agree with the others on the Cuban paper under consideration./l/ Ambassador Thompson said the paper was aimed at Cuba and does not take into account some of our worldwide objectives.
In addition, he said there still existed a possibility of a split between Castro and the Russians.
He urged that we do nothing overtly which appeared to the Russians to be contrary to what we had agreed to do during the Cuba negotiations.
The proposed shipping orders, he said, would cause the Russians more concern than any of the proposed courses of action listed in the paper.
He feared that if we implemented the proposed shipping orders, we might delay the withdrawal of Soviet troops still in Cuba.
He acknowledged that domestically the policy he was suggesting would be difficult but suggested that key Congressmen be told exactly what the situation is.
Secretary Rusk doubted that the Russians would remove any more of their troops and said he believed we must assume that the forces there are going to stay.
Therefore, he felt we should accept the actions listed in the Cuba paper because the risk of delaying Soviet troop withdrawal was not great.
As to the shipping orders, he called attention to the fact that they would mean very little practically.
Free World trade with Cuba has, in the period January 1 to January 19, practically ceased.
He acknowledged that while many of our allies would take informal actions to block the use of their ships in the Cuba trade, these same allies would oppose us if we asked them to adopt a principle,e. an embargo, with which they disagreed.
He said that in view of the President's press statement^ he felt we may have to issue the shipping orders to encounter serious domestic opposition.
John F Kennedy, 1963, 93)2 The Secretary reported that even without the shipping orders, our economic pressures against Cuba are in fact tending to isolate Cuba economically.
He preferred not to take on the task of persuading our allies to act formally to prevent Free World trade with Cuba when they appeared to be ready to block this trade by informal means.
He felt that a decision had to be taken on whether the President's press conference statement required us to issue the orders even if they were not really necessary.
Secretary Ball said that serious problems would not arise until ships which had participated in the Cuba trade came to United States ports and were refused admittance in compliance with the shipping orders.
Director McCone repeated his earlier view that there was little evidence to support a statement that the Russians were withdrawing their sophisticated equipment from Cuba.
Referring to testimony he had given earlier in the day to a Senate Committee, Director McCone estimated that there is about twice as much Soviet equipment in Cuba as there had been prior to the Russian buildup.
The President said that Senator Keating was alleging that there is now in Cuba ten times as much equipment as there was.
He asked how we made available to the press accurate statements of the Soviet increases in equipment.
Secretary Rusk praised the way in which Director McCone had handled the Senate Committee earlier in the day and then suggested that the State Department, the Defense Department, and the White House press heads reconstitute a group to be responsible for giving to the press current information on Soviet equipment in Cuba.
Mr Bundy expressed his view that the Defense Department should be responsible for giving to the press information on the military situation in Cuba.
He added that the Cuban Coordinator should know all the latest information in order to avoid giving to the press differing stories.
Secretary Rusk reviewed for the President the earlier discussion on removal of Soviet troops.
The President asked whether Ambassador Thompson shouldn't raise with Dobrynin the question as to whether the Russians were going to remove additional troops from Cuba as had been suggested in one of the Khrushchev letters.
Secretary Rusk reviewed for the President the problem of the issuance of the shipping orders.
He did not think they should be issued while Donovan was negotiating with Castro on the release of the American prisoners in Cuba.
He asked that we draw up a statement/3/ explaining why we were delaying the issuance of the orders, which would be released only if the press asked about the orders.
Secretary Ball said that the only part of the shipping orders which were meaningful had to do with the shipment of U.S property on vessels engaged in the Cuba trade.
He said that no Executive Order was necessary to achieve this objective because the President could give guidance to the Department of Agriculture which would cover the largest amount involved,e. food shipments.
The President decided that there would be no public announcement but that the Department of Agriculture and other agencies should be directed to refrain from shipping United States products on ships engaged in the Cuba trade.
There followed a discussion of the dropping of propaganda leaflets from free traveling balloons.
In response to a question as to whether a balloon capability should be retained for use in an emergency, Acting Director Wilson stated that USIA would prefer to rely on airborne TV to meet an emergency.
The President expressed his strong reservations to the course of action proposed.
He did not wish to have Assistant Secretary Martin undertake a trip to Mexico, Chile and Brazil with his hat in his hand requesting support for an altered resolution.
Secretary Rusk said the practical effect of the recommended OAS resolution on trade would be very little because the Latin American states had very little trade with Cuba.
However, OAS action would provide a basis upon which to ask NATO to place Cuba under COCOM rules.
Secretary Rusk said we were now seeing in Cuba the effect of our economic embargo.
Director McCone agreed and said that the lack of spare parts for United States equipment in Cuba was seriously affecting the Cuban economy.
The President decided that Assistant Secretary Martin should go to Mexico on other business and incidentally find out the current Mexican position toward further OAS action against Cuba.
Depending on the Mexican reaction, a decision could then be made as to whether he should proceed to Chile and Brazil.
Only then should we decide whether further action in the OAS should be undertaken.
The President did not wish us to undertake an effort which had little chance of succeeding.
He asked for a statement as to what the effect would be if the OAS adopted the resolution we favored and if NATO agreed to place Cuba under COCOM rules.
Secretary Rusk concluded discussion of the OAS by calling attention to the fact that some OAS members felt that we should act more forcefully than we have so far done.
General Taylor expressed reservations about allowing members of the brigade, upon completion of their military training in the United States training camps, to become eligible for membership in a reserve unit.
Mr Bundy expressed his view that the proposed course of action would be difficult to sell to the brigade members.
He said some members should be sent to Latin America to lecture in Latin American universities or to engage in work with Latin American student groups; other members would choose to undergo military training while still others would want to return to civilian life, and, therefore, would be seeking jobs.
He felt that some members could be usefully placed in special forces units assigned to Latin American countries.
He felt that their firsthand experience with Communism could be used to great advantage in Latin American countries in explaining the threat of Communism.
The Attorney General said he had been told that most brigade members were opposed to Cardona, the present head of the Cuban Revolutionary Committee.
Many of them wanted to stay out of politics but wished to retain membership in a group which would be a symbol to those who would eventually rebuild Cuba.
He said we should first talk to the brigade members and then draw up a program.
He thought that the brigade members should be treated as equal partners, and that we should try to get their ideas rather than dictate to them.
In order to avoid their turning hostile, he felt they must be treated properly and must have a sense of participation.
One way would be to tell them honestly that we cannot now invade Cuba and that they can fight Communism much more effectively in the present by undertaking tasks suggested to them in other Latin American countries, either as special forces members or as civilians in the academic field.
The Attorney General concluded by saying that the brigade members should participate in some way in planning our Cuban intelligence actions.
He urged that we not merely pick brigade members and use them as agents, instructed as what to do, but rather we should encourage them to take part in the selection of targets and methods of operation.
He acknowledged that one reason why this had not so far been done was because of the reputation the Cubans had of being unable to keep a secret.
Mr Cottrell expressed his doubt that the brigade members would be accepted by the 26 July group in Cuba which considered them to be mercenaries and untrustworthy.
On the contrary, he said it was considered to be a brave group of Cuban patriots.
He urged that we not destroy the value of the brigade but use it as an asset, preferably by working with individual brigade members.
Secretary McNamara, in response to a question, said there would be no difficulty in providing military training for those brigade members who wished to be trained.
The President decided that in the next two weeks we should find out from individual brigade members what each would prefer to do,e. take a civilian job, be given military training, go to Latin America in various capacities as scholars, lecturers, student leaders, etc., or become intelligence agents.
The Army, CIA and Mr Cottrell's office would work together, in consultation with the Attorney General.
A decision as to whether there should be a brigade headquarters would be made later.
The President expressed his hope that large numbers of the brigade members would choose to take military training.
Secretary Dillon referred to the basic objectives listed in the Cuban paper.
He questioned objective number 5 which called for encouraging Castro to split with Moscow.
He felt this objective was inconsistent with the objective of seeking the overthrow of Castro.
Mr Bundy said this was a subordinate objective which should be kept in even though it was in some ways inconsistent with another objective.
The President said he did not think it was necessary to approve the general parts of the paper and summarized the specific actions which he had already approved.
There followed a discussion of the intelligence ""objective"" author-ized in paragraph 10 of the basic paper.
The President expressed his strong view that we should not risk good men by sending them to Cuba to get information which was only of marginal use to us.
He was reminded that the 5412 Special Group reviewed each plan to send intelligence teams into Cuba.
The President said the Group should make a judgment in each case as to whether the danger of the loss of the team was worth the benefit to the United States derived from the information we would obtain.
He said no intelligence officer should feel that he was required to send in the largest possible number of agents merely to satisfy an intelligence requirement.
According to a covering memorandum from Cottrell to Rusk, January 28, Cottrell sent this memorandum to Rusk informing the Secretary that McCone had similar information.
Castro agreed to release the imprisoned Americans, after a short ""rehabilitation"" period.
He wanted to exchange Molina and the three Cubans involved in the UN incident.
Castro also indicated that a little more of the commodities due for the Brigade exchange should first be shipped.
Castro said he would turn the Americans over to Donovan only, rather than to the Swiss, and would so inform the Swiss Ambassador that evening at a reception.
Castro agreed to reply within a short time to the PAA proposal for ten flights a week on a payment basis of 50 percent in dollars and 50 percent in pesos.
Castro seemed receptive to the Donovan suggestion that in view of Cuban-Chinese friendship Castro might be helpful in obtaining the release of Americans imprisoned in China.
Donovan told Castro his difficulties lay in his dependence upon the Soviets.
At Donovan's suggestion, Castro agreed to review the cases of some Cuban political prisoners, but pointed out in irritation that if they were released, they would only attempt to return and cause trouble as CIA agents.
Castro also was irritated over the United States press story that crutches had been taken from an invalid girl as she boarded the Shirley Lykes.
Donovan and Vallejo agreed to communicate with one another by telephone regarding any matters of importance relating to their conversation.
At the airport just before Donovan's departure, Vallejo broached the subject of re-establishing diplomatic relations with the United States 9.
Castro indicated he wished to talk at length with Donovan about the future of Cuba and international relations in general.
The two high level Red Cross officials who spent two days last week in Havana with the Cuban Red Cross found the latter's cooperation and hospitality remarkably good.
Upon their departure Cervantes, head of the Cuban Red Cross, expressed the hope that the cooperation between the two humanitarian organizations presaged improved relations between the governments.
