COMMENT POLITICS A call for a world BOOKS Nature regulars PROTEST Canadian scientists OBITUARY Phillip Vallentine without the danger of share their tips for who blockaded coal train Tobias, giant of hominin nuclear weapons30 holiday reading34 call for more direct action38 work, remembered40 CORBIS President John F Kennedy meets the United States Executive Committee of the National Security Council in October 1962 to discuss Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Decisions at the brink Linguistic analysis reveals how advisers influenced President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis 50 years ago, argues David R Gibson.
T his October is the 50th anniversary The existence of the ExComm recordwith the meticulous transcription of converof the Cuban missile crisis, when the ings — more than 20 hours’ worth from sation — with all its interruptions, slips and United States and Soviet Union stared these 13 days alone — was known only to hesitations.
Assuming that every­thing that each other down after Soviet nuclear missiles Kennedy’s close associates until they came happens does so for a reason, it asks why, were discovered on the island of Cuba. to light during the Watergate investigations when and with what consequences people Much has emerged about these events as in 1973.
The tapes were eventually declasdo things such as interrupt, restart sentences successive troves of information have been sified and, with a few excisions, released and repeat others’ words.
It also helps to shed uncovered — including records from the to the public in the mid-1990s.
Historians light on why particular discussions unfold as Soviet secret service and ruling Presidium1, have looked to them and the transcripts 3 they do, from conversations about mundane and from the United States Department of State and for insight into the positions taken by the matters, such as about what to have for dinner, Navy2.
My study of of the crisis, between 16 and 28 October 1962. tion analysis.
All rights reserved COMMENT Kennedy was susceptible to persuasion, reflected a growing determination to reach BETTMANN/CORBIS CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS which was shaped by conversational vicisconsensus on some course of action when TIMELINE situdes and exigencies, yet also motivated and constrained by the pace of events in the the best course remained elusive, and to combat attempts to threaten this consensus.
How events unfolded during the height of the crisis in October 1962. outside world.
When all options Soviet missiles photographed in Cuba. look bad, a decision may hinge on the ability TIME TO TALK of groups to talk in circles until such a time The president learned of the missiles on as the more frightening consequences of one 16 OCTOBER 16 October (see ‘Cuban missile crisis timecourse of action disappear from view.
His first major decision was to impose a naval blockade on Cuba, which he announced OVERTAKEN BY EVENTS 22 OCTOBER to the world on 22 October after revealing the Kennedy’s second main decision conKennedy announces discovery of missiles discovery of the missiles.
According to most cerned the implementation of the blockade. and imposition of naval blockade. accounts, President Kennedy was drawn to Soon after the president made his public the idea of a blockade because it seemed like announcement on 22 October, Khrushchev 23 OCTOBER a strong action that did not involve an immeordered Soviet ships carrying weapons to Kremlin orders ships carrying weapons to diate military attack.
Certainly the president be diverted away from Cuba2 (although diverted from Cuba.
Organization of was not eager to begin dropping bombs, but a warhead-laden ship called the AlexsanAmerican States supports blockade, lending it important legitimacy. the blockade option itself carried serious drovsk slipped into port in Cuba before the risks.
Other ships to force Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to were allowed to continue on their course.
In the interim, that an interception would be needed so that Khrushchev rejects blockade. the Soviets would have time to finish work on Khrushchev would not doubt United States resolve. the missiles, some of which could be fired at Four Soviet-bloc ships were put forward as 25 OCTOBER United States cities — perhaps by accident or without candidates.
Two Bucharest and Völkerfreundschaft authorization — in the event that the United were ordered by Khrushchev to turn back allowed past blockade; photographs States attacked. before they could be intercepted.
I identified and examined every passenger ship that no one had the stomach instance of talk about a blockade and subseto challenge for fear of loss of life.
The only 26 OCTOBER quent air strike in the tapes to see whether serious candidate for interception was the Marucla (Lebanese freighter under Soviet the danger of a missile launch was reiterBucharest, a Soviet tanker that, lacking deck charter) intercepted.
I found a marked shift, The ship turned up at the blockade line early early on 18 October, from frequent warnon the morning of 25 October and, before ings, particularly from McNamara, about it could be discussed by the ExComm, was 27 OCTOBER the danger of bombing operational missiles permitted to pass after it declared its cargo Khrushchev makes second proposal, demanding withdrawal of Jupiter missiles on the island, to a string of statements (the benign.
U-2 plane shot down over first from Llewellyn Thompson, former United States that morning was, in part, about whether to Cuba.
Kennedy publicly accepts Khrushchev’s first proposal and secretly ambassador to the Soviet Union) supporting chase it down and board it belatedly. promises to remove Jupiter missiles. the blockade and air strike but omitting any The standard story is that the president reference to this danger. let the Bucharest go because he wanted to After this shift, whenever someone tries to give Khrushchev more time to back down, 28 OCTOBER reintroduce the risk of a nuclear response, that or to respond to diplomatic overtures at the Khrushchev accepts. person is interrupted, talked over or ignored.
HULTON-DEUTSCH COLLECTION/CORBIS Twice, for instance, Robert Kennedy tries to In fact, the tapes reveal a Kennedy who warn about the danger of allowing the Soviets is very worried about appearing weak if he time to finish work on the missiles before a United States does not order the ship to be boarded.
The first hand is stayed by opposition from his moretime, Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint vocal advisers.
The second ure to intercept could easily be justified to time, McNamara repeatedly interrupts him domestic and international audiences, even before he can finish his thought. as they thwart attempts to give sustained I believe such efforts at ‘suppression’ consideration to the way that the Soviets 2 8 | N AT U R E | V O L 4 8 7 | 5 J U LY 2 0 1 2 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited.
The discussions were undoubtedly BETTMANN/CORBIS beneficial in bringing to light the various options and their associated risks, and in forcing the different factions (the ‘hawks’ and ‘doves’) to hone their arguments.
But they were also structured by conversational machinery — based, for instance, on the rules of turn-taking and the expectation that one say something relevant to whatever was said last — that is not easily put to the service of comparing the consequences of competing courses of action.
By the end of the meeting he allowed to talk on at length about the futility be sacrificed. still seems inclined to board the ship, but of accepting Khrushchev’s first offer, receivThe same process could have had a difpostpones a decision until later in the day. ing no challenge despite providing openings ferent ending.
Had a consensus in favour of Before the ExComm reconvened, howfor disagreement. the blockade been forged even a day sooner, ever, a state-department briefing for legislaSeveral times people even suggest that for instance, it might have gone into effect tors leaked the fact that the Bucharest had President Kennedy remove himself from in time for the Navy to intercept the Alekalready crossed the blockade.
Given that this ship was under admit indecision, the Pentagon announced does so most forthrightly.
This results in an orders to sink itself rather than be boarded2, that the navy had let it pass after ascertainexplosion of laughter at his audacity, and at that would have sent ing that it carried no contraband.
When the the way he is pointing out the elephant in “The same histor y careering ExComm reconvened later in the afternoon, the room — that the president has become process could down a different path it took the passage of the tanker as irreversthe primary impediment to consensus as to have had entirely. ible — showing how indecision can be transwhat the president should do. a different The lesson for sciformed into decision by the pace of events.
Finding little support for the position he ending.” entists, advisers and Kennedy’s third big decision concerned has taken, President Kennedy eventually policy-makers is that the deal that resolved the crisis.
Late on relents and agrees to the wording of a letter the details and mechanics of conversation 26 October, he received a private letter in that accepts Khrushchev’s first offer, even matter.
Talk is useful for decision-making, which Premier Khrushchev offered to withthough it hints at later negotiations over but its conventions do not ensure that susdraw his missiles in return for a United States pledge “other armaments”. tained attention is given to all the things not to invade the island.
Before this could be Yet Kennedy remained unconvinced that that could go wrong.
Given enough time, discussed by the ExComm the next mornthis would be enough.
Following a more all branches of the decision tree might ing, the group received another offer, this intimate meeting off-tape on that night, he receive their due, but during a crisis time one made publicly, demanding that Presideployed his brother to secretly deliver a is in short supply, and the hardest decident Kennedy remove the North Atlantic promise that the Jupiter missiles would be sions might require that some branches are Treaty Organization’s nuclear removed from Turkey within a few months neglected and even wilfully abandoned. ■ missiles from Turkey.
The ExComm was of the end of the crisis, on the condition SEE COMMENT P.30 dumbfounded, but Kennedy’s advisers that Khrushchev did not publicize that part quickly converged to recommend that the of the deal.
This marked the beginning of the is published this proposed a missile trade. end of the crisis.
Dobbs, M One Minute to Midnight . felt pressured to respond to Khrushchev’s 3.
The Kennedy Tapes offer before the end of the day, partly for fear NOT SO RATIONAL . that if there was any delay he would issue The Cuban missile crisis had a good end4.
