Until the events of 1959, Cuba was essentially an American protectorate gave USA the rights of intervention in Cuba and required Cuba to provide land for naval bases hence Guantanamo Bay.
Inevitably, this attitude generated opposition among many nationalistically minded Cubans.
Castro on 1st January 1959, Batista's dictoral regime collapses and Castro becomes leader of Cuba.
Whilst it looked like the revolution was nationalist and home grown, with no external aid from communist states, the USA was willing to let it run its course.
In May 1958, Vice President Nixon led to a shift in United States policy towards Latin America economic stability became a target.In fact, Eisenhower agreed not to support dictators in the area.
He could not let them deliver Cuba into the hands of Soviets or China, but needed the support of a great power to manage the inevitable United States response to his plans to reduce United States economic and political influence in Cuba.
In May 1959, Castro introduced agrarian reform which led to American-owned property being seized by the state.
United States fears of Cuba becoming a satellite state were worsened when Soviet First Deputy visits Cuba in Feb 1960 and arranges $100 million in credits to Castrotying Cuba in economically with the SU, but also a political one.
In April 1960, Castro nationalises the oil companies and America imposes economic sanctions, reducing their imports of sugar.
By 1961, USA wanted to remove Castro. 2 of 9 Bay of Pigs & Operation Mongoose 1961 Bay of Pigs had been initiated under Eisenhower and inherited by Kennedy.
It was an unmitigated disaster and humiliation for Kennedy but also confirmed the Soviet Union and Castro's fears about the USA intentions for Cuba.
Castro's power had been reaffirmed as he protected Cuba from American imperialism.
On 30th November 1961, Kennedy authorises Operation Mongoose to overthrow communism in Cuba using covert operations.
Malinovsky concludes that in face of a determined United States attack, Cuba would not survive a week.
Khrushchev decides to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba in 1962 Code name 'Anadyr' to keep USA off the scent.
Khrushchev claimed his only purpose was defence of Cuba in face of United States hostility towards Cuba and determination to translate this into direct action.
This would have been less risky in terms of peace and not provoking the USA the aims of peaceful coexistence.
No one would have been threatened this way thus presents the view that Khrushchev had ulterior motives.
Dominant power was USA, despite what was suggested and Khrush knew this lost atomic leverage in international relations.
Reducing missile gap would also supply military planning aims reducing spending on conventional military forces and initate development into arsenal whilst investing in civilian economy due to fragility of Eastern bloc states.
Spreading revolution through Latin Am. by controlling it as leaders of international communism, not China in view of split due to peaceful coexistence China thought USSR was weak.
Intervention in Cuba was a way of putting pressures on the powers over Berlin.
Linkage strategy between Cuba and Berlin, where Khrushchev was repeatedly failing to remove the Western power.
Political embarassment to Khrushchev and implications in terms of the security of the communist bloc in Eastern Europe.
To put pressure on NATO alliance if other members felt the USA was placing its own regional interests above those in the Western Alliance.
The Cuban issue might present the USA with a hemispheric threat serious enough to impel them to withdraw from Berlin in return for Soviet concessions in Cuba.
However, did illustrate how one problem in one area could be used to solve a problem in another this strategy appears throughout the era.
USA May 1962 Jupiter missile deployment in Turkey to supplement NATO's defensive nuclear umbrella.
Linkage Khrushchev's response in Cuba may be in response to this thus there was equal threat on both sides.
The crisis would have given Khrushchev a bargaining tool to use against United States missiles in Turkey. 5 of 9 Development of the Crisis History presents Kennedy as a strong leader, who forced Khrushchev to back down after his opportunistic challenge to USA's nuclear and global strategic power.
Kennedy's failure in the intial stages lay in his certainty that Khrushchev would never carry out such a reckless plan so close to the USA failed to account for reactions against Bay of Pigs/Mongoose.
Similarly, Khrush did not know how Kennedy would react overestimated the attitude that the USA would have.
Failed to see that his actions would be seen as aggressive and offensive to the international community rather than defensive or driven by sense of need.
Castro had secured defence of his island by pitting the two superpowers against each other.US planes used U2 spy planes to find nuclear site Kennedy claims they will do whatever is necessary to protect its own security and that of its allies.
Gromyko tells the UN, an attack on Cuba would mean war with the Soviet Union.
Soviets depended on a major nuclear build up without United States realising but the secrecy ends on 14th Oct.
They could do nothing, risking splitting the NATO alliance by appearing to ignore interests of Europe as it would expose to a nuclear response.
Naval Blockade would stem the flow of missiles entering Cuba as there was too many missiles to guarantee the destruction of all of them before Soviet retaliatory action.
Soviet ships turn back. ""the other fellow just blinked"" brinkmanship. 6 of 9 The End in Sight Brinkmanship was a high risk strategy and could only be effective if both sides recognised that any form of military confrontation in a nuclear age would be undesirable.
If Khrush had intended to protect Cuba from United States aggression, he had clearly not succeeded Cuba was in more danger.
Khrushchev was the first to propose a truce Soviets withdraw from Cuba on the grounds that USA doesnt invade Cuba.
Peaceful resolution made difficult by Castro who was convinced of a United States attack.
Orders anti-aircraft forces to start firing on low level reconnaissance planes.
Khrushchev amends his proposal by proposing removal of Jupiter missiles.
Kennedy's strategy was to ignore the second proposal and reply to the first.
Kennedy was willing to remove the already 'old' and ineffective missiles in Turkey but not immediately and not incorporated into a public settlement of the crisis so the NATO allies did not see it as a concession.
On 28th October, Khrushchev agrees to remove the missiles, but Castro saw it as a humiliating betrayal by Khrushchev and refused to allow checks on the dismantling of the sites.
Only fulfilled as Soviet ships removing the missiles revealed the contents. 7 of 9 Impact of the Crisis Brought the world closer to nuclear war than had ever happened at any other time.
What the crisis did show was that international relations could not be conducted through crisis management methods and was not a model of crisis management.
In 1963, a 'hotline' was created connecting Washington and Moscow to solve crises directly.
Some historians take the view that its symbolic value was greater than its practical application.
Crisis led to a growing awareness of the need to create some control over the nuclear arms race by placing restrictions on nuclear tests.
Described as a watershed, marking an important new era in arms control.
However, the ban fell short as the treaty made no provisions for underground tests or inspection.
Encouraged weapon proliferation among the nuclear powers and after 3 months powers could restart the testing and no obligatory start up China/France did not join.
SU had to be forced to respond rather than being deterred from taking action USA aggressive.
USSR emerged with the determination to restore its international status.
Cuba remains communist in the backyard of the USA USA's commitment to containment had failed but did not undermine policy.
Cuba was a part of the start of the revolutionary change in developing countries.
