AdvertisementIt was 24 October 1962, one of the tensest days of the Cuban missile crisis, and the Soviet leader was composing a response to his American counterpart, John F Kennedy.
Two days earlier Kennedy had gone on TV to announce to his country, and the world, the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
He demanded their removal and declared a naval blockade of the island, euphemistically calling it a quarantine – in the language of international law, a blockade would have meant war.
On 23 October, Kennedy also sent Khrushchev a private letter demanding that he turn back his ships heading for Cuba.Khrushchev, now in a fighting mood, responded by threatening Kennedy with a nuclear attack.
This was already Khrushchev’s second letter to Kennedy composed that day.
This much longer missive of almost seven typed pages was supposed to be confidential, and Khrushchev did not conceal his frustration.The letter was to be dispatched via Colonel Georgii Bolshakov of the GRU, an acquaintance of the president’s brother, Robert.
Able Archer 83: the Nato war-game that nearly spelled nuclear disasterOn 25 October Khrushchev abruptly reversed course.
Not only did he refuse to send his letter, but he agreed to recall his ships loaded with ballistic missiles and to dismantle Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
Khrushchev had “shat his pants”, recalled his deputy foreign minister, Vasilii Kuznetsov.Within striking distanceThe Cuban crisis had begun only 11 days before, on 14 October 1962, when an American high-altitude U-2 plane spotted Soviet ballistic missiles on the island.
The 22-metre-long medium-range missiles, known to the Americans as SS-4 Sandals, had been built in the Ukrainian city of Dnipropetrovsk and brought to Cuba in complete secrecy.
The Soviet premier cultivated the relationship in order to keep his Cuban counterpart out of the clutches of his great foe, Mao Zedong Khrushchev had two motives for these actions.
The Sputnik rocket aside, Khrushchev had very few of those, and they were highly unreliable.Kennedy was alerted to the presence of the Soviet missiles on 16 October.
Khrushchev, who had publicly declared that he would not put “offensive weapons” on the island and privately assured Kennedy that he would do nothing to undermine him before the Congressional elections of November 1962, had deceived him.
It took Kennedy and his advisers on the ExComm – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council – almost a week to come up with a response.At 7pm on 22 October, a sombre Kennedy, having received intelligence that the Soviet missiles were battle-ready, addressed the nation.
Learning of the forthcoming address, Khrushchev summoned the Presidium members to the Kremlin.
One possibility was to declare that the USSR had a defence treaty with Cuba, making an American assault on Cuba tantamount to an attack on the Soviet Union.
Another was to declare that the missiles were Cuban, and that Havana might respond to an invasion with nuclear weapons.
In that case, Washington would have had to negotiate with Havana, not Moscow, and in the worst-case scenario there would have been a nuclear war between the United States and Cuba, with the USSR remaining on the sidelines.
Now General Pliev was prohibited from using ballistic missiles without orders from Moscow, but the telegram gave him de facto clearance to use tactical nuclear weapons if attacked.
They decided to postpone sending the telegram until they heard Kennedy’s speech.To Khrushchev’s relief, Kennedy did not announce an imminent attack, opting instead for a naval blockade.
But he refused to turn back ships delivering non-military loads, presenting Kennedy with the dilemma of what to do with those cargo ships as they approached the quarantine line.The immediate crisis was resolved when news unexpectedly reached the White House that the ships Kennedy had just ordered to be intercepted had turned back much earlier.
They did not know that Khrushchev had blinked long before, on the night of Kennedy’s television speech.
The lack of timely information almost caused the outbreak of a shooting war.
Unknowingly, Kennedy had in fact ordered the interception of ships moving away from the quarantine line, not toward it.Kennedy braced himself for a possible confrontation on the high seas.
Meanwhile, the military dusted off their plans for an invasion of Cuba, and the Strategic Air Command raised its Defense Readiness Condition to Level Two – just short of Level One, which meant open warfare.
Nuclear-armed B-52s were now in the air, flying to Europe and the eastern Mediterranean.
They were prepared to strike targets in the Soviet Union.Soviet intelligence intercepted the SAC order on 24 October, the day on which Khrushchev dictated his letter comparing Kennedy to Hitler and Napoleon and threatening him that nuclear missiles might start firing on their own if the Americans invaded Cuba.Nuclear dumping groundAdmittedly, Khrushchev also had a friendlier proposal for the American president.
He implied that he would consider removing the missiles as part of a comprehensive agreement leading ultimately to the elimination of all nuclear weapons.
Comprehensive nuclear disarmament was an old demand of Khrushchev’s; turning the Caribbean into the world’s nuclear dumping ground was a new one.Khrushchev woke up on 25 October to a barrage of disturbing news.
Kennedy had responded tersely to his official letter of the previous day, refusing to be pushed around.
Those steps could be taken as an indication that Kennedy was getting ready to strike not only Cuba but the Soviet Union itself.
Mr President,” wrote Khrushchev, “we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied.
Khrushchev’s aides, fearing that his adventurism would trigger nuclear war, unanimously supported his proposal.
The United States leader had scuttled the Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier, and his Soviet counterpart expected him to do the same now.
When he didn’t, a frightened Khrushchev felt that he had no choice but to blink; within three days of the presidential address, the Soviet leader had decided to remove the missiles from Cuba.This, though, didn’t mean the danger and drama were over.
Khrushchev would not have been himself if he had not tried to bargain.Khrushchev asked Kennedy to remove the United States missiles in Turkey as a precondition of removing his missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy was prepared to take the deal – he had contemplated such an exchange from the start of the crisis.
But he could not do so openly or immediately without offending the Turks and sending a signal to Nato that one day he might remove the American nuclear umbrella without so much as a prior consultation.
Ironically, things began to spin out of control just as the two leaders had all but agreed on a deal.On 27 October, the captain of a Soviet submarine ordered a strike with a nuclear torpedo against American shipsOn the morning of 27 October, exhausted after a sleepless night, General Issa Pliev, the Soviet military commander in Cuba, took a nap.
Just then, his subordinates fired a surface-to-air missile at an American U-2 airplane surveying the island, shooting it down.
They had been expecting a United States air attack at any minute, and Castro had already ordered his air defences to shoot at low-flying United States airplanes.
The two Soviet generals who gave the order without consulting Pliev or Moscow believed that, with the U-2 registering the locations of their missiles, a United States assault was imminent.
The officers who executed the shot braced themselves for immediate retaliation.With the U-2 down, the Cuban crisis had degenerated into a shooting war.
It almost turned into a nuclear one when, during the evening of 27 October, the captain of a Soviet submarine in the Sargasso Sea ordered a strike with a nuclear torpedo against American ships.
Only the interference of a senior officer on the submarine stopped the launch.
In Moscow, Khrushchev woke up to the news about the downing of the U-2.
Terrified of what might come next, he was prepared to withdraw his demand about the Turkish missiles.At that moment, news arrived that the no less desperate Kennedy was offering a secret swap of the American missiles in Turkey for the Soviet ones in Cuba.
He transmitted his agreement on Radio Moscow to prevent any new accidents – a note sent through diplomatic channels might take up to 24 hours to reach the White House.
Castro, whose revolution was anti-imperial first and communist second, felt betrayed – his fate and that of his country had been decided by the superpowers without consulting him.The Cubans refused to allow inspection of their missile sites – a condition of the Khrushchev-Kennedy deal.
So the Soviets had to show the Americans the missiles loaded on their ships, and these United States inspections of vessels heading back to the USSR humiliated the Soviet military, turning its commanders against Khrushchev.In October 1964 Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet defence minister, backed the palace coup that removed Khrushchev from power.
Like others in the Soviet leadership, Brezhnev was frightened of Khrushchev’s unpredictability and nuclear brinkmanship.
His attempt to blackmail Kennedy with the threat of nuclear war failed, and he became so frightened that he was prepared to remove the missiles for nothing but a promise from Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
Khrushchev had confidently expected the missiles to prevent American aggression not only against Cuba but also against the Soviet Union.
I was frightened about what could happen to my country and all the countries that would be devastated by a nuclear war,” Khrushchev told the visiting American journalist Norman Cousins later that year.
BBC History Magazine and BBC History Revealed are published by Immediate Media Company Limited under licence from BBC Studios Distribution.
They decided to postpone sending the telegram until they heard Kennedy’s speech.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eTo Khrushchev’s relief, Kennedy did not announce an imminent attack, opting instead for a naval blockade.
But he refused to turn back ships delivering non-military loads, presenting Kennedy with the dilemma of what to do with those cargo ships as they approached the quarantine line.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eThe immediate crisis was resolved when news unexpectedly reached the White House that the ships Kennedy had just ordered to be intercepted had turned back much earlier.
Unknowingly, Kennedy had in fact ordered the interception of ships moving away from the quarantine line, not toward it.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eKennedy braced himself for a possible confrontation on the high seas.
They were prepared to strike targets in the Soviet Union.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003e\u003c!-image removed --\u003e\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eSoviet intelligence intercepted the SAC order on 24 October, the day on which Khrushchev dictated his letter comparing Kennedy to Hitler and Napoleon and threatening him that nuclear missiles might start firing on their own if the Americans invaded Cuba.\u003c/p\u003e\u003ch3\u003eNuclear dumping ground\u003c/h3\u003e\u003cp\u003eAdmittedly, Khrushchev also had a friendlier proposal for the American president.
Comprehensive nuclear disarmament was an old demand of Khrushchev’s; turning the Caribbean into the world’s nuclear dumping ground was a new one.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eKhrushchev woke up on 25 October to a barrage of disturbing news.
A Central Committee official wrote on a copy of the old letter that it should not be sent because of the Presidium’s decision to send a different letter.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003e“Mr President,” wrote Khrushchev, “we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied.
According to the protocol of the meeting, the Presidium decided to “dismantle the missile installations”.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eKennedy’s refusal to back down wrong-footed Khrushchev.
When he didn’t, a frightened Khrushchev felt that he had no choice but to blink; within three days of the presidential address, the Soviet leader had decided to remove the missiles from Cuba.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eThis, though, didn’t mean the danger and drama were over.
Khrushchev would not have been himself if he had not tried to bargain.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eKhrushchev asked Kennedy to remove the United States missiles in Turkey as a precondition of removing his missiles from Cuba.
Ironically, things began to spin out of control just as the two leaders had all but agreed on a deal.\u003c/p\u003e""}},{""@id"":""/v1/contents/12753162"",""@type"":""Content"",""type"":""pullquote"",""data"":{""quote"":,""author"":null}},{""@id"":""/v1/contents/12753163"",""@type"":""Content"",""type"":""html"",""data"":{""value"":""\u003cp\u003e\u003c!-image removed --\u003e\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eOn the morning of 27 October, exhausted after a sleepless night, General Issa Pliev, the Soviet military commander in Cuba, took a nap.
The officers who executed the shot braced themselves for immediate retaliation.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eWith the U-2 down, the Cuban crisis had degenerated into a shooting war.
Terrified of what might come next, he was prepared to withdraw his demand about the Turkish missiles.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003e\u003c!-image removed --\u003e\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eAt that moment, news arrived that the no less desperate Kennedy was offering a secret swap of the American missiles in Turkey for the Soviet ones in Cuba.
Castro, whose revolution was anti-imperial first and communist second, felt betrayed – his fate and that of his country had been decided by the superpowers without consulting him.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eThe Cubans refused to allow inspection of their missile sites – a condition of the Khrushchev-Kennedy deal.
So the Soviets had to show the Americans the missiles loaded on their ships, and these United States inspections of vessels heading back to the USSR humiliated the Soviet military, turning its commanders against Khrushchev.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003e\u003c!-image removed --\u003e\u003c!-image removed --\u003e\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eIn October 1964 Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet defence minister, backed the palace coup that removed Khrushchev from power.
We nearly plunged into nuclear war.”\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003eKhrushchev’s nuclear gamble backfired.
But once the missiles were discovered, he abandoned his scheme.\u003c/p\u003e\u003cp\u003e“Of course, I was scared.
This article contains affiliate links and we may receive a commission for purchases made.
