Successfully tested in November 1952. This was prompted by the Berlin Blockade of 1948-9, the establishment of the People's Republic of China in October 1949, and the discovery of a Soviet nuclear spy ring.
Delivering the bomb by plane From 1953, 40% of the United States defence funds were allocated to the air forces.
By 1955, the USA owned the B52 Stratofortress, the first bomber with intercontinental range. Strategic Air Command became the USA's main nuclear strike force. The Soviets could not compete with SAC but responded in 1956 with the TU20 Bear.
By the early 1960s the arms race had reached the point of mutually assured destruction . 2 of 8 Balance of terror Massive retaliation US confidence about its nuclear superiority in the 1950s led the Eisenhower administration to introduce the doctrine of massive retaliation . Involved the use of brinkmanship.
Flexible response Kennedy rejected massive retaliation. Favoured a flexible response strategy not just an all out nuclear attack.
Mutually Assured Destruction -By the mid-late 1960s, the USA and Soviet Union had reached the position of mutual assured destruction. 3 of 8 The Impact of the Arms Race on the Cold War Stablising effects + Prevented direct US-Soviet confrontation Presence of nuclear weapons caused superpowers to respect other's areasg.
Destablising effects Soviet acquisition of the atomic bomb led to a spiralling arms race. The culture of secrecy surrounding it led to superpowers fears that the other side had military superiority. Encouraged brinkmanship which could have resulted in total devastation. The cost of nuclear weapons imposed huge financial strains on both sides. Nuclear weapons did not stop other forms of superpower competitiong.
January 1959, Batista, a ruthless military dictator, was overthrown by the revolutionaries led by Fidel Castro.
Castro signed a trade deal with the Soviet Union to nationalise United States interests in Cuba that were worth over $1 billion. July 1960: USA imposed economic blockade on Cuba, thereby refusing to buy its sugar. Early 1961: Castro formally embraced communism.
The Bay of Pigs Invasion, April 19611961, Kennedy authorised a CIA-backed invasion of Cuba.
THe Anti-Castro Cuban exiles were overwhelmed by the Cuban army and air force.
Operation Mongoose, Operation 1961Secret programme destablise Cuban regime Jan-July 1962 60,000 acts of sabotage.
American forces go to DEFCON2 . 26th October: Khrushchev sends letter to Kennedy to promising to remove Soviet missiles if United States lifts the blockade and publically pledges to never invade Cuba. 27th October: Kennedy states he will make a statement saying that the United States will not invade CUba if USSR removes missiles from Cuba.
Khrushchev Although the Soviet action had removed United States missiles from Turkey, the Soviet military never forgave Khrushchev.
They regarded the Cuban venture as ending in humiliating faliure and this was a factor in Khrushchev's removal from office in 1964.
Nixon and Brezhnev used the 'hot-line' during the India-Pakistan war in 1971.
The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, August 1963 The two superpowers and Britain signed the treaty, which banned them from conducting nuclear tests in the atmoshphere, underwater, or in space. However, underground testing was still permitted. There was no reduction in armaments.
The Arms Race 1949-63 1. / 5 based on 1 rating NUCLEAR ARMS RACE CONCISE ESSAY PLAN 0.
