According to officials of the science department the job should be completed this week.
In addition, a newly initiated astronbeing constructed at a total cost of $157,784.30, is havomy class wiM be offered to students, with six hours ing final touches of work done on the interior.
Plans are indefinite as of yet for the class annex adjoins the old science building between it and schedule.
Ten New Faculty Members Appointed On Hinds Staff For ’62 School Year Total cost of the annex is $157,784.30.
Regular equipment costs about $23,000.00, while the revolving dome is priced at $4,300.00 and the telescope at $4,945.00.
Ending the completion of the project, the telescope arrived today, and will go into use within three to weeks.
Shipping was demanded, for the telescope was manufactured in Japan and tested I in California.
Technical name for the telescope is the Nishimura twelve inch Cussegrain-Newtowan Reflector, and it will be used by qualified students in the astronomy courses.
The astronomy class is classified as a physical science course, and a student may obtain six hours credit for it.
Night classes will be held, open to any student who wishes to apply, at the descretion of the instructor, Mr Stephenson, new head of the science department.
Plans for the addition were made definite in October, 1961, and bids were let on January 5, 1962.
Campbell Construction Company of Jackson was low bidder, and Jay T Liddel, Jackson, served as architect for the project.
The new addition provides 8400 added square feet of floor space for classrooms and laboratories.
Cheerleaders Voting Set For Wednesday According to an announcement by Head Cheerleader Patsy Roberts, freshman cheerleaders will be elected Wednesday, September 19.
Miss Roberts asked those interested to report to the girls’ gym Thursday night, September 13, at 6:15.
Sophomore cheerleaders elected last year were Ray Rochelle of Jackson, Patsy Roberts of Jackson, and Ruby Hudgins of Brandon.
MORE ADVANCES SEEN McLendon Steps Into 25th Year As Helmsman Of Hinds Progress the language labs are being readied for use.
Ten new faculty and administrative staff members have joined Hinds Junior College for the 196263 session.
James T Sparkman, a native of Morgan City, is the new Dean of Instruction.
She attended Sunflower Junior College and received a B.A. from Mississippi State College for Women.
Miss Peggy Seay, of Batesville, is a new instructor in the English department.
A graduate of Hinds Junior College, Morris interrupted his studies with two years in the United States Navy.
He resumed studies at Northeast Louisiana State College in Monroe, and plans to return there at the end of first semester.
Miss Joan Melton, a new addition in the music department, will instruct music theory.
Stephenson, from Louisville, Kentucky, is a machine shop instructor. in the Hinds, technical school.
He worked for four years as a machinist apprentice in Meridian for Soule Steam Feed Works and taught machine shop at Ross Collins Vocational School.
Stephenson was employed by the Southern Railroad for fourty-four years as a foreman and machinist.
Griffin taught in Mississippi high schools from 1943 to 1956, and more recently was associated with Holmes Junior College.
William M Davis, of Terry, is the new instructor of biology in the science department.
He has eight years teaching experience in high school and senior levels.
Kent Prince, of Newton, has assumed duties as public relations director for the college.
Rex Tatum, from Debach, Louisiana, is a new piano instructor in the music department.
Since “Mr Mac,” as he is affectionately known throughout the educational world, began guiding the destiny of Hinds, staggering changes have taken place in the enrollment and campus appearance.
The 1961-62 session saw the opening of the ultra modern library and the beginning of construction of the new two-story science department annex.
In previous yiears two new girls dormitories, two new men’s dormitories, and the original science building have appeared.
The new administration and academic buildings, a student center and a football stadium have also been added.
At present, Northside dormitory for girls is being expanded, faculty members are occupying the recently completed faculty homes, and On the opening day of registration President McLendon stated, “We extend a cordial and hardy welcome to the faculty, staff and student body.
To those who are with us for the first time, we request you to study the traditions of Hinds and enter in company with the vast number who constantly strive to make improvements.
He is married to the former Louise Boyd, of Montgomery County, and they have two daughters, Mrs.
Betty Bowen, of Jackson Page 2 HINDSONIAN September 12, 1962 It’s Your Duty Cooperation and understanding are two basic traits which should be present in the lives of every college student.
Every student should take an active interest in all school-concerned affairs.
In past years many things have been added to our campus because someone thought it their duty to suggest it.
Of course, that is the purpose or sub-purpose of many clubs and groups, but they can’t think of everything.
Just last week a student suggested that if glasses of tea were placed by helpers on the dinner trays instead of each individual having to pour his own tea and ice, much confusion would be eliminated.
By placing pre-iced glasses on the trays as students come through the lines, the cafeteria workers have caused the line to move much more swiftly.
Now you aren’t jostled and pushed when you try to put ice and tea into your glass.
Of course, don’t be surprised if this type of serving is not continued.
Other ideas may occur which can aid the cafeteria’s problems in better ways.
Whatever the situation, though, students have a direct bearing on the matter.
From such cases as this, you can presume it to be your duty to strive to help our college improve.
Some make plans which are constructive, others destructive, but they are plans and ideas all the while.
Not necessarily to just sit around and think all the time, but to learn to use our brain for something worthwhile.
Erroneous picures of college students have been emplanted in the minds of unknowing persons.
The average student is not one who sits around all day smoking a pipe and stroking his goatee, but one who tries to do his part in all activities which interest him.
There is a thin division line between thinking correctly and just thinking.
Only one channel of thought is right, while there are a thousand others which are wrong.
Hinds Junior College prides itself in fine, outstanding groups and clubs.
As you become better acquainted with the campus and its contents you too will become proud of it.
We students prefer not to think of ourselves as an average student body in an average junior college.
Each division of our school contributes its part to making Hinds what it is.
Every new year brings forth another class to carry on tradition and activities.
W NEWS IN BRIEF Campus Events And Activities _By BELVA WATKINSThe campus Church organizations will sponsor a campus-wide social in the girls’ gym this Thursday at 6:00.
All coeds on campus are invited to attend the meeting and join the group.
Prince Appointed ^•3,231 By LINDA BYRD , There are very few things that a junior college can offer a senior college.
Hinds, however, filled one of the Rebels' needs when Mr Pat D Smith became Director of the Unir versity of Mississippi News Service.
Formerly Public Relations Director at Hinds, Mr Smith was also head of the Department of Journalism, publisher of the Hindsonian and the Eagle, Director of Publications and debate coach.
During his tenure at Hinds, he led the debate team to state championship, published an award-winning annual, and sponsored Mississippi’s first place junior college newspaper, The Hindsonian.
While doing undergraduate work at Millsaps College, he was named on Who's Who in American Colleges and served as the editor of the Purple and White, campus newspaper.
The Hindsonian staff welcomes Mr Prince looks forward to a successful year under his leadership.
LENDON PLAYERS Bill White, President of the Lendon Players, has called a meeting of the group Thursday night at 7:30 in the Music Auditorium.
Auditions for parts in the fall play, Mother is a Freshman, will be held Wednesday, September 19, in the Auditorium.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS Ralph Hemphill, president of the International Relations Club, has called its first meeting Wednesday, September 19, at 7:30m. in room 12 of the Academic Building.
The group will formulate plans for the beginning session, and nomination of officers will be held.
PEP MEETING A giant pep rally will be held Thursday night at 6:00 in front of the grill.
Sponsoring the rally is the Circle K Club, local college affiliate of the Kiwanias Club.
Cheerleaders will be present, and music will be furnished by members of the Eagle Band.
WAA MEET The initial meeting of the WAA will be held Tuesday night, September 18, at 6:15, According to Francis Pickett, president, plans will be made to extend the membership drive now in progress.
New Dean Of Women Adopts Hinds Coeds Into Her Immense Family How did she become involved in By BETTYE SIMMONS Some mothers complain about guiding the life of one child.
For the past twelve years she has served as executive director of the South Central Alabama Girl Scout Council.
The sixteen county council had a girl and adult membership of between six and seven thousand.
She served on summer camp staffs in Jackson, Mississippi, and Memphis, Tennessee, for several summers, and directed the Goldsboro, North Carolina camp one summer.
Coming from Brandon, Miss Marshall attended high school and junior college in Moorehead at Sunflower Junior College.
She obviously likes the students, too, and extends a special invitation to the girls to come by for a conference at any time.
INSPIRED LASS — Standing in front of the Library Building in Washington, D C., is perky Marilyn Mitchell, Jackson sophomore.
Marilyn as a Hi-Stepper, attended the Miss America Pageant in Atlantic City and made the tour with the group.
Such major sights as this were viewed by the Hi-Steppers as they made their way through the north.
She certainly makes an improvement to the scenery on the Hinds campus, and ably takes the position of the initial) Hinds Honey for the 1962-63 school year.
Faculty Members Leaving To Take Other Positions September 12, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 3 Schedule For Bus Routes To Campus Are Announced Six members of the 1961-62 Hinds Junior College faculty have resigned to accept other positions throughout the nation.
Glenda Rush Malone, instructor of piano, has moved to Meridian and will teach at Meridian Junior College.
Rosser Wall, instructor of biology, has taken a leave of absence to PHI THETA KAPPA HOSTS BIG PRE-SCHOOL RETREAT BESIDE RAYMOND LAKE The officers of Gamma Lambda Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa, the national honorary society for junior college students, held a preschool retreat Friday, August 24 at Raymond Lake.
Attending the retreat were Henri Lou Coleman, Marianne Neal, Rosalind Healy, Stewart Gibbes, and Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor.
The purpose of the retreat was to plan projects and programs for Phi Theta Kappa during the coming session.
The present members of Phi Theta Kappa are Henri Lou Coleman— president, Stewart Gibbes — vicepresident, Carolyn McKey—secretary, Marianne Neal — treasurer, Suzanne Slay—historian, Rosalind Healy — parliamentarian, Juanita Hilderbrand, Judy Herring and Larry Lauderdale.
Members are making plans to attend the 1963 National Convention which will be held in Miami, Florida.
John P Adams, instructor of piano, has accepted a position at Odessa Junior College in Odessa, Texas.
A1 Rowan, director of bands, has taken a sick leave, and will return second semester.
Dwayne Cox Southside Stadium Classes Will Start Monday Evening In New Division According to an announcement by Dr.
James Sparkman, Hinds Dean of Instruction, classes will be offered in the Evening division beginning Monday night, September 17, at 7m.
Courses included in the curriculum are those which meet graduation requirements at Hinds, courses which are transferable to other colleges, courses in vocational and technical training, and self-improvtechnical training, and self improvement courses.
Tuition for each course is five dollars per semester hour up to a total of six semester hours of work.
All classes except the technical, vocational and semi-vocational ones will meet one night each week from 7:00 to 9:00m.
Meeting times for vocational and technical courses will be worked out with students at the first class meeting.
Registration will be signified either at the first class meeting or by coming to the registrar’s office in the Administration Building.
Bankston, postmaster for Hinds, has announced that post office facilities are available for student and faculty use.
Post office hours have been set at 8:00-11:30m. and 1:00-4:00 Monday through Friday, and 8:00-10:30m. on Saturdays.
The mail is picked up at 8:30m. and 2:30m. and arrives at 9:00m. and 3:00m.
Ralph Hemphill Eastside Tentative routes for free bus service to the Hinds Junior College campus from the Jackson-TerryForest Hill areas and from Vicksburg have been released by President McLendon.
All routes are subject to change if improvements can be made after this week, and additional buses will be added to the routes to sufficiently handle any number of students.
Applicants must prove themselves willing and capable before assuming definite positions.
Therefore a trial-period will be conducted in which all interested persons may work on the paper.
Interested persons are asked to contact Joe White or Mr Kent Prince in the Public Relations Office.
Positions are also open on the Eagle yearbook, and those wishing to work should contact Belva Watkins or Mr Kent Prince in the Public Relations Office. back out Raymond Road to Raymond.
North Jackson bus route leaves Northside Drive and Hanging Moss Road, comes down Northwest Street to Lamar, goes west on Pearl to Robinson Street, out through Van Winkle to Raymond Road to Raymond.
West Jackson route leaves West Capitol and Gallatin Street, goes out West Capitol, through Clinton to Raymond.
Vicksburg route leaves downtown Vicksburg, comes out business Highway 80 to the Arch where most of the passengers are picked up, to Edwards, to Bolton, to Raymond.
Specific time schedules will be worked out as needed, but most of the buses will leave .about 7:10m. and will leave school at 3:40m. going back over the identical route.
PICK-UP ON EVERY MONDAY AND THURSDAY NIGHTS ON CAMPUS GUARANTEED work or will pay any liable claim.
MITCHELL’S TEXACO SERVICE FREE CAMPUS PICK-UP & DELIVERY Experts In Automotive Service Visit Our Drive In BEST HAMBURGERS IN TOWN RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI South Border of Campus Page 4 HINDSONIAN September 12, 1962 PATIENTLY WAITING — Students amass In the administration building and form lines to complete their registration.
The entrance program will be ended Thursday morning, as classes begin on a fifteen minute schedule at one o'clock Thursday afternoon.
Faculty Members, Campus Clubs Ease Tensions Of Registration Former Hinds Student Comments On Recent Campus Improvements Weaving through, the crowded ( halls on Monday’s opening day of registration was a former Hinds student, Mr Wy D McCreary, now assistant project manager, Nike Zeus Project.
Employed by the Thiokol Chemical Corporation in Huntsville, Alabama, Mr McCreary thirteen years ago attended the old Hinds Agricultural High School and Junior College.
Thiokol manufactures solid fuels used primarily in offensive and defensive weapons.
Mr McCreary is in the division of research and development and has been involved in the Persian and Nike Zeus projects.
Mr McCreary was greatly impressed with the many changes made on the Hinds campus since his stay here.
He said before leaving, “I would like to encourage those interested in engineering to look into Huntsville.
Hanes Underwear Sports Shirts and Socks GROCERIES If mass confusion is the trademark of all registration days for students entering colleges all over the nation, Hinds is no different.
Certainly any change at all would make it seem that HJC’s halls were slightly noiser, more massively filled and full of jittered, jarred and jangled students.
Not just one hour is spent by a person registering, but the whole day may be spent if the student is unfamiliar with the setup of things.
Most students seem half dazed and expressionless, as if the whole thing were just too, too much for them.
Packing info the halls are a record-breaking number of transfer sophomores and entering sophomores and freshmen.
As of yesterday at five o'clock, almost 1,100 students had signed up for classes.
Two more consecutive days of registration will bring this mark up to a figure far above that of previous years.
The main program has been in full swing for some time, being preluded by a faculty workshop, which was held last Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
This program consisted of various meetings spaced over the three day period which covered all phases of the school’s activities.
Also explained was the new faculty housing project which is in part nearing completion just across the highway from the main college grounds.
Guidance, in particular, was stressed, as Hinds takes particular pride in its excellent guidance and counseling program.
James Sparkman, new Dean of Instruction, announced an expansion and increase in number of the committees serving directly in conjunction with the school.
Phi Theta Kappa, honorary scholastic group, and Circle K college Kiwanias Club affiliate, are both in active participation in the affairs.
Booths and tables have been set up by both organzations to give the new students information about Hinds. workshop, in which they showed some members of Phi Theta Kappa last week during the pre-school workshop, in which they conducted some of the new teachers around the campus.
With the end of this trying period, peace will again settle over the campus.
Tired students will remove themselves from the long waiting lines and similarly tired instructors might invent an automatic registraThey will all wonder when someone will invent an automatic registration machine.
Served In The Eagle’s Nest Try It Now We would appreciate the opportunity of doing busi* ness with ell the people in Raymond and Hinds.
The dance team and Eagle Band are the first Southern group invited to appear in the national extravaganza.
Traveling all day and night, the troupes arrived in 'Washington, D C., at noontime Monday.
Guides, furnished by the hotel, led the groups to the high spots of the Capitol city.
Stops were made at the Lincoln Memorial, Arlington Cemetery, and the Smithsonian Institute.
The ambassadors of goodwill saw the Washington Monument, White House, Pentagon, Capitol and Post Office Building before going on to Atlantic City.
RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI ticing were enjoyed before the evening's performance.
Miss Mississippi, Miss Charlotte Carroll, followed the Hi-Steppers and Band in the parade.
Many took tours during the free afternoon, and dur ing the evening the groups had a choice of seeing a Broadway play, Radio City Music Hall or Greenwich Village.
The Hi-Steppers and Band are the first Southern dance and drill teams ever asked to participate in the national extravaganza.
Mention the trip to any of the travelers and they will quickly tell you tales of their wonderful times.
Band members, in particular, recall trying frantically to catch the performances of Miles Davis, Dizzie Gillespie and Qene Krupa — each playing at a different spot in Greenwich Village.
Another co-ed described the pains of packing the necessarily limited luggage.
Alon Bee, who was also the official chaperone for the Miss Mississippi candidate in the national contest.
Jim Morris is director of the Eagle band during the absence of regular bandmaster A1 Rowan.
The forty-fifth session of Hinds Junior College opens Thursday with an address from President McLendon to the student body in an assembly program at 1m.
The following is Hinds’ 1962-63 administrative and teaching faculty list by departments.
Benton, dean of men; Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar; A L Denton, director of guidance; and Walter Gibbes, coordinator of vocational training.
Virginia Riggs, librarian; Jack Treloar, supervisor of campus and farm operations; Kent Prince, director of public relations; Mrs.
Majors, assistant librarians; and Miss Margaret Lucas, assistant registrar.
Juanita Canterbury, Miss Peggy Seay and Claude Williams; and French and Spanish — Miss Hilda Ree Davis.
Marjorie Stricklin, Leslie Reeves, Miss Joan Melton and Jim Morris; physical education—Joe Renfroe, Arlis Ricks, William Oakes, Mrs.
Patrick, Marvin Riggs, Thomas Stricklin, Miss Susan Brown and James Sansing; speech and drama —Fred Brooks; and microbiology, physiology and anatomy—George D Davis.
Annie Vernon Lidell, dormitory hostess; Grady L Sheffield, manager of Frozen Food Locker Plant; B J Frew, director of Baptist Student Union; Mrs.
Speech Department Plans Extra Class Mr Fred L Brooks, Hinds speech instructor, announced that the speech department is offering this year for the first time a special class in the use of parliamentary procedure.
The first meeting will be held next Friday, September 21, in the speech classroom, and will continue meeting for the next four consecutive Fridays.
According to Mr Brooks, the major purpose of the class is to instruct and aid officers of the campus clubs.
Virginia Riggs, head librarian, has announced that five hundred new books, including the 1962 edition of the Encyclopedia Britanica, have been added during the summer months to the local collection.
Freshmen, through their first year English course, will be given an orientation visit to the library., where they will be issued the library handbook containing checkout procedure.
Rating superior in all categories, The Eagle emphasized the advancement made during the McLendon administration.
Seventeen color pages depicting the past as compared to the present highlighted the new nine by twelve book which was broken into six major sections, including faculty, features, organizations, sports, classes and advertising.
The award winning yearbook was sponsored by Mr Pat D Smith and edited by Sallie Baker.
MISSES MEET — Hinds Hi-Steppers who were contestants in the Miss Mississippi pageant this summer meet the state winner in Atlantic City at the Miss America Contest.
Miss Mississippi Charlotte Carroll, Miss Pearl Dot Lyons, Miss Jackson Eva Sipes Alternate Miss Hinds Junior College Una Jo Schaeffer, and Miss Hinds Sharon Bearden.
Hinds' Donnie Dick, number 23, halfback, pauses in mid-air as if undecided whether to fall on the sprawled players or change his direction by rolling.
The Eagles were especially sharp on recovering fumbles, as they took five from the Ranger team during the course of the game.
Hinds’ Eagles stressed defense in practice this week as they readied for the Perkinston Bulldogs in their second game of the season and their first away from home.
Coach Joe Renfroe said, “A lot was learned from last week’s 6-6 tie with the Northwest Rangers.
Team spirit is at an all time high and according to the coaching staff will be evident in future games.
Aerial attacks will continue if nothing happens to the strong right arm of quarterback Mike Vincent.
Last week the ace grid star threw a 52 yard touchdown pass for the only Eagle score of the game.
Last week favored Holmes was upset 10-6 by the Bulldog squad that was selected to finish low in a pre-seasonal poll of coaches.
Last year the Eagles downed the Bulldogs 20-6 in the seventh game of the season.
This year the Perkinston team is under the direction of a new Head Coach, Harold Wesson.
A strong passing offensive pattern has been developed and should be used in this Saturday’s game.
The Hinds Eagle Band under the direction of Jim Morris and the HiSteppers supervised by Mrs.
PLENTIFUL PASSING Season Opener Action, Ending Provides See-Saw With Tied Score Hinds’ Eagles and Northwest Rangers battled to a 6-6 tie here last Saturday in their 1962 football opener.
Though Northwest steamed ahead 6-0 in the first period when quarterback Billy Gold went wide around right end for the touchdown, Hinds deadlocked the game in the second quarter on a 52-yard scoring pass from Mike Vincent to end Jimmy Clark.
Billy Gold, Ranger passer who had been on the casualty list at the first of the week, reported for action and plagued the Eagles with his tossing.
The charging Hinds line covered five Northwest fumbles and completely smothered Northwest’s attempt to kick their extra point.
Wftc * * ""KID GALAHAD"" STARRING ELVIS PRESLEY the Eagles put their game into gear and score with only two minutes gone in the period.
After the half, a strong Northwest line, led by Jim Brinson and James Walker, stopped the Eagle ground game and forced them to take to the air.
Action see-sawed back and forth in the third quarter with neither team posing a serious threat.
In the final minutes both teams frantically attempted long passes in a desperate effort to break the tie.
Coach Joe Renfroe’s Eagles will meet the Perkinston Bulldogs next Saturday at Perkinston.
Rough and rugged junior college football started last week with several favored teams being upset.
In the first game of the season, Holmes, tied for first along with Jones in a pre season poll of coaches, was upset by Perkinston 18-6.
On the records, the Hinds-Northwest 6-6 tie was slated an upset, since Hinds was a high pre-game favorite.
This Saturday the Eagles will travel to Perkinston and following Thursday will meet Holmes in Raymond.
Harold Wesson, new coach at Perkinston, has revealed his dependency on the Bulldog passing attack for the comeback expected of them.
In other conference games last weekend, Pearl River, the defending loop champion, thrilled a home town crowd and beat the Mississippi Delta visitors 30-8.
Copiah-Lineoln trounced East Central, and Itawamba managed a 14-0 win over Southwest.
Student Bus Trip To Perk Ball Game Planned By School Five specified busses of students will attend the football game this Saturday night at Perkinston Junior College.
Four busses are designated for band and Hi-Stepper members, and one is open for student use.
Those wishing to attend the game should sign their name to the petition in President McLendon’s front office.
The bus of students will leave at approximately the same time as the ofter four, from the front of the administration building.
Chaperones for the trip will be Mr Perry, Miss Switzer and Mr Bill Oakes.
The lens equipment was transported from , the Beila Observatory in Anheim, California, arriving on campus last Thursday.
Much student interest assistant John Jap, Forest Hill student, and James Stokes, is shown, both in general astronomy and in the space age Jackson, assisted workmen in carefully lowering the lens and program.
Professor Frank Stephenson said the telescope placing it correctly in place.
Page 2 Zhe wm USX) N d/SCS MigMights of Minds GORT GIVES PERSONAL INTERVIEW Page 3 VOLUME 29—NUMBER 2 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 1962 Campus Shaken By Deluge Of Entering ’62 Students Classrooms, Dorms Quickly Fill Out To Capacity Size LANGUISHING LINES — For students waiting in rows to register for the coming winter session, even the air conditioner didn't work right.
Of course it only seemed that way because of the rush, worry and downright aggrivation which they felt.
Oddly enough, not one entering student at Hinds was lost in the turmoil.
Benton, Dean of Men, definite steps have been taken to improve the crowded parking situation on campus.
All vehicles, operating on the Hinds Junior College campus are required to have a campus permit sticker on the back bumper.
There will be a $1.00 fine if a student does not have his car registered with the Dean of Men, Dormitory boys are required to park behind Eastside and Central, Southside students in front of Southside.
Dormitory girls are to park behind Main and in front of Northside dormitories.
Day students will park on the drive in front of Eastside, Central, Shangri-La and Main dormitories.
There will be parking space in front of the men's gym except for reserved spaces.
Mr Benton, Dean of Men, asks that students do not park in front of the Administration and Auditorium buildings, since this space is reserved for visitors.
All parking space behind the grill is reserved for faculty and grill workers.
Benton said that violations will be doubled if not paid within 24 hours.
If the fine is not paid within 24 hours, the charge will be doubled each day thereafter for a total of ten days, including Saturday, Sunday, and holidays.
Day students should have B stickers on their cars and dormitory students should have C stickers.
NOTICE Elected as Freshmen cheerleaders this morning in chapel for the ’62-’63 session were Brenda Dixon, George Wilkerson, Joy Williams, and Shirley Morris.
The Freshman cheerleaders along with the sophomore cheerleaders will serve as the main cheering squad for the athletic season.
Homes For Faculty Personnel Will Be Finished Tomorrow While students work tomorrow, faculty members will be moving into their new homes across the street from the growing campus of Hinds.
These eight houses for faculty personnel, located in a new area specially developed for such homes, all have three bedrooms, two baths, a kitchen-den combination, and a double garage.
A park in the center of the area will soon be beautified, and curbed gutters added to the new street.
President McLendon, puts the approximate cost of this housing project at $$120,000.00.
Jack Treloar, Superintendent of the Farm and Physical Plant, says that the homes will be fully completed tomorrow.
Two duplex apartments are being built on Old Faculty) Circle and future plans are to build a fourplex for single teachers.
When the project is eventually completed, there will be around twenty faculty houses.
Those who will be inhabiting the eight new homes are the families of Dr.
James Sparkman, Bill Davis, Grady Sheffield, Ivan Rosamond, Fred Brooks, Howard Sessums, Wallace Wall, and Mrs.
The apartments vacated by these families will be completely renovated and made available to other staff members.
Students continue to enroll at Hinds each day, although the once massive lines of admission have diminished to a mere trickle.
The number of regular students totaled 1147 by Monday of this week, the most enrollees in the history of the college.
Only a few reserved rooms remain unclaimed, but those will be quickly filled by names from the top of the long waiting list of students now commuting by bus.
However, a new women’s dormitory is almost complete, and will house 42 girls after October 15.
Miss Herrin reported, but had to be turned down, because of lack of space.
Hinds, now in its 45th year, is the largest junior college in Mississippi.
Enrollment is 40 times as large as the first freshman class of 30 in 1922.
I Page 2 HINDSONIAN September 19, 1962 HINDS-IGHTS Eliminate Confusion Each year our college grows larger, and each year a slight bit more trouble is felt in the parking division.
Definite steps have been taken this week to eliminate confusion and difficulties arising from this situation.
An announcement in this edition of the Hindsonian should clarify the matter for all students.
A faculty committee has assigned specific parking positions for instructors and other members of the staff.
If you are a dormitory student, please leave your automobile in the restricted space designated for you.
The semi-circular front drive of the college has been made to carry smoothly the flow of one-way traffic only.
Parking spots have been marked off in portions of the drive for day students only.
The staff asks your cooperation in this matter, and if it is conducted well, most of the college’s traffic problems will be eliminated.
W Welcome New Faculty As of today, eleven new members have been appointed to the faculty for the 1962-63 session.
Stephenson, William W Griffin, William M Davis, Kent Prince, Rex Tatum, and Miss Annice Rae Jernigan.
W A Social Privilege Date nights are now available to Hinds Junior College students, but there are some restrictions.
In the first place, a “C” average must be maintained before a person is allowed'to participate.
This means that students must particularly pay attention to their school work and grades.
It also means that added incentive is provided scholastically and socially.
We all know that college is not only a time for work and study — many more areas of learning are made available during this period.
The habits, friends, and attitudes that we make this year and throughout our period of higher education will have a main bearing on the life that we lead three or four years from now.
Activities of this sort are possible only when the student body takes the right initiative and obeys the rules.
When some people get out of hand, they can ruin or eliminate an ideal situation.
Be on your best behavior and make your school proud of you during this coming year.
W Muscled Doctor I Hailed Best By j Coed /Followers I m mfrt LINDA BYRD § Man, woman, birth, death, infinity! — five words that Hinds coeds will not be permitted to hear for the next nine months.
Ben Casey is seen on Thursday nights from 9 'till 10 and girls' study hours are from 7:30 to 9:30.
Kildare with his low boyish voice reminds me of a blonde high school sophomore who doesn't know a needle from a sharpened pencil point.
To leave an intern to fill a prime television spot leads me to believe that the producers should visit Dr.
Vince Edwards who plays Casey and Dick Chamberlin who tries to play Kildare are as different as the characters they portray.
Hard hitting Edwards adds the muscular masculine touch that Kildare lacks.
Alas the muscles will be wasted as far as the Hinds girls are concerned.
LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS A mu eteiOAU PRESS ' -Highlights of Minds JOE WHITE Executive Editor BETTYE SIMMONS LINDA BYRD DWAYNE COX Associate Editor Associate Editor Business Manager JIM BONNEY —----Sports Editor CONTRIBUTING WRITERS ...-Wayvene McGrew, Dianne McClung, Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Ralph Hemphill, Vaughn Varnado, Joe Bonelli.
FACULTY ADVISOR -Kent Prince OTHER STAFF POSITIONS OPEN The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
Newspaper people will be most interested in the new television series, “Saints and Sinners“ which centers around this madening world of news called reporting.
Nick Adams plays the lead of the charming reporter who covers everything from murders to births.
John Larkin, the old Mike Karr of daytime drama, plays the demanding city editor.
Newspapermen will be glad to hear there will not be phrases such as, ""Hold the front page,"" and ""Stop the presses,"" used on this show.
Reporters will carry their press cards in their wallets instead of their hats and the liquor drinking image that most people have of reporters will be discredited.
Just how Nick Adams will handle a news story and how he will write a lead for a feature will be determined later.
From week to week I hope to give the students of Hinds a fairly complete resume of what’s going on entertainment-wise, and whether or not it’s worth seeing.
Now playing at the Paramount in Jackson, the picture stars Richard Beymer as Nick.
Beymer still bothers me with his unusual screen personality and his even more unusually flashy set of dentures.
It really hurts to see such a talented young woman so miscast and misdirected.
Several “cameo” roles are played by Fred Clark, James Dunne, and Dan Dailey, superb as a pathetically alcoholic vaudeville promoter.
Newman completely submerges his own personality and becomes the punch-drunk, half-insane, stooped fighter, evoking pity and admiration.
An interesting, enjoyable two hours-plus that proves, with a few exceptions, that the art of acting is not dead.
According to Fred L Brooks, speech instructor and drama coach, the play to be presented is “Mother Is A Freshman,” a three-act comedy.
President Kennedy and his adj visors seem to think otherwise, or | otherwise they are not thinking.
Even under so-called International Law we have the right to invade to protect our national sovereignty.
This invasion wouldn’t be necessary if our leaders had made the right decision at the Bay of Pigs.
More recently, we let them keep North Viet Nam and now they are taking Laos and South Viet Nam.
If the United States lets them keep Cuba, is there any reason to believe the communists will not acquire riotous Dominican Republic j and unstable Haiti, and repeat the cycle.
Conditions are ripe in South I America for an internal communist conquest, just as they were in China.
Castro has said that his ambition is to turn the Andes into another Sierra Maestra, which was his base of operations when he was taking over Cuba.
Khrushchev stated at the 22nd communist party conference in Moscow support of such undertakings, probably because they are less risky and less obvious.
President Kennedy has announced that this government will use force to stop any aggression on the part of Castro in this hemisphere.
What our leaders fail to see is that Castro does not need aggression to turn the Andies into another Sierra Maestra.
He is already doing it in Columbia by aiding long standing guerrila forces.
When the facts are stacked up against this administration’s foreign policy they are staggered and staggering in comparison.
We must remember because we cannot forget that Cuba is just a rug with which the communists are planning on using to pull the whole Western Hemisphere out from under us.
Created four years ago by a Millsaps student for the pure fun of it, Gort now appears, in college publications from Alaska to California, from Pennsylvania to Mississippi.
That unsuspecting Millsaps student who suddenly found himself a nationally syndicated cartoonist is an impressive young bachelor named Michael Kelly.
Gort at first appeared at irregular intervals ini the Millsaps Purple and White.
However, by popular demand and at the insistence of the Purple and White editor, Gort evolved into a weekly strip.
Born in Tupelo in 1933, Kelly moved to Jackson in 1941 and graduated from Central High in 1951.
Incidentally, that was a popular answer to many questions posed to Kelly.
Originally, he was called “Trog,"" from troglodyte, meaning cave-dweller.
Kelly's fondness for palindromes (words which read the same when read backwards or forwards) eventually led him to Gort-Trog spelled backward.
But as to Kelly’s inception of Gort and his continued ideas—no explanation.
The assortment of books lining the walls of Kelly’s Jackson apartment keynote the diversity of Gort.
The personality of Gort's creator is soon—at least partly—revealed as one reads the strip.
GORT—Cynical, dubious, iconoclastic, caustic, witty, perceptive— the central character in Kelly's cartoon carefully, completely controls all situations he confronts.
He has drawn since age seven, with only one week of official art training on record.
He has been with the television station for two years, drawing station advertising.
ONE-MAN SYNDICATE — Michael Kelly, creator of an ugly, inteL lectual troglodyte called ""Gort"", four years ago began the strip for fun.
Now the Mililsaps alumni still has fun, but shares his popular caveman with college newspapers throughout the nation.
TROYER SELECTED PREXY OF NEWMAN CLUB MONDAY IN YEAR'S FIRST MEETING The initial meeting of the Newman Club for Catholic students was held Monday night, September 17 to plan the year’s program.
Since none of the officers from last year are attending Hinds this session, Shelia Troyer, Vicksburg sophomore, was elected temporary president and election was scheduled for Monday, October 1.
Reminders will be posted on the announcement bulletin boards before meetings.
SPECIAL AFFAIR New Staffers Honored At Annual Reception In President’s Home The home of President and Mrs.
George M McLendon of Hinds Junior College was the setting for a reception Tuesday night from 7 till 9 honoring the college’s new faculty members.
Mr Bill Oakes, president of the Faculty Club and Mr Thomas Stricklin, vice-president of the club, met guests at the door and introduced them to President and Mrs.
Robert Mayo, Administrative Assistant. i Honorees in the receiving line were Dr.
James T Sparkman, Dean of Instruction; Miss Fay Marshall, Dean of Women.
Griffin, chemistry instructor; Mr William M Davis, biology professor; Kent Prince, public relations director and Mr Rex Tatum, piano instructor.
McLendon chose a black eyelet sheath for the occasion and accessoried it with strands of crystal beads.
She used the floral color scheme of yellow and gold to accent the coffee table and mantle in the living room.
Guests were directed into the dining room where refreshments were served by the light of petite silver hurricane candles.
Fall flowers of varying shades of gold adorned the buffet along with pale yellow tapers on each side of the arrangement.
Modernistic arrangements of bud roses decorated the right sun porch where Mrs.
Campus Plays Host To State Meetings During Past Summer Hinds never closes.
After being instructed in the procedure of operating state and local government by workshop participation, the boys organized a mock state government, divided into political parties and held elections.
A few weeks after the elections were held and the confetti swept away, the college doors welcomed the State All Stars.
Ten North and ten South basketball players plus 33 South football players invaded the campus.
Basketball players practiced daily in the gym with the North and South alternating in the use of the gym.
The South football team, winner of the All Star football game, was coached by Harrison Arnold of Booneville and George Haley of Lambert.
With the last football passed and the last touchdown scored, Hinds settled down to welcome the PTA safety chairmen from the local units.
Members attended lectures on traffic, home and water safety and were trained to return home and assist local officials in safety campaigns and in educating the general public in safety precautions.
Completing their training the PTA safety members made way for the Hinds County Farm Bureau.
Contests in speaking, talent, quartet singing and beauty were held with Hinds sophomore Kathy Kilby selected Miss Hinds County Farm Bureau and Ann Stephenson chosen winner of the talent contest.
You get MORE for your money here Cameras from the least expensive Brownies to the . . . finest the market offers Standard Photo MEXESEZiH Cameras Photo Supplies «*** ""Serving Mississippians over a third of a Century"" Page 4 HINDSGN1AN September 19, 1962 Luxuries In Menu And Facilitations Instigated In Grill Half finished improvements in the Eagle’s Nest met students as they began re-instigating grillology classes.
In answer to many requests, the grill will offer hot french fries this year, Mrs.
In the equipment department, shorts and shirts for girls’ physical j education classes are being sold for $2.75 and $2.60.
The band j Wednesday_ 7:154:00-5:00-9:30 and Hi-Steppers spent a few hours on the Gulf beaches while waiting f or I Thursday _ 7:154:00—5:00-9:30 the Perkinston football game. i Friday _ 7:153:30-5:00-8:00 _ ___ | Saturday _ 8:00-11:00 [Sunday3:005:00-8:00-9:00 CIRCLE K NOMINATES NEW MEMBERS; PLANS COMMITTEE PROJECTS Circle K Club met Thursday afternoon, September 13, at 4:45 in the cafeteria private dining room for a supper session.
After the meal, the group moved to the Faculty Conference room for a business session.
Also, twenty-two nominees for membership were selected, and the names sent for approval to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar.
Royd McPhail, president; Lynn Earnest, first vice-president; Joe White, second vice-president; Clyde Pullen, treasurer; Joe Roberts, reporter; and Vaughn Varnado, secretary.
Only eight members of the club and Hilda Bullock, Club sweetheart, returned from last year.
BROWN SIZES 6V2-12, A-B-C-D • BLACK M'RAES ★ DOWNTOWN * MEADOWBROOK * WESTLAND Raymond And Hinds.
The department will consist of three main rooms; a painting room, a drawing room and an exhibition and lecture room.
At the rear of the building, off the painting and drawing rooms, will be two patios separated by a green and enclosed by a brick and redwood fence.
ANOTHER YEAR, ANOTHER DOLLAR With today's entry I begin my ninth year of writing columns in your school newspaper for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes.
To be sure, the work would have gone more rapidly had the shovel been invented at that time, but, as we all know, the shovel was not invented until 1946 by Walter R Shovel of Cleveland, Ohio.
Before Mr Shovel’s discovery in 1946, all digging was done with sugar tongs—a method unquestionably dainty but hardly what one would call rapid.
There were, naturally, many efforts made to speed up digging before Mr Shovel’s breakthrough—notably an attempt in 1912 by the immortal Thomas Alva Edison to dig with the phonograph, but the only thing that happened was that he got his horn full of sand.
This so depressed Mr Edison that he fell into a fit of melancholy from which he did not emerge until two years later when his friend William Wordsworth, the eminent nature poet, cheered him up by imitating a duck for four and a half hours.
For nine years, I say, I have been writing this column for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes, and for nine years they have been paying me money.
Whether you love your work or hate it, our system absolutely requires that you be paid for it.
For example, I have a friend named Rex Glebe, a veterinarian by profession, who simply adores to worm dogs.
I mean you can call him up and say, “Hey, Rex, let’s go bowl a few lines,” or “Hey, Rex, let’s go flatten some pennies on the railroad tracks,” and he will always reply, “No, thanks.
I mean there is not one thing in the whole world you can name that Rex likes better than worming a dog.
But even so, Rex always sends a bill for worming your dog because in his wisdom he knows that to do otherwise would be to rend, possibly irreparably, the fabric of democracy.
I think Marlboro’s flavor represents the pinnacle of the tobacconist’s art.
I think Marlboro’s filter represents the pinnacle of the filter-maker’s art.
I think Marlboro is a pleasure and a treasure, and I fairly burst with pride that I have been chosen to speak for Marlboro on your campus.
And in these columns, while grappling with the crises that vex campus America, I will make occasional brief mention of Marlboro Cigarettes.
During this period it is not unlikely that Old Max will step on some toes—principally ours—but we think it’s all in fun and we hope you will too.
September 19, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 5 Faculty Members Pursue Interesting Avocations During Months Of Leisure By BETTYE SIMMONS While the students of Hinds gayly relate their summer experiences, the faculty members are chatting among themselves about their various avocations.
Editor Calls Staff Meeting To Discuss Eagle Assignments Anyone interested in joining the Eagle yearbook staff is asked by .editor Belva Watkins to meet in the Public Relations Office Thursday at 3:00.
Already appointed is faculty editor, Suzanne Slay of Raymond, and associate editors, Bettye Simmons of Brooklyn, and Joe White of Mendenhall.
They spent some time in Hot Springs, Arkansas, then on through the Ozarks.
Thomas Stricklin did advanced work in history at Mississippi State for six weeks.
Marvin Riggs took a general tour of the West, with stops in Kansas City, Denver, and Seattle for the World’s Fair.
IRC TO CHOOSE NEW OFFICERS WEDNESDAY The International Relations Club will hold the first of its regular Wednesday night meetings tonight, September 19.
Offices of the vicepresident, secretary-treasurer, and reporter will be filled.
IRC will meet regularly on Wednesday at 7:30m. in room 12 in the Academic Building.
All members are urged to attend, and all freshmen interested in world affairs are invited.
Two-Bit Haircuts Still Obtainable In Barbering Lab Haircuts, shaves and shampoos at Hinds only cost twenty-five cents.
This is possible through the School of Barbering located on campus, at which students prepare for full time barbering.
The shop is open for business every week day, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 until 3:30.
Barbering students complete a nine month course using up to date equipment.
JOHN’S GROCERY AND CAFE One mile from Raymond on Bolton Road Come eat with us at JOHN’S Miss Hilda Ree Davis studied this summer at Memphis State.
She did advanced work in Spanish, and took a refresher course in French.
After a two week workshop at Ole Miss, he headed west, visiting in Albuquerque, Dallas, Amarillo, and Oklahoma City.
Miss Susan Brown ""baby sat for 3 delightful girls, ages 10, 11, and 12, while their parents went to Europe.
Herring family spent one week on the coast while their Raymond home was being painted.
James Sansing completed his Master's in Education at Mississippi State and worked on a nearly completed Master's in Economics.
Margaret Kimball, went to Chicago for a meeting of the American Association of Junior Colleges.
Kimball also visited Atlanta, Southern Pines, Williamsburg, Charleston, and Atlantic City with the Hi-Steppers and band.
Nell Picketf also went to school, taking secretarial work relating to English term papers and legal documents.
INTERSTATE PAIR — Last week the talk of the Hinds Junior College campus was the lovely addition of a former Miss North Carolina, Miss Joan Melton, standing right.
Now a further attraction comes in the form of Miss Annice Rae Jernigan, left, past Miss Mississippi.
Miss Melton instructs music theory and Miss Jernigan acts as secretary to the dean of instruction.
This novel, though theoretically unable to be called a novel, tells of Maugham’s acquaintance with a young semi-mystical man who finds himself stagnating in an affluent Chicago society.
I say stagnating, for though he had moved In this rich and supposedly highly cultured society in earlier years, he later realized that the society itself was merely a ""gilded cage"" for him.
With this realization he abandon"" ed his society, home, and fiance and 'journeyed to Europe to look for something which he could not express or identify but believed to be valid in his life.
Though Maugham pictures this character in a European underworld of squalor and dinginess, still he reveals him as being beautiful — a most delicate and sensitive being who seems to possess a feline j gentleness.
Guitar Shop Westside Circle Across Robinson from Westland Plaza PHONE FL 4-1237 BAND REPAIR SERVICE FREE ESTIMATES GUITAR LESSONS EPIPHONE, FENDER GIBSON GUITARS HOLTON BAND INSTRUMENTS ALL BAND INSTRUMENT ACCESSORIES for all work on band instruments.
The character which I am referring to will come as no surprise to modern readers, for he seems to be quite prevalent in our increasingly stodgy society.
Maugham does a beautiful job of making the reader repulsed at this character by revealing this personage’s view that man is invalid unless he is wrapped and ribboned in aristocracy and wealth.
But whatever ambivalent feelings the reader might have toward the characters are likely to be soothed by Maugham’s British-American style.
Maugham created this rather interesting effect when he contrived to Americanize his characters.
From the surface they appear entirely American, but a closer look at their descriptions, figures of speech, and general calmness in nature suggested the British strain.
This book includes just about every kind of human emotion and experience, and if Faulkner is right in saying that the purpose of the writer is to lift up the heart of man, then Maugham was very successful with this novel.
Page 6 H1NDS0NIAN September 19, 1962 Hinds Eagl es Ready For Bulldog Invasion EAGLES ROLL — Hinds end, Jerry Clark, sweeps around the left side of the line for a gain in the third quarter of last Saturday's game at Perkinston.
Bulldog halfback Bryan Rasco, center, and Guard Harvey Bond pulled the swift Eagle ball carrier down after he gained seven yards.
The Eagles got off to a bad start with their first play of the game being called back on an illegal procedure penalty.
After three downs, they kicked and Perk took control for the remainder of the game.
Quarterback Teddy Roberts swept from the Eagle 30 to the three-yard line to set up the touchdown on a quarterback sneak on the next play.
On the kick-off the ball touched an Eagle player and was covered by swift Perkinston halfback Wayne Ray on the Hinds 25.
The Eagle defense held, however, and four plays later the scoring threat was removed with the Eagles taking over on th~ir own 18 # The Eagle offense proved no match for the Bulldogs and they were forced to punt.
In the second quarter Henry Letort ran across from the eight yard line, and just before the half ended, the Bulldogs drove 43 yards in four plays capped by a scoring quarterback sneak by Roberts.
Early in the second half the Eagles started an offensive attack that took them from their own 20 deep into Perkinston territory.
Quarterback Mike Vincent tossed several ground gaining passes to end Richard Stacy and halfback Mike Greer before a 25-yiard payoff pitch to Greer put the Eagles back in the game.
In the fourth quarter the Eagles drove to the Bulldog 10 before halfback Phil Carriere intercepted a pass.
Five minutes had elapsed in the final period before the Bulldogs scored again.
Right halfback Bryan Rasco grabbed a 40-yard pass from Roberts in the end zone.
Holmes and Jones, tied for first i the pre-season poll of coaches, ave dropped low in this weeks tandings after two games each, he four teams now tied for first 'ere expected to hold the cellar ositions.
Pearl River, a team undefeated *r 22 consecutive games and the onference champion for the past vo years suffered a 6-0 beating t the hands of Southwestern last aturday.
Copiah-Lincoln dropped Jones for its second loss of the season 13-0 pushing the Bobcats to the bottom of the list.
This week Northwest will travel to Perkinston and Itawamba will meet Pearl River.
In other games East Central goes to Jones and Copiah Lincoln and East Mississippi will meet with both teams holding perfect records.
Hinds will host Holmes and Southwest will travel to Mississippi Delta Thursday.
Three plays later Halfback Roy Jones took a hand-off and walked across for another six points.
Hinds famed Eagle Band and HiSteppers entertained the near capacity crowd in a pre-game show and the Perkinston Perk-etts performed during halftime.
Offensive halfback Butch Greer will fill in at defensive end when needed.
Benton, on the injured list with a hurt thumb, has been unable to play his usual offensive position since his transfer from Ole Miss two weeks ago.
After losing to Perkinston in a season opener 18-6, the Bulldogs won last Thursday 7-6 against Northwest Hinds tied Northwest 6-6 and was dropped by Perkinston 42-6.
The Bulldogs will be a slight favorite in the game, using the strong Holmes line to give quarterback Charles Myers time To fire his passes.
The two touchdowns scored thus far have been on aerial plays from Myers to end Johnny Vaughn.
Quarterback Mike Vincent does the throwing with Mike Greer, Richard Stacy, Ken Johnson and Jim and Jerry Clark potential targets.
In addition to Myers and Vaughn, Holmes Head Coach Billy Mustin is fielding Jimmy Whittemore at end, Clinton and Mike Tompkins at tackle, Alan Wallace and Doug Peterson at guard with Jimmy Phillips at offensive center.
Charles McClusky is the starting fullback with the additional backfield men remaining to be picked.
Halftime entertainment will be provided by the Hinds Hi-Steppers and Eagle Band under the direction of Jimmy Morris and Mrs.
Perkinston 2 0 0 60 12 1.000 Co-Lin 2 0 0 40 6 1.000 Itawamba 2 0 0 41 15 1.000 E Miss.
SoHfed under oufttOrffy of The Coca-Cola Company by JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI PERSIAN IMPORT SPEAKS Page 3 um -Highlights of Hinds BALL TEAM GOES BEAR HUNTING Page 6 VOLUME 29—NUMBER 3 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 1962 New IBM Data Course Offered In Curriculum Hinds business department will add to its regular curriculum a course in IBM Data Processing.
The course, offered to students in both the day and evening class divisions, will be worth three semester hours credit.
Included In the course will be basic machine operation and functional operational principles.
Hinds is paying forty per cent of the cost of the machines, while IBM is paying the remaining sixty per cent.
James Sparkman, in announcing the new course, stated, “Ordinarily, only customers are trained by IBM personnel.
The complete course, when taken through a private agency, costs tremendously.
Political Air Covers Campus Scene Nominees Selected For Soph Offices In Class Meeting The many pictorial banners and posters covering nearly every available wall space on campus create ( a political atmosphere greater than any other of the coming year.
Nominations for sophomore class officers were made Mon'day at 2-A period during the initial class meeting, beginning another season of campus political activities.
Cooley, Jackson, Mike Oliver, Selma, Alabama, George Tannous, Vicksburg, and George Weeks, Jackson.
Nominated for vice-president are Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, Boyd McPhail, Jackson, and Carl Henry Sullivan, Jackson.
They are bottom row from the left, Shirley Morris, Brenda Dixon, Joy Williams;-top row, Karen McBride, George Wiltkerson, and Patsy Roberts.
Ten Classes Offered In Night Division To Adults; Enrollment Now Numbers 75 Resumption of Hinds’ Evening Division resulted in ten adult classes which will meet once each REPRESENT KENTUCKY — The Hinds Hi-Steppers and Eagle Band will represent Kentucky at Memorial Stadium Saturday when Kentucky meets Ole Miss.
The troupes were invited by Kentucky when it became evident that their band could not make the trip.
Performing in the pregame show will be Hi-Steppers top from left Roxie Noblin, Patty Hebler, second row, Sandra Jabour, Martha Knight and Gloria Shirley. week, Dean of Instruction Dr.
Classes, which average ten students each, range over basic science, humanities, and improvement courses.
Educational backgrounds of students vary from high school graduates to holders of master’s degrees.
Special plans are being made to include a course in IBM data processing next semester.
Unless new classes materialize, schedule is Monday, basic electronics and freshman English; Tuesday, principals of accounting and survey of physical science; Wednesday, astronomy and human development; Thursday, reading and speech fundamentals; and Friday, office machines and English literature.
For the office of treasurer, Joy Ferguson, Utica, Hilda Bullock, Jackson, and Steve Erwin, Natchez, were nominated.
Patsy Roberts, Jackson, and Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, are the nominees for secretary.
Miss Joan Melton, music theory instructor, was chosen sponsor of the class.
Campaign speeches will be made Wednesday during the regular assembly period, and the first primary election will be held the following Thursday, October 1.
All nominees will meet with Beemon during the 2-A period Monday for a closed discussion concerning freshman day.
Jackson Music Association Begins Sale Of Seasonal Concert Tickets The Jackson Music Association has announced concerts to be presented this season.
Trips from the college will be made again to each of the concerts, free of charge to the students.
A center has been set up in the music building, where tickets are available.
The concert schedule consists of The Royal Scots Greys and Argyll Sutherland Highlanders, a Scottish Bagpipe group, on October 26; Ivan Davis, who is ""in the forefront of America's pianists,"" on December 4.
Also, the Canadian Ballet on January 15; “the reigning Rigoletto of the generation,” Robert Merrill, baritone, on February 6; and the Detroit Symphony, Werner Torkanowsky conducting, on February 19.
Reynolds Tobacco Company of Winston-Salem, N C., to give the college these recreational materials.
The miniature megaphones will be used by the cheering section at the next football game.
The playing cards were given to Mr Benton, and to Miss Fay Marshall, dean of women.
Dormitory students may check out cards through either of these persons at any time they desire.
All the while you are supposedly a true-blue citizen of the United States of America, one small, unnoticed blunder on your part is revealing to all your inconsiderate nature.
You must know that as each day rises our country’s flag should be raised on campus.
But as each day begins, a tall, undraped flagpole is visible in front of the old auditorium building.
Students walk past all during the day, unmindful of a big error on their part.
Perhaps a few notice, but they cast eyes downward when nearing the spot.
Last year someone raised a furor when it was discovered that an old flag had just been tucked away in a corner on campus instead of being destroyed in a proper flag burning ceremony.
Few colleges have as many active clubs and organizations as does Hinds Junior College.
I propose that one of these clubs, in a spirit of respect, select a person or a group of persons to conduct a flag raising ceremony each day.
W Do It Yourself You are now a college student, and no one is going to make you do anything.
People now presume that you are an adult, and expect you to act as such.
You won’t hear childish sermons about your behavior here at Hinds Junior College.
Instead, someone might sit and talk with you seriously about different phases of your life and schoolwork.
That interested person could be a teacher, administrative officer or just a friend.
Most of the time it will be one of your classmates, perhaps wishing to strengthen himself and his character by talking with someone else who lives his sort of life.
Buses run to the church of your choice, so that you may attend if you desire to do so.
No, I’ll admit it is not required, but didn’t you go to church with your parents when you lived at home.
An adult is a person who is in control of himself at all times, or tries to be.
I’m not like the fictional cleaning woman in Jackson’s Little Theatre production of ""Critic's Choice"" who spouts these words to criticize a play.
Like the cleaning woman, I went to see a play last night but unlike her, I loved my play.
Live drama has something that movies lack— Life and the Critic's Choice is full of life.
Dealing with the troubles that befall a drama critic whose wife writes a terrible playi, the Little Theatre’s production is a light and breezy one.
Mr Levin’s quotes from the play are well worth space in anyone’s scrapbook.
A self-centered director who dislikes Ballentine’s son has this to say, “He’s a cute kid.
One of the funniest scenes came when Hagen Thompson, under the influence of alcohol, tells about the first play he reviewed.
The play, The Wild Duck laid an egg and for the opening line of the review he wrote, “If this is The Wild Duck, I’ll take the vegetable plate.
The gas is contained in four heavy tanks and fastened to the interior of the barge lying on the floor of the Mississippi River.
In order for the deadly fumes to be released in the river, some of the valves leading to the four tanks would have to be damaged.
A recent low in the water level has opened a question of the tanks being hit by passing vessels.
A slight leakage in the tanks would cause Hydrochloric acid to form when the gas and water combine.
This would cause corrosion of the tanks and eventual expulsion of the entire load of gas.
The gas being heavier than air would hang in the atmosphere posing a deadly problem for a long time to come.
The actual lifting of the barge would take from 30 to 60 days of careful exacting engineering.
A single unpredicted tide in the river could bring about a disastrous crack in the comparatively fragile tanks.
Care must be taken that the tanks remain firmly lashed to the barges and that the barges do not attempt any aquanautical acrobatics.
Safety measures are being taken in the form of aid from most state agencies for public safety.
Robert L Crook, Civil Defense Director, has asked the military for 100,000 gas masks in case of emergency.
The central coordinating agency for the emergency is the Mississippi Civil Defense Council.
It will be working closely with the Corps of Engineers, Public Health Service, American Red Cross, Public Welfare Department, National Civil Defense, Highway Patrol, Highway Department, and National Guard. -Highlights of Hinds JOE WHITE Executive Editor BETTYE SIMMONS LINDA BYRD DWAYNE COX Associate Editor Associate Editor Business Manager SPORTS EDITOR_Jim Bonney EXCHANGE EDITOR _ Albert Dahduh CONTRIBUTING WRITERS _Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Ralph Hemphill, Vaughn Varnado, Henri Lou Coleman.
CLOSE TIES NEEDED European Unity Soon To Be Realized By RALPH HEMPHILL One Europe, united, under God, with liberty and justice for all.
The long sought for united states of Europe, today is not a dream, it is an awakening reality.
The idea was conceived in this century by Jean Monnet, an energetic, farsighter French economist.
To make his idea practical, he realized that Europe must first be united economically before she can be united politically.
He sold his ideas to some of the leaders of Europe who formed the Common Market.
In essence, it is a trade agreement among the member nations to gradually eliminate all internal tariffs between them, and, at the same time, by adjusting their external tariffs, bring about one common external tariff.
The original members of the I Common Market were West Ger( many, France, Italy, Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxemburg.
Since j then, however, because of its suc, then, Great Britain, Norway, SwedI en, Austria, Denmark, and Greece have applied membership.
This concept of no internal tariffs accompanied by a common external tariff is very important.
It was one of the major reasons that United States industry grew so rapidly and so big.
We do not have any internal tariffs that restrict trade between the states.
This has caused larger mar kets, and larger markets breed bigger business, while, at the sametime, our industry has been protected by one external tariff.
Khrushchev would then be confronted with two united states, instead of one.
Today, for example, West Germany’s goods are tariffed in France just as American goods.
When the Common Market is completed, West German’s goods will be much cheaper in France than ours, because West Germany’s goods will not be subject to tariff and America’s kill Possibly the greatest significance of the Common Market to America in the future will be in the line of foreign policy.
In the past, their foreign policy has not been ""exactly"" the same as ours.
In the future, there is a danger of the west being split as the Common Market countries begin to merge politically.
In a crisis like Berlin, this could play right into the Communists hands.
In summary, after the facts are weighed, the Common Market is both an opportunity and an over caste.
The only rational answer seems to lie in the area of close cooperation, right from the start, between these two industrial giants of the world.
If our recent past relations are any judge for the future, close co-operation should be highly possible.
September 26, 1962 HINDS0N1AN Page 3 Pensive Persian Importee Has Dreams Of Return To Homeland As Engineer By LINDA BYRD There are not too many girls who aspire to be electrical engineers, but a seventeen-year-old bolt of Persian electricity called Shahla Azordegan does.
A resident of the United States a little over a month, Shahla is beginning her college education at Hinds in hopes of one day returning to her homeland of Persia as a qualified engineer.
With five years each of Chemistry, Algebra and physics behind her, plus three years of Geometry, there is little doubt as to whether Shahla wiill succeed in engineering or any other field.
Since Persia doesn’t believe in co-educational schools, Shahla attended a girls’ school for her twelve years of schooling while her only brother, who is twelve, attended a nearby boys’ school.
Quickly becoming Americanized, she has even last slx consisting of high school. seen an Elvis movie.
WHILE HINDS WATCHES State Colleges Claim Recognition For New Edifices, Title-Holders By LYMAN MOORE The Hircdsonian carries on an extensive exchange program with other Mississippi college publications.
Jones Junior College at Ellisville once again topped the enrollment of second-place Hinds.
According to the TOM-TOM, college newspaper for East Central Junior College at Decatur, Dr.
Montgomery speaks and reads seven languages, including Portuguese, Spanish, French, Persian, Italian and German.
Also of note from the Southern campus — Tommy Nance, former Hinds student from Jackson, moved into his third quarter of editing the Student Printz.
The MISSISSIPPI COLLEGIAN, Mississippi College paper, reports the addition of a new modern male dormitory, Whittington Hall.
A $100,000 renovation of the Old Chapel building has been, completed also.
The building served as both a hospital and stable for Grant's horses during the Civil War.
Miss Carroll was crowned Miss Mississippi in August, and was a finalist in the Miss America Pageant.
Mississippi State College for Women claims ten young women who were candidates in the Miss Mississippi pageant in Vicksburg this summer.
Meanwhile, Hinds has exceeded last year’s record-breaking enrollment; appointed a new dean of instruction; completed a $157,784 science annex; developed a housing project at an approximate cost of $120,000; and added a former Miss Mississippi and Miss North Carolina to the staff.
Shahla's name means ""sad beautiful eyes"" and they are beautiful but not sad by any means.
In fact her laughing green eyes and dark hair are the first things noticed about the future engineer.
They especially sparkle when she speaks of her little seventeenmonth-old cousin in Jackson.
Albert Azordegan, a Jackson neuro-surgeon, whom Shahla is living with while she attends Hinds.
When asked about American television, the Persian freshman’s answer was very Americanized.
She was also saddened when she learned that her favorite movie star, Ava Gardner, has ceased making American movies.
One thing that Shahla Azordegan always does and that is speak her mind.
County Bureau Meets At Hinds The Hinds County Farm Bureau held its monthly meeting in the Hinds cafeteria last Monday.
Jack j Treloar, superintendent of farm and j physical plant, is president of the group.
Resolutions to be presented before the membership at the annual Harvest Supper in October were the main topic for discussion.
Barnett’s stand in the present Mississippi education situation, and wrote him a letter to this effect.
Thomas Whitfield, from the Agriculture Stabilization Commission, discussed the effects of the drought on Hinds county farmers.
Hinds county will host the Mississippi Farm Bureau West Central District contest, which includes an area of 16 counties.
Buy from us with Confidence As a registered PHOTOGRAPHIC DEALER we service, repair, and teach you the proper use of the photographic equipment we sell.
Cameras from the least expensive Brownies to the finest the market offers.
Freshman Students Hear Instructions On Library Usage As a part of the Freshman English course at Hinds, lectures began Thursday, September 20, on general usage of the library and its components.
Students will be tested at the end of the course, and the grade will be part of their regular English course grade.
A change from last year’s schedule makes available only one class in the library for each group.
Howed for Hinds students will be posted ever, it will take approximately two on the “telephone board.” weeks to complete the project.
Margaret Kimball, secretary to the president, has announced that all telephone calls receivThe board is located outside the president’s office.
She emphasized that it is important for students to notice the board when passing so that they can get their calls.
Also, if students see a friend’s call, they should advise him of the message.
Last year, when the library was just completed, each class had a three day instruction course followed by a comprehensive test.
The material is made more compact this year, and a complete, yet brief, program of library usage is taught.
Hurley, publishers of the 1962 Eagle, college yearbook, sponsor the workshop annually.
Those attending the two-day affair were Eagle editor Belva Watkins, Vicksburg; associate editors Joe White, Mendenhall, Bettye Simmons, Brooklyn; and photographer Robert Pickenpaugh, Jackson.
Kent Prince, public relations director and sponsor of the Eagle, also made the trip.
The conference, which is designed IN NEW LABS — Two Vicksburg students, Duane McClurg and Vicky Hazzlerigg, take advantage of Hinds expanded facilities in the laboratory sciences.
Both freshmen are studying introductory botany, and thus qualify to use new equipment in refurnished labs The new science annex adjacent to these reconditioned labs is as equally well furnished, and will be in operation later this semester.
Ralph Hemphill, Jackson sophomore, stated, “The legislature will probably enlarge the senate like the present plan calls for.
It is the same as taking surplus wheat out of one silo and putting it into another.
A visitor to the campus said, ""I'll tell you what they had better do— IRC Fills Vacant They had better do something quick.
Certainly there is diversity of opinion ranging from one house to two houses to four houses.
One lady By BETTYE SIMMONS Governor Ross Barnett recently called a special session of the Mississippi legislature to discuss reapportionment.
Since opening day on September 18, other state matters have divided attention, but the senate has had time to reject the proposed bill whereby the senate would have 82 members and the house 146.
We asked several people on our campus for their opinion as to what the legislature will do, and what then should do.
Jim Toombs, Jackson freshman, answered, ""I believe they wiM wait until they are forced into action.
Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, said, “I think the legislature will pass something, but I don’t think it will be a full-fledged change.
Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore, said, “The legislature probably won’t do anything.
They should go on and redistribute seats according to the population now.
James Sparkman, dean of inGeorge Shumaker, Darrel Slack, struction, replied, “I’ve been out of Marianne Strube, and Peggy White. suggested that there should be two houses for the urban areas and two houses for the rural areas.
Personally, I think the matter should be placed in the hands of an outside committee of Mississippians.
We can only await the outcome T Phi Thetas Invite 1 7 New Members Today In Assembly Students who have attained the standards required for Phi Theta Kappa membership were announced today in chapel.
Dorothy Dianne Breakfield, Rebecca Cooper, Shelia Corbin, Olga Sue Deaton, Joy Ferguson, Ralph Hemphill, Mathew Bowen Johnson, Rebecca Massey.
Also, Merrilym Mitchell, Linda Gail Murray, Dianne McClung, state for several years, but I definitely think we need reapportionment.
Jack Treloar, superintendent of the farm and physical plant, said, ""I think the legislature will have a fiarge senate — one from each county — with the house on a population basis.
And I would favor that the real power continue to belong to the conservaPhi Theta Kappa is the national honorary society for junior college students.
Jimmy Chandler was elected vice president; Steve Cannon was chos| en reporter, and Dawn McNeil was elected secretary-treasurer.
President Ralph Hemphill appointed a committee to make arrangements for a dance in the recreational hall.
Serving on the committee are Dawn McNeil, Leroy Stockdale, Harry Jackson, and Jeffrey Boler.
Tonight IRC will discuss the top ten trouble spots of the world —Cuba, Congo, United Nations, Algeria, India, China, Moscow, Berlin, and the Middle East.
President Hemphill urges all members to attend, and opens the club to all persons interested in international affairs.
The meeting will be held in room 12 of the Academic Building at 7:00m. tonight, and thereafter every other Wednesday night.
RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI Invitation To New Circle K Inductees Offered At Meeting Circle K met Monday, September 24, in the administration building at 7:30, to elect new members.
Easterwood, Steve Erwin, John Fitzgerald, Ralph Hemphill, Johnny Hines, David Jenkins, David Jones, Larry Lauderdale, Marcelle McLendon, and Bill White.
This brings the club membership to twenty-five, if all those selected choose to enter actively.
The next item of business was the decision by the club to sell hot dogs and coffee at all future home football games, as well as the usual concessions.
Last on the agenda was distribution of literature sent to the club by Circle K International.
This literature included information about Circle K for the new members, monthly reports, and various money raising projects the club could undertake for the year.
Next regular meeting of the Circle K is Thursday, October 24 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria.
At this time all new members will be introduced. to aid students in planning yearbooks, began with a general assembly in the Hotel Camden at 1:30 m.
A series of four group sessions taught by outstanding yearbook consultants were conducted throughout Saturday.
Layout and content was instructed by Ernest Rubak of Chicago, and Leroy Brock of Camden.
States represented included Louisiana, Texas, Missouri, Tennessee, Arkansas and Mississippi.
Patsy Roberts, head cheerleader, and Karen McBride, remain from last year.
Robbie Dukes, sponsor of the lplighters’ Club, organization for home economics majors, reports that eleven home economics majors have returned this year.
Club members are largely composed of students enrolled in home economics, but anyone interested is invited to attend.
PHI BETA LAMBDA Phi Beta Lambda, organization for members of business courses, plans a Coke party Friday at 2-A period, in room 6 of the Academic Building.
Walter Bishop, president, encourages all interested students enrolled in a business course, either past or f present, to attend.
Purposes of the club will be dis| cussed at the meeting, and plans receive a WAA pin at the end of will be made for a later election for the year.
WAA meets each Tuesday and WAA A round robin volleyball tournament will begin next Tuesday, October 2, at 6:15 in the girls’ gym for all WAA members.
Volleyball captains are Jane O’Neal, Garry Sanford, Patsy Roberts, and Francess Pickett.
Contestants will be permitted to sign up for participation until Friday of this week.
Freshman girls or new members in WAA must earn 50 points in order to receive a Hinds letter.
Father Pendergrast will be here for the regular meeting next Monday, October 1.
This will be an organizational meeting, at which regular officers will be elected and the agenda for future meetings will be planned. treasurer and reporter.
CHEERLEADERS Four freshmen were chosen to lead cheering Eagle fans throughout the remainder of the year in last week’s special election.
Joy Williams, an 18 year-old brunette from Forest Hill, plans to major in home economics.
Shirley Morris, a 17 year-old Jackson Central graduate, is the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Brenda Dixon, also from Jackson Central, plans to major in elementary education.The 18 yearold student is the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Polly Rabalais, sponsor, also serves as girls’ physical education instructor for the college.
September 26, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 5 lillil ■v LENDONPLAYERS Bill White, president of the Lendon Players announces that an organizational meeting of the group will be held Thursday night at 7:30 in the speech class room.
Officers to be elected then are vice-president and * secretary-treasurer.
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Will be picked up in each dormitory every MONDAY and THURSDAY NIGHTS Between 7:15-7:30 Have your clothes cleaned where ALL work is GUARANTEED All clothes will be picked up and Delivered In THE LOBBY OF EACH DORM Laundry & Cleaners PLAY CAST Rehearsals for the fall production of “Mother Is a Freshman,” are underway this week, following an announcement of the cast by Mr Fred Brooks, sponsor of the Lendon Players.
Selected for parts in this year’s theatrical venture were Warren Nybo, Robert Everet, Paula Jo Hopson, Bill Forrester, Peggy Smallwood, Diane Abernathy, Sanna Forston and Marie Dollar.
Dramatized by Christopher Sergei from the story by Raphael David Blau, the play was successfully made into a motion picture a few years ago and starred Loretta Young.
Hinds production of “Mother Is a Freshman” will be presented November 1, at 8:00 in the college auditorium.
I/;..,; AESTHETICALLY PLEASING — Art major Lynda Berry pauses against the sky in a natural work of art.
Lynda, a 17-year old Jackson freshman, is this week's Hinds Honey — artisically obvious, evidently aesthetic.
Student Bus Trip To Summit Contest Planned By School Student busses will run to the ball game Thursday night at Summit, when Hinds plays Southwest Junior College.
As of two o’clock today, seventy persons had signed the list in the foyer of President McLendon’s office.
Other uncounted lists are placed in dormitories and the day students’ lounge.
According to President McLendon, a special supper will be served at 4:30 tomorrow evening to facilitate the persons making the trip.
Organized in 1955, the band was originally little more than a chunk of the marching band transplanted and playing pep songs.
Gradually it grew to combo size, type music when they perform at hotels, banand performance depending on perquets, conventions, and other spej sonnel.
But between engagements, it is an outlet for jazz hun-, commented during the first rehearsal of the Hinds Stage Band Tuesday night.
The 15-piece big band accompanies a select group of Hi-Steppers got together and organized the big band. gry musicians who like to swing.
Scheduled for later this semester is a jazz concert, director Jim Morris announced.
First public performance with sterile, the Hi-Steppers is on October 27 at ing the White House Hotel in Biloxi, where they will entertain the Mississippi State Poultry Association convention.
Howard Quinn, lead alto; Libby Smith, alto; Jerry Cogdell and Jimmy Goodwill, tenors; and Conrad Dove, bari.
Four trumpets, Mike Jones lead; Bill Brister, James Stokes, and Wayne McIntyre.
String bass, Bobby McCool, and drums, John Tompkins, lead, and Bill Dunlap.
Pursuing the big band sound, the group blows mairtly Bob Siebert charts.
Siebert, famous for his work with the Stan Kenton workshops, scores Kenton-like sounds in varying degrees of complexity.
Headliners in the repertoire are Following the pattern of the big groups such as Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Kenton, they purchased big sound dance band scores, but found them mostly stereotyped and unedifyAccidentally last year they happened on the swinging scores.
A post card offering free trombonerhythm sets came from Siebert’s company.
They tried it (“anything that’s free, man”) found it a “real swinger” and starting stocking up on Seibert charts for the big band.
Plans for the coming season indicate several public appearances —both with and without the HiSteppers.
Cloth samples are being tested so that blazers can be tailored in time for the first performance.
Rowan was highly complimentary when he dropped by the rehearsal yesterday, and director Morris can make nothing but good sounds about what is ahead.
Although the Eagles scored the initial and final touchdowns of the game, they couldn't get up quite enough energy ,to fill out the middle.
Holmes advanced to sixth place in state ranking with the win over Hinds.
Tracks Lead To Summit Woods; Hinds Hunters Hot On Trail By JIM BONNEY A special permit to hunt Bear in Summit, Thursday has been issued to Coach Joe Renfroe and his Hinds Eagle grid squad.
Hunting permit in hand the Eagle party, complete with Hi-Steppers and Band, is set to journey through the wilds of southern Mississippi forests to Southwest Junior College.
In a season opener three weeks ago a tribe of Itawamba Indians trapped one 14-0.
The next week, however, a pack of Wildcats from the Pearl River swamps got hum gry and went picking a fight in the Summit woods.
Undefeated in 22 scraps, the Cats took on more than they could handle and went away licking their wounds from a 6-0 defeat.
Reports from Mississippi Delta hunters last week-end stated the Bears were more plentiful and easier-to handle.
Renfroe has put his squad through fast paced drills this week working mainly on defense.
Three changes in the line-up have been announced putting Ken Johnson in as slotback and Dan Magee going to fullback from halfback.
Joe Patterson will fill the vacated halfback post moving from fullback.
Jimmy Dukes and John Stanley will alternate at fullback with PatOnly two teams remain undefeated after three weeks of fast paced action in the junior college grid circuit.
Perkinston and Copiah-Lincoln are tied for the league's top spot with a record of three wins each.
More defensive changes may be}; announced prior to game time ac-| cording to the coaching staff.
In past hunting seasons the Eagles have taken Bear meat on 14 trips and licked wounds seven times.
Hinds will travel to Summit for a| meeting with Southwest Thursday while Holmes hosts Mississippi Delf ta at Goodman.
The Eagles started with a bang in the first quarter as Eagle Tackle Oscar Teasleyt picked up a stray fumble on the Bulldog 31-yard line and set the stage for the initial goal.
Seconds before the first period ended the Holmes crew turned on their driving machine.
Quarterback Charles Myers opened with a 29Stacy took a 20-yard pass from Thus far this season the rampaging Bears have scored 20 points with their opponents gathering 55.
Copiah-Lincoln and East Mississippi tangled, with each having a Head Coach Horace Williams has perfect record.
Visiting Co-Lin manfive experienced members back Vincent before being downed on the from last year, seven.
Fullback Mike Rebold , Halfbacks Preston Jones and WalTwo minutes into the final period ter Beesley will provide the the Holmes squad took control again sophomore running power, and pushed Fullback Ralph Walker j Center Billy Joe Hurst and across for a score.
Patterson’s kick Tackle Bob Jackson are the was good. ; front wall returnees.
Minutes later the driving machine j 0 pen season will be put on Johnof the visitors took the ball from n y McGuffie, a freshman quartertheir own 25-yard line to the Eagle back who throws pay-off pitches and six.
Hinds pushed from its own 45-yard inston will meet in a battle of giants) at Popularville and Northwest goes; to Fulton to tackle the Itawamba; Indians. aged to hold the title slot on a one point margin as the game ended 1514, _ , it"" 1 Copiah-Lincoln Itawamba and East Mississippi p er kinston dropped ther perfect records over the weekend putting them in a four way race for second.
Halfback Joe One minute and 45 seconds after Patterson took a 20-yard pass from the ball was shifted, Myers pitched to End Johnny Vaughn on the one yard line where he was tackled by Butch Greer.
Myers kept the ball on the next play rolling off right tackle for the touchdown.
The Eagles staged a desperate attempt to control the ball on. offense before punting to the visitors.
Putting their passing ability to full use, the Bulldogs once again started their march toward the posts.
My^ers passed 13-yards to Halfback Keith Morris in the end zone for the score.
Holmes’ third score of the night came after Fullback Charles MeCluskey intercepted a pass on the Eagle 36.
The kick by Peterson was Vincent and was followed in the act by End Jimmy Clark who dashed to the two.
Total.----373 Passes Attempted 17 Passes Completed 9 Passes Intercepted „ 0 Penalties6 Yds.
Hinds tried to even the score in the third period but the strong Bulldog line held it to a single touchdown.
This week the Eagles will face Southwest Junior College at Summit in an effort to regain solid standing in the conference.
Concentrated practice went into full swing this week as Coach Renfroe readied his squad for the ""bear hunting"" trip.
NEW DEBATE COACH SELECTED Page 3 Zhe Highlights of Hinds EAGLES BEAT SOUTHWEST BEARS Page 5 VOLUME 29 —NUMBER 4 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1962 Scholarship Given Hinds Final Campaign Speeches Heard For Soph Votes Candidates for sophomore class offices presented campaign speeches this morning in a final formal attempt to win votes.
SIGN LETTER Hinds Students Display Concern Over Ole Miss Integration Crisis Last week Hinds students reacted arrival of Meredith. sensitively to each vicissitude of the Olei Miss integration crisis.
Straining under tensions tightened by persistent rumors that a Negro was attempting to register at Hinds, several students traveled to Several students were involved in the National Guard call-up.
Also reported, unconfirmed, was that Meredith was being housed on sively waited the resolution of the the Ole Miss campus in Baxter conflict.
Mississippi flag was flown beside j Author of the petition, Mike Oliver, the American, an effigy of some | stated that only a few persons refused to sign.
The' petition said, “We support your stand to preserve States Rights unidentified person was hung in the trees before Central Hall, and a small cross was scorched beside the auditorium building.
Unofficial, unconfirmed reports stated that several Hinds students were present during the mass meetings Sunday night soon after the IRC Sponsors Student Dance International Relations Club will sponsor a campus dance in the recreation hall Thursday evening at six o’clock immediately following the pep rally.
IRC president Ralph Hemphill announced admission price will be 25 cents, stag or drag.
Hemphill explained that the event is a special move by the club to raise funds for programs and club projects while rendering a service to the student bodyi. be required to vote.
Nominees for the office of president are Walter Bishop, Lynn Earnest, Clay Cooley, Mike Oliver, George Tannous, and George Weeks.
Those seeking the office of vicepresident are Ralph Hemphill, Boyd McPhail, and Carl Henry Sullivan.
Nominated for the office of treasurer are Joy Ferguson, Hilda Bullock, Steve Erwin, and Jimmy Chandler.
Beemon this week to discuss possible rules and regulat ; ons for Freshman Day.
Specific rules of the annual harrassment were to be set by the elected officers as soon as possible.
Funds will be pers will perform for the Jackson a( l m i n i s tered by Hinds officials.
In the 30-minute review will be iTrr; ""” r show m ^rv ot 24 sophomores accompanied by the 15-piece stage band.
It is almost the same group that performed at the Neshoba County Fair in early August, Hi-Steppers director Mrs.
Circulators of the signature sheets were insistent that all who signed knew precisely what they were signing.
Director of the stage band, Jim Morris, said that later in the year the groups will perform on campus for the students.
Bee said the band and HiSteppers have received numerous compliments for their pre-game show Saturday night at the Ole Miss-Kentucky game.
She said the entire band and 64 Hi-Steppers will perform at Moorhead this Satur “We will cooperate to the fullest in making the opportunities available on a competitive basis to worthy students,” he concluded.
Featured speaker at the luncheon was Superintendent of Education, Jack Tubb, whose text dealt with the history of education in Mississippi since the Civil War.
Seventh period classes will meet during the __ „„ oatu 2-A period, and the general assemday night for the game between blyi wil1 be at 2:45 > seventh period.
It was announced last week that first public performance would be on the Gulf Coast October 24, but the Mayor’s luncheon was arranged by special agreement this week. 3, according to an announcement made by President McLendon today.
The slogan of the day ^exhibited, left, by Page 2 HINDSONIAN October 3, 1962 Pride Seen Clue To Spirit School spirit is an intangible with a tangible impact on school life, progress and sense of pride.
School spirit at football games is good, but true school spirit is a seven-day project, not a one-night affair.
Maybe the reason we sometimes show a “soft” school spirit at sports events is that we don’t practice it the rest of the week.
We are attending the most outstanding and highly-recognized junior college in the state of Mississippi.
The opportunities of building an empire of knowledge from the fountain of youth flowing through Hinds are both numerous and varied.
We have an ultra-modern, air-conditioned library with new art and language facilities.
An addition to the science building has just been completed, including an astronomy observatory.
The finishing touches are being put on a vocational-technical building.
We have all the ingredients of a wholesome and vigorous school spirit at Hinds.
MC INSTRUCTOR Cast Ballots With Care Tomorrow the students of Hinds will elect sophomore class officers.
The election of these leaders should be no less carefully considered than the election of regular state officials such as governor or lieutenant governor.
Of course students have their favorite for each office, but we seriously doubt that many have thought over the qualifications of the various candidates.
Julia Todd, associate professor of speech and art at Mississippi College, has been named debate instructor for Hinds, according to Dr.
Resolved: that the non-communist nations should establish an economic community.
In their 13th year at MC, the couple previously instructed at Ouachita College, Arkadelphia, Ark.
They will also during the regularly scheduled participate in other speech contests such as extemporaneous speaking, sight reading, oratory, and oral interpretation.
The group will represent Hinds This year definite platforms have been drawn up by each nominee.
Last minute preparations and campaigns show lack of interest and design.
A job worth running for is worth pre1 at the state Youth Congress in the paring for in advance. capital at Jackson on November 30 and 31.
There will be a novice Ask yourself who made the most impressive speech — tournament at Mississippi College who seems best suited to fill the office.
Most certainly those f° r freshmen debaters on Decemelected will determine the direction and accomplishments of ^ er ^ H ‘ nc *s will also attend the sophomore class and student body this year.
The debaters will attend the Millsaps tournament the first of January, MSCW tournament in March, Tomorrow, before you mark just any name on the ballot, take time to reason for yourself.
Her husband, Hollis Todd, acts as coach for the MC senior division Zhe Highlights of Hinds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor SPORTS EDITOR_ EXCHANGE EDITOR _ JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager -Jim Bonney -Albert Dahduh PHOTO EDITOR-.-Robert Pickenpaugh NEWS EDITOR -Jim Toombs 1 p CONTRIBUTING WRITERS -Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Ralph [ Hemphill, Vaughn Varnado, Henri Lou Coleman, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans.
In the future, the class will meet each Tuesday and Thursday evenings at 7.
Of the students registered for debate, only one returned from last year’s championship team.
Ralph Hemphill, Jackson sophomore, was a member of the 1961-62 traveling team which won both South Mississippi Junior College Speech Festival and State Debate Championship under debate coach Pat D Smith.
The 27-year-old debate club will attend its first tournament in early November.
I think the American system is the best devised by any inspired group of men.
It seems some of our present national leaders are, or have been, misinformed as to the abilities, qualities, and goals of our system.
We are not “over the hill” despite the actions of some four leaders on Capitol Hill.
We have not yet begun to fight, and with our present leadership, we may never be given the chance to fight for what we believe.
This is not to condone war, but we are in one, the cold war, and that is just as deadly in the long run as any war that has plagued peaceful people.
It is the fault of our leaders and not of our system that we are in trouble.
Today, all over the world the communists are proving that wrong ideals strongly held, will prevail over the right ideals weakly held.
We must hold our ideals strongly in Cuba, in Laos and South VietNam and in Berlin; and if it becomes necessary, die for them.
Because a civilization that does not have men willing to die for it is a dead civilization.
To do this will not be easy, nor should it be; nothing worth fighting for is.
To stand firm, and even advance, in the face of prevailing adversity will take a national resolve of single-minded purposefulness on the part of the American people.
It seems that one of our greatest handicaps in the cold war is the lack of effective leadership.
We need leadership that doesn’t follow the crowd; we need leadership, not followship.
Today’s psychiatrists would probably say that the books were a means of releasing tension.
The new adaptation isn’t supposed to be colored, however, just looked at and enjoyed.
The new spree of books include ones for secretaries, housewives, executives and just about everyone.
In the one for executives, a drawing representing an executive has this caption, ""This is my suit.
Interesting to note is that the Hurly Companyi of Camden Arkansas, publisher of THE EAGLE, the school annual, also publishes some of the covers for the adult coloring books.
Sales of the books, which range in price from $1 to $2.98, are nearing the million mark after only eight months of publication — proving that even adults have the urge to color.
Practice or no practice it looks as though Americans will be buying and enjoying these adult coloring books for quite some time.
Hinds Industrial, Technical Training j Helps Mississippi’s Vocational Needs October 3, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 3 By JIM TOOMBS Cries for scientists, mathematicians, and members of the professions are heard throughout America daily in the space age.
But little thought is given to where the nation’s builders, tradesmen, and technicians of the future will be coming from.
Ninetyi-six day students, 24 night students, 42 high school shop students from surrounding county schools, and 75 technical students fill classes through the week.
A new vocational building is being planned to house shops, classrooms, and machines operated by the department.
Machines include drill presses, lathes, precision grinders,. and welders.
Finished products are turned out from blueprints and drawings, with the work termed by leading industrialists as a significant factor in the industrial growth in Mississippi.
The program at Hinds, indeed, [ has pioneered in the South the training of skilled, efficient workers for industry, as well as other specialized fields in which craftsmen are sorely needed.
Instructors in the program cooperate closely with industries to prepare trainees for future jobs.
To the stream of new large industries coming into the state, the machinist technician program is an invaluable course.
Following a future technician’s career at Hinds reveals a freshman year crammed with English, maths and sciences, mechanical drawing, political science, physical education, and — finally — his specialization.
As a sophomore, he carries loads including English, literature, history, speech, physics, art psychology, and accounting.
Many of the courses broaden the technician’s background and equip him to deal successfully with the people he’ll meet on the job.
With this program the student earns a junior college diploma and a technical certificate at the same time.
A balance is struck between LATHE — Studying the construction and operation of the lathe along with practical lab work in lathe tool grinding is a regular part of course work in the vocational department.
Episcopalian, Catholic Elections Held At Meetings Monday Night Two religious organizations at Hinds elected officers in regular meetings Monday night.
Canterbury, Episcopal group, elected A1 Dahduh, president; Robert Everett, vice-president; Carolyn Everett, secretary-treasurer; and Ann Strickland, reporter.
Newman club, Catholic group, elected Sheila Troyer, president; Steve Cannon, vice president; Elaine Bossemeyer, treasurer; Sandra Schilhab, secretary; Carol Fortier and Reynolds Ridgley, reporters.
Application is being filed by the Newman club for membership in the nation^ Newman Club Federation.
President Troyer of Newman announced that next meeting will be held October 15, at which time a report will be given on Cardinal Newman by Danny Faulkas.
Also at the meeting, the new constitution drawn up by the club officers will be brought up for ratification.
Canterbury club will hold a special membership meeting Thursday, November 4, at 3:00 in Room 11 administration building.
President Dahduh urged all Episcopalians, day or dormitory, interested in joining the club to attend that meeting. technical training and the academic.
A common concept contradicted by the vocational department is that technical trainees are in the field because little else is available to them.
In addition to maintaining standards accepted by the remainder of the campus, 80 per cent of the enrollees are high school graduates and four are junior college graduates.
An accurate index of the worth of the department is quickly obvious from statistics which reveal demands so great the school cannot produce the workmen to fill them.
Prince also issued a statement that copies of the 1961-62 award winning Eagle yearbook are available for three dollars each.
Students wishing to purchase either of these selections may contact Belva Watkins, editor of the Eagle, Joe White, editor of the Hindsonian, or Mr Prince in the Public Relations Office.
Phi Theta Kappa’s To Hold Initiation On Tuesday Night Gamma Lambda chapter of Phi Theta Kappa will hold formal initiation for new members Tuesday, October 9, at 6:45m., in the college auditorium.
They are Henri Lou Coleman, president; Stewart Gibbes, vice-president; Carolyn McKey, secretary; Marianne Neal, treasurer; Suzanne Slay, historian; and Rosalind Healy, parliamentarian.
Other current members are Juanita Hjilderbrand, Judy Herring, and Larry Lauderdale.
Bowen and the sophomore girls in Main Dormitory will serve as hostesses at the brief informal reception following the initiation.
Lynn Powers, sophomore from Utica, was accidentaHy left off the list of new members in last week’s Hindsonian.
DRILL PRESS — Along with basic theory and techniques of the machinist’s trade, Hinds vocational students learn the construction and operation of the drill press.
Sessions will be held in Meridian’s First Baptist Church, it has been announced by Rev.
Ralph B Winders, Director of the Department of Student Work of the Mississippi Convention Board, sponsor.
Frew, director, urges every Baptist student at Hinds to attend the Convention.
Those wishing to go should contact Boyd McPhail or Miss Frew for further details.
Presiding over most sessions will be Tim Townsend, student at Mississippi jCollege and president of the Mississippi Baptist Student Convention.
The Convention will get underway Friday evening with music under direction of Dr.
Ralph Herring, Director of the Seminary Extension Department of Jackson.
Other features will include special music, a dramatic theme interpretation, group prayer meetings, social activities and a business session.
The three act comedy, dramatized by Christopher Sergei from the story by Raphael David Blau, will be presented in the school auditorium November 1 at 8:00 m.
Students gaining parts in the play have been rehearsing three nights a week.
Thursday is an “off” night since Mr Fred Brooks, director of the play, teaches a speech course on that night.
Lines for the first act have been memorized and the long hours of rehearsing and re-rehearsing are now underway.
Link/ Page 4 HINDSONIAN October 3, 1962 EAGLE LOOSE — End Jerry Clark, right, breaks loose and picks up yardage for the Hinds Eagles in their game with the Southwest Bears last Thursday.
Southwest Fullback Bob Jackson, left, and Quarterback Davis McLain try to catch the fleet-footed Clark.
Eagles Travel To Moorhead Saturday; Co-Lin Wolves Lead Mississippi Junior College Grid Conference For the first time since the season started, a single team holds the lead in the Mississippi Junior College Conference.
Hinds’ arch-rival, Copiah-Lincoln gained the top spot after holding an open date last week.
This win by the PR Wildcats puts them in a second place tie with their vanquished foes.
East Mississippi suffered from its open date and dropped from a second place tie position to third spot.
Delta and Holmes tangled last week in a free-scoring game that showed little defensive activity for either team.
After 60 minutes of running up and down the field the Delta squad had tallied 40 points and the Bulldogs 28.
Not counted on the standings because it was non-conference, the game left the Bobcats one spot below Hinds and Northwest.
Embedded in the cellar with three losses and no wins is East Central who took a much needed rest this week.
Coming up in weekend action, Itawamba’s Indian’s will be favored to lose against top-rated CoLin, and Perk is expected to walk over East Central.
East Mississippi and Southwest tangle on the Summit field and Jones travels to Holmes.
In the only Thursday game scheduled Pearl River is on the move traveling to Senatobia for a fight with the Northwest Rangers.
According to the Eagle coaching staff, if the pass defense of the Delta squad slips as it did last week, the potent passing combinations of the Hinds crew could play havoc.
Vote Hemphill for Vice President ROLL WITH RALPH SCHOLARSHIP, LEADERSHIP, CHAMPIONSHIP MITCHELL’S TEXACO SERVICE FREE CAMPUS PICK-UP & DELIVERY The Trojans, on the other hand, have swift Quarterback, John Garrison, who is equally at home on the cinders or grid turf.
Last week the fast signal caller put four of his teams touchdowns on the board.
Hinds has ace Quarterback Mike Vincent to depend on for their running and passing attacks.
In earlier games this season Ends Jimmy and Jerry Clark, along with Richard Stacy, have been the aerial targets.
Last week halfbacks Ken Johnson, Donnie Dick and Dan Magee moved into the pass receiving game taking pay-off pitches.
For the backfield power Fullback Jimmy Dukes and John Stanley will alternate.
After the touchdowns are made the Deltans have something the Eagles don't—a kicker.
End Tommy Shumaker is the; boy with the golden toe to the Trojans while Hinds hasn’t scored a point after this season.
Hinds Eagle Band and Hi-Steppers will make the trip to Moorhead where they will entertain the crowd in a pre-game show.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK HINDSONIAN Page 5 SOUTHWEST DOWNED — Guard Durwood Magee, left, and Ken Johnson, right, piled in to stop a Southwest drive short in the game at Summit last Thursday.
Though the favored Bears held the Eagles in check during the first half, they couldn’t control the ball in the second.
It was the Eagles first win of the season and the third loss of the year for the Bears.
Hinds’ practice on defense during the past week paid off as the Raymond crew held the Southwesterners to' just 67 yards on the ground.
During the first half of the game, Summit picked up only 35 yards on the flats.
The victory-hungry Eagles came out after the half on the bottom of a 6-0 score.
Halfback Ken Johnson took a 33-yard pass to the one foot line where Quarterback Mike Vincent walked over for the touchdown.
I End Jimmy Clark intercepted a pass on the 50-yard line and carried to the Bear 25.
Six playis later Halfback Dan Magee picked up a I pass from Quarterback Vincent and stepped across for the score.
The Bears, desperate in the final minutes, hurled passes o*n nearly every play in an attempt to pull out of their slump.
Bob Jackson playing in the slot position grabbed a short-jump-pass on the fouryard line and powered his way across the goal line.
The Bears attempted one kick and a pass while Hinds had a kick go wild and two aerial plays fail.
Dean of women, Miss Fay Marshall, announced that women students may attend the men’s intramural events.
WHAT TO WEAR TILL THE DOCTOR COMES Now that you have enrolled and paid your fees and bought your books and found your way around campus and learned to hate your roommate, it is time to turn to the most important aspect of college life.
She was a real Englishwoman who lived in Elizabethan times and, indeed, England is forever in her debt.
Smash the Spanish , Sink their boats, Make 'em vanish, Like a horse makes oats.
Then we'll drink ale As a reward for these inspirational verses Queen Elizabeth dubbed her a Dame, made her Poet Laureate, and gave her the Western Hemisphere except Duluth.
But this was not the extent of Dame Fashion’s service to Queen and country.
In 1589 she invented the laying hen, and she was awarded a lifetime pass to Chavez Ravine.
In 1591, alas, she was arrested for overtime jousting and imprisoned for thirty years in a butt of malmsey.
Certain to be the rage again this year is the cardigan (which, curiously enough, was named after Lord Cardigan, who commanded the English fleet against the Spanish Armada.
The sweater is only one product of this remarkable Briton’s imagination.
The cardigan, I say, will be back, which is, I believe, cause for rejoicing.
Because the cardigan has nice big pockets in which to carry your Marlboro Cigarettes— and that, good friends, is ample reason for celebration as all of you will agree who have enjoyed Marlboro’s fine, comfortable, mellow flavor and Marlboro’s filter.
Beemon, biology instructor at Hinds, vigorously engages in the art of living, making himself a prime example of how to get adventure and fun out of life, whether grubbing in a garden gathering zoology specimens or theorizing on bugs in a classroom.
Off and on from 1949-1960, he was the lone sponsor of the Eagle yearbook as well as the sophomore /-j-fc « -r* 1 DOOK as well as me bopnomvre Kanger Koundup class.
He still holds the latter posiFeatures Faculty t,on today ' Trio Of Cowhands Three faculty members will sing in the Raymond PTA Ranger Roundup tomorrow afternoon.
Faculty members participating are A1 Rowan, Band Director; Writer Gibbs, Vocational Coordinator; Jim Morris, Band Director; and Eurlton Gibbs, brother of the Vocational Coordinator.
The Roundup, an annual part of the Hinds County Livestock Show is taking place in the Edwards Livestock Arena.
Performances of the Roundup will include horse shows, calf chasing contests, rooster races, and a greased pig chasing contest, square dancing, can-can girls and the Hinds quartet.
Prizes for the contests are all trophies except the greased pig chasing contests in which the winner will receive the greased pig.
Tickets for the entire show are being sold to adults for seventy cents and to students for thirty cents.
The PTA will also sponsor a supper featuring Bar-B-Q pork, beef, chicken and kid.
One dollar will be charged for adult plates and fifty cents will be charged for student plates. tti • t scaping is r oreign Language Dormitory.
Group To Gather Many students think their ears have gone bad when they hear that Mr and Mrs.
They both remain “young at heart” and their swift witticisms and pleasant humor make them favorites of all the students.
He implies, though, that neither was a tragedy—but quite the opposite so.
He has lived hapily ever after and the old building was replaced with three news ones.
With the campus in an uproar and the fire raging, he rushed out to take a first-hand photograph of the incident for the paper and annual-only to find that his camera, along with the rest of his equipment, had gone up in the smoke and flames.
Mr Beemon, in stating a very sensible philosophy on life, says, “My wife once heard a physical therapist sayi that people who work in yards don’t go crazy.
I Once on a trip to Arizona, he took a short detour — via Yellowstone National Park.
As he talks a animal and plant life in his classes, students are given glimpses of his interesting trips.
Now that the college curriculum and student body have grown, he only instructs courses in biology.
When asked why he chose this field, Mr Beemon said, “I think it’s a dynamic subject.
Circle K Will Feature Speech Tomorrow Night Circle K will meet Thursday night, October 4, at 4:45 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria.
At this meeting all new members will be introduced to the club, and will be presented their Circle K pins and their copy of the constitution and by-laws of the club.
Mr Henry Cadjen, the club’s advisor from the Jackson Kiwanis club, will be featured speaker.
President Boyd McPhail urged all old and new members to attend this meeting.
Modern Language Club will hold its initial meeting tomorrow evening at 6:30m. in the Home Economics Building.
Bill White, vice president of the group, will conduct the program on France, and will include slides and commentary.
The Modern Language Club is open to all students taking a foreign language, and to those interested in learning more about other peoples.
During the years as sponsor for the Eagle, he was the only photographer and darkroom expert.
SHONEY’S WESTLAND PLAZA NEW ATTRACTION — Added to campus features this year is Sandra Thrash, 18, of Byram, who’s majoring in secretarial science and minoring in men.
PHILLIP MORRIS SPONSORS Campus Contest Opened For Hinds; TV Set WiU Be Offered Students Herman Kaiser, representative of Phillip Morris, Inc., announced Monday that Hinds students may participate in a “college round-up,” with a 19 inch Motorola television console set as grand prize.
The contest is open to any individual, but groups are likely to compile more points and win more easily.
The contest is based on a system of points, whereby each empty package of Marboro, Parliament, or Alpine cigarettes will have a value of 5 points.
All packages will be turned in on November 8 in the Eagle's Nest between 1:00 and 3:00m.
Quick results from the count will be aided byi this, and no other order of arrangement will be accepted.
Any club or group which wins may place the television set wherever they wish.
WHO Prize will be awarded to any Group, FraterWINS* n ^ y ’ Sorority or Individual who qualifies and has the highest number of points.
Each empty package submitted on Marlboro, Parliament or Alpine will have a value of 5 points.
Each empty package submitted on Philip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points.
Closing date, time and location will be announced in your campus newspaper.
Contest closes November 8 at Eagles* Nest between 1:00 and 3:00 All packages will be turned in at that time.
Marlboro Smells And Sights And Sounds Summarize State Fair’ For those who like to venture off the beaten track, you can give all your senses a workout at the Kinney Brother’s World’s Championship Rodeo held nightly at the coliseum.
Robert Horton, alias Flint McCullough of television’s Wagon Train series, even sings as one of the stars of this extravaganza.
Leaving the rodeo possibly feeling saddle sore, many people head directly for the exhibitions.
Here, in aluminum roofed barns, Mississippians display for six days products that often take months in preparing.
Quilts, spreads, rugs, coats, dresses, knits, and pillows of varied colors, shapes and designs to fit anyone’s taste are viewed by thousands each year.
Prizes are given to the best, and to the others are given the thrill of exhibiting their products for their fellow Mississippians.
Agricultural displays by the thousands consisting of shining jars of food perfection, make the average housewife’s cooking seem second rate.
City dwellers especially enjoy visiting the livestock barns, where calves are as meticulously groomed as the Vogue's high fashion models.
Closing the barn door and taking a last walk down the midway, a candied apple in hand, the sights, sounds, and smells are left behind for others who tread behind us to see, hear and smell.
Though the smells are memorable there are also the visual remembrances.
The middle-aged woman carrying a teddy bear; a child looking for a lost coin in the sawdust; the lines at the concession stands; the lights revolving against the ebony sky; the people—the fair.
The 1962 edition of this “road production,” which runs October 8-13, has even more smells, sights and sounds than ever before.
The midway is jammed with 50 rides of every description—gay and thrilling ones like the Round-up, the Calypso, the Paratrooper and the Trabant, invented in Germany.
SPACE WHEEL — Circling high above the crowds at Mississippi State Fair is the immense double ferris wheel.
The Space Wheel, a new ride, has been, added to the Royal American Shows' midway.
The huge, four wheel sky climber rises to a height of 90 feet above the fair's crowd level.
James Campus Hosts ME A Classroom Teacher In Fall Convention Between 50 and 75 classroom teachers met at Hinds Saturday for their annual district fall conference.
Representing Mississippi Education Association Districts VI and VII from Natchez through Yazoo County, the women gathered as prescribed by the MEA to disseminate information from an earlier state meeting of classroom teachers.
Sparkman represented Hinds at the opening session and welcomed the women to the campus.
Newton, Tylertown schools; and Hugh M McCall, manager of Sears Roebuck in Natchez.
The conference was divided into three sections; two Monday and one Tuesday morning.
Monday the main address was ''The changing design of college buildings” by Gordon P Nimnicht of Education Laboratories.
Monday afternoon he spoke on “Planning new facilities” to the presidents and business managers and on “Utilization of academic facilities,” to deans and registrars.
Tuesday morning discussion was devoted to the transfer of credits from junior to senior colleges.
Robert M Mayo, Hinds Administrative Assistant, stated that the purpose of the conferences was to co-ordinate the work of the junior and senior colleges of Mississippi.
He went on to say one of the primary concerns between the two groups was to keep informed about the transfer of credits between the two college levels.
He noted that as a result of close co-ordination through conferences such as this, there has been little trouble in transfering work.
Presiding at the meeting was Ralph Noonkester, vice-president, Mississippi Association of Colleges.
SOPHOMORE OFFICERS — Elected last week were, from the left, George Tannous, president; Ralph Hemphill, vice president; Dottie Breakfield, secretary; and Jimmy Chandler, treasurer.
Slides, films, and other materials would be received from that organization at cost.
The objective of the group would be to instruct its members in the nature of communism and its designs upon the freedom of the Western World.
Bishop Beat By Tannous In Secondary Banner-filled halls of the past two weeks are gradually returning to normal following the election of sophomore class officers.
Thursday’s primary saw Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, elected vice president; Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, selected secretary; and Jimmy Chandler, Vicksburg, chosen treasurer.
Hilda Bullock and Joy Ferguson tied at 67, allowing Chandler an open lead of 123.
Nominations for positions were made Monday, September 24, during the initial class meeting of the current session.
A week of campaigning ensued before final speeches were made on Wednesday, October 3, during the general assembly.
Miss Joan Melton was selected class sponsor during the nomination period.
Page 2 HINOSONIAN October 10, 1962 Suffrage Sufferers Voting is becoming the most important right held by the American people today.
The right to vote, won for us by the forefathers of our country, should be cherished as a golden freedom of Americanism.
Yet in the recent election at Hinds, it was evident that this great privilege was not used by everyone.
If we aren't good citizens now,we can’t expect to be when we get out of college.
With Star Role Immmhi By LINDA BYRD ^§ Very few oeople can steal a scene from Snsan Hayward, but a bleached blonde named Diane Cilento can and does in I Thank A Poor' now playing at the Lamar Theatre in Jackson.
Not only does this green-eyed starlet steal a scene — she steals the ent’re show.
The character Miss Cilento portrays, the vivacious young wife, obsessed with the past and halfloving, half-hating her husband and the present, is a ""natural"" for scene stealing.
His character, the long suffering tyrant of a husband, is appealing and thought provoking.
Anything else about Mr Finch’s performance would have me listing superlatives by the dozens.
Her lines are said with blank expressions and no warmth penetrates the screen.
It is so unlike Miss Hayward to leave an audience cold and yet she does in this picture.
Diane Cilento simply takes advantage of this and plays her part to the hilt, thus beLITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS Don’t make the mistake of calling the Presidents Council a President’s Council.
The word is punctuated correctly without an apostrophe and should always be spelled that way.
A defeatist attitude is sometimes evident when a student mentions the Presidents Council.
Hinds students seem to think that this council belongs specifically to the president of our college and is just a way to rigidly direct campus activity while outwardly placing it in the hands of student leaders ... just another way to get things done for the administration.
A surprising fact to many com,ng the real fema,e star * is that President McLendon visits the council meetings when' invited, to add his constructive ideas, or when he wishes to make an important announcement.
Faculty sponsor of the group is actually Mr Robert Mayo, administrative assistant.
Directing the activities of the group is the president of the sophomore class, this year George Tannous.
The Presidents Council receives its name from the fact that it is made up of the presidents from every organization on campus, rather than that it belongs specifically to a certain president.
Committee plans are being drawn up now by President Tannous, in an effort to formulate an early organization of activities.
Mr Mayo, who has sponsored the Presidents Council for two years, expresses his wishes on making this year’s council the best ever.
The group should strive to top the ’61 council, which was directed last year by President David Yewell of Owensboro, Kentucky, Announcements will be made tomorrow to organizational members.
W 4 l I/V\ pf£ AlPIWS UP UPAS A '^5 \\l£Zl iJ CURRENT EVENTS _ Coins Have Two Sides -By RALPH HEMPHILL""We must go Fo’ward,” to coin a phrase.
We must be willing to accept it at face value, KenAs far as the plot is concerned nedy’s face.
I Thank A Fool reminds its audience of Jane Eyre but has much, much more than the Bronte novel.
If you enjoy a movie that keeps its audience guessing and if you enjoy seeing a starlet turn into a star before you, then don’t miss I Tha-nk A Fool.
If you’re hoping to see the real Susan Hayward, however, stay up and watch the late movie.
The other side, the one we do not see, contains the cost of the New Frontier.
Not only in dollars but in incentive, free enterprise, freedom of religion, and free medical care.
MANY STEPS FORWARD Various Newspapers Show Progress Of Mississippi’s Growing Colleges By BETTYE SIMMONS j now underway.
A flourish of exchange papers New electronic equipment, costPresident Kennedy said this would cause inflation, because the steel unions had just signed a socalled non-inflationary contract with the steel companies.
The U S. steel workers are the highest paid factory workers in the world, as a result of this and other past contracts.
The economic truth of the matter is that rising prices cause inflation like wet pavement causes rain.
The Kennedy administration says it wants to help the elderly people in America.
They say medicare, or foot-in-the-door socialized medicine, is the only way to do it Then the Kennedy Administration | turns around and has a 12 billion dollar deficit, causing further inflation.
Mirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Varnado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Claire Parker.
From these papers we have gathered interesting tidbits for Hindsonian readers.
According to the Reflector, the department of Student Affairs has accepted the invitation to appear on the nationwide quiz show.
Mildren Meacham, director of public relations at Northwest Mississippi Junior College, will conduct a five-minute daily newscast from the school over Radio Station WSAO in Senatobia.
Seven buildings are scheduled to be built during the next few years, with a gymnasium at the top of the list. people.
As Mississippi College freshmen moved into their third week of initiaton, they were allowed not to wear their Indian costumes for a day, but instead were forced to dress in suits and heels for classes.
Co-Lin Watchman became Mississippi’s newest junior college newspaper with volume 1, number 1, on September 25.
The Watchman, edited by Joanna Shaffer, will be published every other Tuesday.
It's also true that there is not any steel plant modernization, on a scale that is needed, now in America.
It is also true that inflation would have wiped out any benefits gained from it.
It is also true that it is the other side of the coin that shows its value.
Unnaturalized Citizen Endorsed For Natural Leadership Ability October 10, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 3 By VICKY HAZZLERIGG As the result of a tense runoff, George Tannous, Hinds sophomore, was elected president of the sophomore class and Presidents Council for the 1962-63 school year.
The election of George as student body president was another first for Hinds’ campus.
George is the first foreign-born, unnaturalized citizen who has obtained the highest student office.
George asked the advice of T T Beemon when he was nominated for class presidency.
He was uncertain of any school rules pertaining to unnaturalized citizens holding school office, and was recouldn't believe it.
I was excited because I was happy/' Upon his arrival in / Vicksburg, j where George’s uncle lives, the plans were being completed for his college attendance.
I have been impressed most by the good people, especially the Southerners; they have hospitality almost like that of the people in my country.
George's hobbies include collecting stamps which number 40,000; swimming and diving and deer Recruiter To Show Rlue Angels’ Film At Coming Chapel Chief William T Worthey, U C Navy Recruiter, Post Office Building, Jackson, Miss., will present a movie entitled “The Navy's Blue Angels"" on Wednesday, October 17, at assembly.
They demonstrate skills taught to all Naval Cadets during flight training.
Chief Worthey will be on campus each Friday from 10:00 until noon in the Grill, and will discuss military obligations with any interested student.
When George first came to Hinds he had no idea of being elected sophomore class president.
Elias Tannous of Beshmezzeen, Lebanon, cheerfully announced the arrival of a baby boy on May 2, 1944, and proudly proclaimed him George Elias Tannous.
He was president of the Athletic Education Youth Organization for 3 years, chairman of the social committee at the YMCA, president of his high school senior class, a Boy Scout leader, and supervisor of the Sunday School at his church.
When George was 16 the Lebanon Consulate received a recommendation from John Bell Williams that George come to the United States and attend school.
So in 1961 the big decision was made and George was on his way to America.
I am very thrilled and honored to be elected to the highest office a student can hold.
George’s plans for the future provide for a medical career, either as a surgeon or a psychiatrist, but he doesn’t know what college or university he will attend.
Choose this style in black or red kid or black suede with soft heel counters.
Business ethics prevent our mentioning brand names, but you’ll recognize every one in our store.
DAILY RITUAL Canterbury Club Votes To Raise Flag In Response To Editorial their beliefs on purgatory, with the Rev.
James Butler presenting the church's doctrine on the subject and leading the discussion.
At the close of the meeting, the cent Hindsonian, the group readily Rev.
Butler asked everyone to ob* agreed to assume the responsibilserve the universal hour set aside Canterbury Club last week voted to raise and lower the campus American Flag each day, club president Albert Daduh announced.
Inspired by an editorial in a reity when the question was raised in the regular meeting last Monday.
Following the business meeting, the Episcopalian group discussed For fast Quality and Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE Either in Color or Black and White Stan da r d Photo MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers by the Episcopal diocese for prayers for the officials of the United States.
Thursday at three o’clock in room 11 in the Administration building, the club will discus the subject of church architecture.
Page 4 HINDS0N1AN October 10, 1962 STATISTICS E a gl es Take Beating At Mississippi Delta; Open Date Scheduled Fpr This Saturday Hinds’ Eagles were simply outfind their way against the Trojans effort to come from behind.
I Twice the Deltans intercepted On the ground the Eagles were Taking the low end of a 35-6 final passes that led to scores, yet the even more helpless, gaining only score, the Eagles couldn’t seem to Eagles continued throwing in an 43 yards rushing in the first half and losing 10 in the second.
Taking a cue from the pros the Deltans had several blockers ahead and to the side of every ball carrier.
In the third quarter pass interference was called against the Trojans on their own 10-yard line.
Two plays later end Jimmy Clark took a pass in the end zone from Vincent for the score.
Sparked by quarterback John Garrison and halfback Randy Hodges the Delta crew moved the ball about the field with ease.
Halfback Joe Dean Shannon was the aerial standout of the day grabbing three touchdown passes.
Garrison led the ground scoring with 71 and 61 yard runs, on both occasions weaving his way through a nest of Eagles wouldbe-tacklers before breaking into the open.
Hodges, playing his first game this season, proved himself an equally outstanding broken field runner.
Taking pitch-outs from Garrison, he picked his way around the Hinds team members and gained on every play.
Prior to season's start Hodges was involved in a freak lightning accident and was out for the first four games.
OCT 10th BRIGIETTE BARDOT in ' A WOMAN LIKE SATAN"" and 'LA PARISENNE"" » SUNDAY, OCT. 14th UNLOCKS THE BACK ROOMS OF THE 'KEY"" CLUBS WAIT FOR ME — Eagle end Richard Stacy, number 84, and Trojan quarterback John Garrison, number 15, grapple for the ball in the late second quarter.
Pearl River Wildcats Schedule League Leading Gopiah-Lincoln Copiah-Lincoln’s Wolves, undefeated in four starts, will meet mighty Pearl River next Saturday for the outstanding Junior College game of the week.
In other action, Perkinston whipped cellar dwelling East Central 27-6 and Holmes dropped Jones 2714.
Southside Takes Intramural Lead Shangri-La and Southside dorm teams took honors last week in intramural football contests.
They are sponsored by the Men’s Recreational Association, the only men’s intramural sports organization on campus.
STANDINGS This week East Central will travel to Holmes and Southwest will go to Jones.
Homecoming Court Election Set Monday is mm NORTHSIDE ANNEX — Construction is Nominations Start Today By Petition Of Hinds Students Politics will again dominate the extra-curricular life of Hinds this week as the election of Homecoming Queen and her court are held.
Nominations began this morning, and the final selection will be made October 22.
A faculty committee appointed by President George M McLendon recently compiled and released the rules governing the selection of the queen and her maids.
Any student may initiate a petition which must be turned in to Miss Joan Melton, sophomore class sponsor, by 3:30 Friday, October 19.
The four leading candidates for queen will be queen and three sophomore maids.
Three freshman maids will be | chosen by the same procedure as the queen.
A person may sign only one petition for freshman maid, making it possible for a person to sign 2 petitions—one for a sophomore and one for a freshman.
Election will be held in the administration building Monday, October 22.
In charge of election will be Miss Melton and sophomore class officers George Tannous, Ralph Hemphill and Jimmy Chandler.
Faculty committee is composed of Kent Prince, public relations director, William Oakes, recreation director.
VOLUME 29 — NUMBER 6 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI MigMights of Minds WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1962 Livestock Judging Team Captures Trophies Banes Team Named Top Award Winner During State Fair WESLEY CLUB TO FOSTER PROGRAM ON CHALK TALK Guest speaker at the next Wesley Foundation meeting will be Kenneth Quinn, art instructor at Whiton Junior High in Jackson.
His subject will be “Chalk Talk/’ a talk given in connection with a religious picture done in chalk.
Hinds Junior College livestock judging team, competing in the Mississippi Junior College Judging Contest held last week at the State Fair in Jackson, captured fourteen trophies and won the award as the best overall judging team in the state.
Scott won the W overall individual judging award, the best beef-cattle judging award « and first place in the Angus judgJ| KJBH Bi ing.
The team is, from the left, Billy Banes, instructor; Charles Rogillio, John Blough Jimmy Scott, Roger Sturdivant, Bernard King, and James McCaskill.
The building will be reserved for sophomores. j three rounds of discussion and two ; rounds of speeches advocating a phase of the topic under discussion.
Also under consideration will be the goals that such an economic union should have in mind if formed.
The topics under discussion will point up a need for the free world taking definite steps to unity.
Would currency differences be a severe handicap to achieving The most exciting part of the conference to the participants will be the last portion dealing with advocacy speeches.
Discussion rounds and advocacy speaking will be judged by competent members of college speech departments.
Julia Todd, participating in the conference will be Carol Fortier, Dawn McNeil, Jayne Landis, Belva Watkins, Woody Maye, Jimmy Chandler, Woody Herring, and Ralph Hemphill.
The team culminated its season by winning the South Mississippi Debate Championship and the Mississippi State Junior College Championship.
John Blough won first place ii hog and hamster hogs while Jame; McCaskill won first place trophiej in sheep and hamster sheep.
Char lie Rogillio ranked superior in shor horns at the annual judgng event.
Teams participating were Hinds Itawamba, Northwest, East Cen tral, East Mississippi, Northeast Perkinston and Holmes.
The win ning Hinds team was led to victor} by Billy Banes, Hinds agriculture instructor.
The bus will leave Raymond at 5:30m., returning to the campus at approximately 7:30m. the same day.
Fifty cents transportation fee will be charged, and students must register for the trip in the president’s foyer.
High School Day has been combined this year with Engineers Efcay, resulting in an elaborate program which will include tours of the various schools on campus.
A large number of high school bands will participate in the half-time ceremonies along with the famous Maroon Band of Mississippi State.
So fast, in fact, that not always can each task or duty be completed properly.
People rush around in a frenzy trying to get their particular job done as quickly as possible.
Each person’s actions throughout the day determines in some way what will happen.
Therefore it is of great importance that each of us perform our duties with much preciseness.
If Worker A takes all day to perform a task to perfection, while Worker B does the job in half a day to near perfection, Worker B should be valued more.
This is a question that most all freshmen ask themselves early in the academic year, usually after the first test.
The first semester is usually a time of adjustment to a new way of doing things.
One of the first facts that is realized is that the first year in college is not a grade thirteen.
Another thing that must be reckoned with is, ironically —free time; that is, what to do with it.
This is the easiest course on campus present to take, and the hardest to drop.
JHM"" jauadT APBJUMElY YOIK FAMILY ON YOUK W.Z6 &Nf SALARY/ CURRENT EVENTS Quality Wanted, Not Quantity --^By RALPH HEMPHILLIt happened in England, and it has been an obvious failure.
Government sponsored medical care is what the above three have in common.
It all boils down to the point that free medical care is not free with the government running it.
If this analogy is followed Your high school days were filled with planned activities, further, it seems the best way lies Your college days will be filled only when you plan your acti\ n the plan with the most assets and vities. | the least liabilities.
Now, if the objective is to get to This is undoutedly one of the main purposes of college; ■ the core and truth of the matter it to teach you, or better still, let you teach yourself how to is indispensible that the concept make decisions.
A good decider is a good provider. | which the practice of medicine is Life is full of trivialities.
One must learn what is imb t ased ^ u P on ls . k f now *\ portant in life and go after it.
When a person inquires about a doctor he doesn’t ask about the doctor’s price list; instead, he asks whether the doctor is good or not.
In all due respect to the number of patients a physician may have, the emphasis is still placed on the DWAYNE COX quality of the treatment received.
Business Manager Albeit true, i*n some instances the -Jim Bonney doctor may make your bank acAlbert Dahduh' count look sick while making you We now have free medical care, freedom to choose under the free enterprise-medical care system.
The conclusion may be drawn that doctors are gaining wealth off our health.
This may be so, but, on the other hand, we are gaining health off their wealth.
It infuriates me to think that Jackson, the capital city, a city that has so much vital interest in theatre and the arts, can be so absent minded as to have only two movie theatres.
The population of the ever growing Jackson demands an increase in movie houses.
Not necessarily seating capacity, although that is important also, but mainly Jackson needs at least one more theatre for variety reasons.
Since movies are 75% of their entertainment, it poses a problem on dates.
Of course this question holds no importance to the theatre owners, since they are confident of gaining a crowd—even on the worst of shows.
My greatest revenge would be to see a brand spanking new theatre erected downtown—a theatre to compete with those who hold monopolies on Jacksonians' entertainment.
I am ashamed to say that Meridian, our somewhat smaller neighbor, sports three movie houses.
Even the middle age group has been complaining about the lack of enough entertainment facilities — movie wise.
As long as this lack remains movie producers will keep losing money and television gaining it.
Perhaps a few dashes of fresh movies and new movie theatres will brighten up the capital city.
Who knows, Jackson might even become the cinema center of the state. -Robert Pickenpaugh well, but the issue still is which do NEWS EDITORS -Rodger Owenby Jim Toombs, Ralph Hemphill; y0 u value most, your health or your CONTRIBUTING WRITERS _Mirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn' wealth.
Varnado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky j Recent history proves that in Hazzlerigg, Claire Parker.
I countries where a person’s wealth Committees' Activate Freshman Day Plans By Making Rules, Selections By BETTYE SIMMONS Frightened freshmen are beginning to cringe with the approaching of Freshman Dayi, set for October 24.
Committee on rules, composed of Joe White, Richard Foster and Dottie Breakfield, released today 23 rules the underclassmen must observe.
Charles Dudley, A1 Dahduh and Shelia Troyer are presently assigning freshmen to their sophomore sponsors.
Another committee is planning Kangaroo Court where freshmen will be punished who fail to meet sophomore approval during the day’s activities.
Members of the court committee are George Tannous, Mike Oliver, Joe White, Ralph Hemphill, Hilda Bullock, Boyd McPhail, Patsy Musselman, Jimmyi Chandler and Ronnie Mollere.
FAULTY ADVISOR Kent Prince The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
OC-The world is not flat, but spherical. ‘y-It is but an infinitesimal speck in a vast, curved universe. z-This universe is dominated by a Spiritual Force, who has chosen Man to make His Truth manifest to all this universe.
The world is a roll-on applicator in a celestial bottle of spiritual deodorant.
The building also served as a hospital for Confederate soldiers during the Civil War.
Next week the Band a-nd HiSteppers will present a show based on a ""rebel"" theme at the convention of the Sons of the Confederates.
Then on October 23, the two groups will journey to Biloxi for a performance at the meeting of the Misissippi Poultry Association.
Bee spoke on the Miss America Pageant, giving a day by day account of the thrilling events of the pageant.
Bee's surprise guest was the current Miss Mississippi, Charlotte Ann Carroll.
This statement, filed in 1856 is one of the many fascinating fragments to be found in the history of Raymond’s stately court house.
Oldest records indicate Raymond was founded some time before 1820, with the first court house being constructed about 1822.
It was a simple frame building erected where the water tower stands today.
Built in 1857-59 by a skilled slave labor crew, the second Raymond court house was designed by the famous Weldon brothers who were also the builders of the old Vicksburg Court House.
Within five years, Raymond and Sparkman Releases List Of 1962-1963 Department Heads Department heads for the 1962-63 school session have been elected, according to Dr.
Robbie Dukes; mathematics, Miss Lurline Stewart; music, Leslie Reeves; physical education and recreation, Joe Renfroe; reading, Miss Calvinia Switzer; social science, Tom Stricklin; speech and drama, Fred Brooks; and technical and vocational, Walter H Gibbs.
Canterbury Club held its regular meeting Thursday with Robert Everett presiding in the absence of President A1 Dahduh.
Ann Strickland will report the summer Canterbury Conference at Rose Hill at the next meeting. the court house became victims of circumstances during the Civil War.
The little town itself was unimportant—but it lay in the path of Grant’s inland march to Vicksburg, an objective which was extremely important to the Union cause.
Following the Battle of Raymond on May 12, 1863, the court house was used as a hospital for confederate soldiers.
Probably because the federals were stationed there, the court house records werd saved, an unusual occurence during the burning-mad marches of the Union forces.
Reconstruction period brought the first and only Hinds County Negro sheriff.
The Negroes were granted the right to vote and registered by marks—few, if any, could write.
In 1870 the county was divided into two separate judicial districts with court houses in both Raymond and Jackson.
The division remains today in Hinds County, and in infrequent counties throughout the state.
A town so full of pre-war relics and landmarks would quite naturally have the tales and legends to I accompany.
One townsman recalled the halloween night a group of boys carried a mule up the stairs to the | belfry.
The town, was awakened I the next morning by the braying I hinny, and the owner embarras-1 singly hastened to reclaim his muleJ The stile onei must climb in order j to enter the court yard carries an interesting note.
It seems the cows and horses used to wander through the town, and the black rail fence and steps were erected to keep them out.
Gillespie Annex was added in 1949, and houses the county library, old jail, and numerous county offices.
Engrossing files dating back to 1822 of wills, property deeds, divorces, and so on are kept there.
Since property was worth little more than $1.25 an acre, the most important item within, the will was the bequeathing of slaves.
An obviously wealthy gentleman in 1835 left to his five children seven slaves, named Chang, Mary, Violet, Robin, Washington, Gilbert and Joseph.
Another man left to his daughter CANTERBURY CLUB HOLDS TALK ON ARCHITECTURE, SETS NEXT MEET REPORT a buggy, and to his son a horse.
Within one sentence the cows, horses, slaves and bedroom furniture would be distributed.
Still another oddity—In the sometimes delicate, sometimes bold, scroll used to record happenings, Mississippi was often spelled Mipipippi.
The courts of the early 1840's were rather active, recording as many as thirty decisions in one day.
But the court is still one more story, and the sleepy town of Raymond has an endless supply.
Catholics Ratify New Constitution In Monday Session New constitution for the Newrqan Club was ratified with minor changes at Monday’s regular meeting.
The historian would be required to keep a scrap book with newspaper clippings and pictures of club activities.
Because of the time taken for the constitution discussion, president Shelia Troyer called a special meeting'for next Monday.
The Official Women’s Club, which is composed of the wives of Mississippi’s state officials, held their meeting on the Heidelberg Roof.
CAMPUS AGENTS DWAYNE COX Southside Stadium BENNY CROSBY Shangri-La RALPH HEMPHILL Eastside MILTON MOORE Central Eagle Emblem FLEECE LINED Sweatshirts.
At the stoke of 12 last night, she was washing dishes and he was grading papers.
Many nights they grade papers together—for both are instructors at Hinds.
Married since May 26 of this year, Mike and Polly Rabalais are best known for their quality of being individuals as well as teachers.
To see them in downtown Jackson one would hardly suspect that they teach at all—much less teach college students.
She doesn’t have the short dumpy figure of our junior high gym instructors and he looks far from the stereotype of the reserved, proper, overly prim professor of ten years ago.
During the ten year span from then till now, the two have enjoyed an active education as well as an active life.
Rabalais was born in Aberdeen, Mississippi and delights in telling of the summer she graduated from high school.
It Stewart Gibbes In Head Position Of Westminster Club Westminster Fellowship elected officers in its third meeting, Stewart Gibbes, president; Gerrye Sanford, vice-president; Katie Thompson, secretary; Elizabeth Seitz, treasurer; and Nancy Smith, Nona Goodwin, Ronnie Moore, Charles Nicholas and Eulalia Hallman council members.
Meeting in the home of Reverend Norman Harper, the group was served ice cream by Mrs.
Westminster Fellowship meets each Monday night at 6:15, in room number one of the Music Building. was because I had to sit at a desk eight hours a day, that I decided to become a gym instructor.
He is known as the ArkLaMiss teacher—having lived for a time in Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi.
The Pelican state is his love, however, and he hails from Marksville, 30 miles from Alexandria.
He graduated from Pineville High School in Arkansas and has the distinct memory of playing football against a rival high school team that had as its lead scorer, a young boy named Charlie Tollar, now playing with the Houston Oilers.
To say Mike and Polly were popular in school with students and teachers alike would be a gross understatement.
She was elected Miss Hinds Junior College, class officer, cheerleader, president of the Women's Recreational Association and was a member of Pi Tau Chi.
As she moved to further heights and received her B.S. degree from MSCW, “cajun land” played host to Mr Rabalais, who gave his political aspirations a work-out by being elected president of the student body at Southwestern, vice-president of Blue Key, honor society, and elected to Who’s Who in American Colleges and Universities.
Those students taking psychology courses under Mr Rabalais have no doubt noticed how well he presents his subject.
Rabalais, remembering how hard chairs can be, never wavered from her desire to teach physical education.
Both Polly and Mike Rabalais worked in and outside of college—she, mostly lifeguarding, in the summer, and he working in bowling alleys and representing the L&M tobacco Company on the Southwestern campus.
If Mr Rabalais loses a paper, even though she doesn’t know where it is, or where to look for it, Mrs.
Rabalais walks around the room, giving him moral support, until he finds it— then she sits down.
Sitting down was not easy this summer for Mike and Polly since they were kept quite busy attending summer school at Ole Miss.
Rabalais accompanied him to work on her masters degree in ""LUZIANNE"" LOVERS — Mr Mike Rabalais, h aili n g from southern Louisiana, naturally enjoys a morning cup of strong black java.
Rabalais has acquired the knack of perfect coffee-making,and often sips the pre-dawn coffee along with him.
Boyd McPhail Represents Circle K At Business Session In Louisiana Meet physical education.
At Hinds Polly and Mike Rabalais are in complete agreement as to why they enjoy teaching col-, lege students.
Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore and president of Hinds Circle K, attended a weekend business session of the Mississippi, Louisiana, and West Tennessee Districts of Circle K in Pineville, Louisiana, last week.
Registered students spent Friday i night on the Louisiana College campus in Pineville, and met Saturday's sessions at the Kiwams Lodge in Alexandria.
Representatives were guests of I the Alexandria Kiwanis Club for , lunch Saturday. j McPhail returned to the Hinds campus Saturday evening.
Freshman Day Rules Dormitory freshmen should dress up by 6:30 as they are told to do.
Sophomores will dress freshmen; however, if a freshman has no sophomore, he or she must wear his clothes inside out.
From 7*30-8:15 all freshmen must perform exercises in front of the cafeteria.
All freshmen must wear a name tag with name and home town enscribed on it.
When sophomores yell “CHARGE,” all freshmen must run at least five yards, then fall on the ground and imitate a Yankee dying.
Each freshman must have 13 minnie balls in a sock and be able to count them upon request of sophomores.
Each freshman must know all the words to Dixie, the Alma Mater and “Go Mississippi” and be ready to SING at command by any sophomore.
No freshman can cross the streets without the permission of a sophomore.
A freshman may not enter the cafeteria without permission of a sophomore.
Freshmen are required to attend Kangaroo Court and participate in all other freshman activities.
SOPHOMORES AND FRESHMEN MUST DRESS IN SEMIFORMAL ATTIRE for supper after Freshman Day activities.
A freshmen may not be seated in the presence of a sophomore unless requested to sit.
Engineering Group Meets To Discuss State Trip Friday Engineering Club will hold its organizational meeting Friday, 2A period, in room one of the Administration Building, Miss Lurline Stewart announced.
The club, comprised of engineering, science, and math majors, hold discussions and lectures in an effort to stimulate interest in present day trends in scientific and industrial development.
But other than that, some names have meanings that otherwise could apply to just about anything but the person behind' it.
Back in Medieval times, people took the names of their occupations and made them their own—regardless of what they meant or how they were spelled.
A number of Butlers, Bakers, Farmers, Cooks, and one Carpenter on the Hinds campus suggest that somebody has kinfolks from way back.
Getting on the tastier side of things, there is Berry, Bean, Lemmon, and Bacon.
And although there must be an East and a South somewhere, only North and West showed up at Hinds.
Among the things of nature, there are Woods, Hedges, a Hill, a Lane, Clay, a Rose, and Brooks filled with Reeds.
Even various kinds of fields are represented, such as Barefield, Brasfield, and Breakfield.
Splashes of Whites and a dash of Green adds a little color to a dull group of Browns and Grays.
It is also very nice to know that the names of Dickens, Hawthorne, and Fitzgerald will live on, continually reminding us of those great authors.
The freshmen certainly aren't the bravest class in the Land with two Cowards among them.
In the miscellaneous category, you might find a Ring, a Monk, a Cannon, Cotton, and even a few Bells.
In summing things up and getting down to the Price of things, Hinds isn’t very well off financially with only three Dollars.
Clay Cooleyi, sophomore from Jackson, became acquainted with the three terms, plus dozens more, while working at Yellowstone National Park this summer.
He applied for the position through civil service after a friend suggested the job.
Stationed at Canyon Village, Wyoming, Clay, along with fifty other boys, lived in barracks in the early part of the summer.
The well-organized camp was run “much like a military camp,” said Clay.
While learning the new type of work, the young men had to adjust to the climate.
Clay enjoyed the opportunity of viewing the country around Yellowstone.
The boys, whose ages ranged from 19 to 29, worked to rid the forest of ribes, which (indirectly causes blister rust on white pine trees.
The “hodag,” an instrument slightly resembling an ax was used to first detect the ribes, and then to dig it up.
Clay, who is inter ested in “everything and nothing' * plans to continue his education a either Millsaps or Southern.
YOU LUCKY DOG — Registered Pekingese pup knowi as “Phoo-Phoo” cuddles contentedly in the arms of bubbling Bobbie Jean Kitchens.
The vivacious 18-year-old Jackson Cen tral graduate pleases people regularly with Hi-Stepper appear ances and extraordinary charm.
Page 6 H1N0S0NIAN October 17, 1*62 Thursday Contest Highlights Sports Action EAGLE GRIDDERS — Members of the 1962 edition of the Hinds’ Eagle football team are set for action when the East Mississippi Lions invade Raymond tomorrow night.
The squad, under the direction of Head Coach Joe Renfroe and assistant Ivan Rosamond, has undergone intensive practice during the past two weeks in preparation for the contest.
East Mississippi Squadron Invades Tomorrow Night Back in Raymond tomorrow after three weeks away and an open date last week, Hinds Junior College Eagles are digging in for the mid-week invasion of the high scoring East Mississippi Lions.
Eagle coach, Joe Renfroe, encouraged by the bristled spirits of his Hinds crew, spent last week's breather in hard contact drills and sweat sessions.
Most of the injured Eagles, crippled earlier in the season, are well on their way to recovery, Renfroe said.
His sprained arch kept him out of the Delta game two weeks ago and could possibly keep him sidelined the rest of the season.
Richard Stacy, end, who figured heavily in Hinds passing offense this season, has been bent under a bruised shoulder, and Joe Patterson, another strong fullback is nearly recovered from a sprained ankle.
Last year the big Lion team took second place in the junior college conference, and is pushing its way into the same position again, this year.
At present Coach Bob Sullivan's boys are tied in the number two slot with the Perkinston powerhouse, four wins and one loss each.
Sullivan will be depending on his versatile running-passing offense which clicked so*well against Northwest.
Defensively he will be counting on strong secondary such as Allen Bruton whose defensive play against Northwest’s passing attack last week ended in a spectacular interception.
Especially since Hinds has thrown over a hundred passes this season, 40 of them in their last contest.
Of the 19 games, Hinds has won 12, East Mississippi 5, and only one ended in a tie.
They are tied with Central for the top spot, each having one loss and three wins.
In spite of the Tuesday upset, Shangri-La remains in third place and Eastside is still dragging the rear.
No game will be played Thursday night of this week because of the football game, Polly Rabalais announced.
The last round of the tournament will be played next Tuesday night, October 23, between Frances Pickett’s team and Patsy Roberts’ team.
Sending the Wildcats from second to fourth place in the standings, the Wolves now hold a solid grip on the top slot with five wins and no losses.
However, this week they meet third place Delta, and next week second place Perkinston.
Perkinston, Hinds, and Delta rested last week, but will venture forth this week during a full slate of six scheduled games in. the conference.
Thursday, Copiah-Lincoln will travel to Misissippi Delta, and East Central will journey to Southwest.
Saturday Pearl River will meet Holmes at iPoplarville, and Itawamba will go to Perkinston.
Favorites in the Thursday contests will be Co-Lin, Southwest, and East Mississippi.
Perkinston, Jones, and Pearl River are favored in the Saturday battles.
Coke makes your party Sparkle JACKSON COCO-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY MISSISSIPPI ENGRAVING CO, HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES P.0.
Sophomore maids chosen are Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson; Annis Bell, Jackson; and Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg.
Freshmen maids selected in a special election Tuesday are Kaye Bullock, Jackson; Carmen Cotton, Florence; and Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Jackson.
On Friday evening a campus party has been planned for the many students expected to remain on campus for Saturday's activities.
Highlighting the Saturday program will be official opening of IN FULL SCHEDULE — Hinds Hi-Steppers began budgeting their time as the parade and show season stacked on top of regular football appearances.
Already scheduled are the Red Carpet Bowl parade and halftime in Vicksburg, Christmas parades in Columbus and other Mississippi cities, stage band shows in Jackson and New Orleans, all in addition to halftime shows at all Hinds remaining football games.
FOURTH STRAIGHT YEAR Hindsonian Receives High Rating From Associated Collegiate Press Hindsonian has been awarded First Class Honor rating in a national contest of junior college papers for the fourth straight year, Kent Prince, public relations director and Hindsonian advisor, announced.
The award, given for ""excellent"" work during the second semester last year, was presented to only eight other papers in the country during this grading by the Associated Collegiate Press.
Joe White of Mendenhall, co-editor of the Hindsonian last year is editor again this year.
He is also president of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association.
Gwen Canoy of Magee, White's co-editor on the award winner, is now at Mississippi State College for Women.
Associate editors were Sallie Baker of Miami, Florida, and Linda Byrd of Jackson.
The contest, widely recognized as one of the tightest collegiate newspaper rating services, is extensively known for its service to universities and senior colleges.
Autumn Confab ipi Of JC Press Association Five Hinds students will attend the annual fall workshop of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association October 26, and 27 at Southwest Mississippi Junior College at Summit.
Delegates to the conference will be Joe White, editor of the Hindsonian; Bettye Simmons, associate editor; Wayvene McGrew, literary critic; Danny Evans, editorial writer and Jim Toombs, news editor.
Kent Prince, public relations director and sponsor of the Hindsonian will accompany the group as faculty advisor.
Hinds Represented At Education Meet President George M McLendon, Robert M Mayo, administrative assistant, and Dr.
James Sparkman, dean of instruction, represented Hinds at a meeting of the Mississippi Association of School Administrators yesterday in Jackson.
General sessions and sectional meetings were conducted throughout the day.
An appearance by Governor Ross Barnett highlighted the morning’s program.
Office of Education, Washington, D C., who spoke on ""Progress in Mathematics and its Implication for the Schools,"" Dr.
The feature of the final session was an address by Tom Bailey, Florida State Superintendent of Education.
Pictures For Annual Scheduled By Editor Belva Watkins, Eagle yearbook editor, announced today that student pictures will be taken November 8 on the auditorium stage.
This is the only day that individual photographs for the yearbook will be taken.
According to Belva, ""students must wear dark coats and ties or dark blouses and sweaters.
Belva stressed that only one day will be designated for picture taking.
Students who do not attend will not have their pictures in the 1962-63 Eagle.
This date, a month later than that of last year, was chosen so that boys’ hair would have time to partially grow out, Belva said.
Price has been set at $1.04 per student, which will be paid at the time the pictures are taken.
Howard O Pippen Studios, Jackson, has been selected to make the portraits.
Pippen Studios is noted nationally for quality workmanship in the photographic field. the new science observatory.
Visitors will be allowed to view the stars and planets through the new 12-inch reflector telescope at convenient hours both day and night.
Informal tours of the campus and coffee hours in the home economics lounge will fill the afternoon agenda.
Following annual alumni dinner in the Hinds cafeteria, a talent program will be presented in the college auditorium.
The crowning of Queen Hilda Bullock will proceed the ItawambaEagle football clash scheduled for eight.
Immediately following the game a reception for the court and a dance will be held in the air-conditioned girls physical education building.
JOHN STENNIS Stennis To Speak At Bureau Supper On Hinds Campus Senator John Stennis will be featured speaker at the annual Hinds County Farm Bureau Harvest Supper Tuesday, October 30, in the Hinds cafeteria.
In addition to Senator Stennis, special guests will be winners in the West Central District of the Mississippi Farm Bureau.
Included will be Miss Kathy Kilby, district Farm Bureau queen and Miss Ann Stepher&son, district winner in the talent division, both Hinds students; and a vocal quartet composed of Mrs.
Senator Stennis is expected to speak on recent developments in farm legislation.
He is nationally recognized as the champion of the small farmer and as the leading sponsor of agriculture and forestry research.
He has worked tirelessly in be* half of agriculture, forestry, health and education, and the development of rivers and harbors.
Page 2 HINOSONiAN October 24, 1962 Tonight Decides Future Not to remain in a singular, didactic vein, some comment must be made on an important, though irregular, program taking place on campus tonight.
The faculty and administrative committees have been thoroughly patient and understanding with the student representatives who petitioned for the social occasion.
The idea for this program originated in the student body, initially in a sophomore class meeting.
The petitioning students recognized that a major let-down is felt by all after the Freshman Day activities, dressing in semi-formal attire for the evening meal and then returning to the dormitories.
These students expressed a desire for a social occasion to follow up the light-hearted day.
A cross-sectional interest interview was plotted throughout the student body and faculty members.
We can now enjoy the results of complete student-faculty cooperative relations.
Thus we are able to obtain an extended hour program, which will last until nine o’clock.
Realizing that it is highly irregular to hold such an affair in the middle of the week and especially at the later hour, some basic restrictions must be observed by participating students.
They simply follow campus rules, which must be doubly respected at this time.
If we don’t respect these obligations to our college now, we never will.
It is clearly discerned that an infraction of the rules now will eliminate any further week-day social action by the student body.
The program is given as a grievance-apology to the freshman from the sophomores who have harrassed and heckled them most of today.
HINDS-IGHTS |Depression Hits Hinds Campus; ' ""Students Change ; By LINDA BYRD Dear depressed Reader, The time has come for you and me to have a little talk.
We have lots in common and therefore have a common, ground on which to converse.
We both attend college, a junior college, and we're both interested in getting an education.
We try to further our knowledge by coming here, and so we are partners in the learning process.
I can't believe you are one of those individuals who is attending college just to be going, or escaping the draft, or waiting just for that gold band.
The others I mentioned* aren't parts of this or any other college campus—they're simply fixtures.
Sometimes, though, like now when we’re in the seventh week of school, depression sets in and you change.
In the early stages of this disease called depression, a slight change occurs in your makeup.
Homework becomes harder to produce, teaching boring and friends friends seem childish.
You become a mass of irritability, homework is cursed as a necessary evil, classes are unbearable and your friends— well, you lose some of them in this stage.
It usually tapers off at the end of the eighth week of school, just in time for you to start studying for nine week exams.
Since we don’t know the exact reason for its beginning, neither can we pinpoint its ending.
Perhaps because of exams we are busier than ever and therefore too busy to worry about ourselves.
Maybe, however, when there is a slag in our existence, time plants the need of self-pity in our minds and depression results.
I can’t tell you if your tomorrows will hold ebbs of depression and heights of enjoyment for you decide your own days, not me.
I simply want to let you know that depression, doesn't strike only you.
It can hit several, thousands, and nations at one time and yet we all consider it an individual tragedy.
The first was made by the President himself, and the second by the Attorney General, and later reiterated by the President at a news conference.
The first statement, made by President Kennedy at a news conf e r e n c e, concerned negotiations over Berlin.
If the above statement has been our attitude, then no wonder the Communists leaders have been able to talk us out of most of their present day possessions.
Such an approach with the Communists at the negotiating table is the same as Ole Miss and Kentucky scheduling a football game, and Ole Miss not showing up for it.
This is not to say we should lower ourselves to their level, but it is to say, at least have a practical and knowledgable attitude as to the objectives of our opponents.
Great Britain had to learn the same thing when she took the predominant world power had to realize that it couldn’t rely just on principles, and depend on others to look out after its interests.
FACULTY ADVISOR Kent Prince The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
This statement may explain why Robert Kennedy has not prosecuted the Communists for not registering as agents of a foreign power, as they were supposed to under a recent law passed by Congress.
The Attorney General does have plans for prosecuting the Ole Miss rioters though.
This film and evidence proves that the riots were caused, started, and led by professional agitators of the Communist party.
Yet, there wasn’t any prosecution of these instigators by the Attorney General.
If the Communists can stir up resentment against an American Government committee, then they can stir up resentment against the American Government.
If that is not the case, then our leaders either do not know that the threat exists , or they are naive to the facts.
And takes less than two sweet-Southern utterances and one spontaneous smile for one to lose his heart to Miss Charlotte Ann Carroll, Miss Mississippi of 1962-63.
We found this to be keenly true when we met Charlie, who was visiting in the home of Mrs.
Alon Bee, Hi Stepper director and official chaperone for the past feur Miss Mississippis.
Bee and Miss Carroll had met some time ago when both the Hi-Steppers and Charlie appeared at a Junior Chamber of Commerce district meeting.
Their second meeting came after Charlie, officially Miss Eupora, captured the Miss Mississippi title in Vicksburg on August 4.
FL 2-8331 Of the numerous articles written about Charlie, not one has failed to express marvel at her naturalness, lack of sophistication, her All-American manner.
These merits, as well as her rollicking impersonation of Popeye’s girl, the long-loved Olive Oyl, won for her both the judges’ and the people’s approval in Vicksburg.
Charlie charmed the Atlantic City audience also, winning first night talent honors and a slot among the ten finalists.
Incidentally, on the Saturday afternoon preceding the final judging, Miss Mississippi was ranked second in the annual press poll.
A sophomore at Delta State College, the 19-year-old fireball is a physical education major.
Three times All-State basketball guard, Charlie hopes one day to instruct, probably on a college level.
It would seem she generally likes being active, and that includes horse riding, swimming, water skiing, and even hunting.
Evidently, the love of outdoors runs in the four-daughter Carroll family.
She chose Delta, ""because some of my relatives went there, and because I like a small college, although when I visited the campus recently there were so many unfamilar faces.
Delta doubtlessly appreciates the free praise and plugs of its excellent representative.
Delta is no doubt beaming also because its frolicsome femme stole the Miss Mississippi title from the Ole Miss monopoly.
We put this statement to a test by asking did she remember a certain night in a certain restaurant when she crowded into a tiny ladies room with another girl.
Finally she did remember, and recalled discussing the damp weather's effect on hair, but she was surprised to learn the other girl was this writer.
At Vicksburg, I didn’t really expect to win, but I wanted people to like my talent.
I was sitting backstage eating nabs and drinking Pepsi, wishing I could take off my bathing suit.
Miss Mississippi continued with assorted hand gestures and word emphasis, ""And what thrilled me more than anything—at least half of the Miss Mississippi contestants sent me telegrams when Mrs.
That hilarious knack for impersonations which rang the rafters at both pageants is not infrequent in Charlie’s everyday conversation.
During our interview, she went into a cigar smoking routine, imitating a fellow student at Delta State.
This delightful performance continued as the subject changed to future plans.
Charlie plans to return to Delta second semester, staying through the summer school session.
Scores of appearances throughout Mississippi are scheduled for 1963 for flawless beauty.
Accompanying Miss Mississippi on most of her trips will be her chaperone, advisor and “second mother,” Mrs.
MISSISSIPPI'S FINEST — Charlotte Ann Carroll, Miss Mississippi of 1962-63, breaks forth with her now famous spontaneous smile as she chats with Hindsonian writer Bettye Simmons.
WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON Initial Student Faculty Forum Discusses Censorship Of Press “Censorship of the press” will be the topic under discussion as the students and faculty combine their respective thoughts and conclusions in Wednesday’s, Oct., informal panel meeting.
Miss Susan Brown, originator of the panel, and Boyd McPhail, student chairman, invite all faculty members and students to participate in the discussion every Wednesday at 3:30m. in Room nine of the Academic Building.
IN THE COLLEGE BRAND ROUND-UP Get on the BRANDWAGON ... it’s lots of fun) Prize will be awarded to any Group, Fraternity, Sorority or Individual who qualifies and has the highest number of points.
David Blackstock, president; Frank Wilson, vice-president; Robert Hudson, secretary and treasurer; and James Bond, reporter.
After the meeting adjourned, Wallace Wall, club sponsor, demonstrated the new blueprinting machine.
FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE Either in Color or Bfiack and White MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers Tannous Addresses Pelahatchie Group George Tannous, newly elected president of Hinds Junior College sophomore class and Presidents Council, addressed the Pelahatchie Parents Teachers Association Tuesday night.
A 14-month immigrant from Lebanon, Tannous used a Lebanese magazine and post cards as samples while he explained the economy, politics, and American aid aspects of Lebanese life.
Tannous spent much of his talk speaking informally about the differences between Lebanon and America.
Comparing the clijmate of his native land to that of Californa, he commented on the extreme weather in Mississippi.
Many people, he said, are surprised to learn that Lebanon is called an • eastern Switzerland because of the mild climate.
He passed pictures among the group, showing how in this climate, cedars of Lebanon, which were mentioned in the Bible, are still growing on the hillsides.
Tannous, a resident of Vicksburg, was accompanied by Jim Smith of Pelahatchie who introduced him to the large group.
A few general comments were made about Pelahatchie students at Hinds, showing the overall records they make and the honors they are awarded.
Beginning at six o'clock this morning freshman students gathered in small groups to confer on the coming activities.
Most of these freshmen wandered to their selected spohomore's room and be* gan to perform menial tasks for him.
These tasks included such meaningless forms as mopping and waxing floors, sweeping halls, emptygarbage, and even cleaning sinks with a toothbrush.
Sophomores corrected , freshmen at the slightest infraction of Freshman Day rules.
A mid-evening program, ending at 3:30, concluded the major portion of activities.
Freshmen were tried in a mock trial, conducted in a satirical vein in the manner of ' the Supreme Court.
MISSISSIPPI Students Have Varied Reactions Toward Kennedy’s Tough Talk Against Communist Controlled Cuba By MIRIAM MAY Monday nighjt, a large number— perhaps the majority of Americans —sat grim-faced in front of their T.V. sets and others only half-sat, rigidly, on the edges of their chairs beside their radios.
A familiar voice sounded through the wires and cables of our communication systems.
In a survey taken to see how the situation has affected students on Hinds campus, we found that most of them have only a vague knowledge of what is gping on.
A number of students agreed with Kennedy’s plan to impose a blockade on arms shipments to Cuba.
Several people thought that some of the ""older guys"" such as Truman and Eisenhower, should be called hi for advice.
Sylvia Sandifer, also of Pelahatch e, thinks Kennedy was late making a decision.
Some one noticed that the StarSpangled Banner was played before and after Kennedy’s speech for the first time since his inaugj uration.
They pointed out that the I purpose for this was to stir up I patriotism that has been dead for j so long.
One boy thought that President i Kennedy seemed nervous, while de. livering his nation-wide emergency message—like it was actually the beginning of a war.
He only hoped that he wouldn't slip and make 'any serious mistakes that would set off a nuclear war.
Many students thought that the crisis would heal, if Castro were only done away with.
Vicki Hazzlerigg and Dannie Evans, both freshmen, will attend seminars on varied journalistic writing and tour the newspaper plant.
The first consists of news art, news photography, general news writing, women’s news, and a tour of the plant.
Second session will include discussions of sports news, editorial writing, feature writing, and headline and make-up theories.
Noon luncheon on the Heidelberg roof will feature speaker Norman Mott, president of the Misssisippi Press Association.
Page 4 HINDSONIAN October 24, 1962 SCHOOL PICTURES FOR 1962-63 YEARBOOK 1962 63 EAGLE HINDS HONEY — During the warmxiays of October, Patsy Barnes takes time out to enjoy a bit of rustic nature.
Miss Denton, an English major, is the daughter of Hinds faculty members, Mr, and Mrs.
George Boyd, head of the English department at Millsaps College announced Miss Denton’s enrollment.
While at Millsaps, Miss Denton was a member of the Millsaps Players for four years.
She is a full-blooded Chiricahua Apache and holds the world's hammer-throw record.
The little woman I referred to is someone we found crouching under the sofa when we moved into our apartment several years ago, and there she has remained ever since.
She never speaks, except to make a kind of guttural clicking sound when she is hungry.
Muiy tyftiwttoo mh Imid To get back to tests—sure, they're important, but let's not allow them to get too important.
There are, after all, many qualities and talents that simply can’t be measured by quizzes.
Gregor, a freshman at the New Hampshire College of Tanning and Belles Lettres, has never passed a single test; yet all who know him agree that he is studded with talent like a ham with cloves.
He smokes them one at a time-settling back, getting comfortable, savoring each tasty puff.
Well, sir, there you have Gregor Sigafoos—artist, humanist, philosopher, Marlboro smoker, and freshman since 1939.
Anna Livia, a classmate of Gregor's, had no talent, no gifts, no brains, no personality.
She would cram like crazy before a test, always get a perfect score, and then promptly forget everything she had learned.
Naturally, she graduated with highest honors and degrees by the dozen, but the sad fact is that she left college no more educated, no more prepared to cope with the world, than when she entered.
SPECIAL SPEEDSTER — Jerry Lee Ainsworth stands beside his 13 foot speedliner boat whieh ls eqmpped w;th a 50-horsepower Mercury engine.
Misfortune found him twice this summer as he overturned ms speeding boat in races.
At present the boat is being readied for a 6 hour Christmas race in Miami, Florida.
First, second and third place winners of each division will win identical motors to the ones they have on their racers.
Pit crew for the Jerry Lee “Special” n are Jimmy Farris, Jer ry Newman, and Jimmy Williamson.
Girls Find Out First-Hand Information About What’s Going On In Boys’Dorms R u I I Kin a ovon --x_ By LINDA BYRD and BETTYE SIMMONS We’re females.
Granted we aren’t the first, but we are the first single females to spend the night in Southside, boys dormitory.
Monday night of last week we ventured to the south section of the campus, pillows in hand, and entered the male sanctuary.
The lobby was, surprisingly enough, near empty with only one boy talking into the telephone in quiet and I secretive tones.
He did however, interrupt his conversation long enough to acknowledge our entrance by a long look of disbelef.
Boys passing by upstairs were shocked to say the least to see two girls bring bag and baggage into the dorm.
I Our hosts, Mike and Polly Ra| balais, showed us a few tricks of | dorm communication — knocking on the wall.
Mr Rabalais and Jimmy and Jerry Clark have a foolproof system that would put Alexander Graham Bell to shame.
As far as Mr Bell is concerned, he seldom gets recognized at Southside.
Sophomore boys are too busy with football practice, English papers, and grill duty to stakeout in the lobby waiting for a phone call.
Both commented on the quietness of a boys dorm and declared things couldn’t possibly be as quiet in th e girls dorm.
Northside, Southside, Westside and Eastside, she had quite a few things to say about her favorite dorm.
When asked to describe in one word her opinion of the Southside boys, Mrs.
Quietness rang from the rafters interrupted only by the constant ringing of the phone.
Our purpose for staying, to write this feature article, had proved an amaginzly quiet one.
T MOfci mfa tfvflwrtfy yfffo Coca-Cola Company by JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI Page 6 HINDSONIAN October 24, 1962 INTERCEPTED PASS — Halfback Woody Martin intercepts an East Mississippi pass in the third quarter of last Thursday’s football game.
Lion End Tal DeCell charges in trying for a tackle while Eagle Guard Carl Sullivan looks on.
Laurel Picked As Site For Saturday Contest Playing at neutral Watkins Stadium in Laurel, Saturday, the Hinds Eagles and the hosting Jones Bobcats of Ellisville will tangle with almost identical records.
Sporting four losses and a tie each, the Jones County squad is one ahead of the Eagles in the win bracket with two against the Eagles one.
Although the records are nearly equal the Bobcats will be a slight favorite to win.
Head Coach Sims Cooley will be fielding his ace quarterback, Mike McLellan, to lead the attack on the invaders.
Speedy halfbacks Billy Burnette and Jerry Bourg will provide the running power along with fullback Lester Aultman.
Hinds Head Coach Joe Renfroe is set to use his aerial attack in a slightly modified form this week.
Instead of using his starting quarterback Mike Vincent for the entire game Jim Buell and Percy Boell will alternate.
In the halfback slots Ken Johnson and Woody Martin are slated to start with Larry Jones and Butch Greer filling in as needed.
In the fullback post, converted halfback Dan Magee will start with John Stanley and Joe Patterson substituting.
Regular starter Jimmy Dukes has been sidelined for three weeks with an injured foot and may be out for the remainder of the season.
Starting on the line are ends Jimmy Clark and Richard Stacy; tackles Rick Thrash and Larry Newell; guards David Jones and Carl Sullivan and George Benton at center.
The Bobcat line-up will feature Billy McMullen and Dayton Pridgen at ends, Bill Windham and Pete Evans at tackle, David Pope and James Stedman at guards and Larry Sullivan at center.
Delta Upset Hurts Co-Liu Wolves; Perkinston Could Decide Standing Passing, the game usually favored by the Eagles, was another story of woe with only eight of the 24 passes attempted conecting for a total of 62 yards.
Following the opening touchdown the Lions settled down to slow, steady marches down the field but the hard-pressed Eagle unit held on several fourth and a few yards plays, keeping the Lions from scoring again until 50 seconds prior to half’s end.
After moving the ball from their own 31-yard line to the Hinds four, fullback Richard Hubbard swept over tackle for the touchdown.
Five times the Eagles moved inside the Lion 20-yard line and five times their drives failed.
Pass interceptions twice stopped the advances, with the Lion line holding on three other attempts.
Previously undefeated CopiahLine oln met their downfall in the Mississippi Junior College Grid Conference last Saturday when the ing Perkinston Saturday in the top game.
East Central hosts Mississippi ^ .. ,, Delta and East Mississippi travels powerful Mississippi Delta whipped |t0 Fulton for a game with Moor . head.
While the Wesson Wolves were losing to the Trojans East Mississippi was in.
Raymond downing the STANDINGS Eagles 20-0 and thus putting the EMJC Lions in a tie for the top ' East Mississippi slot with Co-Lin.
Copiah-Lincoln In other conference action Pearl Perkinston River defeated Holmes 26-7 while Holmes Northwest ran over Jones 7-0.
Pearl River Central won its first game of the i Delta season and handed the cellar posiItawamba tion to Southwest following a 4-6 Jones upset win.
Served In The Eagle’s Nest Try It Now MILK ICE CREAM FOOD PRODUCTS JACKSON MISSISSIPPI Eagles Set For Jones Following 20-0 Defeat First Place East Mississippi Lions Run Rampant Against Hinds Team East Mississippi’s Lions proved themselves “King of the Mississippi Junior College Conference” last Thursday with their 20-0 win over Hinds’ Eagles.
Playing their third game before a home crowd—the sixth of the season—4he luckless Hinds crew just couldn't match the power of the Lions.
Quarterback Lester Smith pitched five yards to Brent Jackson in the end zone just four minutes after the opening kick for the first score.
When Hinds did take charge, it was to no avail, as the powerful Lion defense kept the yards gained on ground total to 19 in the first Half and 54 for the game.
Hinds Coach Joe Renfroe changed his pattern of substitutions during the game.
Most noticeable was the use of three quarterbacks instead of the usual one.
Regular starter Mike Vincent played with Jim Buell and Percy Boell alternating throughout the game.
Running at halfback was Woody Martin, Ken Johnson, Butch Greer and Larry Jones.
RAYMOND SAGE PASSES JUDGMENT Page 3 wm Migblights of Minds PLAYERS TO PRESENT COMEDY Page 9 VOLUME 29—NUMBER 8 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 1962 divides Set Saturday Night Fireworks, Waterfall Lend Theme For Observatory’s Grand Opening Lighting the sky during the halftime crowning of Homecoming queen Saturday night will be bright rockets, pyrotechnic waterfalls and other devices used to exemplify this year’s theme which is connected with the observatory grand opening.
Sophomore maids will be Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson, escorted by Jimmy Chandler; An-' homecoming COURT — Reigning at Sandra Jabour, Sharon Bearden, Annis Bell, Homecoming Saturday will be Queen Hilda Carmen Cotton, and Kaye Bullock.
Game time Bullock and Maids (from has been set at 7:30 and crowning ceremonies the left clockwise) Bobbye Jean Kitchens, during half-time.
TODAY'S PROGRAM The entire Hinds team of seven members was judged superior for their overall performance in discussion and excellent for their advocacy speaking.
Hemphill scored, in individual awards, three superiors out of a possible five.
Barnett continued by outlining the recent economic advances made in Mississippi.
We were the first to build a governor’s mansion and the last to remodel one,” he laughed.
He won in the first two of three rounds of discussion and in the second round of advocacy speaking.
Hemphill was a member of the state championship junior college debate team from Hinds last year.
Also attending from Hinds were James Chandler, Vicksburg; Carol Fortier, Jackson; Woody May, Vicksburg; Dawn McNeil, Jackson; Jane Land, Clinton; and Belva Watkins, Vicksburg.
Colleges participating were Harding, Lamar State, Louisiana College, Louisiana Polytechnic Institute, LSU, McNeese State, and Mississippi College.
Hemphill was the only member of the troupe ever to have debated against senior college squads.
Julia Todd of Clinton coaches the Hinds squad. nis Bell, Jackson, escorted by Boyd McPhail; and Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg, escorted by Lynn Ernest.
Freshman class will be represented by Kaye Bullock, Jackson, escorted by Ralph Hemphill; Carmen Cotton, Florence, escorted by Harold Mitchell; and Bobbye Jean Kitchens, escorted by Joe White.
Hinds Eagles willmeet Itawamba at 7:30, with the crowning ceremonies plus a special fire-works display highlighting the halftime affair.
Band director Jimmy Morris said a few fireworks will be used in the pre-game color guard presentation, but the main display will come during halftime.
Queen Bullock and her court will be presented to the visiting alumni at a reception in the girls’ physical education building immediately following the game.
Official grand opening of the new science annex is also scheduled for Saturday.
Visitors may tour the observatory any time during the afternoon, one hour before the game and one hour following the game.
Weather permitting, Saturn and Jupiter will be viewed through the 12-in.ch reflector telescope.
Stephenson, chairman of the science department, said the entire annex will be open for inspection.
Coffee will be available in the Home Economics Lounge throughout the afternoon.
McLendon Accepts Award For Service From Farm Bureau Hinds County Farm Bureau awarded Hinds Junior College President George M McLendon its Distinguished Service “Man of the Year” award last night at the annual Harvest Supper in the college cafeteria.
Mr McLendon was chosen to receive the organization's highest honor for having done more to promote agriculture in Hinds County during the past year than any other member.
Principal speaker for the occasion, Senator John Stennis, praised the group for choosing McLendon and endorsed them for having presented “this fine award, so well deserved” to one who serves so many in so many ways.
Greaves, director of the Bureau and member of the Hinds Junior College Board of Trustees.
Also during the meeting, Walter Gibbes, coordinator of Vocation Training at Hinds, was elected vice-president of the Bureau for the next term.
Jack Treloar, Superintendent of Hinds Farm and Physical Plant, is outgoing president of the Bureau.
Featured during the program was Hinds student Kathy Kilby, District Miss Farm Bureau, and Ann Stephenson, Bureau talent winner.
Page 2 HINDSONIAN October 31, 1962 College Days Flicker Time is like a roman candle or a giant explosive.
It suddenly bursts into flame, without warning, and then is usable no more.
A small boy timidly lights a holiday's roman candle and waits expectantly for the flood of brilliant light which ensues.
He half expects the tube to explode in his hand, and is ready each moment to throw it down a$d run for cover.
He no longer thinks only of fireworks and the fourth of July or shortlived Christmas fires.
During his eighteenth or nineteenth year he begins his college education.
Remembering bygone days, he still takes some delight in childish activities.
Only four years or so will he spend getting his education ... just a short while and he will be depended upon to act as an educated, mature person.
The process is stepped up, and he just waves the roman candle around, causing it to burn faster.
When the four years are gone, he stands alone, with an empty, burned-out tube in his hand.
For the remainder of his life he will keep a tight grip on the used candle.
Perhaps if he had not been in such a hurry to see, the pretty fireworks the wonder would have lasted longer.
W LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS A pencil,M iss Au£N, I wish to pictate an exam FOR MY MONPAY /WPRN/NiS CLASS ,« Come To Homecoming Hinds students last week showed that they could and would support well planned social occasions on the campus.
Approximately four hundred students attended the program in the girls’ gymnasium.
This idea has been stated and restated during the past three or four years.
It is up to the students as to whether other school programs of this type will continue.
Also, take every opportunity to encourage week-end activities of this sort.
The girls’ gymnasium is open every weekend for dancing, card playing, basketball, gymnastics and television viewing.
JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager -Jim Bonney -Albert Dahduh LITERARY CRITIC _ l ___Way vie McGrew PHOTO EDITOR-Robert Pickenpaugh NEWS EDITORS Rodger Owenby, Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS--Mirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Varnado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Klaire Parker, Jim Toombs.
Kent Prince The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
The theme song of the Kennedy Administration seems to be Too little and too late, or too much too soon, or never enough at the right time.
To see what is meant by this, one has only to profile the recent Cuban capers.
If an accurate view of recent events in this sphere is desired at least two questions must be answered.
To get a true picture of the possible reasoning behind recent events, there must be a further sub-division of these two questions into two lines of thought.
This is an election year and there are a number of congressional and senatorial seats that could go Republican, and so by initiating a long-drawn-out affair like an embargo, it will over-shadow some of his recent unfavorable policies and congressional defeats.
This seemingly stern action may shift enough votes to return these shaky seats to Congress re-filled with Kennedy Democrats.
In answer to the second question, why did the President wait so long to take action; if he would have acted in May, say, the Cuban crisis would probably be over, and most people have forgotten about it, or he could have gotten the United States into a worse jam by now.
The second line of thought is that President Kennedy was really trying to protect us.
If the President was really trying to protect us, why did he embargo Cuba, and give Castro a chance of putting the United States in a predicament of blackmail by demanding that if the U S. does not lift the embargo, he will fire those rockets.
Applying the same reasoning to this question, one speedily comes to the conclusion that there is no answer or logical reason for waiting this long to take action in this area.
Again, it seems that the Kennedy Administration is trying to cover its mistakes with better late than never linen, and one this is for certain, there is a lot of dirty Lenin in Russia to cover them with.
HINDS-IGHTS map] School Days Kept Alive In Hearts Of Tree Carvers 1mm By LINDA BYRD To those returning alumni who are visiting Hinds this year for homecoming festivities, may we say welcome.
You’ll notice by looking about the campus that things have changed quite a bit since you last attended school here The trees are # a little taller, the grill a little noisier and the people a little busier.
Our new library is one of the finest in the south, the science annex a step ahead in scientific knowledge, the new dormitories a well-equipped resting place, and the girls gym a haven for body culture.
Our faculty has enlarged quite a bit from your day, and by observation you can readily see that the student population has doubled if not tripled.
We have school buses now that go to and from the Jackson areas as well as the Raymond and Vicksburg districts.
Yes, Hinds has grown during your absence and will continue to grow long after this printed column turns yellow with age.
The school spirit that resounds at football games, the war sounds at football games, the warmth of the grill on cold days, the teacher student friendliness, the carvings on the tree bark, the fascination of a zoo laboratory, the world of books and the air of a college campus—these haven’t changed.
Because this campus remains as it was when you were here and because it has undergone a series of changes, homecoming shall remain a part of you, no matter how old nor how far away in miles you are from the campus.
Remember, homecoming is celebrated not necessarily on the campus but is celebrated in the mind and memory of the students who once walked these grass covered lawns and carved their names on the bark of ageless oaks.
George Earl was christened in the First Presbyterian Church, where his father is an Elder.
Saturday night they attended a reception at the LSU Alumni House, where Tad is Alumni Director.
He works at Keith Press and is officially designated Pat Fairchild's secretary, since Pat can neither read nor write.
By VIC COTTON “I don’t mean no harm, Mister, but my name’s Fairchild, and I ain’t kin to any of the others” were the words that first introduced me to one of Raymond’s most colorful citizens.
Dressed in riding jodphers, an army coat, foots and spats and a Confederate cap, Pat Fairchild MONDAY NIGHT cart usually be found walking briskly down a Raymond sidewalk, across the middle of the square or at his Keith Press ""office,"" where he often ""pronounces a few words"" on current affairs.
Once he failed to appear at Keith Press for BSU Executives Select Activities For Thanksgiving, Christmas Time several days, and Thomas Keith later reprimanded him because of his failure to report his whereabouts.
Looking at Mr Keith, he pursed his lips and stated assuringly, ""Mr McKeith, I am twentyone years old.
Mr Fairchild's conversation is usually centered around dogs, for he is a well known connoisseur of the canine.
Specializing in Blue Ticks, Redbones and Walkers, he has also owned some prize Jap hounds which ""come from Berleen, Germany”, and whose ears drug the ground.
Once the Keiths had wood cut and hauled to his house which is located on the outskirts of town, only to have him come to town complaining of the cold.
October 29, and selected committees to make plans for gathering food for Thanksgiving baskets.
Plans were also made to promote the annual Lottie Moon Christmas Offering for foreign missions.
Program plans were completed for students who planned to visit the Home for the Aged Tuesday night, October 30.
At the Tuesday night program Ralph Hemphill gave the devotional, Marcelle McLendon led the singing and Brenda Mullins accompanied on the piano.
The stage depicted a grill scene with students drinking Cokes and coffee.
Those taking part on program were Judy Herring, Rosalind Healy, Lynn Earnest, Patsy Reed, Marcelle McLendon, and Ann Birdsong.
Two years ago, when ""Young Tom and Big Tom”, as Fairchild calls the Keith brothers, decided to give him a good hot water bath, he revealed his feelings concerning physical hygiene.
PROFESSOR PAT — Pat Fairchild, an everpresent person in the Keith Press scene, often livens up the atmosphere with his direct philosophy on life.
Fairchild, a permanent fixture around the press for over a half century, here chats with Thomas Keith, Hindsonian publisher, during his lunch hour.
Language Of Life For Musician Results In Farm Bureau Title Her high school life at Raymond High also involved music, as does her life now at Hinds.
Those vocal cords which yield a sleepy-Southern sound, typical of Raymond products, are a source of delight to Kathy’s acquaintances.
The dancing fingers aren’t left unused, however, since Kathy’s conversation is usually accompanied by various hand explanations.
Miss Susan Brown, western, civilization instructor who is a friend and former instructor of Kathy, summed up this unusual girl, by saying, ""Kathy is a very capable girl.
Circle K Decides To Repair Entering Signboard At Hinds Repairing the Hinds Junior College signs at the entrance to the campus was the main object of business at Thursday’s Circle K supper meeting in the private dining room of the cafeteria.
The club which gave the signs two years ago, mentioned several improvements; among them was replacing the picture of the eagle with a silhouette of a boy and girl in cap and gown.
Also, it was decided that any club may have its insignia painted on the sign by contacting a Circle K member and giving him the necessary details.
Under the sponsorship of the freshman and sophomore class and Circle K Club, the dance would be held on the Friday night before Christmas holidays begin.
A committee was formed to discuss various facets of the dance, including band, decoration, and concessions.
As soon as Freshman officers are elected, more specific plans will be announced.
Presidents Council Names Committees At Today’s Meeting Presidents Council met this afternoon at 4:45 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria for a special meeting.
Committees were designed to set up Freshman Day rules for next year and work on a constitution for the Presidents Council.
Reports were made by each member/'president of a club, about the organization and activities of his group.
Robert Mayo, administrative assistant, met with the group for the supper meeting.
By BETTYE SIMMONS Music has always been the language of life for Kathy Kilby, and once more her vocal cords and dancing fingers have brought honors to the Raymond sophomore.
In the 16-county district Farm Bureau contest held in the Hinds auditorium recently Kathy was selected Miss Farm Bureau.
The next step is the state contest on November 13, 14 at the Hotel Heidelberg in Jackson.
The same judging procedure will be used, but with only five girls in competition.
The winner of the state contest will go to the National Convention in Atlanta later this year.
Other duties will include speaking at various luncheons, banquets and affairs of the Farm Bureau.
Kathy won first place in the state-wide talent contest sponsored by the Farm Bureau last fall, earning the right to perform at the National Convention in Chicago.
The 19-year-old music major developed her knack for music early in life, becoming pianist for Raymond Methodist Church at age 13.
Page 4 HINDSONIAN October 31, 1962 Bubbling Blue-Eyed Blonde Captures Coveted Title To Add To Collection HOT TAMALE HILDA — Perhaps it doesn’t dreamed up by Homecoming Queen Hilda take much skill to open a tamale can, but it Bullock.
Talkative Hilda regularly treats does take some originality for the concoctions Northside suitemates to assorted rarities.
Headquarters for the Latest Fashion in Make PARISIAN your shopping WEARING APPAREL CAPITOL AT LAMAR JACKSON, MISS. nu&c-iut* By BETTYE SIMMONS A bouncing, bubbling barrel of fun known as Hilda Bullock has been selected by the Hinds student body to reign as queen of the Homecoming celebration this week end.
Perfectly exemplifying the classic “Five foot two, eyes of blue,” this 19-year-old blonde has a mountainous list of other admirable qualities.
Smith of Jackson, the sprightly co-ed began amassing honors while a student at Enochs Junior High.
She was a cheerleader, class officer, listed in Who's Who, and chosen Miss Enochs.
Entry at Jackson Central brought titles from Miss Thermo-Jac to Miss Central High to Junior Miss Jackson.
A listing of Hilda's high school activities would take—well, some amount of space.
Artificial flowers and pumpkin shaped candles contributed to the seasonal atmosphere.
A taffy pull proved to be quiet sticky, and some of the girls got wet hair from bobbing for apples.
Another game was to feed a partner chocolate pudding while blind folded.
Steve Sloop, a senior at Belhaven College is in charge of the Westminster Fellowship at Hinds.
Hinds’ gay queen was also Homecoming queen for Central, serving as a member of the court three years.
Incidentally, this year marks the third time Hilda and her younger sister, Kaye, have been members of the same court.
Hilda was a member of the 1961 Homecoming Court, a campus favorite, one of the top five beauties, and an alternate to Miss Hinds Junior College.
Hinds has shared its talented product with other parts of the state and nation through Hi-Steppers.
And it must be so—for rarely does one see the doll-shaped face not in motion.
Anything from the privilege of voting to the merits of November water skiing.
Before the word politics is completed, Hilda rushes into “I think everyone should be forced to vote —you know, like in Denmark.
A self-described ""motor-mouth,"" she willingly continued, transferring to the virtues of old time best.
Hilda does her part to correct that situation with a friendly word for all.
According to her Northside suitemates, after Hilda has virtually talked them to death she invites them over for potted meat canapes, chili, and hot tamales.
Still in doubt about her college after Hinds, Hilda will doubtlessly remain the same friendly, natural and talkative young lady she is today.
Boyd McPhail, president of Circle K, remarked, ""If I had a sister that is not really mine, it would be Hilda.
His farm on Spring Ridge Road ptrsoni'ies his agricultural interests and fills many hours with work and pleasure for the award winner.
Like the lawyer who secretly desires to become an actor, President McLendon, an educator, has an avid interest in the land, its produce and the animals that live off the land.
Many after school hours are spent in the planning, preparation and operation of his property and its cattle.
On several occasions, he journeys to his farm to check on his cattle and land before going home.
He takes particular pride in his herd of 35 fully registered herefords.
Not only does Mr Mac possess an interest in agriculture in the sixties but he has also seemed to make it an important part of his past.
During the war years, he personally looked after the college herd—an outstanding feat for a college president.
In reality, though, the feat isn't so outstanding, considering that he has been the leader in developing the agriculture program at Hinds.
Mac's own cattle is sold to 4-H and to the FFA (Future Farmers of America) boys in This area and to cattlemen in the various counties of the state.
As one of the directors of the Hinds County' Livestock Association, in Edwards, Mississippi, President McLendon is well-known for taking an active part in developing the facilities of the town.
Not only does Mr Mac fill the full-time job of being President of Hinds, but he also has time for his fascinating interest in southern agriculture—thus making him well deservant of his new award.
Be sure, however, never to use the phrase “shoot the bull” when talking to President McLendon—he doesn’t take kindly to shooting bulls of any kind, especially Herefords.
October 31, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 5 ASTRONOMICAL ADKINS — Richard Adkins, of the science department, peers searchingly through the new 12 inch reflector telescope purchased by the college.
Open house will be held for the public Saturday afternoon from 3:30 to 5:00, from 6:30 to 7:30 and for an hour after the ball game that night.
According to science instructors, both Saturn and Jupiter will be visible at this time.
Everyone from cheerleaders like Karen McBride to class officers like George Tannous.
Their expressions will vary from worried-anxiety and grim-determination, to smug-satisfaction and wild-exuberance.
Some of the players, like Steve Erwin and Jimmy Tweedle, play to accomplish the impossible.
The story goes that Steve will bid game with only four points in his hand, and Jim will make it.
If you're looking for a game on a weekend, more than likely you'll find one in the home of Richard and Irene Adkins.
Both of the Adkins are avid bridge players and frequently invite students to play at their house.
An invitation to play there, especially on a Saturday night, is something that no bridge player could ever resist.
If it happens to be a Tuesday afternoon and you're hunting a game, try the accounting room in the Academic Building.
The school feels that the bridge playing may be just a fad, so they are sponsoring it on a trial basis.
If there is enough response, then it will be established as an official club.
Benton, Dean of Men, a pay telephone has been installed in Central Dormitory.
The action reportedly took place in response to a petition by the dormitory students a few weeks ago.
The paper was given by Benton, who presented it to Bell Telephone Company in Jackson.
DO YOUR BANKING WHERE SERVICE IS A TRADITION 1962-63 EAGLE Merchants & Planters Bank RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI Page 6 HINDSONIAN October 31, 1962 Pre-season Pigskin Selections Fall Short At Seasons End Something strange happened in the Junior College Conference this year.
Holmes and Jones were supposed to be powers according to the pre-season picks of the coaches.
Jones and Holmes are both exactly mid-way in the list of 12 schools in the conference.
Copiah-Lincoln and East Mississippi turned out to be the powers, and Pearl River, Mississippi Delta and Perkinston are running them a close race.
Looking over the three week schedule remaining this season it seems that the Wesson Wolves have the best chance of topping the circuit.
This week they invade Holmes Bulldog territory followed by games with Southwest and Hinds.
Barring any unforeseen injuries, they should come out with a final season record of nine wins against their one loss.
East Mississippi, currently occupying the top slot with Co-Lin, is By JIM BONNEY Hindsonian Sports Editor going to get a rude awakening when they meet Mississippi Delta November 15.
The shock could come earlier however; Holmes and Perkinston must be dealt with first, and either is capable of handing the high-flying Lions a loss.
Perkinston gained their reputation at season’s start, and injuries have taken their toll.
It seems likely that the only real scrap they have left will be with East Mississippi this week.
So either the Lions or the Bulldogs are about to climb out of the race.
Pearl River should go undefeated for their remaining three games against East Central, Jones and Hinds while Mississippi Delta will roll over Jones and Northwest before meeting East Mississippi.
Anything could happen in this rough and tumble brand of pigskin play, and upsets could throw all of the predictions out.
FIFTEEN YARDS — Referees put the ball back 15 yards during the Hinds Eagle vs Jones Bobcat game in Laurel last Saturday.
Coach Joe Renfroe will be using a complete freshman team as his starters this week.
Putting this group of men in action will give next years sophomores valuable game experience and provide an experienced batch of returnees for the 1963 season.
This right-minded type of thinking could make Hinds a power to deal with in future games.
It’s interesting to note that the Eagles are about to break a record set in 1958.
During the next game or so it would be interesting to count up the passes and watch the mark fall.
From the sideslines the Baton Rouge boys seem to be a much better team—better in this instance means Jerry Stovall and Danny LeBlanc.
Both are fine, speedy runners that have made it a habit of breaking loose when a score is needed.
This is one of the reasons why the Pelican State crew leads the SEC in rushing.
The Rebels, although fielding a good grid team have not met any real competition yet — certainly Vandy, Houston, Tulane and Mem,phis State couldn't be put into LSU's class.
Florida game had ended the LSU cheerleaders, student body and band struck up the famous “Go to Hades Ole Miss” song.
For sure it’ll be a good game with 68,000 staunch supporters packing the stadium.
Wesson Wolves Teach Perk Bulldogs Valuable -But Costly Grid Lesson When Wolves are on the prowl little Bulldogs should stay at home.
This is the lesson Perkinston’s dog team learned after they were defeated 28-7 in the Wesson Wolves backyard Saturday.
The Lions from Scooba retained their first place standing by taking Itawamba to the cleaners via a 20-6 score.
The feature game of this week will pit Perkinston against East Mississippi on the Lions home field.
Copiah Lincoln will travel to Holmes while Pearl River is at East Central.
If Perk lucks up and downs favored East Mississippi this week, and if Pearl River and Mississippi Delta also win while Co-Lin loses, then next week's standings will find five teams in first place.
Co-Lin is favored to top Holmes, and Pearl River is expected to dump East Central.
STANDINGS W L T PF-PA East Mississippi 6 1 0 15654 Copiah-Lincoln 6 1 0 14894 Miss.
Hinds and Jones were rated to be nearly equal by conference records, but the score after the two teams met last Saturday in Laurel’s Watkins Stadium proved different.
Scoring in every quarter except the second, the victorious Bobcats rolled up 32 points and held the Eagles scoreless.
The well-balanced Jones attack produced three touchdowns running and two by air, with Jones’ manpower breaking loose after halftime to net two touchdowns in each of the final two periods.
Halfway through the first quarter the Bobcats scored their initial touchdown.
After driving from their own five-yard line to the Eagle 28 In a series of 14 plays and four first downs, the Bobcats pitched the six point toss.
End David Pridgen grabbed the pass in the end zone from quarterback Mike McClellan throwing.
However, the break was negligible, for on the first Eagle play, the Bobcats regained control via the same route they had lost it—fumble-itis.
The Hi-Steppers paraded on and off the field before the Bobcats could score again.
Fine kick-off return by Percy Boell remained uncashed, and Jones forced Hinds to punt when three downs produced only ’ two yards.
David Lyons stood in the end zone and received the pass from halfback Billy Burnette who also kicked the extra point.
For the second time in the half, the Eagles took the ball and gained no yardage on four attempts before they handed the ball over to the Bobcats on their own 26.
Fullback Lester Aultman plowed through the center of the Eagle line from the 10-yard line to score.
Burnette’s kick was good, and the Jones team led 20-0 at the start of the final period.
After the Eagles regained control of the ball for the kick-off return and two plays, a dropped ball was picked up by fullback Joe Mouney.
Hinds trailed only 10-4 in first downs at intermission, but was behind 16-4 at the end.
Renfroe during his 15 year reign at Hinds has taken teams to the Little Rose Bowl, Spindle Top Bowl, Oleander Bowl and two Lions Bowl games.
Itawamba Indians Reported Out To Wreck Hinds Homecoming Contest This Saturday Itawamba’s Indians will be on the warpath this weekend in the Raymond area, trying to wreck the Hinds Eagles Homecoming.
From the looks of past records they should accomplish this mission with little difficulty although Eagle Head Coach Joe Renfroe has completely changed his starting line-up.
Using an entire freshman crew the Eagles will field the nucleus of the 1963 edition of the Hinds team, giving them valuable experience in game action.
Game time has been moved up to 7:30 for the contest instead of the usual 8:00m. due to the Homecoming ceremonies at halftime.
Heading the list of starters will be quarterback Percy Boell, with halfbacks Jim Buell and Butch Greer seeing action.
The fullback slot is a question mark since freshman Jimmy Dukes is still out due to an injured foot.
Starting at center will be Oscar Teasley, John Couch and Robert Eady at guards, and Mike Mahoney and Rick Thrash at tackle.
Larry Newell, suffering from an injured knee, might take Thrash's place if he responds to treatment before game time.
Last week when the Eagles invaded Laurel for a contest with Jones, the slightly favored Bobcats rolled up a little more than slight 32-0 victory.
With this defeat in mind the Eagles have been working on both offense and defense in preparation for the Indians.
Line Coach Ivan Rosamond has been drilling the offensive blockers and defensive tacklers, and Renfroe has taken the backfield men aside for special work.
Backfield drills included intensive practice on rushing plays after the squad gained only 35 yards in last Saturday's defeat.
Passing also received attention with an eye on the Hinds record set in 1958.
Southside Dumped In MRA Football Top ranked Central beat Southside in MRA football competition last week 7-6.
Shangri-La defeated Eastside 19-6 during the past week’s intramural activities.
Central was called off because of bad weather, Southside competed against Eastside today, but results are not yet complete.
Lynn Earnest, president of the Men’s Recreational Association, makes clear that girls who wish to attend the games may do so.
DWAYNE COX STADIUM HAROLD MITCHELL SOUTHSIDE CHARLES DUDLEY CENTRAL BERRY CROSBY SHANGRI-LA Five Hindsonian Staffers Attend JC Press Association At Summit Five students traveled this weekend to Southwest Junior College at Summit for the annual fall conference of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association.
Following registration early Friday afternoon, delegates representing seven junior colleges were addressed by Miss Una Harris, East Central, former state advisor.
The four divisions included elements of reporting and newswriting, headlining; the editorial page; newspaper advertising; feature writing.
All sessions continued Saturday morning, with additional meetings on sports writing and photography.
Highlight of the conference was the Friday evening buffet supper at Percy Quin Lodge near McComb.
Guest speaker was Purser Hewitt, executive editor of the Clarion-Ledger.
He delighted the Hinds delegation by basing the text of his speech on a recent Hindsonian editorial, “Little Shots Grow,” by Ralph Hemphill.
Joe White, executive editor of the HINDSONIAN and president of the MJCPA, presided.
Conclusion of the conference was a luncheon at which Glen Jones, former MJCPA president now associated with Mississippi Chemical Corporation, gave the main address.
Language Clubbers Travel To Mexico Via Trip Pictures Modern Language Club held its regular Thursday night meeting October 25 in the Audio Visual Room.
Miss Hilda Ree Davis, sponsor of the organization, conducted the program, showing slides of Mexico.
Miss Davis highlighted the pictures with vivid details she learned while studying in Mexico.
The club, which ordinarily meets every other Thursday night, will not meet next week due to tests.
Announcements will be made soon concerning the date of the next meeting.
Modern Language Club is open to all students taking a foreign language, and to those interested in learning more about other countries.
Lecturing Abigale is Dean Billingham, played by Robert Everett, Vicksburg freshman.
Following six long weeks of rehearsals, the curtain will rise tomorrow evening at 8:00 o’clock in the Hinds Auditorium.
Officials Chosen While Flourish Of Campus Organizations Meet NEWMAN CLUB Newman Club met Monday night, October 29, in the Administration Building.
Discussion was held on plans for a dance on November 15 from 6:00 to 7:15m. in the Recreation Hall.
Richard’s Parish in Jackson will speak to the group November 26 at 6:00 m. in room 12 of the Administration Building.
President Scottye Troyer invites all interested students to attend the discussion.
Under group discussion was a series of films about health, which ^ will be shown on the campus this year.
Those elected were Kay Beasley, secretary; Mary Thomas, treasurer; and Jack Hayes, reporter.
Of[ficers returning from last year are Walter Bishop, president; Carolyn McKey, vice-president; and Patsy Owen, program chairman.
The groups meets at 2A period Friday in the accounting room of the Academic Building.
WOMEN'S ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION Hinds’ WAA met Thursday night, October 25, to elect two freshmen representatives to the official council and to make plans for the Freshmen-Sophomore Powder Puff football game.
Freshmen, Ann Strickland and Ann Graham, were selected for the official council.
Freshmen girls chose Ann Pharr and Ann Strickland captains for the freshman football team.
Jane O’Neal, Frances Pickett, and Patsy Roberts will captain the sophomores.
Membership in the Women’s Athletic Association is not necessary, president Frances Pickett explained.
Mother Is A Freshman’ But Players Love Her And Await Audience Reply By LINDA BYRD The lights dim, a hush comes over the audience and the curtain rises—this will be the scene tomorrow night at 8m. when Hinds fall production of “Mother is a Freshman” is presented in the college auditorium.
Hinds production of “Mother is a Freshman” directed by Fred Brooks, speech instructor, has been in rehearsal for the past six weeks and is ready to hit the boards and gain the applause of the public.
Playing the lead in Thursday's staging will be Paula Jo Hopson, as Abigale, the mother who desires an education for financial reasons.
Portraying the fashionable and available professor on campus, who enjoys teaching an older woman, will be Warren Nybo.
As the play progresses, Susan, Abigale’s daughter, played by Peggy Smallwood, loudly professes, “I’m a sophomore.
Like it or not, Susan does have DISPENSING OPTICIANS ONE OF THE FINEST EQUIPPED MODERN OPTICAL LABORATORIES LENS DUPLICATED WITHOUT DELAY PROFESSIONAL SERVICES IN • Contact lenses fitted and lenses ground to your Doctor's Prescription • Artificial eyes fitted • Sunglasses • Frame Adjustments FL 2-7625 1000 N State Street JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI a mother and she's a freshman—a situation that makes for comedy in anyone's book.
If Susan had known the sensation her good-looking mother would cause when she hit the college, she would have wailed even louder.
Playing the part of Dean Gillingham in the college production will be Robert Everett.
Others include Sylvia, played by Sanna Fortson; Bill portrayed by Bill Forester and BoBo played by Mike Oliver.
John Leggett will portray Howie; Harry Jacobson as Jack; Diane Abernathy as Mrs.
Miller; Marie Dollar as Helen; Ann Stephenson as Bunny; Carol Maxwell as Clara; Libby Allen as Marge and Claudice Dees Rosedale as Carrie.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK up will be headed by Mary Ellen Edwards.
Opening night promises to be a successful one for the play cast as well as the audience.
At least it makes the student realize what would happen if their mother were a freshman.
Written by the late Jimmy Arrington, September 29, 1957, and revised by his son, Jamie Arrington, October 1, 1962.
Then the King said unto Little Brother Bobby, “I am afraid of the Barnettites, as a people of the southern kingdom, lest they mark me and close their sunny football fields to me and cause me to spend my days on the bleak and dreary island of Rhodes.
And it came to pass that King John spake the words given unto him by Little Brother Bobby saying, “Hearken unto me, my people, and give ear unto me, Oh, my nation, for an order shall proceed from me, an order like unto none ever given by those who reigned before me.
Throughout the kingdom I command that all men, the white, the black, the red and the yellow and the beasts of the earth and the cattle and everything that creepeth shall no longer follow after their kind.
The sheep shall lie down with the lion, the mice with the cats, the dogs with the crocodiles.
And it came to pass that King John closed his ears to their protests and a people who beileved in constitutional government rose up and smote him. campus The chief aim of the Association The Trace Association re-elected drive in the 1930’s which made the dream of the Trace a reality.
Daniels, historian and editor of the Raleigh News and Observer, says he doubts that the nation or even Mississippi realizes the significance of the Parkway.
The Trace, he says, has carried Andrew Jackson’s democracy on into the White House.
Local Clubs Plan Concession Stands At Saturday Game j Circle K and Phi Theta Kappa will sponsor concessions at the Homecoming game this Saturday night, November 3.
These two groups conduct the program at each home football and basketball game.
Approximately eight members have been selected to work in the concession stands and circulate through the bleachers.
Miss Mildred Herrin and Jack Treloar will supervise the work, as sponsors of the clubs.
White explained that the edition dll consist of approximately tweny pages and a full color cover.
Special editorial articles and reorts from citizens and students like will be presented.
Co-operaion between the Hindsonian staff nd English department will suply creative features.
Students will contribute literary articles through their English instructors or by giving their work to a member of the HINDSONIAN staff.
There will be no restriction on content, though Christmas features will be given precedence.
The magazine supplement will be folded and inserted into the regular Christmas edition of the newspaper.
Other such literary editions will be an annual publication, an nounces Kent Prince, Public Relations Director.
HALLOWEEN HONEYS — Hilda Bullock, left, and her sister Kaye serve as double Hinds Honeys for this week.
Robert M Mayo, Hinds administrative assistant, was among a group of four Mississippians who recently returned from touring the industrial education centers in North Carolina.
Purpose of the trip was to study the building designs, equipment, preparation, and administration of the Twenty industrial centers.
Sponsored by former North Carolina governor Luther Hodges, now Secretary of Commerce in the Kennedy administration, the technical program began four years ago.
Center training in skills range from very elementary to highly complicated skills such as medical technology, civil technology, electronics technology and practical nursing.
Tests are given to each entering student, with those regis tering higher scores placed in tech nical training.
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1942 Self Study Begins Second Year North Carolina does not have a junior college system, but these centers were built by local funds, and is by local school units and the state education board.
Mayo stated, “If we incorporate such a plan into our junior college system, we can do it for less than North Carolina because we have the laboratories already.
Mayo continued, “There are no public tax-supported junior colleges in North Carolina, but as a result of the establishing of the industrial centers, people are requesting that at each center a junior college be established to add academic work to technical.
A visiting team from North Carolina is expected to visit Mississippi next summer to study the junior college system.
Expansion of the North Carolina program is planned, and the centers will Try to supply over 7,000 technicians and 20,000 skilled craftsmen, within the next three years.
Emphasis Now Turns To Committee Studies And Detailed Evaluations Hinds Junior College self-study program has moved into high gear with the completion of departmental evaluations, and emphasis has now turned to committee studies.
Roy Bozeman, center, serv^ uctl0n ^ er o f the project, and offered for sale articles ranging from truck bodies to cars to heaters and refrigerators.
Fortenberry, president of Copiah-Lincoln Junior College and a member of the Mississippi Junior College Commission; and Dr.
Russell Levanway, an associate of the Mississippi Technological Research Commission, made the three-day trip with Mayo.
Nominations for freshman class officers were made Monday in a special class meeting.
Eddie Livingston, Vicksburg, will be listed on the ballot as a write-in candidate.
Nominated for vice-president are Bill Dunlap, Jackson; Ray Sullivan, Terry; and Jim Toombs, Jackson.
Seeking the office of secretary are Elaine Birdsong, Edwards; Vicky Hazzlerigg, Vicksburg; and Ann Stephenson, Raymond.
Nominated for treasurer are Margie Lee, Jackson; Carole Maxwell, Raymond; Sandra Weaver, Utica; and Joy Williams, Jackson.
Who’s Who Voting Takes Place Today Mr and Miss Hinds Junior College were chosen today in the annual Who’s Who election.
Petitions were distributed as students filed out of the general assembly.
Debate Teams Earn Superior , Excellent At Ruston Tourney Hinds debate squad members received superior and excellent ratings in debate competition Friday and Saturday in Ruston, Louisiana.
Members of the two Hinds Teams j attending were Belva Watkins, Jane Land, Carol Fortier, Edith Brummett, Woody May, and Ralph Hemphill.
Hemphill, a pre-law student from Jackson, was a member of the state champion junior college debate team from Hinds last year.
Resolved that the NonCommunist Nations of the World Should Establish an Economic Community.
The self-study procedure is designed to help colleges and universities reassess their objectives, measure success in attaining them, explore ways and means by which educational efficiency may be improved and prepare for the everincreasing demands upon institutions of higher learning.
Sponsored by the Southern AssoParade Of Beauties Petitions Available Friday To Students The second annual Hinds “Parade of Beauty” has been scheduled for December 6, according to Kent Prince, advisor to The Eagle, college yearbook which sponsors the pageant.
Petitions for nominations will be available in the public relations office Friday, November 16, and must be returned to Kent Prince by November 30.
Top five beauties will be selected from the nominees, with the identity of the top beauty remaining secret until the release of the yearbook.
Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, will supervise the pageant presentation.
The Eagle stage band, directed by Jim Morris, will perform several numbers throughout the evening.
Other Hinds talent will be presented while the audience awaits the judges decision.
Judges for the ecent will be announced at a later date, Prince stated. ciation of Secondary Schools, the program is not a part of the accreditation system, but intended to clarify and evaluate purposes of schools.
The Manual for the Institutional Self-Study and Periodic Visitation Program is being used as a guide.
With the beginning work of the committees, questionnaires have been sent To virtually every teacher concerning organizations, library facilities, financial conditions, physical plant, and faculty personnel.
Final drafts of major committee reports are due March 1, 1963, with the committee visitation in November of that year.
Circle K Completes Repairing Of Signs At School Entrance Main signs on highway 18 at each entrance of the college have been renovated and repainted by the Circle K Club.
According to Boyd McPhail, club president, Circle K furnished half the money needed and the college provided the rest.
The signs officially belong to the service club, Circle K, who purchased and erected by them five years ago.
President McPhail also announced that organizations wishing their name or insigna to be placed on sign should contact any member of the group.
Circle K designed the signs to keep up with the modernistic advances made by the college.
After I studied almost thirty minutes for each test they still flunked me.
They talk so fast I can hardly take notes, and anyway I usually forget to bring a pencil to class. mmmm HINDS-IGHTS * Wig Now Becomes Popular Apparel At Hom$, Campus By LINDA BYRD LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS Now you . would think they could understand when a student is a little late for class.
After all, I’ve only been five or ten minutes late for my history class six times.
Every time she says something I’ll smart off about it and get the class to laugh at her.
Well, I happen to belong to the class of society which believes that you should get part of your knowledge from social activities and parties.
And it’s the same way at home ... my folks are always j te * f,rel, 9 hf * , , ,, . ,, x x I Gone are the jumping on me about something or other.
And that silly roommate of mine ... a Phi Theta Kappa member, straight A’s and all.
I don’t know how he finds time to do that after studying every afternoon.
Centuries ago a working man could leave home in the morning, kiss his brunette wife goodbye, return at lunch, and again at dinner, and, not to his surprise, his wife would still be a brunette.
Later, with the use of bleaches, the unsuspecting husband would kiss a brunette wife goodbye in the morning and kiss a blonde hello in the evening.
Now, in the fabulous 60's, the married male population has stopped expecting the usual and has begun to expect the unusual.
According to this editorial, the name is punctuated correctly without an apostrophe.
It is not run by any one person, but rather is directed by the president of the sopomore class.
Yesterday an announcement was released by the Presidents Council itself.
W days a woman’s head remained the same color throughout her adult life.
To keep her husband and to protect what little sentiment and romance that remained in her marriage, the housewife usually refrained from bleaching her hair.
Instead she shops in her bavorite department store and purchases inexpensive wigs of any color or style.
Mondays it’s back in place as a wig and the husband is back in his steady habit of expecting the unusual.
Campuses, Hinds included, are the scenes of blooming blondes and ebony-topped coeds.
Romney outdistanced Democratic incumbent Swainson for the Governor’s seat.
Robert Pickenpaugh NEWS EDITORS ----Rodger Owenby, Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS_-Mirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Vamado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Klaire Parker, Jim Toombs, Dawn McNeil.
DWAYNE COX Business Manager -Jim Bonney -Albert Dahduh _Way vie McGrew Slide-Rule Course To Begin Monday Frank J Stephenson, chairman of the science department, today announced a course in slide-rule will be offered to Hinds students beginning Monday, November 19.
The special course will be nonacademic credit ,and classes will meet each Monday and Friday during the 2A period.
General custom has been that slide-rule not be offered until the second nine weeks period, thus enabling freshmen previously engaged in Education 10 to begin the course. new senator from Massachusetts.
The Kennedys and Lodges have been battling for political predominance in this state for half a century of more.
Judging by this particular outcome, the Lodges have a long way to go on the come-back trail before they will be strong enough to compete again on this level.
Attorney General McCormick, who was Ted's Democratic primary opponent, probably set forth the shrewdest observation made in many of the campaigns.
He pointed out that if Ted’s last name had been Jones instead of Kennedy, his campaign would have been a farce.
If Republican Richard Nixon didn't see the handwriting on the wall in November of I960, when he lost the presidency, he has surely seen it now.
At the same time, Pat Brown, by defeating a former Republican Presidential candidate, might well have placed his name in the Vicepresidential slot on the 1964 Democratic ticket.
The people who talked Vice-President Lyndon Johnson into accepting that position and leaving the Senate, in the hopes of restraining the Kennedy's, may well find themselves wandering where their relatives are when they talk about the government. sues or platforms evolved.
At first, one might think the candidates were afraid to commit themselves.
This assumption may be correct in some elections, but not in the above three or any other significant elections this year.
In fact, the opposite prevailed, the candidates were starved for something to say or attack.
The real reason no real issues came to light, and to the attention of the nation was that they were snowed under a barrage of ""Castro has missiles"" propaganda right at election time when platforms were What really happended was that there were two embargoes levied by the Kennedy administration; one around Cuba, and another around election deciding issues.
O wad some power the giftie gie us, To see oursel's as it hers Day Room In Main Undergoes Uplifting The girls’ Day Room in Main Dormitory is undergoing a gradual face-lifting.
It has put on a new coat of winter paint and new curtains adorn its walls.
New tables and chairs have been ordered to add to the comfort of the day time home-away-fromhome.
More improvements are being planned to make easier the already comfortable girls’ day-room.
Tickets Available To Roger Williams Concert In Jackson Roger Williams, world-famous pianist, will present “An Evening For You” in concert at City Auditorium in Jackson Wednesday November 28 at 8:15m.
Williams will begin the show with ""Nola"" and ""Exodus/' and will perform in the styles of well known pianists.
Campus Residents Voice Opinions Following Release Of Test Grades SgiSjStHsrSSS Hi-Steppers Model Wood-Pulp Dresses For Forestry Association November 9 Would you or wouldn’t you like your clothes to be made of wood’ Don’t laugh.
Hi-Steppers last Friday modeled dresses made completely from wood pulp at the Edwards Hotel before the Mississippi Forestry RAYMOND SOPHOMORE Kathy Kilby Competing For Title At Farm Bureau Convention Association Convention.
From all over Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, members, including Governor Ross Barnett, assembled at noon Friday to discuss this new fabric which promises to open up a whole new industry for wood.
Crowning of the queen this evening will climax two days of competition.
Contestants are being judged by evening gown appearance, talent performance and in1 1 # ■ ■ a ^ V _ ■ in late August.
Sixteen counties were represented and the judging procedure was the same as on the state level.
When it is perfected, the fabric, which appears to be a mixture of knit and tweed, will be stronger than cotton.
Kathy i s representing the West State contest winner will attend the National Convention in Atlanta scheduled for later this year.
Other duties will include appearances at luncheons, banquets and affairs of Hnn,ce Kae J ©rnigan, former the Farm Bureau throughout the Miss Mississippi, now secretary to ^ a * e * Dr.
Alon Bee, who narrated the show, reported that most of the apparel modeled were basic dresses with jackets, traveling dresses, plus hats also constructed from this amazing new fabric.
Annice Rae Jernigan, former By BETTYE SIMMONS As is always the case, midsemester exams revealed a certain number of exceptional grades, but at the same time showed that some students have not reached their full capacities.
We asked several instructors and students for their opinions as to the cause of the failures.
M'ke Rabalais, psychology instructor, said, ""The majority of our students have the ability to do satisfactory work, but are obviously lacking in motivation.
I feel that some lack this motivation because they don't have any definite goal or purpose.
Miss Susan Brown, western civi zation instructor, answered, ""I think that people are not willing to make the sacrifices necessary for good grades.
There seems to be little desire to really learn something—the goal seems to be just to get by.
On the whole, our students seem to be victims of the grand ole American average.
Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore replied, “The main reason that people are failing (speaking ior the sophomore class) is that we just have not settled down and started studying.
Darrell Slack, Jackson sophoniore, said, “Some students aren’t used to essay tests, for one reason.
J R Harris, political science instructor, answered, “The problem is wholly psychological.
This is the first time irt my teaching career that a trend has been this extensive.
Whatever the opinion, most everyone interviewed agreed there will be a change for the better once the results of mid-term exams are fully known. ' "" i dispensing opticians ONE OF THE FINEST EQUIPPED MODERN OPTICAL LABORATORIES lens duplicated WITHOUT DELAY Kathy is also a state Farm Bureau talent winner, and performed at the National Convention in Chicago last fall.
James Sparkman, and Hi-Step. pers Jo Schaeffer, Hilda Bullock, Becky Hollingsworth, Sharon Bearden, and Gloria White were models for the Convention.
MAIN OFFICE/CAPITOL AT STATE/JACKSON, MISS BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK ^M'SSION^RCHBS^M Y M $ 4 . 00 -tJ.JO — MAIL orders accepted — BOX OFFICE NOW OPEN WERLEIN FOR MUSIC RECORD department Page 4 HINDS0N1AN November 14, 1962 Eagles, Wolves Prep For Closing Game To Be Played Thursday Night At Co-Lin Predictions are out the window when the Hinds Eagles and CopiahLincoln meet Thursday.
The final game of the season for both teams will be held on the Wesson Wolves’ home field.
Although the Co-Lin crew has a much better season record (six wins and three losses), the Eagles, posting a season mark of three wins, five losses and a tie, will be looking for an upset.
Earlier in the season, Hinds met and defeated Southwest on their home field.
Hinds Coach Joe Renfroe is set to use the same team that has worked so well during the past two games.
Heading the list is Quarterback Mike Vincent, with Dan Magee at fullback.
On the line, Jimmy and Jerry Clark will control the ends with Richard Stacy filling in for additional pass catching duties.
Tackle posts will be manned by Mike Mahoney, Larry Newell, Oscar Teasley and Rick Thrash.
On quard duty for the Eagles will be John Couch, Carl Sullivan, and David Jones.
Several new plays were introduced in last week’s game with Pearl River and will be carried over into the Wolf battle, Renfroe reports.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES Girls’ Volleyball Teams Lose Match In Belhaven Trip Hinds All-Star volleyball teams pitted skills with Belhaven College Monday night, November 12.
Team A consisted of Patsy Roberts, Ann Graham, Frances Pickett, Mary Thomas, Barbara Clack, and Sharon Beardon.
Team B consisted of Gerrye Sanford, Dottie Darling, Ann Pharr, Ann Strickland, Ginny Reed, Sandra Weaver, Jane O’Neal, and Olga Sue Deaton.
A return match will be staged Monday night, November 19, in the Hinds girls’ gymnasium.
Served In The Eagle’s Nest Try It Now MILK — ICE CREAM FOOD PRODUCTS JACKSON MISSISSIPPI TUMBLE OF TANGLES — Dan Magee, Eagle fullback, almost clears the mass of Pearl River tacklers out to “stop him” in last Saturday night’s game.
The Pearl River team had just punted to Hinds’ 20 yard line and Magee moved the Eagles out of a tough position by scooping the ball and carrying it for a major gain.
MUDDY MARAUDERS Homecoming Game Provides Hinds With Win Over Favored Itawamba Hinds’ Homecoming was a mudsplashed, happy affair as the Eagles romped over favored Itawamba 22-6 two weeks ago.
Fumbles handicapped both sides and the turf, wet from rains that began before daylight, was soft and slippery.
The first touchdown came when halfback Woody Martin took a fouryard pass from quarterback Mike Vincent ran the conversion to clinch the contest.
Before the half-time ceremony, Ken Johnson scored from the four yard line to give Hinds a 14-0 lead.
In the third period, Vincent passed to Richard Stacy for the final tally, and fullback Dan Magee ran the conversion.
Itawamba’s only touchdown came in the second quarter on a four-yard pass from Russ Maxie to halfback Buster Brown.
Pride And Reputation Fall As Top Teams Drop To Secondary Position Living on pride and past reputation just doesn’t pay-off in the fast Junior College grid loop.
This was proved last week when three teams occupying first place positions in the conference were dropped by cellar dwelling opponents.
Copiah-Lincoln, Pearl River and Perkinston found out the hard way FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE Either in Color or Black and White Ctmera* Sullies MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers that anything can, and will happen toward season's end.
This puts the conference first place slot in a two-way tie instead of a five place battle, as was I the case a week ago.
The key game this week will feature Mississippi Delta and East Mississippi, Thursday.
Other games the same day are Hinds at Co-Lin, Southwest at Perkinston, and East Central at Northwest.
Simply outplaying the invading Wildcats, Hinds managed to control the ball throughout the game, [ handling the pigskin 80 times while their opponents took control for 44 [ plays.
Pearl River grabbed the first touchdown after an Eagle fumble on the Wildcat 30-yard line.
It took just seven plays and two minutes for the visi, tors to grab a 6-0 lead.
A bad snap from center in the Pearl River end zone and an Eagle recovery put the scoreboard ahead two points for the Hinds team early in the second period.
With 50 seconds for game time remaining before the halftime performance, Vincent pushed across from the one yard line, ending a 60-yard drive.
Halfback Joel Pigott picked up a six-pointer for the visitors during the third period, scoring from the two yard line over tackles.
Helped by a 15-yard clipping penalty, the Eagles marched from the Wildcat 45-yard Hne to the one-yard line.
Bobby Van Calsen pushed over from the two late in the fourth period for the final Pearl River score.
During the contest Hinds gathered 14 first downs against 10 for Pearl River.
For the first time this season, the Eagles found firm footing for their running attack.
Bolstered by gaping holes torn in the enemy ranks by hard hitting Eagle linemen, fullback Dan Magee, halfback Woody Martin, and safety man Percy Boell picked yard on top of yard straight up the middle.
Defensively, the Eagles smashed through PR's protective shield with comparative ease and consistently flattened the unwary Wildcat quarterback before his receivers could even get to the flats.
Would appreciate the Op* FEMININE FOOTBALLERS — Some of the girls participating in the Powder Puff Football tournament gain practice each day on the regular grid turf.
Annual r Powder Puff’ Football Scramble Scheduled For November 20 In Stadium By ROGER OWNBY | die ton, Stockdale, Watts, Jimmy Powder puff footbaU practice is Smith, Dunlop, Rigley, Ring.
Wayne Fields and Nick Nichosome 50 HJC feminine grid-stars meet to prepare for November 20’s annual all girl game. las.
The powder wiU fly and lipstick wiU smear at 4:15 Tuesday afternoon (the day before school recesses) in the Hinds stadium.
Ann Stricklin, freshman team captain, says her team is ready for anything the Sophomores can dish out.
Each afternoon the girls practice and polish up on their basic skills of passing, punting, and ruiv ning.
The game, sponsored by the WAA will help finance their trip to the coast.
At 3:30 and before the girls enter the scene the MRA All-Star football game will be played.
Combs, Montgomery, MidHalf-time will feature the provocative all-Male High Jumpers.
Last week Southside took over first place in the standings when Central was upset by Eastside, 12 to 7, and Shangri-La was defeated by Southside, 24 to 18.
All-Stars from the teams meet the top rank team in the standings November 20.
AN AGONIZING RE-APPRAISAL To those of you who stay out of your student government because you believe the committee system is just an excuse for inaction, let me cite an example to prove that a committee, properly led and directed, can be a great force for good.
Last week the Student Council met at the Duluth College of Veterinary Medicine and Belles Lettres to discuss purchasing a new doormat for the students union.
It was, I assure you, a desperate problem because Sherwin K Sigafoos, janitor of the students union, threatened flatly to quit unless a new doormat was installed immediately.
Actually, Mr Sigafoos is much better off without the wart hog, who tusked him viciously at least once a day, but a companionship of 22 years is, I suppose, not lightly relinquished.
The Student Council met, discussed the doormat for eight or ten hours, and then referred it to a committee.
There were some who scoffed then and said nothing would ever be heard of the doormat again, but they reckoned without Invictus Millstone.
Invictus Millstone, chairman of the doormat committee, was a man of action—lithe and lean and keen and, naturally, a smoker of Marlboro Cigarettes.
Because, dear friends, active men and women don’t have time to brood and bumble about their cigarettes.
In brief, dear friends, they need to be sure it’s Marlboro—for if ever a smoke was true and trusty, it’s Marlboro.
Get matches too, because true and trusty though Marlboros are, your pleasure will be somewhat limited unless you light them.
That the college build new schools of botany, hydraulic engineering, tropical medicine, Indo-Germanic languages, and millinery.
That the college drop football, put a roof on the stadium, and turn it into a low-cost housing project for married students.
That the college raise faculty salaries by $5000 per year across the board.
That the question of a doormat for the students union be referred to a subcommittee.
The big sweepstakes is starting now . . . keeps going and growing through the school year.
Detach your serialized L&M Grand Prix 50 License Plate from your entry blank.
Tear off the bottom panels from 5 packs of L&M King, L&M Box, Chesterfield King or Chesterfield Regular.
Menthol smokers can enter with Oasis. panels, or acceptable substitutes (see entry blank), must accompany each entry.
Mail us the panels and your serialized entry blank ... it matches your license plate.
As your entries are received they become eligible for all subsequent drawings.
These words, small in number, represent the purpose and spirit of man’s Thanksgiving season.
Centuries ago, when the first “day of thanks” was set aside, men were recuperating from a bleak and white winter.
There was no thanks in their hearts because, at the time, there was little of which to be thankful.
The turkey gobbled his way to the head of the pilgrim’s menu, and there he’s stayed, throughout the centuries.
Our winters are often equally as bleak and our spring harvest just as sweet.
The turkey is still a fowl's fowl and the pumpkin pie and mince meat paint pictures of rustic cabins, open fires and black pots sizzling with holiday food.
Whereas the men of yesterday listened to soft songs sung around crackling fires, we sit quite comfortably, warmed by central heating and listen to a traditional program—Perry Como’s Thanksgiving Special.
We’ve changed a lot, and our methods of celebrating are often different, but we seldom sway from the basic concept of the season—a season so filled with thanksgiving and goodwill that it is second only to Christmas.
Perhaps we have strengthened our belief and enjoyment of this time, through our changes.
According to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, 81 per cent of the 1256 academic-day and vocational students are from either Hinds, Warren or Rankin counties.
Only 30 students are from out-of-state, and only three students are from foreign countries.
Forty-four per cent commute, either in private cars or on buses furnished by the college.
A new girls dorm is under construction and will be ready for occupancy by second semester.
Frosh Select Montgomery Prexy In Monday’s Voting In the midst of beauty and Who’s Who elections, the freshman class quietly chose officers for the current session during final elections Monday.
Billy Joe Montgomery of Edwards, was selected president on the first ballot last Friday.
Bill Dunlap, Jackson, defeated Ray Sullivan, Terry, for the vice-presidency.
In a close FROSH OFFICERS — Billy Joe Montgomery, front center, was elected president of the freshman class Monday.
Other officers selected were, from left, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Mike Rabalais, sponsor, Billy Dunlap and Carole Maxwell.
TWO-DAY AFFAIR Hinds Representatives to Attend Youth Congress At State Capitol The State of Mississippi will be i in Jackson on November 30.
The entrusted to the younger generation for two days when the annual Mississippi Speech Association sponsored Youth Congress meets PRESSING PROBLEM — From left to right, Jeanie Bramuchi, Joy Williams, Linda Vance and Sandra Thrash seem to be having trouble getting all their luggage packed for the holiday period which begins this afternoon at 3:30. mock session of the legislature will continue through December 1.
House of Representatives will be taken over by high schools from throughout the state.
Other senators from Hinds will be Woody May, Carol Fortier, Edith Brummett, Dawn McNeil, Belva Watkins, and Jane Land.
Fred Brooks, head of the speech department, will accompany the delegation. race for secretary, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Vicksburg, won over Elaine Birdsong, Edwards, and Ann Stephenson, Raymond.
Carole Maxwell, Raymond, edged Sandra Weaver, Utica, for the office of treasurer.
Klare Parker, Vicksburg, defeated Kay Bullock, Jackson, in the race for reporter.
Chosen as sponsor for the class was Mike Rabalais, psychology instructor.
Posters, decorative and informative bills lined the walls and even the floors of campus buildings.
However quietly, the necessary personal campaigning accompanied the visible display.
Nominations, for .officers took place Monday, November 12, in a special class meeting.
Forty-One Students Receive Top Grades At Mid-Semester s Break Forty-one Hinds students earned all A’s and B’s during the first nine weeks, according to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar.
Margaret Bonney, Jackson; Charles Boswell, Jackson; John Bove, Vicksburg; Donna Breitling, Madison; Hilda Bullock, Jackson; Carol Charlton, Louisville; Nancy Clayton, Jackson, Sheila Corbin, Vicksburg; and Jo Ann Gardner, Jackson.
Mary Geiger, Columbia; Stewart Gibbes, Learned; Sylvia Gipson, Jackson; Johnny Hannon, Raymond; George Haynes, Utica; Patty Hebler, Vicksburg; Judy Herring, Raymond; Juanita Hilderbrand, Vicksburg; Gayle Holaday, Florida; Jane Marie Hopkins, Noxapater; and John Lauderdale, Madison.
Martin, Greenville; Carolyn Melton, Clinton; Linda Murray, Jackson; David Neal, Vicksburg; Mary Louise Polk, Prentiss; Lynn Powers, Utica; Rebecca Ann Presley, Lena; Doris Rae, Brooksville; and Connie Roediger, Shelby.
Alice Shuff, Raymond; Bettye Simmons, Wiggins; Darell Slack, Jackson; Hartman Stanley, Jackson; Hollis Thomas, Jackson; Martha Thompson, Philadelphia; Peggye White, Pelahatchie; Peggy Wilbanks, Carthage; Frank Wilson, Vicksburg.
Page 2 HINDS0N1AN November 21, 1962 Students Ignore Selves Students still gripe about it.
It seems to be a tradition on our campus as well as in other colleges throughout the nation ... the lack of social activity.
There always seems to be some excuse on the student’s part to cover up his portion of the blame.
LITTT F, MAN ON CAMPUS — .ujjja Groups of organizations try diligently to plan a form of recreation, dances, etc.
Nothing could be further from the truth. f No one will dispute the fact that the faculty doesn’t plan varied social functions.
They are here to instruct and guide, not to keep a lot of teen-agers happy and carefree twenty-four hours a day.
Their workday begins at eight in the morning and usually continues until eight the next morning.
Students ignore the fact that the question should be directed toward themselves.
As long as students had rather gripe and complain about affairs nothing will be done.
Someone Struck Out -By RALPH HEMPHILLDual Plaudits Given Double congratulations are in order for the Eagle squad and students who attended the Hinds vs.
The Eagles have won three straight games and should be congratulated for their activity.
If it were not season’s end, the cooperation would surely last toward a championship.
Robert Pickenpaugh CONTRIBUTING WRITERS Rodger Owenby, Ralph Hemphill Jdirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Vamado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Klaire Parker, Jim Toombs, Dawn McNeil. -The votes have been counted . . . the winners announced.
But there’s no joy in Mudville tonight; the losers were the ones who were right.
The returns show a Kennedy victory when tabulated according to the number of pro-Kennedy seats filled in the Senate.
A well-worn coalition of Southern Democrats and conservative Republicans is the only hope for the preservation of individual sovereignty, and the only hold-out against self-suffocating socialism.
He was the only one with the national stature that could have brought the election deciding issues of taxation and fiscal policies, the role of the national government in local affairs, and foreign policy into the light of the voters’ attention and kept them there over the bannerizing Cuban crisis.
The GOP has been relying on the national popularity of war time patriots to win for them.
The long run ineffectiveness and weakness of this strategy is presently glaring them in the political face.
The Republicans are now without a strong presidential candidate for 1964.
The concentration by the GOP on the national leader technique has left them without an effective program or plan of action that can be used to fake-down the left-wing of the Democrats.
The significance of these ""off year"" elections is both candid and crystal clear.
First of all, it is very probable that Medicare will be resubmitted to Congress again this January.
Another thing the nation can expect is certainly an even more leftist attit , (ie v at the U N. by Stevenson and Co., Inc.
This will probably be carried out under the assumption the U S. should try to offset some its recent “rightists” actions concerning Cuba.
On the domestic scene, the South can expect more civil rights legislation to deck the halls of Congress.
The NAACP and CORE have been pressuring the President quite frequently to seek some further congressional action backing up their positions.
Kennedy has held up rather admirably, considering the strain which must have been on him.
The states righters can expect this kind of treatment to end in the near future.
In retrospect, Kennedy said he wouldn’t campaign because of the Cuban crisis.
President Kennedy, being the politician he is, couldn't help but realize this.
So the American people can expect another incident, probably in Latin America, again, because of its location, to color the 1964 Presidential campaign.
Autumn leaves are but little chil dren who wave their arms in the wind.
Just small, silent playmates balleting on wobbly toes, posing frail hands, then grandly strutting away.
And how magnificently they do perform when the wind returns and finds them incumbent on the earth.
Prickling up their slender stems, they begin to enact the Song of Autumn; le chef-d’oeuvre of the master choreographer, the Wind.
The air becomes full with the sad but happy whistle of Wind, and when the crescendo whistle has ar rested the universe, the leaves— Nature's inate actors—shake the dust from their fragile bodies; then ascend into the haze of autumn air and sunlight.
How quickly, how gently, how very exquisitely they master the intricate pirouettes and dips and bows.
Seemingly unconscious of their beautiful art, they gambol and sway, making light of every thing—even their bruised and torn bodies.
And they perform, oblivious of time and * 1 2 flying music, until their act is but mere silhouettes of gaunt stems.
Their once lithe and graceful forms now appear rugged, al most awkward, and the Wind, in its reguiem stillness, softly, mater nally gives them back to the earth.
No, they are only aged and decrepit spirits which struggle to escape the monsoons of Winter.
So helpless, so effete, they tenaciously grasp and plead for sturdy stalks and leaves to wrap around their cold and dying bodies.
But, the stalks are too strong— they will not bend, and the leaves they can hear only the Wind, luring voices of a Siren.
So quietly, as quietly as did come the green buds in spring, do the withered actors fade into the earth, until at last they are a part of the vast nondescriptive earth.
And the light-toed-touch of fresh autumn leaves irrevocable pushes the dead distorted players into further blackness.
Down, down, they sleep, soon forgetting that little children wave their arms in the Wind.
Explaining his “accident prone” nature, Billy Joe related the time in Pensacola that he flipped a gocart they said couldn’t turn over; the time sand was thrown in his eye and he almost lost it; the time when both his parents were in the hospital and he had a wreck on his way to visit them.
The six-foot blond is interested “in a little of everything,” but especially sports.
While at Raymond, Billy Joe played basketball and was captain of the tennis team.
Denton, long time sponsor of the freshman class, pauses with recently elected freshman class president Billy Joe Montgomery amid plans for the coming year.
The 18-year-old Raymond High School graduate claims to be prone to accidents and jokes that the biggest “accident” was being chosen president in Monday’s class election.
He plays with a five-piece dance band occasionally at high school dances, “but we aren’t very professional.
Like most males, the new president likes to “fool around with cars, to dance, and to talk—about what people should do and should not do.
Billy Joe has worked the past two summers as a compliance reporter with the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service in Raymond.
At Hinds the talkative fellow is a member of Westminster, Engineering Club, Presidents Council, and “the powder puff homecoming court.
Band, Hi-Steppers Set Season Dates Last night the Stage Band and Hi-Steppers presented a floor show at the Sun and Sand for the Jackson Lions Club.
Performing in a series of Christmas parades, the Hinds Eagle Band and Hi-Steppers will go to Columbus on November 26 and then to Yazoo City on December 3.
Immediately after a performance in Newton on that date, they will rush to Vicksburg for a repeat performance in Vicksburg’s Christmas parade.
Selah, pastor of Galloway Methodist Church in Jackson, spoke to the Hinds student body in today’s general assembly.
Selah has been at Galloway since 1945, and has become syiUnymous with the term Methodism in Mississippi.
He has twice addressed the World Congress of Arch Masons and was the Grand Chaplain in 1956-57.
He was also a delegate to the Tenth World Conference of Methodist Churches in Oslo, Norway in August of 1961.
Selah received his B.A. from Central College in Fayette, Missouri, and his doctorate from Yale Divinity School in 1923-24.
Who’s Who Finals To Be Held Today Final run-off elections of Who’s Who at Hinds are being held today.
Ballots were again distributed as students left the general assembly, and will be available throughout the day at the voting center.
In the run-off for Mr Hinds Junior College are Ralph Hemphill, Jimmy Chandler and George Tannous.
Nominees are Ralph Hemphill, Fred Peyton, Boyd McPhail and Jimmy Chandler.
In the run-off for boy freshman class favorites are Bill Dunlap, James Gross, and Billy Joe Montgomery.
Miss Hinds Junior College, girl sophomore and freshman class favorites were chosen in the first election last Wednesday.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK THANKSGIVING HONEY — Saucy Sandra Jabour calms her sizzling Thanksgiving bird with an equally saucy baste, warning the “Tom” that he must simmer ’till Thursday.
COKE"" IS A REGISTERED TRAOE-MARK BOTTLED UNDER AUTHORITY OF THE COCA-COLA COMPANY BY JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY Page 4 HINDSONIAN November 21, 1962 Miss.
Eagles Take Final Game, Over Grid Circuit After Final Games It’s all over-/there ain’t no more.
The Mississippi Delta Trojans have captured first place in the Junior College Conference and it’ll be another year before revenge can be had.
Other action saw Perkinston smash Southwest 77-6, Jones dump Pearl River 14-6 and Northwest roll over East Central 37-6.
In the final standings there are only eight slots this year due to ties for second, third and fifth.
Second place goes to Perkinston and East Mississippi while a threeway split exists in third.
CopiahI Lincoln fell into this group via a j loss to Hinds in the last game while | Pearl River got the same treatment I a week before.
Hinds and Northwest tied 6-6 at season’s start and are tied for the fifth slot in the 12 team circuit.
Had it not been for the pass snagging ability of the Eagles and the strong right arm of quarterback Mike Vincent the score might have been completely different.
Field general Vincent pitched three touchdown tosses for his team with Richard Stacy, Ken Johnson and Jimmy Clark receiving.
Wolf signal-caller Clifton Reed threw touchdown passes to Bobby Wallace and Dicky Knight.
Co-Lin’s only touchdown of the night which was scored on the ground was by fleet-footed Wallace on a 53-yard sprint.
While running up this margin, the Eagles tossed 24 times and connected 12, with three being intercepted.
The Wolves pitched 31 times, completed 13, with two being stolen. with Laird kicking good on the j conversion. j Hinds halfback Jim Buell took a short pass on the first play after the kick and raced the pigskin 72yards before he was hauled down on his own 20-yard line.
Two plays later Halfback Ken Johnson took an eighty yard toss for the score.
With only 1:30 seconds remaining in the first half Jimmy Clark grabbed a 36-vard pass on his fouryard line and stepped across for another Eagle tally.
Neither team could manage a scoring threat in the third period with most of the action being centered on the mid-field stripe.
Early in the fourth period Richard Stacy added point-insurance by taking an eight-yard pitch from Vincent.
RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI The home crew led off with a touchdown just 16 plays from the start of the game when Wallace took an 11-yard pass from Reed.
Hinds jumped back into the game only minutes later with their first score by Jim Buell.
The point-after attempt was no good, and at the end of the first period of play the Eagles were behind 7-6.
Just two minutes into the second period speedy halfback Wallace raced for his crowd-thrilling score mat.
HAPPY TALK As we all know, conversation is terribly important on a date.
When lulls in the conversation run longer than an hour or two, one’s partner is inclined to grow logy—even sullen.
But occasionally one finds it difficult to keep the talk going, especially when one is having a first date with one.
When Harlow is going to take out a new girl, he makes sure in advance that the conversation will not languish.
Before the date, he goes to the library and reads all 24 volumes of the encyclopedia and transcribes their contents on his cuffs.
Thus he makes sure that no matter what his date’s interests are, he will have ample material to keep the conversation alive.
Take, for example, Harlow’s first date with Priscilla de Gasser, a fine, strapping, blue-eyed broth of a girl, lavishly constructed and rosy as the dawn.
Harlow was, as always, prepared when he called for Priscilla, and, as always, he did not start to converse immediately.
First he took her to dinner because, as everyone knows, it is useless to try to make conversation with an unfed coed.
Also, her stomach rumbles so loud it is difficult to make yourself heard.
So he took her to a fine steak house where he stoked her with gobbets of Black Angus and mounds of French fries and thickets of escarole and battalions of petit fours.
Then, at last, dinner was over and the waiter brought two finger bowls.
And Harlow—poor Harlow!—looked upon his cuffs and broke out in a night sweat and fell dumb.
With that she flounced away and poor Harlow was too crushed to protest.
The Executive Council is composed of Jimmy Morrison of Mis-1 sissippi College, Alton Wasson, from j Millsaps, and Jack Lynch from Ole Miss.
There will be sessions including j the delegates from the junior and senior colleges together, as well as separate meetings for the two.
Presiding as speakers at the convention will be some of the state’s outstanding leaders and educators.
Billy _ J o e Montgomery, freshman president; Bill Dunlap, freshman vice-president; and Vicki Hazzlerigg, freshman secretary.
The delegation will be accompanied by Robert M Mayo, administrative assistant.
AND MISS — Capturing the highest honors available at Hinds, Jimmy Chandler, Vicksburg, and Hilda Bullock, Jackson, were recently chosen Mr and Miss Hinds Junior College in student Who’s Who voting.
McLendon views bulls Administrative Officials Attend Southern Confab Held In Dallas National Scholar Officers Discuss Local PTK Plans National President and National First Vice-President of Phi Theta Kappa visited the Hinds campus last week and discussed plans with local officers.
College in Corsicana, Texas, and James Pennebaker, National First Vice-President of the honorary scholastic organization were returning from a regional meeting in Joplin, Missouri.
The two were then taking a trip to the Hospitality Bowl in Gulfport, in which Navarro Jr.
Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor, Henri Lou Coleman, president, and Marianne Neal, treasurer of the local chapter, toured the visitors around the campus.
Phi Theta Kappa officers discussed this year’s study project, “The Image of the Junior College,” and various problems facing all Phi Theta Kappa chapters.
Leaving Raymond Sunday, the delegation attended the opening session of the one-day program of the Southern Association of Junior Colleges in the Baker Hotel on Monday.
The day's program included reports and panel discussions on the various committees of the association.
Committees are administrative, legislative, student personnel, and curriculum.
Tuesday the delegation split, with President George M McLendon and Jack Treloar, superintendent of the farm and physical plant, attending the Texas Oklahoma Hereford Sale.
Tuesday’s program was highlighted by a discussion of the twelve month academic calendar, in which the summer session equals one full semester.
Discussion was led by superintendent of education of Florida, where the system is being tried.
Schedule for Wednesday included special sessions for specified administrative officials, such as the registrar.
High school portion, with a panel discussion of high schoolcollege relations, ended the annual meetings.
In addition to McLendon and TreThirty-Eight Coeds Vie For Title Most Beautiful Girl At Hinds The second annual Beauty Revue, sponsored by the Eagle yearbook, will be held Thursday night, December 6, at 8:00 in the college auditorium.
This function is the major program of the year sponsored by the yearbook.
Contestants will be presented in small groups, each fol[ lowed by a trio of folk singers ri,m S Aumrrl from Jackson.
This group reijivete Awaru |places the college stage band To President Mac which was first designated to p perform.
Emcee will be provid111 Lhapel ed b y one °f the local radio sta* tions, announces Belva Watkins, editor of the Eagle.
Rankings of beauty will be judged cently awarded to the Hinds Eagle i f n . tlr f y ° n , beauty and poise; no Marrhin* RanH anH Hi-St*nn P rc talent wl11 be Presented by the conJim Morris, director of bands, presented to President McLendon today’s assembly a trophy reMarching Band and Hi-Steppers for their activities in the Columbus Christmas Parade.
Sponsored by the Columbus Jaycees, awards were presented to the best band, best marching unit, best float, and best participating unit.
The field of contestants will be narrowed to fifteen semi-finalists, then five finalists.
These five beauties will be recognized, but Most participating unit, the equivalent of ' -n a sweepstake trophy.
More than fifty units, including bands, floats, and dancing groups, appeared in the annual parade held on November 26.
On Monday of this week, the popular groups performed in the Christmas parade in Yazoo City.
Further dates include the Newton Christmas parade on Friday, December 7, where they will give additional performance on the loar, the Hinds delegates were I high school football field preceeding Robert Mayo, administrative as1 the downtown parade. sistant, Dr.
James Sparkman, dean On the same day, the band and. • ----of instruction; Miss Mildred Her-1 Hi-Steppers will travel to Vicks Carmen Cotton, Pearlie Cook, Brenrin, registrar; and Miss Fay Mar-1 burg to present the half-time show ' da nl — ~ shall, dean of women. at the Red-Carpet Bowl.
Walking music for the contestants will be provided by a small local musical group, not yet selected.
Twenty signatures of students were required to officially register the petition.
Suzanne Bryant, Randa Bumgarner, Gloria I Bickham, Kay Bullock, Hilda Bui| lock, Sharon Beardon, Pat Bain, Ole Miss Professor To Be Presented In Clarinet Concert On December 13 On Thursday evening, December 13, at 7:30, the Hinds Department of Music will present Gene Saucier, clarinetist, in a concert in the main auditorium.
Joan Melton Lynch, music theory instructor, will accompany for the recital.
Lynch was the accompanist for Saucier in recitals he presented at Ole Miss during the past two years.
Sonata for Clarinet and Piano, Lynch; Piece en forme de Habanera, Ravel; and Three Pieces for Clarinet, unaccompanied, Saucier.
Dixon, Wanda Dai lay, Donna Huffman, Veronica Haydel, Vicki Hazzlerigg.
Patty Hebler, Mary Elizabeth House, Sue Howell, Jean Junker, Sandra Jabour, Bobbye Kitchens, Marty Knight, Pat Kochi, Dot Lyons, Patsy Musselman, Carolyn McKey, Carol Maxwell, Shirley Morris, Karen McBride, Susan will appear.
In addition, the tradi tional student recitals will be pre-1 Nicholson sented beginning after Christmas.
I Also, Patty Roberts, Sandra Rob^ The program is open to the pubj erh# J 0 Schaeffer, Freddie Jean Sones, Libby Seitz, Jan Simpson, Marianne Strube, Joy Williams, and Sandra Weir.
Admission for the pageant will be 50 cents for students and one dollar for adults.
Proceeds from this event will go toward financing the college yearbook.
This concert will be the first of a series to be presented by the Hinds music department.
Throughout the year various guests artists GENE SAUCIER NOTICE School pictures will be distributed Friday, December 7, according to an announcement made by Bill White, class editor of the Eagle.
Distribution will be handled by annual staff members from the hours 8:30 to 3:30 through windows of the book store located in the auditorium building.
Pictures were made this year by School Pictures, Inc., a division of Howard O Pippen Studios in Jackson.
LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS Ann Arbor, Mich. — — Personality factors are of paramount importance in selecting students for college and university honors programs, says Allan 0.
While creative students tend to be very intelligent students also, not all persons who score high on ability tests are necessarily creative.
He explains that honors programs involve such significant elements as more advanced course content, greater use of seminars and classroom discussion as well as increased opportunity for independent study.
He notes that non-honors students, generally speaking, hold honors students in high esteem and are favorably disposed to the program itself.
Pfnister believes the emphasis in honors programs should be on enrichment — on providing depth rather than allowing the student to complete his program more rapidly.
A certain amount of acceleration is inevitable because the superior student gets through his material rapidly.
A recent report showed most honors students (60 per cent) believe that the level of instruction in honors classes . . ... . , was better.
A great majority believed that indepen dent thought was encouraged more in honors classes. -.-___CURRENT EVENTS Language Group, Home Economics Share Activities MODERN LANGUAGE CLUB “The American impression of guided somewhere along the way,” the French people has been misstated James Sansing at the Thursday night meeting of the Modern Language Club.
With such a lead, the economics instructor proceeded to relate his impression, gained while he spent twenty-eight months in Southern France during his Army tenure.
ClbSS&!' —» * HMM an HINDS-IGHTS ^.—_ Mazes Make Mirrors mmmmmrn mm By WAYVIE McGREW mm Mirrors surround us all.
We stop to attempt an answer when suddenly we are caught in soft, shiny hands and pushed into a maze.
Mazes are always so confusing—they exist only as long as they can deceive.
So we enter the deluding little playground—somewhat hesitant of creeping into the narrow darkness —but edging along the walls, we gain back our infant courage until finally we triumphantly shout, ""It is a Ah, how clever we are, and what a dim-witted scientist the mazemaker is—these are the consoling, self-inflated thoughts of ourselves— these are the dreams which absorb the shock of reality—these are the fated appearances — reality schemes.
LAMPLIGHTERS CLUB Lamplighters recently installed officers in a dimly-lighted room in the formal procedule.
President, Joy Ferguson; Vice President, Ann Birdsong; Secretary, Ditto Reed; Treasurer, Elaine Birdsong; Reporter, Lynn Royce.
To the average United States citizen, thousands of miles from the scene, this may seem the extent of the recent invasion of India by China.
Actually, this conflict embraces much more than several thousand square miles of land along the now disputed border between these two giants of Asia.
The initial reason given for this aggressiveness on the part of the Chinese is their present internal troubles, not the least of which is wholesale famine.
If so, just how could this timing have methods to develop by, from the status of a free India and a communist China.
As long as China was ahead in economic development they got along fine.
So, she is out to down her rival militarily, an area in which India is certainly not a match for China.
To be sure, it will not be necessary for China to conquer India to prove her point and win this round.
For China to come out ahead in the eyes of the underdeveloped world, she merely has to quit when ahead (before massive United States aid arrives) and keep what she takes.
Thus the Red bosses would have succeeded in covering up their economic setbacks, and providing that China is stronger than India.
If Nehru and democracy are to survive in India, neither must be allowed to happen.
Also, It would introduce 'the possibility of a nuclear conflict, which the communists wish to avoid right now.
It means, despite Chinese boasting to the contrary, they really are afraid of an Atomic War, or else they would have waited until their military position was much stronger, when they could have used nuclear pressure to frighten Nehru.
If the western leaders realize the above, this encounter may well work out, ultimately, in our favor.
Our praises bound against the thick walls of the maze --some ricochetting into the open air—but only to be smothered by the ridicule of laughter.
We cannot see, but there is the bizarre sensation that we are being whirled through space in one perpetual circle.
But all in a moment, the air is not laughing, and we are no longer spinning.
We are plummeting into the maze where the violent floor of deceit pounds us into the chaos of reality.
Lamplighters also sent delegates to the Mississippi Home Economics Association, held November 2 at the Heidelberg Hotel in Jackson.
Ramona McClelland was elected state reporter of the college clubs section.
For the year’s project, Lamplighters have decided to redecorate the home economics department by purchasing new drapes and accessories.
Lamplighters meet every fourth Wednesday in the home economics building at 3:30.
Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klaire Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson.
Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Junior College.
The old library building, as well known to students as Scarlett O'Hara's Tara, is being remodeled, cleaned out and modernized.
Past records and objects found in the two story brick building make the renovating seem more like grave robbing.
Faded pages of the Hindsonian yellowed with age and frayed on the edges were found laden with dust, forgotten through the years.
Old annuals, with pages stuck together by constant non-use armchairs with tired arms, car tires with no tread, harps and pianos with soundless strings and keys— all were found silently waiting within the building Thirty years ago when the brick was new and the harps and pianos were not noteless, the old library was Hinds.
It was Hinds because it represented a beginning, a beginning that is now being prepared to meet the future.
When our parents attended school here, the business office and registrar’s office were both in the old building.
Because of its vastness it’s not surprising that the four-columned structure has the distinction of never being completely vacant, completely unused.
Even though the books left when the new library was built, English stayed.
The building has and perhaps always will house the teachings of the English language.
Room after room of freshman composition and sophomore literature keep the walls vibrating and the halls filled.
Who knows how many important people have stood on that stage or walked down those aisles.
That morning, committee meetings had been held to consider pending legislation.
Mike Oliver of Hinds presented his bill on “Sanitary Disposal Systems for Municipalities,” which later passed the senate unanimously, to the social welfare committee of which he was a member.
This bill was referred to the Business and Industry Committee, of which he was chairman, and later passed the senate.
Some students even take the time to examine the old library’s face lifting on their way to class.
The library has received its secditions ond stock of new books this vear I Also fane ^ tx which range in scope from football James' and Henry to philosophy.
Future scientists can spend an inspiring evening ploughing through Physics in the Soviet Union, Regular Solutions, and Colloid Chernistry.
RegAttending as alternates, and also serving i«n the senate, were Edith Brummett and Jackie Williamson.
Oliver tied with Sandri Norton of MSCW and James Moffett of MSU for the sweepstakes award, each having received five superiors during the congress.
S, PP'/futh Congress, having overdue books are needed in the ibrary and must be returned immediately.
After this notice, the erring students’ names will be given to the deans for executive action. participated three years in the Alabama House.
DWAYNE COX HAROLD MITCHELL BILLY LEE LESLIE CARTER La u nd ry Clea ners The other award presented to Hinds was a superior for Best Bill by Hemphill.
The business at hand was the nomination and election of the presiding officer.
Oliver was nominated for this position by Hemphill, with a second from Bullock.
Guest speaker was Attorney General Joe Patterson, who spoke on the opportunities and responsibilities of the young people of this state and nation.
He humorously observed that the Youth Legislature carried on business in a more adult and orderly manner than the real legislature.
In the second session McPhail amended the ""Civil Defense Bill"" to include ""Instruction by Qualified Personnel,"" which was seconded by Chandler and passed by the senate.
Suddenly, the United States had a flavor cigarette with a filter on the end.
Today the whole place is Marlboro country—land of the filter cigarette with the unfiltered taste.
Behind this popularity is the famous Richmond recipe of ripe tobaccos , and the pure white Selectrate Filter.
Page 4 HINDSONIAN December 5, 1962 Episcopalian Club Sets Season Meet The Canterbury Club will hold its regular meeting Thursday at 3:00 m. in the Administration Building to plan a Christmas party for the club, Presicjpnt A1 Dahduh announced.
All members are urged to be present, so an approximate number of people attending the party may be determined and so each | member will be pictured in the ; yearbook, Dahduh said.
SOPHOMORE FAVORITES — Elected in final run-offs as sophomore favorites were, from left, Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson, Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg, and Fred Peyton, Vicksburg.
FRESHMAN FAVORITES — Serving as this year’s freshman class favorites are, from left, Billy Joe Montgomery, Jackson, Carmen Cotton, Florence, Kay Bullock, Jackson, and Bill Dunlap, Vicksburg.
Regina Goodwin, Hinds circulation librarian, has announced the policy for checking out books over the Christmas holidays.
Students who do not have books currently overdue, beginning Monday, December 17, may check out books to be kept until Wednesday, January 2.
A penalty of 25 cents will be added on all books kept over the holidays without permission.
Students who have overdue books or owe fines must clear their records before they will be eligible to check out books over the holidays, Mrs.
The names of students with overdue books or a fine record will be posted on the bulletin boards in the administration building and the li brary lobby.
As the yearbook staff rushes to meet deadline number one, the 1963 version of the Eagle is beginning to show definite signs of potential All-American greatness.
The extensive pictorial portrayal of life at Hinds is due largely to a new method of printing being used this year.
OFt ' 0 DISPENSING OPTICIANS ONE OF THE FINEST EQUIPPED MODERN OPTICAL LABORATORIES LENS DUPLICATED WITHOUT DELAY PROFESSIONAL SERVICES IN • Contact lenses fitted and lenses ground to your Doctor's Prescription • Artificial eyes fitted • Sunglasses • Frame Adjustments FL 2-7625 1000 N State Street JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI New photographic equipment, such as the Slave-flash, have been added to the public relations department, making possible professional-quality photographs.
Annual staffers are using as stimulating guide books other yearbooks published by the Hurley Yearbook Company of Camden, Arkansas, publishers for the second year of the Eagle.
The 1963 Eagle, which will again run nine by twelve, is divided into three major sections—Fall, Winter, and Spring.
The Fall division, nearing completion, includes registration, faculty and administration, freshman day, homecoming, football, and other highlights of the current season.
Winter's section will contain features, basketball, the Christmas dance and parties, open house, and additional events of the winter months.
Spring’s allotment will record awards day, classes, track, tennis, Miss Hinds Junior College pageant, and graduation.
Much prior planning and study have been made by staff and advisor of the 1963 Eagle.
Editor Belva Watkins, accompanied by associate editors Joe White and Bettye Simmons, and by photographer Robert Pickenpaugh, attended the annual Hurley Yearbook Workshop in Camden held in late September. by; photographers, Robert Pickenpaugh, Daniel Fazekas; and assistants on lay-out, Klare Parker, Dottie Darling, Jackie Sanders, Mary Jenkins, Claudia Deas, and Al Dahduh.
From all indications, this year’s Eagle should be well worth waiting for.
Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, recently addressed the Maid and Matrons Club of Jackson.
She intrigued her audience with personalized inside details of the Miss America Pageant.
Bee related many of the exciting experiences she has had in her capacity as official Miss Mississippi chaperone.
Freshmen were welcomed and congratulated for outstanding achievement by chapter president Henri Lou Coleman.
Margaret Bonney, Ted Boswell, Donna Breitling, Carol Charlton, Nancy Clayton, Jo Ann Gardner, Mary Rebecca Geiger, Sylvia Gipson, Gay Holaday, Carolyn Melton and David Neal.
Also, Rebecca Presley, Martha Thompson, Peggy Wilbanks and Winnie Sue Winters.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK HINDS HONEY — Miss Carmen Cotton — Homecoming Court member, Who’s Who, Hi-Stepper, beauty extraordinaire ~ ^ already a wheel on campus after arriving this year as a freshman from Florence.
Wheeling on the exercise bike seems a bit unnecessary, however, since Carmen’s statistics appear the ideal of the reducing salon.
A senior at Delta State College in Cleveland, Linda was one of twenty at that college to receive this honor.
Fisher of Utica HINDS0N1AN December 5, 1962 Basketball Crew Journeys To Perk Five Returnees Set For Battle Tomorrow Nite It’s going to be a long tough fight in Mississippi Junior College basketball competition this year, but Hinds Eagles have a string of five returnees to pace their attack.
Another returnee, Johnny Hines, was honored along with Wade by being selected for honorable mention on the All-State roster.
George Puckett, Clarence MacMillen and Leslie Carter are the other returnees.
Barnes and Jerry Legg are among the freshmen crew members with Buddy Dollar, Ronnie Helmock and Ed Fortenberry expected to see action.
Gary Carpenter, another yearling member, was on the South Mississippi High School All-Star team that played the Northern kingpins prior to school’s start.
Troy Ricks is head coach of the group with Jim Sessums serving as assistant.
In what was described as a “spectacular play,” he lunged at a ball carrier and tagged him; After the play he told friends he heard his stomach “pop,” the DAILY KANSAN reported.
Hinds 1963 edition of thumpballers has hit the courts, and after one scheduled game and a scrimmage contest the Eagles are undefated.
In the Saturday night battle at Scooba the Eagles were paced by high point man Will Wade with 10 field goals and four foul shots for at total of 24 points.
Hinds pushed the Lions during the first half, allowing the home crew only 31 points while picking up 42 for themselves.
Earlier in the scrimmage CopiahLincoln fought the Eagles down to the final buzzer, but after it was all over the single point difference was in Hinds favor.
Coach Troy Ricks shrugged off the narrow win as a nervous, unorganized game played too soon GAINING GROUND — All-Star Billy Joe Montgomery drives for a gain against Southside in the final MBA football contest last Wednesday.
Stopping the play is Shan Arender, a defensive specialist for the defending champion Southsiders.
Wade again led the Eagles in scoring action although this time the points were gathered on the white line.
Picking up 11 tosses via fouls, the top scorer added four field goals for a game total of 19 points.
Fourteen points were tallied by Johnny Hines with Leslie Carter contributing eight.
Standard Photo MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers Account MISSISSIPPI P.0.
We take a simple, beautiful and blessed holiday, transform it into a complex, ornamented and even dreaded season, only to ultimately return to that original, uncomplicated spirit.
Whereas the Christmas season, as late as a decade ago, began around the first of December, today the first of November would be a more accurate estimate.
Certainly, as far as merchants are concerned, all preparation has been accomplished by Thanksgiving.
Street and store decorations are up, extra help has been hired, and a jolly old Santa greets kiddies in every store on Main Street.
The American Greeting Card Association really begins early, deciding in May if Santa or Cherubs will adorn the three billion cards that will soon start flooding the mails.
For 1962 it has been decreed that Santa will reign— playing a harp, bass fiddle or honky-tonk piano; wearing Western boots, top hat or Bermuda shorts; or just any ole thing America’s versatile symbol can do.
And housewives will go into frantic panics pondering if they’ve forgotten anyone on that enormous card list.
This concentrated commercialism will continue to build, constantly bombarding every American until, at last, it does become a chore and we do start to wonder what's the purpose of it all.
We’ve done the best we can and now we sit back to reap our two-month’s struggle.
This has always been Christmas, but every year our complex circle widens before we finally reach our -real Christmas in all its simplicity.
Campus Readies For Big Holiday In MC Tournament Hinds debate squad members earned a superior and excellent ratings in debate competition Friday and Saturday at the Mississippi College Novice Tournament.
Jackie Williamson and Jimmy Chandler; Belva Watkins and Jane Land; Woody May and Edith Burmmett; Dawn McNeil and Carol Fortier.
Receiving exeellents were Jimmy Chandler, Dawn McNeil, Carol Fortier, Belva Watkins, Edith Brummett, Jane Land, Woody May, and Jackie Williamson.
Julia Todd of Clinton is coach for the Hinds squad DORMS — Girls in Main Dormitory begin prep a rati°ns f ° r the holiday season on the Hinds campus by decorating the annual dorm Christmas tree.
FIVE ATTEND Action Begins Friday With Dance; Choir Program, Dinner Next Week Varied activities have been planned for and by Hinds students during the Christmas season.
Pre-holiday activities are in full swing, and committees have set to work planning and decorating for parties and festivities.
Friday night, December 14, a campus social will be held in the girls gymnasium from 9:00 until 1:00.
The Presidents Council is sponsoring the event, with cooperation from the freshman and sophomore classes.
January Graduates o' Given Instructions Through Registrar Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, announced this week that students who expect to graduate in January and obtain diplomas should begin making application in the registrar’s office.
According to Miss Herrin, graduates are entitled to exemptions from exams providing they meet graduation requirements.
Also, Miss Herrin said, students should fill out second semester schedules and complete them in the registrar’s office.
Students who complete their schedules now will have a varied choice of class periods, teachers and sections, since most classes are not yet filled.
A fine of $5 will be imposed for students who do not complete schedules before January 28.
Hinds Delegation Observes Confab Of College Governments’ Council Mississippi Inter-Collegiate Counj Dr.
Betterswirth stated that it cil, an association of college' govj wasn’t until later, in Paris that ernments, held the first of its bi1 the present arrangement of adminisannual conferences at Mississippi | tration was adopted.
Bettersworth, speaking in the plenary session, discussed the origins of colleges and their growth.
He pointed out that the first universities were organized and run by the students, that it was the students who selected the faculty and established the rules. the state.
McCain, addressed the second plenary session the following morning on the role of higher education in the state.
Delegates from Hinds were Vicky Hazzlerigg, George Tannous, Ralph Hemphill, Billy Joe Montgomery, and Robert tMayo, administrative assistant.
Monday afternoon, December 17, open house will be held in the girls’ dormitories from 3:30 to 5:00.
Suite and room doors w;ill be decorated for Christmas and prizes will be given in each dormitory for the neatest rooms and best decorations.
The public is invited to attend at this time, along with male students, faculty members, and the board of trustees.
The annual Christmas dinner will b eheld Monday night, beginning at 5:00.
Carolyn Bowen, Main dormitory matron, has decorated the cafeteria with two floral arrangements.
The two decorations are set up in the private dining room and above the central water fountain in the main cafeteria.
Following the evening meal, at 7:30m. a musical program, “Cards and Carols of Christmas,” NOTICE The clarinet concert of Gene Saucier scheduled for tomorrow has been canceled, according to an announcement by Leslie Reeves, chairman of the Hinds Music Department.
Due to the illness of the clarinetist, the program has been rescheduled.
The time will be announced at a later date. will be presented by the choir with the assistance of the art department in the college auditorium.
The stage setting will depict three different aspects of Christmas — the home scene, the carolers outside, and the sacred portion.
Among the sacred numbers will be ""The First Christmas Candle,"" (including a narrator, Mrs.
Featured soloists are Peggy Smallwood, Brooks Noble, Beth Ponder, Brenda Mullins, Billy Barefoot, and Donna Breitling.
Tuesday afternoon, December 18, open house will be held in the boys' dormitories for the general public.
Northside dormitory has no organized party, but separate suite celebrations will be held.
Classes will end for the Christmas holidays Wednesday, December 19, at 3:30m.
No, next -accident prevention week, but it could well be. ^fejglth^tehristmas holidays probably more people will be using the nation’s highways than ever before.
The initial procedure for preparing to leave a college for weekends and holidays seems to be a vast overloading job.
Not over six people should ride in a car, says the state highWay patrol office.
And those six people aren’t saved from 1 accidents by having belongings piled on them and around them.
No doubt, patrols will be doubled and trebled for the onslaught of citizens on the highways.
More than normal care will be exercised by all law enforcement officers.
Needless to say, various radar stations will be posted along the highways around all colleges of the nation.
No matter what you hear from the tall children, called adults, the jolly old man with laughing eyes does not exist.
He doesn’t breathe, no eyes have seen him, and no ears have heard his voice— therefore he is not real, nor is he important to us.
The only thing that is of real Importance is that which we can see, that which we can feel and that which we can, in time, possess.
The adults that supposedly rule this world are mere children, and weak ones at that.
It is hard for them to live without a hoax.)a hoax that makes life cleaner and more worth living.
You, Virginia, you and your fellow children are the victims of man’s weakness.
Your father and mother and their parents and theirs all conspired to and Jackson, as it has been during the past few months.
U CURRENT EVENTS Someone Please Explain Confusion says that no one at Hinds knows what the absentee policy is.
The reason for sueh a mix-up is the recent change of policy for absences.
Some sources say that an absence directly before or after a holiday counts as a double cut.
Others reply that this practice was done away with when the policy of “three absencies” was begun.
It is sad that people, millions of them, can be so engulfed with an image, a dream, that they forsake peace and quiet for jingling bells, and a red coated, whitebearded man.
Some will argue that the Christmas season is one of beginning again, of reviving old friendships, and bandaging past arguments.
Do you know that if all the tinsel, trees, lights, cards, and gifts—if all these were taken away—man would still have Christmas.
Russians Straddle Fence By RALPH HEMPHILL The Soviet Union now finds itself in a position usually reserved for the United States — straddling a fence.
In the past it has been America that’s had to abandon a proven ally in favor of a more liberal footing on something.
Now it’s the Soviet Union that is abandoning her ally, Red China, bf deciding to fulfill its agreement to send Mig Jets to India.
These jets are to be used against Khrushchev’s oriental typhoons in Peinping.
This very easily could have been one of the primary factors which caused Mao Tse Tung to decide CLUB COLUMN Campus Groups Activate Season -BY DAWN McNEIL CIRCLE K CLUB Zhe $ 2 ) -—--Highlights of Hinds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor Circle K will present a film on Telstar Thursday night at 6:00 in the visual aids room of the Academic Building.
President Boyd McPhail invites all science and enginefiring students to attend.
Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klake Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson.
Last meeting,, Circle K began making plans for a date night meeting to be held in the Rec Hall some time after Christmas.
Circle K project committee is investigating the possibility of having bells installed in Southside dormitory.
These bells will ring 5 minutes earlier since Suthside is so distant from other school buildings.
Circle K resolved to procure a CANTERBURY CLUB Canterbury Club members celebrated the coming of Christmas with a party at the lodge on December 10.
James Butler supervised the party. first to invade India, and second, to announce the withdrawal of his troops.
China might have invaded India in hopes of presenting a dilemma to the more liberal Russians, who seem to interpret Marx differently than they do.
The Chinese belief must have been that Khruschev would cut off aid to India and throw-up a screen of neutrality, if this could have.been achieved Mao would be without a rival for Soviet affections.
Since the U.S.R.R. has apparently sided with India, the Chinese invasion is a farce, which probably explains their announced troop withdrawal.
Under present circumstances there could possibly exist some jealous rivalry between Red China and India in their relations with Russia.
They are both being watched by the under developed countries to see which method (Indian democracy or Chinese communes) is the best method to develop themselves with.
The situation is, since Red China ordered all Soviet technicians out in I960, Khrushchev has found himself in the position of aiding India by-pass China.
Now, he is helping a non-communist nation, India, defeat a communist nation, China.
The eternal triangle might best describe the predicament the two heavy weights of communism, China and Russia, find themselves in today in their association with India.
No matter the differences in Soviet and Chinese interpretation of Marx, we must remember they both still read Marx.
Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Tunior College.
This talk about annexing Wales and Lapland is, incidentally, not just idle speculation.
Great Bntam needs a desert desperately on account of the tourist trade.
Tourists are always coming up to the Prime Minister or the Lord Privy Seal or like that and saying, “I’m not knocking your country, mind you.
The American plainclothes force is called the FBI after Frank B Inchcliff who invented fingerprints.
Before Mr Inchcliff’s invention, e’verybody s fingers were absolutely glassy smooth.
This, as you may imagine, played hob with the identification of newborn babies in hospitals.
From 1791 until 1904 no American parent o( ever brought home the right baby from the hospital.
As a result, identification of babies in Swedish hospitals is so haphazard that Swedes flatly refuse to bring their babies home.
There are, at present, nearly a half-billion unclaimed babies in Swedish hospitals—some of them well over eighty years old.
We were speaking of Christmas gifts which naturally put us in mind of Marlboro cigarettes.
Any time, any season, when you light a Marlboro you can always be certain that you will get the same mild, flavorful, completely comfortable smoke.
There are, of course, other things you can give for Christmas besides Marlboro cigarettes.
If, for example, you are looking for something to give a music lover, let me call to your attention a revolutionary new development in phonographs—the Low-fi phonograph.
The Low-fi, product of years of patient research, has so little fidelity to the record you put on it that if, for instance, you put “Stardust” on the turntable, “Melancholy Baby” will come out.
Judges appeased the audience by announcing the top five campus beauties.
Three sophomores—Sharon Bearded/ Port Gibson; Hilda Bullock, Jackson; and Una Jo Schaeffer, Jackson—were given approval by the panel of judges.
Two freshmen, Randa Bumgarner, Clinton; and Carmen Cotton, Florence—rounded out top five.
A1 Simmons of Jackson; and Glen Worthington, director of the Brandon pageant.
Randa Bumgarner, Sharon Beardon, Kay Bullock, Hilda Bullock, Carmen Cotton, Mary Elizabeth House and Kathy Kilby.
Also, Sandra Jabour, Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Dot Lyons, Patsy Musselman, Jo Schaeffer, Jan Simpson, Sandra Weir and Joy Williams.
Sponsored by the Eagle, college yearbook, the over-all winner will be announced with the release of the annual.
Entertainment was provided by Doug Sullivan and Ann Stephenson, both Hinds students, and by the Sundowners, folk singing group from Millsaps.
Woodie Assaf of WLBT served as master of ceremonies. vs* URS ,s a land of happy homes, of free hearts.
KEITH PRESS “Home of the Hindsonian” Page 4 HINDSONIAN December 12, 1962 # # * v iveforthelifeofac^^ IS POUO*BIRTH DEFECTS ★ ARTHRITIS and THE SALK INSTITUTE SEASON'S GREETINGS — Hinds Honey Randa Bumgarner of Clinton welcomes in the Christmas holidays with decorations galore, both on the wall and in attire.
ROBERT OWENS SELECTED Phi Beta Lambda Elects Editor, Prepares To Publish Newspaper At the Friday meeting of Phi Beta Lambda, Robert Owens, student from Clinton, was appointed editor of TABS, a paper to be edited and published by Hinds Junior College’s Department of Business Education.
This news bulletin will be sent to high school seniors, will be distributed to the business students at Hinds, and will publicize the business education department, Mrs.
It will contain news of students enrolled in the business education classes at Hinds and in the local high schools; extra-curricular activities in which students participate, such as “Commerce Day,” social outings, and field trips; and the courses offered in general business and secretarial science.
It will also carry the honors and degrees awarded instructors and students, sketches of outstanding people who have graduated from Hinds, and all the latest techniques in the field of business education.
Two issues of TABS will be published each year, one in the spring and one in the fall.
This organization is devoted to the enrichment of the mathematics curriculum and to the upgrading of accreditation of teachers with the purpose of improving the teaching of that subject in the schools of Mississippi.
Special Magazine To Be Distributed Publication of the special Christmas magazine supplement to the Hindsonian has been delayed because of photographic and engraving difficulties, Editor Joe White announced today.
ICE HOCKEY NASHVILLE DIXIE ELVERS KNOXVILLE KNIGHTS DECEMBER 18, 8 P M. COLISEUM See the world’s fastest and roughest sport in this regular season Eastern Hockey League Game.
The Eagles jumped to a 3722 intermission lead before storming back on the courts to whip up a 17-point final margin.
Ole Miss stayed in the game during the first half via the shooting of Spencer Schreiter, Glen Lusk and John Gayden.
Two Eagle members topped the Bulldog highpoint man in the scoring column but couldn’t manage enough to tip the balance.
Barnes led with Last year’s Southern division 21 points, and Will Wade racked 17.
If you hold any of the 5 winning numbers, claim your Pontiac Tempest LeMans Convertible in accordance with the rules on the reverse of your license plate.
Alt claims for Tempests and Consolation Prizes must be sent via registered mail, postmarked by Dec.,1962 and received by the judges no later than December 31, 1962.
If you hold a consolation prize number, you win a 4-speed Portable Hi-Fi Stereo Set, ‘The Waltz” by RCA Victor.
Copiah-Lincoln Invitational Christmas Tournament Set Hinds basketball crew will journey to Wesson tomorrow for a twoday Christmas Invitational tournament hosted by Copiah-Lincoln.
Thursday night Hinds will be paired with Southwest and the little Rebels will meet Co-Lin’s Wolf crew.
For the Friday finals, the 1 Thursday winners will meet for championship with the losers cla ing in a consolation contest.
Friday trounced Ole Miss, 91 The Eagles have not met Southw Coach Troy Ricks’ Eagle c] is a pre-tourney favorite and spi only one loss in four starts.
Faculty Advisor _ KENT PRINCE This is the first of a proposed series of Hindsonian supplements which will be issued at the end of each semester.
Published at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by and for students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss., this magazine does not necessarily express the views of the faculty or administration of Hinds Junior College.
THE COVER, photographed by Daniel Fazekas, is an evocative expression of the spirit of jazz.
Also in this issue see other interesting expressions of the spirit of creativity at Hinds . . . poetry, short stories, vignettes, features, photographic study, and graphic arts.
The Story of 'Silent Night’ Over a hundred years ago in the tiny village of Arnsdorf, Australia, the beautiful words of a Christmas carol were born.
On the night before Christmas Eve, Father Josef Mohr, the parish priest, was troubled.
Because the old pipe organ in his little church was broken, there would be no special music.
This must have been the way it was in Bethlehem on that silent, holy night when Christ was born.
As he read over the words, Franz felt the sacred beiauty of that first holy night.
He began to sing, and those who heard knew that they were listening to an immortal song.
FROM PHI THETA KAPPA 4 the Christmas Doll a short story by Miriam May The year was 1960.
The traffic was terrible -she was almost afraid to try to weave her way to the opposite side of the busy avenue.
It was Christmas Eve and it seemed that everyone had forgotten the last item on his shopping list and was rushing to purchase it before the shops locked their doors for the long weekend.
Because the twenty-fifth fell on Sunday, most of th city was taking Monday off.
A kindly gentleman in a gray tweed suit bravely stepped out into the middle of the street and raised his hand as policemen do to allow poor pedestrians to cross through the jungle of cars.
I wonder who he could be, Sue thought further; probably a cop in civilian clothes doing one last job before going home for the holidays.
As soon as Sue’s left foot joined her right on the other curb, she spotted a familiar head on a well-built body that was pushing and writhing to get through the swirling crowd of shoppers.
His husky voice ate its way through the noise and din of the gift-minded people.
Despite the hustle-bustle and rush of the yuletide season, the air, neverthelss, was still.
It was filled with the usual Christmas smells of cedar, pine and fir trees that were yet to be sold, the thick aroma of coffee brewing on the sidewalk stands, and the candy that filled the bags of those passing by.
A rainbow of colors ran together into one titantic blob of vermilion, emerald, and silver.
Sue closed her eyes, almost afraid to listen to the words that would come next.
She and Neal had been married thirteen years and at every Christmas had hoped to have someone to play Santa Claus to the next—namely a child.
But it looked as if after years of hoping, nature wasn’t going to allow them one of their own, so they had firmly decided to adopt one.
And that was where Neal had been tonight— to get the final word on a little girl.
It had been only three weeks ago that a lawyer friend of theirs, Bill Hobson, had called with the news that a young man and woman had been killed in a four car accident.
He thought Neal and Sue, wanting a child so badly, would be interested to know that the couple’s little girl had also been in the wreck — but because the terrific impact of the crash threw her from the car, she was alive and safe.
He went on to say he had heard that she had been turned over to a local children’s home and was being put up for adoption.
Her name was Tandy, just like the big walking dolls that had been planted in the store windows to catch the hearts of little mommies.
She had black hair that fell in springy curls about her ears and gray-blue eyes that twinkled like tiny stars.
She was unusually small but despite a slight lisp in her voice, she had a remarkable hold on the English language for a three year old.
It is natural to assume that the foundations fell also However, one remains today on the Hinds campus.
This foundation is tottering, gi weak and _ granted, hut it still stands.
Each day this ancient relic—the wooden podium in Mrs J RHarris’ literature c l ass _supports the historical world of yesterday.
And yet its downfall is inevitable, like the downfall of the e arly Roman Empire.
During the first class meeting this year the aging warrior gave a light gasp, and two of its weak legs folded under.
First aid was applied immediately via the shoes of a handy male student.
Slings and tractions did their part toward patching up the old pillar of knowledge.
However advanced the medicinal field, it cannot perform miracles, so the old warrior stands at a sixty degree angle and barely can hold himself up during class periods.
Sophomore lit s t u d e n t s watch each day as a last remnant of ancient history declines.
Harris, who proclaims, “Maybe T can get it hammered back together in the vocational shop” TIME By PATSY MUSSELMAN Over the river there is an old railroad bridge.
Its frame is rotten and black from the smoke of millions of trains that have passed The old bridge is alone now.
The old bridge stands now as a reminder, a sentinal tombstone to time and people gone forever.
The river flows under the bridge, splashing again at its stone foundations.
The river people who worked on the boats and docks filled these smoky, one room bars.
There were bands in all of them, playing the blues and the music of the river.
The river still sings the blues for those who listen; and at night, down on the old bridge you can hear an old man, bent and wrinkled by age, blow out his love for the river on an old battered horn.
The Father, a Known King, and the Son, a Prime Prince, They did lash at each other with words.
The one son, he did beg for his rights to be free For to wed the young girl born to know poverty.
The young prince pled his cause; he did think of his love, For the poor, unknown girl had none worthy of kin.
Easterwood David Jones Bill White Larry Lauderdale 0 The jazz world is a small world.
For the first time in history, the Hinds Stage Band, which is somewhat young itself, will perform in a concert.
Entitled “Winter Jazz Concert,” 10 the program will consist of various original numbers played by the 19member group.
In 1955 the band was only a few members of marching band organized to play pep songs.
Slowly it grew and the type of music they played depended on the type of performance.
Then the big band was organized to meet the requests for a small number of musicians and Hi-Steppers to perform.
At first, the band planned to follow the pattern of the big groups such as Stan Kenton, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie.
They tried a free offer from Bob Siebert of trombone-rythm sets, found them cool swingers and now they stick mostly to Siebert scores.
All these arrangements were written specifically for stage bands by such men as Seibert of the Stan Kenton group, Johnny Thompson, and Mickey Tull.
In the past the Hi-Steppers have appeared with the band, but this time the band will solo it.
The show will be free and everyone that comes is sure to be premeated by the cool, vibrant sounds of a new thing at Hinds.
Several public appearances are in line for this year, and the band promises to fulfill these with vitality galore.
Thus far, they have made approximatey 25 appearances, including programs ‘or the Miss.
Decked out in their new uniforms, with olive blazers ,and using their stage band stands, they promise to be excitingly fresh.
Composing the saxophone section are Howard Quinn, lead alto; Libby Smith, alto; Ann Stephenson, tenor; Jimmy Goodwill, tenor; and Conrad Dove, baritone.
Five trombones are Milton Moore, lead; Buddy Thrash, Eddie Armstrong, Douglas Sullivan, and Ray Sullivan.
The trumpet section seats Mike Jones, lead; James Stokes, Jerry Cogdell, and Wayne McIntyre.
John Tompkins and Bill Dunlap are percussionists, as Bobby McCool and Jimmy Scoggins play the string bass and piano respectively.
The price He paid has bought my soul And this I can’t forget That even though I give my life I’ll always be in debt.
I I bow my head in grateful thanks And search my heart within, And ask the Saviour of the world To cleanse my soul from sin.
Luke 2:14 T II E GRILL 13 MERRY CHRISTMAS AND HAPPY NEW YEAR FROM Laundry & Cleaners MAKE A SENSIBLE NEW YEAR’S RESOLUTION NOW Let one of JACKSON STEAM LAUNDRY’S Agents pick np your laundry weekly during 1963.
PICK-UP and DELIVERY ON CAMPUS DWAYNE COX HAROLD MITCHELL BILLY LEE McLendon CHRISTMAS By BETTYE SIMMONS On Christmas Day 39 years ago President George M McLendon was a nervous prospective bridegroom.
December 26, 1923, he married the gracious Louise Boyd of Montgomery county.
A native of Jones county, the Hinds pilot received his B S. and M A. degrees from Peabody College in Nashville.
It was while serving as superintendent at Phoenix Consolidated School in Yazoo County that McLendon met his future wife.
Hinds’ First Family has seen many Christmases pass since th at first one 39 years ago, 24 of them at Hinds.
McLendon, who serves as official hostess to various civic and college functions throughout the year, takes great pride in her Christmas decorations.
Her door, which last year won recognition, will again be adorned with an original painting by Mrs.
This year the McLendons will celebrate Christmas with one of their daughters, Mrs.
The remainder of the holiday period will be spent at home with their other daughter, Mrs.
I But ’til that hour when death doth claim my soul— While quite aware that life is but a test— I know that all I truly yearn to hold Is you, who brings to me all happiness.
Although my love for you is wrong, I know My wayward heart still clings to one design.
The pain I feel I cannot bear to show, For life, though sweet, can never make you mine.
May I be strengthened by the One above For naught is lost if I but have His love.
AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR FROM THE NEWMAN CLUB FOR THE LATEST IN FASHIONS SHOP AT VANCE STYLE SHOP JEWELRY TO MATCH $1.00 up LINGERIA $4.00-$10.98 SWEATERS $5.98-$ 10.98 EDWARDS SHIRTS _$2.97-$3.99 T,ES $1.00 $2.50 HOSE, GLOVES, BEAUTIFUL BAGS 2 PIECE SUIT $11.95 $16.95 17 There was an old mao who used to live on that hill.
Some folks m these parts say he’s dead and some say he’s gone up north, but I can’t believe that, because you see son, that old man, he hated the north.
In the summer he used to Sit right up there on his porch and tell all us yoimgims about how the Yankees took Atlanta and how they marched down this very road, a whole regiment of them, and took his pigs.
I could almost see tears In that old man's eyes when he I used to tell us kids about them Yanj kee.s offering him that pork.
My Uncle John, he used to say that’s why the old man never had no family —he was filled with too much hate, Maybe that’s why he never smiled.
Why, he’d got so rowled up just talkin’ about Yankees that my Paw told me to stay away from him.
I guess Paw was scared he’d get so mad, he’d think us younguns were Yankees.
But we weren’t scared. 1 don’t guess there was a day went by I didn’t see him.
We used to see him on his porch as we passed, but when us hoys grew up and left home, the old man left too.
I guess it did,Funny, us boys never did;tell tkn old man how much we loved him.
Four boys are crouched around a hole in the concrete floor of the wellhouse.
A fire at one end of the wellhouse provides heat, as the day is dark, rainy, and windy.
A boy in the well, hanging on a network of ropes, a rope ladder, and a makeshift harness, ties another rope around a large board and yells to the others to pull it up.
The rope is hoisted and the board is thrown on the pile of debris already cleared out of the abandoned Civil War hole.
Let’s see if I can get a rope through the hole I’ve cleared in the debris.
The rope is lowered, and Harvey guides it through the hole in the trash.
Bobby lets the rope slither through hsi hands, as Harvey, about 5 feet down the well, watches expectantly.
It had been rumored to the boys that the well was about 35 to 50 feet in depth.
Under the debris, which they had been extracting, was 75 feet of water.
They were jubilant at finding its bottom, but their happiness was covered by a layer of quiet.
Then Harvey suggested that they stretch out the rope to see just how deep the well was.
Suddenly everyone bubbled over with excitement as they realized what could have happened to them in the deep, dark hole in the ground.
Everyone had come to Cooper’s Well, knowing that it was dangerous to do what they planned.
The boys were freshmen at Hinds Junior Colleg'e; Harvey Moore, boy in the well; James Rodgers, the only other person to enter the well; Bobby Gardner, who provided the transportation; Fred Fry, and Dannie Evans.
In addition to their discoveries in the well, they had come upon some other constructions.
They had found a circular foundation which they thought to be an observatory.
In and around it were found. bottles of varies shapes and a china plate.
What they had found was only a beginning of what was there, waiting to be discovered.
Bill had had to go to Chicago for seven days and because they had chosen him to take care of all the business, his being gone slowed them down somewhat.
They had hoped to get her sereval days before Christmas, but the usual red tape that always pops up in such cases, put her homecoming further off.
Neal had tried all week—but in vain —to get permission to just bring her home for Christmas day.
At any rate, yesterday Bill had sent word for Neal to come tonight—Christmas Eve.
No, she couldn’t believe it—a child at last, a little gift of joy at Christmas time.
She was lost in an unbelieveable dream—all at once an emptiness had been filled.
Jim smiled his lucid smile and closed his eyes as he reached up and turned the collar of his overcoat up to keep the raw wind from hitting the back of his neck.
Without moving a foot, he reached over and took four neatly wrapped packages out of his young wife’s arms and motioned for her to start walking.
They had stopped and were standing under an enormous raindeer head that protruded from over the door of the French Flair Dress Shp.
The deer, supposingly Santa’s Rudolph, had a big red nose that blinked on and off.
The colored light cast ruby-shaded rays across their faces as they stood and looked each other squarely in the eyes.
People don’t think fairy tales happen in real life—that dreams don’t really come true and that folks don’t really live “happily ever after”—but they do.
It was almost an hour later when the driver pulled the cab to a screeching stop in front of Bill’s modern castle.
Sue immediately got out and as i Neal fumbled around in his wallet for the right bill, she leaned down and stuck her head in the front window.
The driver ended the conversation with a wave of his hand and he was gone into the still blue night.
While Neal had gone after Sue, the head of the children’s home had gone after Tandy.
T^e child had just about gotten used to Bill’s home and the officials thought it would work out nicely to tie the final knot there.
Neal hesitated at the big double doors that opened into Bill’s “receiving room” as he called it.
This accounting machine is one of four instructional machines which will be offered to both day and night students.
Committees have been appointed to arrange preparations for the day-long event.
Representatives from business machines companies will be present to display their latest business equipment in the Workshop, with others by Johnny Stage Band Blows First Concert With A “Big Sound” Repertoire The big sound is coming to Hinds tomorrow evening at 7:30 in the college auditorium.
Hinds' stage band will at that time present their first public concert.
Under the direction of Jimmy Morris and A1 Rowan, the band will offer a full evening of what is described as “big band jazz."" individually and as a performing unit.
Warm reception is expected of Hi-Steppers who appear at con-i for the 8 rou P from Jackson i azz ventions, civic club meetings and fe as wel1 as <>am P u f enthusiasts the like.
Arrangements used are the big band iazz vein, mainly by Bob The concert wil1 be « in at 7:30 Siebert of the Stan Kenton Jazz I ln the main auditorium.
Novices are promised an exciting introduction to new sounds. academic building.
After each delegate to the event has been greeted and supplied with identification cards, the visitors will be taken on tours of the campus Thompson and Mickey Tull.
Included in the repertoire will be such jazz originals as “Browsin’,” “Swing Now, Pay Later,” “To Beat, Too Beat, Two Beat,” “Cha, Cha by members of the local Phi Beta Judy,” and “Easy Side course to its regular curriculum.
He suggested IBM furnishes engineering service through their Jackson offices.
The course, the only one of its kind offered in the heavily industrialized three county area that Hinds serves, was set up through special arrangements with the International Business Machines Corp.
Instructor Harry Brister will teach the first semester of data processing classes.
Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared to assume positions in business and in\ dustry where IBM data processing equipment is being used.
Instruction will be given in four machines, the alphabetic printing key punch, the sorter, the accounting machine with one digit selector, and the reproducing summary punch.
These students are requested to come by Denton’s office to get applications.
Deadlines for registration are set for January 26 and March 30, respectively.
Denton also urged sophomores to take advantage of the opportunity to take the exam if they have not had it.
Most Mississippi senior colleges require the test for transferring students.
Milton Moore of Liberty, lead; Buddy Trash, Eddie Armstrong and Douglas Sullivan, all of Jackson; Ray Sullivan of Raymond.
Debaters To Attend Forensic Competition On Millsaps Campus Hinds debate squads will meet at Millsaps College in Jackson this week end for one of the largest forensic tournaments in the nation.
One of the few junior colleges entering, Hinds will face some of the best college and university debaters in the country.
Last year over 86 teams from California to Iowa, Kentucky and Ohio to Florida, entered the Millsaps contest.
Wayne McIntyre of Jackson; and zine this week named a Hinds student, Mrs.
Wilhelmina Porter of Vicksburg, as the 1962 Woman of the Year in Mississippi.
Porter, who is the southern 1 regional advisor to the National Home Demonstration Council, was named for her outstanding service to rural women of the state.
Now in her fourteenth year of active home demonstration work, the busy woman is the past president of the Mississippi Home Demonstration Council, and the recipient of the Five-Diamond Pin, the highest award presented to a Mississippi Home Demonstration woman.
In 1959 she represented the Mississippi Council at the Association of Country Women of the World in Edinburgh, Scotland.
It was during this trip, at which time she also toured parts of Europe, that she decided to return to school to study languages.
In addition to the duties of student, housewife and mother, Mrs. tee work, a member of the Women’s Cabinets of Public Affairs, State Family Life Council, Country Women’s Council of the U S., Associated Country Women of the World and the State Agricultural Coordinating Council. i Jerry Cogdell of Rolling Fork.
John Tompkins of Yazoo City and Bill Dunlap of Jackson, alternating percussionists; Bobby McCool of Jackson, string bass; Jimmy Scoggins of Jackson, piano.
Rehearsals for the performance have been underway throughout the semester and directors are reported more than pleased with the musical development of the students In the two-day contest, squads which win two of the four elimination rounds Friday afternoon will compete in four more rounds Saturday.
Other speech contests will also be conducted in interpretative reading, oratory, and exemporaneous speaking.
JUST JAZZ — Hinds stage band, in their first public concert, will present exclusively jazz — nothing more.
But they’ve got the choice arrangements, including numbers by Bob Siebert of the Stan Kenton Jazz Workshop.
Previous to this concert, the 19-piece unit limited appearances to accompanying small groups of Hi-Steppers in convention, hotel performances “Big band jazz,” as described by directors Jimmy Morris and A1 Rowan, will greet the audience at 7:30 tomorrow evening in the college auditorium.
In fact, only a handful of students actually disagree with the cost of their education.
The cost per taxpayer for each student at Hinds Junior College is approximately $500.
This may seem like a huge lump sum at the moment, but let’s see where the money goes when it leaves the taxpayer or the entering student.
Gigantic funds are necessary to build classrooms, dormitories, cafeterias, libraries, etc.
The average American gripes about having to pay so much when he builds a home, but you don’t see him sparing any effort when he decides to construct a business.
If he uses his money, intelligence, and education well he can become successful.
Or if he decides to scrimp and sell shoddy, cheap merchandise, he may find himself soon in a state of bankruptcy.
This is not mentioning the thousands of dollars worth of equipment and books included in the operation.
Perhaps one of the most important costs in education is' through personnel.
They, like businessmen, cannot work ,f ™ ay we,) . be # the most fa ^ -i without being paid.
No one would say that the taxpayers are Z^rn hutory"" The ""announled wasting any money by overpaying them.
The state GOP has a wealth of campaign ammunition at its finger , tips, not the least of which is a Of course, most of this money comes from the govern[well qualified, and, what will probstatement by the founder of Russian Communism himself, Lenin.
Once in a letter, Lenin wrote that of all the governmental systems he had studied 1 , the one most acceptable to him was the one in use in our 'sovereign' state; because it embodied his ideal, a one party system.
Regardless of the man chosen, he will be faced by the same basic problem that has plagued past governors of this state.
The problem is, frankly speaking, that Mississippi is only one generation away from the plow.
This can be accounted for by the Students gripe about the $35 they have to pay each j actlon f of the candidates when the month to attend Hinds, yet could hardly live that cheaply j at home.
There attending college don t use the time they have. | is a possibility though, that he has Most colleges that dropped Saturday classes in the past are now returning to them so that students can have a more detailed education.
Many schools are changing to tri-semester schedules — yes, school all year ’round — so that stu( reached his zenith because of his stand on legalizing liquor.
If these were all the candidates running for the state’s highest ofdents can graduate more quickly and leave room for others. i fice ’ the P rofessional politicians Also, why should the government and taxpayers have to raise Safe JUSt ^ reverse more money for buildings when the ones they have aren’t used all year long.
They can’t save money if the buildings and facilities are idle three months out of the year.
According to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, possibility that Hinds Junior College will classes into its schedules.
The announcement by Rubel There is a j Phillips, a Jackson attorney, that enter Saturday he will run for governor on a Republican ticket should be heralded by all believers in a two-party system.
The metallic clicking sound you hear on many college campuses these days is not the sound of typewriters nor the pitter pat of little feet, but is the newest of college fads—knitting.
The method and stitches are the same, though somewhat improved from 40 years ago.
Sweaters, afghans, scarfs—anything you want can be made by a few simple stitches, two needles an da scan of yarn.
When the knitting craze hit college campuses, Millsaps was one of the first to accept the fad in this area.
A few at Mississippi College are trying the fad and now Hinds has two or three who keep the “beat” via the clicking of knitting needles.
Not too long ago, the craze was undoubtedly in the northern states because a famous love-lorn editor received a ""distress signal"" from a young woman whose boyfriend had become so interested in knitting that he took his yarn and needles everywhere—even on dates.
The girl was disheartened because the boy never paid any attention to her—only to his knitting.
The writer promptly answered the letter, telling the girl not to worry—just drop a few of his stitches and if that didn’t work, steal his knitting needles.
The advice was drastic but it undoubtedly worked, since the girl never wrote again.
However, the boy just might have presented his girl with a luscious hand-knitted sweater—and what girl could steal a boy's needles if he did that.
In fact, she looks as though she was quite mad because she had to put down her knitting long enough to pose.
Since knitting is both time consuming and enjoyable hobby, most coeds hate to lay their knitting aside long enough to attend classes.
Selected were sophomores Rick Thrash, Bobby James, Mike Vincent, and George Beiton.
Renfroe, who in the same balloting was selected president of the junior college coaches association for the sixth straight year, is dubious about selecting All-Star teams.
Vincent was an outstanding passer and ground gainer during the season, finally breaking several of Hinds passing records before the season was over.
Responding to a statement by junior college Coach of the Year Jim Randall, Renfroe said that under the present round robin schedule, there’s not anything to do about it.
Randall, in an interview for the Jackson Daily News with Hindsonian sports editor Jim Bonney, advocated cutting the regular season from ten to eight games.
Randall attributed most of the injury problem to the shortage of players.
He attributed losses during the season to game action, injuries and the new conference rule which limits players to residents of the junior college district.
Randall’s comments followed his statement that injuries toward the end of the season had kept his team from previously winning the junior college title.
Renfroe, commenting on other aspects of the junior college grid circuit, said that Hinds would play out-of-^tate teams if they could work it into their schedule.
The question of Mississippi junior college teams not playing interconference games has resulted in their being barred from the Junior Rose Bowl unless they compete in other conferences.
Renfroe said the reason Mississippi teams don’t play more out of state teams is because of expenses.
It’s not bad, really,” she said, lighting up her second stogie, “until you get to the end.
We left them coughing. in their last two games, yet Hinds was third-to-last in the final standings.
In previous publicity, James' name was listed with the outstanding ends.
Teasley, chosen for his work at center, also sparked the Eagles from tackle and as Hinds kicker.
Regina Goodwin, librarian, announced today that students must obtain library clearance slips before they will be allowed to take semester examinations, or before they check out of school at semester’s end.
Lists of students with overdue books have been placed in the administration building. eia z Don’t Touch Will Wade appears determined to hold onto the ball as a Mississippi Stater heads for it in the exhibition game with the Maroon freshmen.
Linda Breese is one of the 250,000 children who are born in this country each year with a significant birth defect.
She was one of the first treated at The National Foundationsponsored Birth Defects Clinical Study Center at Children’s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio.
Today, Linda’s just about as active and exuberant as any other little charmer m her part of Ohio.
To be on the safe side, she wears her braces outdoors and at school, but in the house they’re often laid aside . .. perhaps one day forever.
There are thousands of other Lindas, victims of birth defects, arthritis and polio.
They need the help your dimes can give—to support research, and to bring medical care of the highest quality to every community in the nation.
Denton, counselor, engaged in discussions relating to problems between junior colleges and universities. from the | are more job opportunities.
The rethough training usually will upgrade employment salary, Gibbes said.
Earlier in 1962 a six-week course in metals was held in the Jackson city schools. other fields ting in the program are Central Mississippi area job contracts have already been made from as far away as Texas.
They study electronics two hours each day and office machines four hours each day, five days a week.
The program is a result of the 1962 Federal Man Power Division Future programs in are being planned, Gibbes said, but they depend on which needs are determined by the state agencies.
Special Federal Vocational Class Progressing Well Mississippi’s first nine-month vocational re-training program has successfully moved out of its introductory phase, Walter H Gibbes, Coordinator of the Hinds Vocational Department, said this week.
The program, a federally supported venture which is being conducted through the Hinds Vocational Department, trains men whose civilian occupational specialty needs to be changed for gainful employment.
Now moving into their fourth week, the 20 students being re-trained were chosen by state employment services and the Trades and Industries Division of the State Department of Education to study electronics and office machines.
At the close of the course they will be qualified to go into the field of business machines in either sales, service, adjustment, mechanical, or related fields.
In conjunction with this national program, a member of the Department of Labor visited the campus on Monday, discussing the program with Gibbes and making pictures for his department.
Gibbes commented that several Hinds vocational students who graduated as regular college students earlier in the same field are operating their own office machines business in this area.
But Gibbes explained that the re-training program is different from the regular vocational college training in that it is highly accelerated and that subject matter is limited to electronics and office machines.
In regular vocational training at Hinds, studbnts are required to study corollary reading courses from the liberal arts.
FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE By BETTYE SIMMONS Interest in the history of Hinds was sparked with the release of the 1962 Eagle which illustrated in both pictures and prose the rise of Hinds from 1917 to 1962.
Well, this week a beloved human part of the campus and its history made his return.
Otho Glaze, who ""grew up from a barefooted boy and got the worse whipping of my life down under that tree near the library,"" retired from twenty years' service in the Army and returned to his home in Raymond.
Otho’s father, Oscar Glaze, became the chief cook when this institution opened as a County Agricultural High School in 1917.
Oscar Glaze brought with him his two children, and both attended school in Raymond, spending play time on campus.
I loved to build things so I was making a mud chimney with mud and sticks.
During his twenty years of service, he was stationed in England, France, Belgium, Japan, Korea, | Germany, and numerous places throughout the United States.
He usually hated to leave his camp, and it would seem his companies usually hated to see him go.
When he was transferred from Fort Lee, Virginia in I960, his company gave him $50.
As for his future, the youthful looking 50-year-old man wants to find a part-time job, being off on weekends.
Mrs, Dorothy Glaze Catchings is the maid for Northside and Westside dormitories.
From now on, the cards Otho Glaze used to send to Hinds each time he moved will be in person.
The Eagles captured only one victory among the five games played before Christmas holidays.
Mississippi State freshmen and CoLin Wolves trounced the Eagle group one time each.
Hinds topped Ole Miss freshmen at the CopiahLincoln Invitational Tourney.
SOUTHWEST Collective shooting ability and advantageous height aided the Southwest Bears in scoring a win over NOTICE UNPRINTED MANUSCRIPTS Submitted for CHRISTMAS SUPPLEMENT WILL BE RETURNED on request In Public Relations Office Hinds, the Eagles were downed 10894 on the Summit court.
Will Wade led the scoring barrage for the Eagles by netting 23 points on 11 field shots and four free throws.
SOUTHWEST Opening the Copiah-Lincoln tournament at Wesson against the team that had just handed them a loss only the night before, the Hinds crew put up a rough yet fruitless fight.
At halftime period the Eagles trailed only three points, as the scoreboard showed 39 points for the Bears and 36 for the Eagles.
Barnes ripped the nets for 21 points and Harlan Stanley dumped 12 for the only double-digit scores of the night.
STATE In an exhibition game with the freshman Maroons from Starkville, the Eagles had the opportunity to play in the spacious Mississippi Coliseum in Jackson.
John Franklin paced the attack with 12 points and Johnny Hines and Leslie Carter captured 10 points each.
CO-LIN Only two points separated the Wesson Wolves and Hinds during their first game of the season, played on the Co-Lin court.
GOW»BRANCH 0FF|CES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK of m i s a I 8 s I P P i UP 'N THE AIR — Johnny Hines stretches tall in a jump during the exhibition at Mississippi Coliseum in Jackson with the freshman Mississippi State team.
Hinds Five Favored In First Game On Eagles’ Home Grounds Saturday Basketball comes to Hinds Satur-f Pints Miccicei™ Basketball comes to Hinds Saturday for the first time this season when the East Mississippi Lions invade.
The Eagles will be a slight favorite because of their defeat of the Scooba crew in the season opener, but according to Hinds Coach Troy START THE NEW YEAR OFF RIGHT Have one of Jackson Steam Laundry’s agents pick up your laundry and dry cleaning in the dorm each Monday and Thursday nights DWAYNE COX HAROLD MITCHELL BILLY LEE Laundry & Cleaners Ricks, East Mississippi is a much improved club and will be ready for the invasion.
Defensively, despite the insurmountable problem of lack of height around the backboards, the Eagles have been polishing their man-to-man work.
JEWELRY LINGERIE NOVELTIES SWEATERS Large Selection at Anns Fabric Shop Downtown Raymond Page 6 HINDS0N1AN January 9, 1963 Job Training In Vocational Department Creates Skilled Personnel For Industry WALTER H GIBBES Vocational Coordinator McLendons Host Faculty Couples, Staff For Dessert President and Mrs.
George M McLendon Tuesday night hosted three faculty couples and members of the Hindsonian staff at a dessert party at their home.
Also honored were Miss Margaret Lucas and Jimmy Morris, who will be married next month.
In keeping with the “marriage” theme of the party, Linda Byrd entertained guests with a humorous poem.
Tea and party favors were served from a table decorated with silver candlebra with white tapers, and centered with a white and green floral arrangement.
Members of the Hindsonian staff present included Miss Byrd, Bettye Simmons, editor Joe White, Dwayne Cox, Jim Toombs, and Dannie Evans.
IRC Students See Debate Team Work Two Hinds debate teams debated the national topic before the International Relations Club Wednesday night in their first public appearance before the Hinds student body.
Hinds debate teams have journeyed to LSU, to Ruston, and to the Mississippi College Novice Tournament.
By DANNIE EVANS Hinds will show what it has to offer the vocational minded student, Thursday, January 10, when it unveils its vocational exhibit at the Coliseum in Jackson.
The exhibits from various industries and Hinds and Ole Miss will let the public know what opportunities lie untaken in the many fields of industry and business.
The industrial exhibition will be sponsored by the Jackson Chamber of Commerce and local industrial development groups.
The exhibit from Hinds will attempt to show that such facilities as those Hinds has are a step toward eliminating the problems that now exist in industry.
These problems include the idea of jobs looking for men, while at the same time men search for jobs.
In other words, there are thousands of jobs available for skilled personnel, if only there was skilled personnel to fill them.
As Walter Gibbes, coordinator of Hinds Vocational Department explains ""For many years, colleges have trained the brain only.
Hinds Vocational Department, realizing this need for practical learning, helps prepare vocational and technical students to qualify for the best jobs possible and give them practical problem-saving in those fields.
First, a technical program has a greater holding power than a strictly academic course of study.
Also, a program as that which Hinds offers provides the possibility of training the hand and mind simultaneously.
The vocational co-ordinator noted that an article in the latest issue of the Readers' Digest entitled “Why Johnny Can’t Get a Job,” was a justification of technical education.
It is more logical for a two-year college to give such instruction than a four-year senior college.
Therefore, the junior college has been deemed anonymously as the instrument to do this training.
Symbolizing the increasing interest in vocational programs is the about-to-be vocational annex, expected to be finished by September, at a cost of about $310,000, and the overflowing exurberance of President McLendon and others of the administration.
Sigafoos was a keen, ambitious lad, and when he finished high school he wished mightily to go on with his education.
R L.’s father could not send the boy to college because a series of crop failures had brought him to the brink of disaster.
He had a deep-seated fear that the task would be too great, that he would never be able to carry on a full, busy college life and still find time to do odd jobs and make money.
One day, walking and brooding, he came upon a park bench and sat down and lit a Marlboro cigarette.
Sitting and thinking and smoking a Marlboro on the park bench, R L. was suddenly interrupted by a small, quavering voice which said, “My boy, you are troubled.
Seated beside R L. was a tiny, gnarled man with wispy, snow-white hair.
His skin was almost transparent, showing a delicate tracery of fragile bones beneath.
I, for example, used to get up at five o’clock every morning to stoke the furnace at the SAE house.
At eight I had my ears pierced so that at nine I could tell fortunes in a gypsy tearoom.
Registrar Mildred Herrin reports that in the regular college division, 42 new day student and approximately 20 new dormitory student applications have been approved.
Hinds students wait patiently for the completion of registration — payment of tuition and board.
Maybe the students in the front section are smiling because they near their goal; the last few don’t seem to be in such a gay mood.
Fire began when an elevator motor either overheated or caught fire in the six-story dorm.
Black smoke filled the building, causing little material damage but great alarm.
Fire fighting crews from the university and adjoining Starkville, Columbus and West Point quickly assembled to battle the blaze.
A rapidly-spreading fire destroyed the kitchen and caused extensive damage to the main dining area of State's cafeteria.
Extent of damages could not be determined, but Governor Ross Barnett quickly issued orders for National Guard and state Civil Defense officers to set up emergency feeding operations on the campus, which was still wrapped in subfreezing temperatures.
Merchandise and , of the few i unior colleges entering, equipment in the student grill was Hinds faced some of the country s Classes Fill, List Set For IBM Courses Registration for the new IBM Data Processing course at Hinds is almost complete, with vacancies left only in night class, Dean of Instruction James Sparkman said today.
With one of the four machines installed, the new course is receiving fast response from students.
Names are still being taken for the day course and are added to a waiting list in case of conflicts or drop-outs.
Sixty persons are registered for the day course, not including waiting list.
Unprinted Stories From ‘Supplement’ Held For Owners Public Relations Director Kent Prince announced 'today that students who submitted articles which were not printed in the Hindsonian Christmas Supplement may pick them up in the Public Relations Office.
However, articles which were used in the publication must be kepft on file.
Students interested in one of the under-staff positions should contact Editor Joe White or Prince in the Public Relations office for an interview.
Other positions include two associate editors, sports editor, exchange editor, art editor, photo editor, news writers, news editor, and feature editor.
Course work in journalism is not a pre-requisite to Hindsonian staff work, although it is desirable.
Prince said. currently enrolled student body has registered for second semester.
Miss Herrin commended the students for their cooperation in pre-registration.
Students not completing second semester schedules by this date will be fined $5, Miss Herrin said.
These courses will follow a completely varied second semester schedule.
Final figures are not yet complete on registration for special students, vocational students and enrollees for day and night classes.
On January 11, 26 entering students completed day-long freshman entrance exams on campus.
Students meeting graduation requirements are automatically exempt from exams if they apply by 'the 18th, according to Miss Herpunch, accounting machine with | rin.
Only two sophomores have apone digit selector, reproducing j plied for graduation to date, Sandra summar punch, and sorter.
Hinds debaters topped squads from Hardin-Simmons, David-Lipscomb, and Middle-State Tennessee.
Saturday, Watkins and Land faced Iowa State and were retired from competition in a close decision.
Also representing Hinds were Carol Fortier, Dawn McNeil, Woody May, and Ralph Hemphill.
Private Collection Now Being Shown For Student Body J The art collection of music instructor Rex Tatum 'this week is being exhibited at the library by the Art Department in hopes of encouraging art appreciation among Hinds students.
The collection includes 21 paintings dated from the 17th Century, most of them Italian and American.
Tatum, who began collecting as a college freshman, prefers American work and intends to restrict his acquisitions to that field in the future.
The exhibit is the first of a proposed series to be shown in a newlycompleted art department located o nthe ground level of the library, department head Mrs.
Special IBM Instructor Joins Faculty For Business Course Harry L Brister, associated with the International Business Machines, will instruct special sections of IBM Data Processing when the course is added to Hinds’ day and nigh't programs second semester.
Brister has worked with various firms in different sections of the country, handling numerous IBM assignments since 1950.
He graduated from Los Angeles City College with highest academic average for a male graduate in 1957.
He has worked with IBM machines in operations, wiring, installation, design, instruction, and supervision.
Even while in the Army, the 31-year-old man served as wiring operator and unit instructor on IBM equipment.
HARRY L BRISTER Page 2 HINDSONIAN January 16, 1963 ""Hinds College” Not far in the past, when educators agreed something definitely had to be done about the lack of colleges and other institutions of higher learning, junior colleges were formed.
They evolved naturally to fill a need, and since then have assumed more and more responsibility.
The ordinary American believes “junior” connotes an actual junior or son of a college.
Junior and senior colleges meet each year and side by side work out required curriculums.
The only difference in the two types of colleges is name and number of years offered.
Freshmen and sophomores number many more than juniors and seniors; classes dwindle in size as they progress through college.
Junior colleges are not babies; they just teach the same things for half the time.
Their status is growing and perhaps tomorrow will produce another duty for them to fill.
Junior colleges are not inferior to senior colleges and should not be classed as such.
W HINDS-IGHTS Plenty Of Noise Local boys’ gymnasium was filled to capacity Thursday night, January 10—filled to capacity with noise, that is.
About 40 boys and three girls shouted, ranted, and stomped until the walls shook.
They cheered and hissed, in fact, more than students at conference basketball games.
The crowd wasn’t as large as usual, of course, but the spirit was higher.
Perhaps it was higher because spectators were closely connected with players on both teams, for this was an intramural basketball game.
Southside dormitory was pitted against the day-students’ team in a rough and tumble game.
The contest was held immediately before the stage band jazz concert in the auditorium.
Never let it be said only conference ball players know how to toss a pointer or escape a guard.
Vocational students made up the major part of the cheering section, and a cheering contest stole the spotlight from the game.
Watching an intramural game can be as interesting as viewing a humorus yet exciting movie.
W Surgery vs Sugar As Kildare Loses In Love, Marriage -""By LINDA BYRD — “ Like “Pogo” in the funnies, television poses some controversial questions.
Kildare,” a question was raised as to which is more important to a woman—career or marriage.
Before I go any further, let me say that I have become an avid fan of the young doctor, but not to the extent of selling my volume of neuro-surgery edited by Dr.
Jim Kildare fell sweetly, tenderly in love with a codoctor, who just happened to be blonde, quick-witted and extremely attractive.
The “impossible” element had to be added to this budding romance and the writer chose to let the girl be an aspiring young surgeon.
To make a simple plot simpler— the girl had to choose between profession or a professor, or surgery or sugar as someone put it.
To those who saw the program, the opinions were varied as to whether or not the girl made the right decision.
Even though the story was an imaginary one, the plot is more controversial in the 60's when women are being educated and are holding important positions in business than it was in grandma's day.
It is important because we are the ones to make the decision—not some heroine in a television show.
We shall, possibly, one of these days have to decide between a marriage or a career.
Of course millions of women are combining them and doing so quite successfully.
Perhaps we can learn to combine the two or decide which we want the most.
But then perhaps no one will ask us to marry them and we won’t have to worry about a decision.
The third term wil lno't be compulsory, and in it a student may take from six to eight semester tour.
Thus, fulltime students could, Jim Bonney j with two other terms, take up to Albert Dahduh50 credit hours a year, completing his degree in less than three calendar years.
This announcement corresponds with an editorial in last week’s Hindsonian.
DWAYNE COX Business Manager Columnists, historians, statesmen, and politicians have already begun to choose up sides.
Regardless of the vicinity one chooses, events will be channeled in the direction of a single, timeworn statement.
The trick is to find an acceptable technique that will enable the West to go forward simultaneously at home and abroad.
It is highly improbable, in today's world, to have one without the other.
If this statement is not interpreted to mean a loss of American individuality, then it should be interpreted 'to be a step in the right direction, even though it is probably premature.
In this vital area, we should not underestimate the value of propaganda and fts impact on an illiterate mass.
We should express our attitude toward other peoples (that’s what our foreign policy should be) that inhabit other nations in a language that is both attractive and understandable.
While not overlooking the overseas diplomat, we shouldn’t ignore the masses either.
If 'the United States will set out using these three as the pegs of a progressive policy in the fight for peace, we will have something to hang our leftists — termed “warlike” 'tactics in Cuba and Berlin on.
It is this kind of influence and sway that the communists cannot compete with or against.
They can make missiles like sausages and frighten the world, but they can’t make sausages like missiles and free the world.
It's when one begins talking practicalities that freedom's opponents lose out and liberty's opportunities win out.
Not to be forgotten is when endeavors of free-enterprise economy are seen, the masses will get wise and join the free world, therefore following America’s surmise.
Intermediate badminton competition pits Barbara Clack against Jackie Snaders and Frances Picket against Sandra Weaver.
In the losers' bracket, Jane O'Neal meets Sandra Vaughn, and Linda Hill faces Klare Parker.
In beginners’ badminton, Olga Deaton battles Ann Pharr for the championship.
Connie Roediger and Francis Pickett clash for championship of intermediate ping pong.
In beginner’s ping pong competition, Jackie Sanders meets Carrie Bliss, while Barbara Clack faces Linda Hill.
January 16, 1963 HINDSON1AN Page 3 MISSISSIPPI ENGRAVING CO. -a HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES MATS January Features Encore Of ’62 Snow, Temperatures By BETTYE SIMMONS Over the weekend Mississippians braced themselves for a fantastic conglomeration of thunderstorms, 'tornadoes, freezing rain, ultra-low temperatures—and just to appease everyone, the slight possibility of snow.
Sleet began falling early Saturday afternoon and became mixed with light snow later that evening.
Coupled with the icy covering found in most areas, the snow was hardly College Knowledge Not Always Useful On Test Questions THE EYES HAVE IT — Sandra Roberts, pretty Jackson freshman, not only has pleasing eyes, but IS pleasing to the eyes.
Margaret Lucas Honored Tomorrow With Miscellaneous Bridal Shower Miss Margaret Lucas, assistant registrar, will be honored tomorrow afternoon at a bridal shower given by Miss Susan Brown, Mrs.
FL 2-8331 BAGBY HALL RAMBLER Would a§»pr®«iaf# the Opportunity of Doing Business With All The People In Raymond and Himk Miss Lucas and Hinds band director Jimmy Morris will be wed Feb. 23 at State Line, Miss.
The shower, set for 2m. in the home economics building, is miscellaneous and decorations will be provided by Mrs.
Morris and Miss Frances Morris, both of Vicksburg. —Students learn many things while in college.
Trouble is, the acquired knowledge too often has nothing to do with questions asked on tests.
Mr -is a bald-headed man who can clean your house and everything that’s in it.
Do not pass --, do not collect-dollars. enough to build snowmen or have traditional battles, but it did revive a memory.
It was on January 12, 1962, that the thermometer dropped one degree below zero in Jackson, and a blanket of snow from one to five inches deep enveloped the state.
But Hinds was open, and sophomores—for the most part—havj^ fond memories of the few happy days when girls wore slacks to classes, and other girls provided laugh'ter for onlookers with spills on the slippery ice.
The 1963 sequel was less funsome, however, producing a rash of minor accidents and generally hazardous driving throughout the state.
Those disappointed in the 1963 performance, can probably find comfort in the newness of this year, and can look forward to likely repeats of this past weekend.
Big Hinds' Eagle In Final Stages, Editor Discloses One of 'the major sections of this year’s Eagle is now in the process of final proofing.
The Eagle will be published this j summer and will have a circulation of more than 1400.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE Either in Color or Black and White Standard Photo WEEEEEBSSSMffn Contra* p,,^Supplies MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers Dave Gardner, the quick-thinking Tennessee comic, will perform Sat., Jan., at Municipal Auditorium in Jackson.
January 16, 1963 STUDENT COMPETITION TOTALS OFF THE BACKBOARD — Center Leslie Carter, 6’ Eagle from Raymond, nets two points for the Hinds team during Saturday’s match with East Mississippi Lions.
Carter contributed* high-jumping talent as his part of the decisive victory.
A fast break was employed during the first half of play by the Hinds aces.
The Eagles pushed the Lion members aside at the bucket and controlled the backboards.
Will Wade and Johnny Hines led the scoring for the victors netting 17 tallies each.
High point honors for the night went to Keys Currie of East Mississippi.
Roundballers Face Duo Of Invaders, Plan Fast Breaks Two home basketball games remain on the slate this week at Hinds.
John Dickens and Rick Stewart are the top point scorers for the Bulldogs and Jay Johnson leads Pearl River.
The Eagles sported a 3-5 won-lost record prior to Tuesday’s game at Jories.
It will be the first meeting between Hinds and either Pearl River or Holmes.
Circle K selects a number of nominees to be invited into the organization The number of selected students is decided at the meeting, generally ranging from fifteen to twenty.
Billy Barefoot, Billy Joe Montgomery, Bill Dunlap, Bill Watts, Johnny Franklin, Harlan Stanley, Jimmy Buell, Larry Hill, Joe Campbell, Jerry Legg, Chris Sparkman, Dwight Middleton.
Barnes, Jerry Smith, Woody May, Jack McCaskill, Johnny Hannah, Jackie Williamson, and Billy Lee.
Selectees will show their acceptance of the offer by attending the regular meeting of Circle K tomorrow night at 4:55 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria.
Folk Flavored Sundowners Present Concert Thursday The Sundowners, new vocal group from Millsaps College, will present their first full-scale concert in the Hinds auditorium tomorrow evening at 7:30, sponsored by the Hindsonian.
Having already appeared at Hinds during the Beauty Review in November, the group is being well received and tickets are going fast, said Joe White, Hindsonian editor.
Using predominantly folkflavored music, the trio arranges their own numbers for their unique blend of one male and two female voices.
Most of their selections come from re-arranging well-known, folk songs, but some come from reTorcfs and from the Coachmen, now defunct Millsaps male quartet of which the Sundowners guii tarist was a member last year.
IThey began singing together in September during spare time at the Millsaps choir retreat.
Since then they have appeared in numerous campus spot appearances and have performed for such public attractions as the Jr.
Tickets are on sale in the Public Relations Office, but will also be sold at the auditorium door tomorrow night Special price of 50 cents has been set for Hinds students.
Dwayne Cox, Hindsonian business manager, is in charge of ticket sales, and Jimmy Chandler is in charge of stage for the performance, White said.
The program will last approximately one and one-half hours, White said.
MOVING IN — Dottie Breakfield discovers an easy method of moving into the recently completed $85,000 Northside annex.
NOTICE A mobile X-ray unit will be set up on campus tomorrow from eight o'clock until twelve o'clock and from one o'clock until five o'clock.
This will be the last semester checkup, and all teachers and students are urged to have an X-ray made during this time by the college nurse, Mrs.
ONE ALL A's Sixty-Five Students Earn Honors As Herrin Lists Semester Grades According to Registrar Herrin’s Alton Wayne Ball, Port Gibson; grading figures, thirteen students are listed on the President’s List and fifty-one on the Dean’s List.
Listed on the Dean's List were Hi-Stepper Director To Judge Contests In Various Schools Business Students To Visit Campus For Annual Commerce Day Feb.
Epsilon Eta Chapter of Phi Beta Lambda sponsors its annual Commerce Day on February 14 The day-long visit will begin with registration, followed by tours of the campus guided by members Mrs.
Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, will serve as a judge in of the | oca , Phi Beta Lambda, the annual Beauty Pageant at Murrah High School in Jackson on Thursday, February 7.
A , , Edith Brummett, Jackson; Jo elected by P ° pular VOte Bryant, Hattiesburg; Hilda Bullock, Jackson.
Also, Randall Everette Carney, Jackson; Nancy Carol Clayton, 'Jackson; Henri Lou Coleman, Mendenhall; Billy Herschel Cook, Jackson; Becky Cooper, Jackson; Vernon Dawson, Jackson; Lucy Nell Felder, Jackson; Johnny Franklin, Redwood; Ann Garner, Jackson; Stewart Gibbes, Learned.
Sylvia Gibson, Jackson; John M Hathorn, Jackson; George W Haynes, Utica; Patricia Hebler, Vicksburg; Ralph Hemphill, Jackson; Juanita Hilderbrand, Vicksburg; Michael C Jones, Raymond; Sylvia Jones, Alabama; David Michael Lane, Vicksburg; Betty Jane Long, Jackson.
Mary Jane McDonald, Jackson; Diane Mahaffey, Jackson; Sandra Marble, Jackson; Jo Carolyn Martin, Greenville; Becky Massey, Goshen Springs; David Neal,11 Goshen Springs; David N e al, Vicksburg; Marianne Neal, Vicksburg; Mary Louise Polk, Prentiss; Carol F Puckett, Jackson; Bettye Simmons, Wiggins.
Darrell Slack, Jackson; Harlan Stanley, Jackson; Judy Statham, Jackson; Mary Ann Stewart, Utica; Pete Taylor, Raymond; Judy Thompson, Clinton; Faith Walker, Crystal Springs.
Patsy Warnack, Jackson; Lela Ann Wilkinson, Jackson; Frank Wilson, Vicksburg; and Winnie Sue Widers, Jackson.
A business exhibit in the academic building will display the the latest business equipment.
Companies to be represented included Burroughs Corporation, InOn February 18, Mrs.
Previously, the girls have been nominated and pany. i Also on the day's agenda will be entertaining.
The first segment will explain the local chapter of Phi Beta Lambda, and the second part will deal with the Hinds business department.
Following lunch and further tours, the guests will be treated to a social at the Raymond Lake Lodge.
Schools expected to attend are Clinton, Raymond, Jett of Vicksburg, Puckett, St.
All high schools in the Jackson area have been invited and others may answer the invitation before next week.
Maybelle Furness, sponsor of the chapter, emphasized that all Hinds students may attend the exhibits during the day.
These honored students will be presented awards in an upcoming chapel program.
The idea originated last year before publication of the 1962 Eagle, in which top students from various departments were featured.
Selections are made from all-round attitudes, grades, cooperativeness, with each department adding requirements necessary for its field.
Aside from Phi Theta Kappa, national honorary society, this is the only major program on the Hinds campus which endorses high-ranking students.
It gives recognition where it is due and encourages students to perform better in classes and in extra-curricular activities.
Care has been taken that top students in one division will not receive the award for another division also.
Perhaps it would be good to have open competition, such as a special exam, when there are indecisions or ties for the top student.
Recently a contest was staged on campus, in which an attractive 19 inch Motorola television was to be given away.
They will end the contest in the Grill between 3:30 and 4:00 Tuesday, April 2.
According to their announcements, a minimum of 1,000 empty packs of Alpine, Marlboro, Parliament or Phillip Morris cigarettes must be submitted to qualify.
In other words, an entry of 1,001 empty packs might win the person or club a television.
Some suggestion has been made that the set be won and placed in the college grill.
Or, if some club, organization, or individual wishes to obtain the television set, they may collect packs on their own initiative.
It’s not often that someone gives something away, especially not a valuable television set, but when they do it seems smart to take advantage of the opportunity.
Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the Faculty and administration of Hinds lunior College.
The popular Millsaps College folk singers, appearing at 7:30 m. in the auditorium this Thursday, will be honoring Hinds, its students, and faculty with their first full scale concert.
Those who attended the Beauty Review a few months back will remember the group and the rousing applause that followed their performance.
This concert, however, promises to be even greater than their other appearances.
Time for songs like, “If I Had a Hammer,” “The House of the Rising Sun,” and many others.
At present a university without its own group of folk singers is like burlesque without strippers.
Listen to the radio or songs in the grill—yes, clod darling—many of the records are merely folk songs.
You’ll like those songs, too, and I’ll even go so far as to bet you my “Peter, Paul and Mary” album that you’ll be standing in the aisles asking for more.
The staff of this paper, who incidentally are sponsoring the Sundowners concert, will be on the first row.
We never sponsor anything or anybody we don't ourselves enjoy, and since many students are avid fans of folk singing an dits singers, the Sundowners will be greatly welcomed and enjoyed, especially since their Alma Mater is a local college.
Meanwhile back at the auditorium, don’t be among the clods who sit in the dormitory listening to the rattle of the open space between their ears.
Rise up for your beliefs, and go to the Sundowners concert Tell them Byrd sent you—no, you’t better not.
The whole crux of the problem seems to be Britain’s insistance on Adenauer of West Germany 1 some kind of special invitation; quickly came to England’s aid including some parts of her ecobut not rescue.
He is in favor of admitting Great Britain to the Inner Six; as are Lucembourg, Belgium, Netherlands, and Italy.
Only the Grande Ole Man of France stands against the tide, and ignores the knock of MacMillan for English admission to the Common Market.
What’s more, Britain isn’t the only one who has been disturbed from her markets and lost her trade to this new neighbor.
Even the 'quietest' citizens of this busy community (Sweden and Switzerland) have become alarmed at the activity behind the 'Green Door' and have pushed the membership doorbell.
It seems that these two, along with Finland, Hi-Stepper Director Bee Returns After Three Day Hospitalization Mrs.
Alon Bee, Hi-Steppers’ director, returned to work this week after several days absence due to illness.
This is the reason de Gaulle gave for his recent no-thank-you note to Her Majesty.
Regardless of the Common Market, one must go outside of pure economics to find the real reason for de Gaulle's stubbornness towards English admission.
It probably all boils down to the Grande Ole Man’s desire for a Grande Alliance headed by a Grande France.
If England is allowed a ‘brick house’ in the community and everyone else retains one of the ‘shingles’ this Grande Idea may be thwarted.
So, looking at the situation from de Gaulle's position, England still thinks she is a hundred dollar bill, when actually she's only about a fifty.
This would allow British entrance into the Common Market and preserve de Gaulle’s Grande Idea.
The circumstances seem to dictate an eventual united Western Europe though, despite de Gaulle’s delusions of grandeur.
Wh ere did you get that navel, Adam?., State’s 'Mr Republican” Rubel Phillips Rallies Conservatives To GOP Cause February 6, 1963 HINDSONIAN Pa a a 3 By BETTYE SIMMONS and RALPH HEMPHILL A century old precedent in Mississippi politics was broken earlier this year when Rubel Phillips officially announced his candidacy for governor with this unique provision—that he would run as a Republican.
Phillips, introduced to Hinds students at last week’s assembly, explained more fully his unique position in a special interview with the Hindsonian.
He continued, “Seriously, there would be a change, or rather an improvement in our relationship with the federal government and in our fiscal program.
A Republican could go to a national convention with some respect and an opportunity to speak.
Following the Phillips announcement—the first official announcement of the 1963 election—came a | political upheaval in Mississippi.
In any case, Phillips seems to hold the stirring stick in this traditionally one-party state.
S H O N E Y ' S WESTLAND PLAZA campaign will not be Barnett's administration or the Ole Miss crisis, but Mississippi's relation with the national government, and education highways, and state finance.
Charles Sullivan, who made the liquor question a lively issue in the 1960 campaign, announced his candidacy again as a Democrat last week.
Already termed ""The Republican,” the 37-year-old Jackson attorney expects to have as many Democratic as Republican supporters.
PRECEDENT SHATTERED — With the advent of a Republican in the Mississippi gubernatorial race, state politics enters into a new era.
GOP candidate Rubel Phillips shakes hands with President McLendon after speaking to the student body last Wednesday in chapel.
USSR TO CUBA International Relations Group Views Film On Communist Growth The history of communist expansion was the subject of a documentary film recently viewed by the International Relations Club.
Main Auditorium — HINDS students-soc ADULTS—$1.00 TICKETS ON SALE AT MILLSAPS AND HINDS PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICES expansion.
Starting with the conquest of the Soviet Union, it pointed out the tactics and strategy used by the party bosses in taking over country after country, right on through the Cuban Revolution in 1959.
At a business meeting prior to the film, the club chose its symbol and pin, and placed orders for them.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES MATS P.0.
FL 2-8331 T Page 4 HINDSONIAN February 6, 1963 Young Lebanese Sacrifices Homeland For Medical Education In The States HINDS HONEY — Gloria Conerly, Jackson sophomore, provides a charming contrast to the mass of machinery revealed in one of the new IBM computers installed recently.
Cardinal Newman Week Staged With Catholics’ Unity Theme By LINDA BYRD The way home is said to be a hard one, and for Joseph Scrhen, it will also be a long one.
Many of us will be married and parents before Joseph again sees his family and homeland, for he has sacrificed both for a medical education.
Both bags and heart were filled—one with clothes, the other with pride.
In fact, his family of three brothers and three sisters is one of Joseph's favorite subjects.
His father, a wholesale merchant, financed the trip to the United States and is also “footing the bill” for Joe’s education, which he plans to continue at a California university after graduating from Hinds.
A friend from high school days, Newman Club will mark Cardinal Newman Week Feb.-March 2 with Christian Unity.
Included will be the recitation of the Rosary on Wed., Feb., at the Catholic Church in Raymond.
Though unable to carry out his plan for Oxford, his idea is seen today in the many Newman Clubs and Centers throughout the United States.
George, as president of the sophomore class, is the first student of foreign birth ever elected a class president.
His five years of English should help a great deal and a full schedule—including reading, French, algebra, physical science—will keep him quite busy while at Hinds.
Oddly enough, Joseph doesn't want to return to his homeland to practice medicine.
It will be four to six years before he returns, but the advantages gained will help make up for the sacrifices.
Rules: Who Wins: Beautiful 19-inch Motorola Television Console for Hinds Junior College.
Empty packages of Marlboro, Parliament, Philip Morris and Alpine cigarettes must be submitted in order to qualify.
Prizes will be awarded to any recognized campus group or individual submitting the largest number of empty packages of Marlboro, Parliament, Phillip Morris and Alpine cigarettes.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT opportunities and some projected needs, and schools will have reported training facilities.
Russell Levanway, consultant to the Mississippi Research Commission, engages junior colleges as chairman for each area study.
In the initial meeting a broad representation of employers, legislators, school administrators, and for the study.
Hinds' program is the fifth project to actually reach working level in the state.
The project at Holmes has almost reached conclusion, and those at Itawamba, Perkinston, and Delta are well underway.
The remaining junior colleges in the state are working toward planning meetings with area industrialists, Dr Levanway reported.
When the documentation is complete, it will be presented to the legislature for appropriation of LOCAL TALENT — Various students combined talent for a dance held last Thursday by the Lendon Players in the Recreation Hall.
Leroy Stockdale, Eastside proctor, sings a number with accompaniment furnished by other Hinds students. survey already completed by Ole Miss and Mississippi State.
Levanway noted that in this program, acutal participation by the \ significant parties will yield more results than similar surveys in which there is no direct participation. education funds.
It will also be used in attracting new industry and in filling positions now vacant in already established industry.
Have one of JACKSON STEAM LAUNDRY’S agents pick up your cleaning each Monday and Thursday night between 8:00 10:00.
Since Rubel Phillips entered the gubernatorial race as a Republican he has been a popular and controversial subject.
We asked several Hinds students how they think the entry of a Republican into the gubernatorial race will affect Mississippi.
Harold Mitchell, Vicksburg sophomore, answered, ""I think it will be good for us.
Shelia Troyer, also a Vicksburg sophomore, said, ""The greater majority of Mississippians will accept this step toward a two-party system and be proud of it.
A change will help Mississippi, and I think Phillips will get somewhere.
Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, answered, “I’m afraid that right now there will be no change, but it is a start.
Mike Rabalais, psychology instructor, said, “There will be very little effect.
Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg sophomore, replied, ""No, I don'f think there will be any change.
Belva Watkins, Vicksburg sophomore, said, “It will be a good effect because Mississippi has hackee^ the Democratic party since the Civil War and when we realize that this is not the same party that fought the Civil War, then we have begun Clay Cooley, Jackson sophomore, said, “I think it is the best possible thing that could happen to Mississippi.
McLendon announced that more political speeches will be featured in the weekly meeting.
Harlan Stanley netted eight free throws and two field goals for 12 points.
High point man for the night and the chief thorn in the Eagles side proved to be Wildcat ace Frank Necaise with his 31.
Pearl River Hinds had trouble with Pearl River on the Wildcats home court Jan 24 and fell foe to the Poplarville based team.
Hinds held the edge during the first half but couldn’t control the win minded Wildcats during the second half.
John Franklin led the Eagles with 13 points while George Puckett tipped in 12.
Gary Smith got hot for the visitors in the second half and contributed 17 points during the period.
CLEAR FIELD — Bobby James nets two points for the intramural football team’s basketball squad during last week s exhibition with the vocational team.
Johnny Stanley (back to camera) and Carl Henry Sullivan protect James as he shoots.
Leslie Carter was ace of the night with his 10 field goals and single free throv^ for 21 points.
Barnes and Johnny Hinds bucketed 16 and 15 points to trail in the scoring column.
Hinds hit 79 percent of their charity tosses while the Jones crew hit 67.
Hinds cage schedule is almost finished with only two games remaining on the slate.
The first of the contests is an out-of-towner against Holmes Bulldogs of Goodman Thursday.
The following Tuesday, Feb., the Mississippi Delta Trojans will invade for the season finale.
He added that both opponents will be tough to defeat and the Eagles must be ready for anything.
Tomorrow will be the first meeting of the Hinds and Delta crew, though the Eagles have hosted Holmes in a previous game.
FL 3-9915 CURB SERVICE DINNERS ITALIAN PIZZA PO-BOY SANDWICHES STUDENTS WELCOME Intramural Basketball Merchants & Planters Pk.
You probably don’t rej tines and gifts of flowers and candy, j fields at well.
Business Confab Meets Thursday Phi Beta Lambda To Sponsor Day For Ten Schools Approximately ten high schools in the Jackson area will be represented tomorrow when Commerce Day ; sponsored by the Epsilon Eta Chapter of Phi Beta Lambda, is held on the Hinds campus.
Maybelle Furness, business instructor and sponsor of the chapter, explained the purpose of the meeting.
But Valentine's Day is not a celebration exclusive to our generation, or even to our parents^ The earliest known valentine, dated 1415, is preOne of the first appeared in 1790.
Commercial valentines started as “In addition, we want to acquaint them with our organization, and the opportunities the club can offer,” she said.
The addition of mechanical valentines—with served in the British Museum.
It is | folding or moving parts—were Gera message, written by Charles man manufactured and common in Duke of Orleans, while he was held prisoner in the Tower of London.
Another popular belief is that the celebration owes its origin rather to a medieval belief held in England and France that it was at the start of the second fortnight of the second month that the birds began to mate.
BUSY BUSINESS MAJORS — Two Phi Beta Lambda members prepare for tomorrow’s annual Commerce Day.
Karen McBride and Ronnie Moore work on displays which will pus tours and a two-part’original, decorate the sta § e as a P art of the da ylon g affair skit at a morning assembly program.
Seven Jackson business equipment companies will display the latest equipment in a special exhibit in the academic building.
Today the celebration of Saint Valentine’s Day is confined largely to the United States, and American gentlemen have a wide selection of cards from which to choose.
And that card would make us wonder just how far we have from the “Roses are An annual affair, Commerce Day is one of several projects Phi Beta Lambda undertakes each year.
Having been invited every year since their organization, the group this year will perform at the Krewe TWENTY-FOUR SELECTED Initiation Of New PTK Members Will Be Conducted February 19 Gamma Lambda Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa will conduct formal initiation of twenty-four new comers on Tuesday, February 19, in INITIATES — Ten of the new Circle K members are shown from left, front row, Jackie Williamson, Billy Watts, Billy Barefoot; second row, Joe Campbell, Billy Lee, Billy Joe Montgomery; third row, Jerry Legg, Larry Hill, Harlan Stanley, and Johnny Franklin.
Required for acceptance into the national honor society is a 2. grade average for freshmen, and a cumulative average of 2. or better for sophomores.
Seven freshmen and seventeen sophomores will take the member‘ 1 ’ ‘ vows administered by Henri Coleman, chapter president.
Freshmen invited to join are Donna Breitling, Madison; Johnny Hannon, Raymond; Carolyn Melton, Clinton; Carolyn Pounds, Rebecca Presley, Lena; Connie Rodiger, Montana; and Larry Slack, Jackson.
Easterwood, Jackson; Jo Ann Gardner, Jackson; Patty Hebler, Vicksburg; Carole Killingsworth, L o r m a n; Carol Lott, Jackson; Margaret Nunley, Jackson.
Also, Mike Oliver, Salma, Alabama; Patricia Reed, Jackson; Linda Rogers, Jackson; Bettye Simmons, Wiggins; Vera Smithhart, Vicksburg; Eugenie Stogner, Tylertown; Patsy Warnack, Jackson; Joe White, Mendenhall; and Frank Wilson, Vicksburg.
Members are chosen on the basis of the unanimous rcommendation of character and citizenship by the active members of the chapter and a faculty committee on membership.
Carrollton Carnival Ball, elite club ball of prominent New Orleans natives.
With the theme of famous musicians, their floor show program will feature new acts and new costumes, director Mrs.
Alon Bee said Last year the group attended Mardi Gras as one of the marching units of the official 13-mile opening parade.
Last Saturday the groups were featured on the television program “Teen Tempos,” over WLBT-TV, Jackson.
The popular teen show spotlighted most of the group’s regular stage show, including solos, duets, and trios which are frequently featured in stage appearance.
Buses will leave New Orleans around midnight to return the group for classes Monday morning.
Upholstery Class Resumes In Reply To Many Requests Due to a series of requests from people in the Raymond-Clinton area, Hinds will resume night division instruction in upholstery, announced President G M McLendon this week.
Taught two years ago but discontinued last year, the class includes instruction in upholstery of all kinds of objects from automobile seats to furniture.
Walter Gibbes, vocational division co-ordinator, announced that registration will be open on Tuesday and Friday nights until February 22.
Volume 29—Number 16 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI Wednesday, Feb., 1963 i/m -Mighlights of Minds Page 2 HINDSONIAN February 13, 1963 CURRENT EVENTS Dry Canada Dampens — Soon To Be Muddy -By RALPH HEMPHILLGC IN MONSTER’S GRIP utation Smeared During recent weeks much unfavorable publicity has been directed toward Hinds Junior College, and portions of the public have made erroneous assumptions.
Regrettably, it is true that at least eight Hinds students have been connected with burglaries in the Jackson area.
Newspapers and radio stations in this vicinity have been exceptionally cooperative during the past few weeks.
Carefully they ignored a flashy lead for the burglary stories and left the name of Hinds Junior College out until they could no longer disconnect the boys from the school.
These news media saw that no good could come from playing up the name of the college.
They can no longer separate the two, and possibly they think of Hinds as a breeding place of juvenile delinquency.
Nothing has been said about the other part of Hinds’ student body, the part that is 99.44 per cent pure . . . the honest students who go to college to gain an education.
Hinds has always been known as one of the finest and fastest progressing junior colleges in the nation, and we don’t want this to stand as a blot on our record.
If someone’s impressions of the present situation needs correcting, please correct him.
W The wild goose may go where the wild geese go, but Canada is not dry.
Last week Canadian politics moistened up a bit when Prime Minister Diefenbaker’s government received a vote of no-confidence from the Parliament.
This means there must be an election to decide whether a new government must be formed, or if the conservative party of the Prime Minister wins the most seats in Parliament, retaining the present one., Even though Diefenbaker received a vote of no-confidence, he has retained his party's support, which indicates that he will lead his party *n the coming elections.
The government was toppled by a combined vote of the opposition parties, social credit and the liberals.
This simply means—trying to stay in office by outmaneuvering your opponents by predicting The reasoning behind that last statemnt is based on a comparison of French-Canadian and English-Cahow the voters feel, nadian population growth combined with their respective political views.
So far in modern Canadian history, the English descendants have been the most populous, best educated, and consequently have determined Canada’s political and cold war course.
Recently, however, this hegemony was the issue on which centered the has been reversed in all but the field of education by the French decendants.
Their rising rate of population in the last 15 years has outdispute that undermined Diefenbaker.
Diefenbaker, a political pro, has seen the handwriting on the census-taker’s notebook, and is reacting accordingly.
The results of this election will be significant out of all proportion to its true importance in world affairs.
If Diefenbaker’s antiUnited States stand prevails, it may well set the Also involved was a note from j stripped the English by a rate of trend, which was started by de the United States State Department that, in so manv wor^s. backhanded Canadian refusal of the United States offer.
At stake in coming elections is the future of the North American Defense Alliance, comnosed of Canada and the United States.
Politically he may be right, but militarily this stand weakens the defense of North America from j nuclear attack.
This maneuver can be comoared to de Gaulle's rerent rejection of a United States offer to share its ""nuclear wealth"" The liberal and social credit parties, stands are pro-American on this issue.
To understand the significance of this crisis, one has to know the existing circumstances in Canada.
Further, there is an increasing trend in Canada, as we have long past experienced in South America, that the United States is the Colossus of the Western Hemisphere.
HINDS-IGHTS West Side Swings By LINDA BYRD ""Shut up singing and get on with the movie.’’ was to discover that a movie, that was the recipitant of 10 academy awards, actually deserves all 10 of No, Frank nains didn't say it^but them Co|or espeeia „ y was pot to its greatest use as was photography. one Jacksonian did while watching the year's best picture.
To say that it would take something spectacular to make me rise early, miss lunch and stand in a long line of convention delegates is an understatement, but West Side Story did just that.
The loss of sleep was taken care of the next night, a dismembered ham sandwich eaten in the darkened treatre provided lunch, and a loyal friend who stood in line as my proxy made the afternoon an enjoyable one after all.
Letters to the editor addressed to the Hindsonian must meet certain requirements.
Authors MUST sign their names to these letters or they will be rejected.
W BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager ASSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGER ___ Becky Presley SPORTS EDITOR -Jim Bonney EXCHANGE EDITOR Albert Dahduh ART EDITOR__Marcelle McLendon PHOTO EDITOR _____1_ Daniel Fazekas NEWS EDITOR _-.—-_ Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS _Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klaire Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson.
The singing was a little too much to stomach in some of the scenes, such as the death scene This is a compliment to the show’s actors.
In most musicals the motto is, ""stop all the talking and get on with the singing,’’ but in West Side Story, the characters have such good lines, and the actors deliver them so well, that singing sometimes acts as an unwanted intruder.
As far as George Chakris and his best supporting actor award is concerned,—I think Russ Tamblyn turned in the same quality performance.
She totally, completely and shamelessly deserves her best supporting actress award.
Mr Beymer was his usual self and was saved only by the good graces of the professional Miss Wood.
Both the Jets and the Sharks had illustrious characters for members, especially the white gang of Jets.
Their song on why they were bad is a classic piece of musical satire on today’s JD’s—juvenile delinquents.
For those who have seen or will see West Side Story, notice the unique way the credits are given.
February 13, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 SAGBY HAIL RAMBLER Would appreciate ft® Opportunity of Doing Business With Ail The People In Raymond end Hinds.
The letters can only be held a short time before they are returned to sender.
MAKE CHECK TO: FERRANTE AND TEICHER ENCLOSE STAMPED SELF ADDRESSED ENVELOPE Mississippians Called To Fight For Heart Fund During Month SNOW STUDIES — Hitting Ronnie Mollere instead of the books, an assorted group of winter comics take part in an enormous snowball war which eventually included half the campus.
Students were mobbed and rolled in Tuesday’s one-inch snow as they attempted to attend classes or enter the grill.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES P.0.
FL 2-8331 IMMORTALIZED ON CELLULOID — Hi-Steppers turned Teen Tempos on Jackson station WLBT into a colorful public relations stint for Hinds last Saturday as they performed with the stage band.
Friday, the state of Mississippi will attack heart disease, the state's I leading killer, in an all-February drive for the Heart Fund.
Headed by Tom B Scott, Jr., Hinds County Heart Fund chairman, local residents will be aiming for the goal of $35,000 in the heart fight as their share of a $205,000 state goal.
Since half of all deaths in Mississippi are caused by heart disease, half of the 1963 Heart Fund will be spent for research into its causes and cures, promises John H Stennis of Jackson, state chairman.
The rest of the money pays for heart education and community service in behalf of the heart victim and his family, Stennis and Scott add.
To highlight the month, women volunteers will finish their neighbor to neighbor collections on Heart Sunday, February 24.
A series of special events throughout the county will combine heart fun with Heart Fund.
In this list of benefits are the Queen of Hearts benefit tea in the Governor’s Mansion on February 15, and a Tri-College Concert at Millsaps on February 22 Businessmen from Jackson, George Bailey and Paul Faulkner, are co-chairmen of a special gifts appeal while Joe Latham is heading an invitation to business and industry to help control the heart conditions which threaten so many American men in their best earning years.
Herbert Berryhill in Terry and Sam Simmons in Utica ‘Hinds students are urged to participate in any ways they can.
UNIFORM REGULATIONS Iranian Gives Talk To Relations Club On Politics, Customs A profile of Persian customs, economy and politics will be the subjects of tonight’s address to the International Relations Club by Shahla Azordegan, Hinds student originally from Persia.
Subjects such as the living conditions, education, and dating customs of Iran will be the main topics.
Also, the recent upheavals in Iranian politics and the Shah’s land reform program will be analized by the speaker.
Council Makes New Hair Cut Rule For Future Freshman Day Frolics ""Presidents Council, after a month of deliberation in committee meetings, recently passed the following resolution concerning Freshman Day procedure.
McLendon, and and Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, said it would be inserted in the Freshman Handbook.
It has been found advisible through past experience to expect all incoming freshmen, without exception, to participate in Freshman initiation activities.
On a day not later than the fourth week in school, to be determined by the student executive, barbering instructor, and the Dean of Men, all male freshmen are to be escorted by their sophomore sponsor to the campus barber shop for hair-cutting ceremonies.
Out of each hair-cut, the School of Barbering shall receive twentyfive cents and the student treasury shall receive twenty-five cents.
There shall be a special pep rally during activity period at which the prizes bought with the treasurer's portion shall be awarded.
Immediately following his haircut, all male freshmen shall report to the grill to purchase their official Hinds’ beenie.
The student executive in cooperation with the cheerleaders, and possible faculty advisors, shall be responsible for dispensing with the foregoing.
Our nation has an ample supply of dependable electricity . . . for the investor owned companies like MP&L have planned and built ahead.
Brothers Slack Study As Separates, But Snag Similar Scholastic Citation By BETTYE SIMMONS People who like to believe that all good things run in pairs wiU find satisfaction in a certain pair of brothers—Darrell and Larry Slack.
Larry, 18-year-old freshman, was recently invited to join Darrell, 20-year-old sophomore, as a member of Phi Theta Kappa, national honor society.
Both young men were listed on the first semester honor list, with Larry registering a 2. average and Darrell earning a 2. average.
Now day-students commuting from their home in Jackson, the boys are transplanted Yankees, having spent most of their lives in Missouri and Michigan.
The elder brother attended most of his high school in Flint, Michigan, but graduated in Missouri after his family moved to that state.
When questioned about the difference of northern schools as compared to southern, Darrell said, ""There is really not a lot of difference—mainly northern schools are more specialized.
I took three years of drawing and courses related to my major, engineering, be* fore graduation from high school.
What they considered the largest difference in the north and south was, without doubt, climate.
While unfrequent snow fell on the Hinds campus, the two fellows sat and talked of Mississippi’s warm climate.
Miss Mildren Herrin, registrar and sponsor of Phi Theta Kappa, said this of the young men.
SHARP SLACKS — Darrell and Larry Slack study together in the library, quite an unusual thing.
Approximately 80 girls are learning to square dance this nine weeks as a part of the physical education program.
Those who are less accomplished may attend the instructing sessions on both Friday and Saturday.
Manning and Nita Smith of College Station, Texas, national round dancing instructors, will conduct these sessions.
The applicant may be a college student, a senior in an accredited high school, or a recent high school graduate.
Most lengthy is a typewritten autobiography of not less than 1000 words stressing interests and plans for the future.
Also, high school recommendation containing scholastic record to date or a record from the college registrar on work to date must be included.
The application form includes data on community activities and honors in high school.
Denton, Director of Guidance, this week released a list of the best jobs for the future from the United States Department of Labor’s latest Occupational Outlook Handbook.
Greatest demand will be for school counselors, engineers, technicians, physicians, dentists, nurses, librarians, and teachers, says the handbook.
A rapidly increasing demand for all kinds of engineers, especially in the fields of computer technology, rocketry, and nuclear energy, will provide many new openings.
Salaries for beginners range from $5,335 to $7,400 a year, with highest offers in electrical machinery and electronic fields, says the Occupational Outlook Handbook.
Training usually includes two-year college course leading to a degree of associate in arts.
Industries that employ chemists are expanding at a rapid rate and are creating vast opportunities for chemists.
A chemist with a bachelor’s degree can expect about $490 a month to start; with a doctoral degree, about $763, says the handbook.
In the medical profession, perhaps some of the highest paid professions, the demand is for more physicians, registered nurses, pharmacists, dentists and optometrists, says the handbook.
Other excellent jobs for the future listed from the Occupational Outlook Handbook are for physicists, mathematicians, economists, accountants, architects, lawyers, librarians, dietitians, home economists, commercial artists, newspaper reporters, programmers, statisticians, office machine operators, pilots and co-pilots, stewardesses and airplane mechanics.
All claims; far i Jem pests amt Co n so lat ion Prizes must be sent via registered mail, postmarked by February 23,1963 and received by the judges no later than February 25,1963.
B234707 bM GRAND PBIX 50 Sweepstakes for colleges only More than 50 times the chance to win than if open to the general public.
Jonathan, the black and white cat seen every day in the vicinity of Main Dormitory, is a permanent fixture on campus.
He told me he has been here longer than either Tripod or Pooch—two other members of Hinds distinguished menagerie.
They fight for a place to sit, turn the television set up so loud that it hurts my ears, and then of all things, they force me to vacate my favorite rocking chair.
It seems that he was a stray cat, and someone took him in out of the wind and weather.
Communism Clinic Set For Saturday By Jackson Church Calvary Baptist Church of Jackson will conduct a one-day study of Communism on Saturday, February 16.
Frew, Director of the Baptist Student Union, urges all students to attend this course.
Page 6 HINDS0N1AN February 13, 1963 TWO AGAINST ONE — Johnny Hines has his hands full trying to grab the ball from a couple of Mississippi Delta Trojans during the game here last night.
There will be an important meeting of all team Captains at the 2A period, 10:05 the Men's Gymnasium.
Merchants & Planters Bank RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI Westside 2nd Tops i Girls’ Basketball Westside second floor stormed to the lead last week in the annual Round-robin Basketball Tournament sponsored by the Women’s Athletic Association They scored successive wins over Westside first, 46 to 25, and Northside second, 31 to 18, Tuesday and Thursday nights.
Westside 2 Westside 2, Westside 1, Main, Northside 1, and Northside 2 are the five dormitory teams competing.
Barnes takes a dive for the j floor after he tried in vain to block a shot by a Holmes Bulldog in last week‘s contest.
Barnes and Johnny Hines topped the scoring for the victors with 21 and 20 points each.
Barnes led the Eagles in their first half scoring spree with eight field goals and two cha tosses for a total of 18 points.
In the second period the ace arched an additional five points to become the game high point man with 23.
Close behind in the point count was Harlon Stanley with 15 in the first half and four in the for a game count of 19.
Johnny Hines opened up in the second half and took control of the backboards.
Besides grabbing key rebounds, Hines sacked three field goals and five free tosses.
Johnny Franklin and Leslie Carter contributed six points each while Gary Carpenter netted two.
Following that, a series of performances at various churches in the Hinds district are scheduled, and March 9, the Hinds choir will host the Junior College Choral Festival On March 14 they will sing for the choral division of the Mississippi Education Association.
The Girls’ Ensemble sang for the Bolton Rotary Club Ladies night last Monday.
Composed of 10 to 12 girls from the regular choir, the group is directed by Mrs.
Later this school year the student body will hear the choir's Song Fest.
The date has not been set, but Reeves said he expected it to be the apex of an especially good spring concert series.
He noted that the choir is still accepting invitations to sing at area churches, and urged that any student interested in having them sing for his church contact Reeves for a possible booking date.
Crowned At Social Boyd McPhail, Circle K president, released plans today for the upcoming Circle K sweetheart election.
The dance will be held in the Girls’ Physical Education Gymnasium Thursday night, March 7.
Hilda Bullock, present Circle K sweetheart, will be present at the affair and take part in the corwning.
The new sweetheart will attend the district Circle K Convention in mid-April, along with other members of the group.
Benton, Tuesday discredited rumors about new restrictions for male students at Hinds.
In an interview with the Hindsonian he stated emphatically that no new rules have been added, despite rabid grill talk Because of a few Hinds students being involved in Jackson burglaries, an old rule that no male student leave or arrive on campus between midnight and six in the morning has been enforced, Benton said.
The situation will continue as it was before, just as students were Music Department Imports Saucier For Clarinet Concert February 25 told in dormitory meetings, Benton said.
There is no truth to the rumor that students cannot return to campus on Saturday after leaving Friday.
He added that students who have legitimate reasons for trafficking after midnight should present those reasons to his office in writing.
This year will mark the Hinds president’s final year as a member of the vital administration committee, which is concerned with the developing of new junior colleges, educational facilities, and every phase of junior college administration.
Composed of sixteen educators from throughout the United States, the committee meets biannually.
The 1963 four-day convention will include, in addition to committee meetings, special forums on the role of the Board of Trustees, transferring students, testing, technicians for industry, and other important matters related to the junior colI lege of today.
The president and his wife left Raymond Sunday morning, taking a personal tour of the West on their way to Seattle.
Their itinerary includes overnight stops in Dallas, El Paso, Tucson, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Portland before arriving in Seattle on Monday, February 25.
Following the convention, they will return by way of Boise, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne, Denver, Amarillo, and again Dallas.
Band , Steppers Will Entertain At Conventions On Friday and Saturday of the upcoming weekend the Stage Band and Hi-Steppers will furnish entertainment for two conventions in Jackson, marking their 38th performance for the year.
The Friday evening performance will be before the National Tile Convention meeting at the King Edward Hotel.
Miss Mississippi, Charlotte Carroll, and Miss Hospitality, Loren Ormen, will serve as hostesses.
The Saturday show will be for the Mississippi Lions Club Convention meeting at the Hotel Heidelberg.
The same troupes who performed in the New Orleans Mardi Gras will appear in these two shows.
Last evening a small group of Hi-Steppers and stage band members ,along with the Provine Stage Band, provided entertainment for the annual Rambler Who’s Who contest.
Gene Saucier, clarinetist, will be presented in concert Monday evening at 7:30 in the main auditorium by the Hinds Department of Music.
Lynch, accompanied Saucier the past two years in his recitals at Ole Miss.
One in a series of presentations by the Hinds Music Department, the program is open to the public.
NOTICE Phi Theta Kappa will conduct their annual Freshman Talent Show in the college auditorium Tuesday night, February 26.
According to an announcement today by President Henri Lou Coleman, varied talent has been planned.
Twenty-four members were inducted into the nation scholastic group in a dignified hour-long program.
This editorial is dedicated to these people — the complacent complainers.
This year the Presidents Council has set new precedents, explored new areas for student participation, and in general, worked with the administration in furthering the progress of this institution.
It has set new precedents, in cooperating with the sophomore class, by sponsoring the Freshman Day Dance last fall.
The Council has also sought a closer atmosphere of student cooperation in a unified effort to halt some students from ignoring the rights of others by breaking ahead in the cafeteria line.
Another precedent-setting decision by the Council was a rule on hair-cutting, to be employed during next year’s freshman initiation ceremonies.
Also, a relapsed activity at Hinds, a Christmas dance, was inaugurated again this year.
Probably though, the most far-reaching and longer-lasting effects will be felt by the Council’s efforts in exploring new areas for student participation.
A committee from the Council has been working steadily on a constitution for Hinds that will be ready shortly.
These steps have culminated in a more wholesome atmosphere of administration — student body cooperation.
H SECOND SPHINX SECOND GUESSES CURRENT EVENTS Arabian Knights Cheer Dawn Of Revolt -By RALPH HEMPHILL Think It Over In 1923, eight of the world’s most successful financiers met in Chicago.
The President of the largest independent steel company, Charles Schwab, died bankrupt, living on borrowed money for five years before his death.
The President of the largest gas company, Howard Hopson, became insane.
A member of the President’s Cabinet, Albert Fall, was pardoned from prison so he could die at home.
The greatest “bear”' on Wall Street, Jesse Livermore, committed suicide.
The head of the world’s greatest monopoly, Ivar Krenger, committed suicide.
The President of the Bank 'of International Settlements, Leon Frazier, committed suicide.
Zhe lUKUfccKl/dC Highlights of Hinds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor ASSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGER SPORTS EDITOR_ EXCHANGE EDITOR_ ART EDITOR_ PHOTO EDITOR ___ DWAYNE COX Business Manager _ Becky Presley __Jim Bonney _Albert Dahduh _Marcelle McLendon _ Daniel Fazekas NEWS EDITOR_,___Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS _Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klaire Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson.
The Arabian Knights brightened up a bit last week in the glow of an army revolt in Iraq.
Iraq, a desert coated oil field, has had its share in internal dissension since 1958.
To get an insight into the present problem one must look to the past, 1952, when Nasser came to powerin Egypt.
Since then his stated goal is an 'Arab World/ dominated by you know who.
That year witnessed the establishing of the United Arab Republic The members of this first step toward Arab unity were Yemen, Syria, and last but not by any means least, Egypt.
Then came the rival union of Arab States which was set up to maintain the balance of power in the Arab world.
This union met its destruction one hot July morning in 1958, at the hands of Karim el Kassam.
From 1958 until this week, Kassam followed a course of trying to use the communists to develop his country, stay in power, and at the same time, hold the pyramid of Arab politics—Nasser—at bay.
Looking back to bring the U.A.R. up to date; in 1961, Syria revolted against Nasser and succeeded in gaining its independence.
Since then, the Sultan of Yemen has died and his leftist leaning son has taken over.
He has begun severing the ties between Yemen and Egypt in his first few months on the throne.
Now, at first glance and judg ng by the pro-U.A.R. statements of the leaders of the ruling unta in Iraq, it seems that the pendulum has swung back in Nasser’s favor.
As far as the west is concerned, this could very well be true in the Arab world.
By “unheard sounds” it is meant that Radio Cairo has been unusually quiet.
Besides the expected favorable announcements of the Iraq revolt, it has neither praised nor pilfered the leaders of the unta.
Since the tactics of watchful waitforeign policy, this silence can be I though, that military men like only interpreted to mean only one thing.
UndoubtedThe Egyptian Sphinx—Nasser—has looked the junta leaders over and done some second guessing.
From reading on the Egyptian leader, one finds that he is an avid chess player.
As any tournament chess player will tell you, one of the best methods of out-guessing your opponent is by looking at the position of his pawns.
If his pawns are staggered, watch his bishops; if they are lined up straight, watch his knights.
Applying this to the present Arabian circumstances, one discovers that the pawns are straight across the board, meaning the junta is stacked with military men.
True, there has been some speculation of an alliance between Egypt and Iraq.
Also true, there is some reason for this speculation, because military men like alliances.
The fact must not be overlooked ly, from the Iraq junta’s viewpoint, there are little or no advantages of an alliance with Egypt.
Egypt has the highest birth rate in the world and is in economic trouble over the Asian High Dam.
Judging by how Nasser gleaned Syria and put her economy in an economic straight jacket, to the Iraqi military there can certainly be no advantages of a union with Egypt.
In light of the circums-ances, this revolt will probably trim out in favor of the west.
This is said because the Iraqi army was trained and is equipped by the British.
I didn't understand the part about the Zen priest . . # how they find the meaning to life in the monastery or whatever they call them.
Bye. • — * lve Jett Hl S h school, Vicksburg, students inspect the latest i n equipment during the annual Hinds Junior College Commerce Day held last Thursday, February 14.
The punched cards are fed through a ""card reader"" which ""corrects"" all the exams taking roughly V /2 seconds each.
If, for example, the professor sees that almost no one got question 5 right, he may discard this.
Again, if he sees that virtually everyone got question 27 correct, he may also ; discard this, because he can see that neither questions performed a useful function.
Presidents Council Reactivates Committees To Keep Group Active In a special meeting of the Presidents Council last Wednesday, President George Tannous named a Council steering committee to serve in a coordinating capacity for the rest of the year.
The committee on organizations will work closely with campus clubs, and keep the council informed as to planned programs and projects, and as to ways the council can be of assistance.
Social affairs and all other council activities will be centered in the , committee on activities The committee on chapel recom mendations will investigate ways of i I promoting student interest in the programs, and will cooperate with the administration in diversifying the talent presented.
Informing council members of sessions and urging adequate participation will be the responsibility of the committee on attendance.
Also, a rule on attendance was passed at last week’s council, stating that an organization is allowed two regular meetings without representation.
If an organization’s representative misses two council meetings, that group will be suspended from the council for the remainder of the semester.
Next week, a report from the constitution committee will head the order of business.
Tannous urged all organizations to send a representative to this important meeting.
MERCHANTS & PLANTERS What the professor aims for is a bell-shaped frequency distribution curve.
The highest point of the bell is the most frequent grade obtained by students taking the test.
If a reasonably symmetric bell-shaped curve is formed by the histogram, then the test is considered to have been sucessful.
If the hump of the graph is too far below or above the defined passing grade, the exam was either too easy or too tough.
An instructor can, for example, more easily justify marking the exam on a scale.
Next week Lebanese George Tannous will discuss middle Eastern state of affairs.
She said that Iran has three television stations, four radio stations, and four airports—two commercial and two military.
But to use these facilities, Iran has a population of two million people, she said.
She pointed out that there is little difference between American girls and Iranian girls—they both like new hair-dos and new dresses.
She did say, however, that Iranian girls thought an education more important than getting married.
In Iranian high schools, Azordegan stated, the boys and girls are segregated into separate classrooms.. but there is a lot of socializing in the halls between classes, Iran has 10 universities and, if a special examination is passed, attendance is free of charge.
Prior to Shahla’s informative talk, the club members received their diamond shaped membership pins which had been ordered at the preceding meeting.
A new presentation of material will be used, blending artistry and musical sense of humor.
The duo has been represented on more than three dozen LP records and has played to rapturous reviews and standing ovations in every state and throughout the world.
They have also displayed their humorous approach to music on top radio and television shows—all of which have made them one of the best-known and most sucessful musical attractions on 4he current scene.
Tickets are priced $2.50 and $3.00 for reserved orchestra seats, and $1.75 for balcony seats.
PRETTY PAM — Patricia Ann Martin, known by her initials PAM, perches on a step to pose as this week’s Hinds Honey.
TEN PROMOTERS Representatives Meet To Discuss Plans For New Technical Program Local, state ,and national representatives met at Hinds last week to initiate plans for a new technical curriculum to be added to the Hinds Vocational Division.
Ten men began laying plans for a possible re-training program in agriculture.
Presently Hinds is cooperating with the state employment service by re-training men for the business machines field.
The vocational program, as part of the 1962 federal Man Power Division and Training Act, does not offer college credit but re-trains persons in a vocation where more job opportunities exist.
The plans discussed were in addition to the $600,000 expansion of vocational facilities now in progress.
There are now no known programs in agriculture through the 1962 act, stated Jack Treloar, Supintendent of Hinds farm and chairman o fthe meeting.
Plans are for a terminal re-training course which would teach the student a particular phase of agriculture so that upon completion of the course he would be prepared to take a specialized job in agriculture.
In addition, a special terminal two-year program in farm management will be set up.
This course, involving two nine month school years and one summer, will begin first semester next year.
It consists of nine semester hours in the classroom and three semester hours on-the-farm laboratory each semester.
You get more for your money here Cameras from the least expensive Brownies to the . . . finest the market offers Standard Photo WEEXssmsEW mum Cameras mf<> Finishing 'Serving Mississippians over a third of a Century' Jackson Engineer Discusses Film During Morning Assembly Program Robert C Lunardini, employee of Michael Baker, Jr., Inc., and a member of the Mississippi Society of Professional Engineers, was the guest speaker in today’s morning assembly.
Using a film, Lunardini discussed the engineering world and its future.
He is a registered professional engineer in both Mississippi and Illinois.
Soon buds the crocus, soon trills the giant condor, soon come the new spring fashions to adorn our lissome limbs.
Gather round, you rascals, and light a Marlboro Cigarette and enjoy that fine mellow tobacco, that pure white filter, and possess your souls in sweet content, and listen.
In fact, one of the highlights of the season turns time backward in its flight.
This charming accoutrement, too long neglected, has already caught on with in undergrads everywhere.
On hundreds of campuses the bossa nova is giving 4 way to the minuet, and patriotic undergraduates are dumping British tea into the nearest harbor.
This, as you may imagine, does not sit well with King George III who, according to reliable reports, has been stamping his foot and uttering curses not fit to reproduce in this family newspaper.
For that matter, a lot of our own people are steamed up too, and there has even been some talk about the American colonies declaring their independence of England.
She, on the other hand, relies on us for turkeys, Marlboro Cigarettes, and Route 66.
But let not our British cousins mistake this willingness to negotiate for weakness.
O, get some!—we were, I say, smoking Marlboros and talking about spring fashions.
Let us turn now to the season’s most striking new featurepneumatic underdrawers.
Thanks to his pneumatic underdrawers, he suffered no injury when he struck the sidewalk, but the poor fellow is still bouncing—his seventh consecutive day—and it is feared that he will starve to death.
The recent Iraqi revolt by the right wing of the army against the left has attracted much attention in western capitals and the Soviet Union.
George Tannous president of the sophomore class and a native of Lebanon, was recently button-holed by this reporter on his views of the present situation in the Middle East, where his country is located.
Kept informed by bundles of newspapers regularly received from his parents at home, Tannous has maintained a rigid neutralists stance throughout the conflicts.
The issues of the conflict seem to pivot on whether Iraq will join Nasser's Egypt in the fabled Arab Union.
Tannous pointed out that joining depends on the authority given to the new president and on how many members of Parliament or the military officers are in favor of the union.
The future of the Iraq government seems to center on its foreign policy which depends on the outcome of the Parliamentary elections that have been widely predicted.
Having only been away two years from his native Lebanon, which borders the disturbed area, Tannous said that the revolt will be recognized in Lebanon, but will meet mixed reactions in other surrounding countries.
This profound statement is repeated over and over by those who attend Jackson’s newest contribution to the arts—the Capri Theatre.
Specializing in foreign films, the Capri is a breakthrough for this area.
Colleges have tried to show foreign films in the past, but have met with little success from the public.
Now the Capri makes the scene, appealing to the elite as well as the working man who enjoys variety in his film diet.
Irish Italian spaghetti, beef Stroganoff, Pennsylvania Dutch hot shredded cabbage, and French bread.
Making the bread and preparing the rice for the beef Stroganoff were Ramona McClelland, Sara Stewart, and Marilyn Hutchinson.
What a change this is from the downtown theatres where seats are so close that crossing your legs means bumping and bruising both of them or maybe one, if you're lucky The Capri offers a lot and seems to demand nothing.
Those who attend one of the foreign films usually return a second, third and fourth time.
This paper is especially happy about the Capri’s opening, since a column was written earlier in the year, expressing the need for variety in the films and theatres in the Jackson area.
Now that variety is being offered, and from the numbers of people attending the new moviehouse, it seems as if the variety is also being accepted.
PICK-UP ON EVERY MONDAY AND THURSDAY NIGHTS ON CAMPUS BETWEEN 8-10 P M, All work done to your SATISFACTION MISSISSIPPI ENGRAVING CO, HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS Eagles Look For Tournament Win Hinds Readies For State Action As Southwest Hosts Tourney Play Ending basketball season with a rush.
Hinds enters the Southern Division Junior College play-offs Thursday night at Summit.
Having won four of the last six contests, the Eagles meet powerful Pearl River in the opening series of elimination games.
In the only other clash scheduled for the opener, Jones tangles with host Southwest.
In the finals, the Wolves will meet the Hinds-Pearl River winner, and Perkinston meets the Jones-Southwest winner.
Saturday the two remaining teams will meet in the finals for the southern division championship.
COW***BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK or Mississippi COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES MATS P.0.
FL 2-8331 As the thump, thump, thump of the basketball comes slowly to a halt, the oldest sport in the world starts up.
Track, the sport of ages, is set for a full series on the Hinds fields starting with a six-way Magnolia Conference High school meet March 27.
Junior College thinclads will dash for the tapes three days later when Mississippi Delta invades on Saturday the thirtieth for Hinds’ first contest.
In rapid succession, the Eagles will meet Perkinston and Jones at Ellisville April 2, and will host Scooba and Northwest on the sixth.
Co-Lin and Holmes will run against the Eagles on the Raymond track April 9.
Saturday, April 13, Jones and Marion Institute will meet the Eagles here.
Four junior college units are entered in the Northwest Meet on April 20, and the 27th will find Hinds at Perkinston.
Delta will host the Eagles 4 in the final meet before the state J.C. meet on the 11th.
May 7 has been selected as the date to run any event which was rained out during regular schedule.
Intermixed between the junior college events are eight high school meets.
W L Westside 2 3 0 Westside 1 l l Main i i Northside 1 0 1 Northside 2 0 2 Westside first scored 42 points against Northside first’s 25 Thursday, February 14.
HOOK SHOT — Rodney Duke arches a fancy shot for two points in the intamural basketball contest featuring the Eastside 2nd Floor against the Football Team.
Most Folks Say For My Money It’s Westside Sustains uSTqn Freshmen Display Talents At Event Sponsored By PTK Freshman talent ranging from single vocals to jazz combos highlighted the evening when Phi Theta Kappa sponsored its annual Freshman Talent Show last night.
Mistress of ceremonies Ann StepHenson introduced thirteen varied acts to a large receptive audience in the college auditorium.
Proceeds from the talent event will be used to help finance the Gamma Lambda Chapter’s annual trip to the national convention.
The 1963 convention will be held in Miami, Beach, Florida, from April 3-5.
Approximately thirty Hinds students will begin the trip April 1 and return to the campus April 7.
The talent presentation represented much planning on the part of PTK members.
Various committees solicited talent, sold tickets, and publicized the event.
In a special meeting Monday final plans for the freshman show and the group began work on the upcoming Faculty Talent Show, scheduled for March 7.
And the cries, in turn, produced men whose footprints are forever etched among their great deeds.
Hinds planned to answer, so the rumor went last week, and the echo of memorable names resounded.
Meanwhile, Latter Day Dan’l Boones, are running things into the ground.
Local Antiquarians Will Converge At Scene Of Century-Old Battle First Of Student Recital Series Scheduled Monday, Music Building First student music recitals of the semester will be presented by Beth Ponder and Winnie Sue Winders Tuesday, March 5, at 7:30 in the Music Auditorium.
Miss Ponder, Jackson sophomore, will sing various selections including works by Monteveide and Carissimi.
She will also present two groups of folk songs with settings by John Edmonds.
Piano works to be presented by Miss Winders are by Bach, Haydn, and Brahms.
The convention, attended by members of PBL chapters from colleges and most Mississippi high schools, will feature various contests, meetings and election of officers.
Walter Bishop will compete in public speaking, Kay Beasley and Ronnie Moore in the Mr and Miss Future Business Executive voting, Betty Turner and David Hintson in the Mr and Miss Future Business Teacher contest.
Frances Brown and Ronnie Moore will enter the Vocabulary relay, Mary Berryhill in the talent contest, and Kay Beasley will enter the Hinds project report.
Others attending will be Kathleen Martin, Shirley Patton, and Gene Jackson.
Hindsonian, Eagle Move To Altered Ree Hall Offices Renovation is almost complete so that the Hindsonian and Eagle offices will be moved into the cafeteria building later this week, Kent Prince, Public Relations Director, disclosed today.
The groups will occupy the front portion of the recreation hall which once housed the college post office.
Offices will be maintained there until the construction of the student union building in the next few years.
At present the groups work out of the school public relations office in the administration building.
Plans were made last year for separation of student publications and school public relations, but extra space was not available until now.
College Business Manager Grady Sheffield has made arrangements for remodeling of the new room.
On the eve of the hundredth anniversary of the siege of “The Gibraltar of the Confederacy,” the Mississippi Historical Society will hold its annual meeting in Vicksburg.
Scheduled for March 1-2, the program will include lectures, tours, the entertainment, all centered on the anniversary of the seige.
Since the program is open to the general public an active movement is underway to encourage and transport Hinds students to the program planned for Friday.
On Friday at the first general session, beginning at 10:00, there will be a series of talks dealing with modern Mississippi history.
Included will be a report on the ‘'Excavation of the Grand Village of the Natchez,” by Robert S Neitzel, Mississippi Department of Archives and History.
Complimentary coffee and dessert will be served at the Old Court House Museum later, from which point the tour of the Vicksburg National Military Park will begin.
The ever-popular melodrama, “Gold in the Hills/' opens another season at 8:15m. in the theater.
Over the past few years Hinds has provided many performers for this production.
At the general session Saturday featured speakers will be Donald Rawson, Northwestern State College of Louisiana and Dr.
The Society was first organized in 1858, with the current organization coming into being in 1952.
Any persons interested in the objectives and activities of the Society may attend the 1963 meeting.
Hinds students should contact any member of the social science department faculty.
LEAVE FRIDAY Forensic Team Travels To MSCW For Two-Day Speech Tournament Hinds debate team journeys to Columbus this Friday and Saturday to participate in the annual MSCW speech tournament.
Besides debating, the squads will participate in all other major competitions.
Jane Land will represent Hinds in Oral interpretation, and Dawn McNeil, George Tannous, and Ralph Hemphill will enter the field of original oratory.
Carol Fortier and Woody May will present original after dinner speeches, and Dawn McNeil, Belva Watkins, George Tannous and Ralph Hemphill will speak extemporaneously on current event topics to be drawn from & hat ten minutes before they speak.
NUMBER 18 VOLUME 29 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1963 Highlights of Hinds HINDS HEADS FOR TOURNEY FRIDAY Page 6 GALA GROUP — Six entrants in the Phi Theta Kappa Freshman Talent show last night prove what a success the venture was.
Ann Stephenson swung out with the ever popular “I Enjoy Being a Girl”, showing dance talent as well as vocal.
Mimicking a popular record “A Little Bit of Soap”, Kaye Bullock preferred to deck herself with suds and sing in an old fashioned tub.
More talent is being prepared for the annual Phi Theta Kappa Faculty Talent show next Thursday.
CATTLE GAP SCUTTLEBUTT Page 5 Page 2 HINDSONIAN February 27, 1963 First Freedom Denied For every privilege, there is an equal and accompaning responsibility.
Mississippi will witness the denial of this freedom to a lot of young, eager junior college students.
It is certainly not the students’ fault, since speech activity abounded on the junior college level last year in the state.
No, the nation and the state spend millions teaching the youth of the magnolia state to acquire an inquisitive mind and to be able to express themselves.
In spite of all of this effort, there will not be a Junior College Speech Festival in the state this year.
This generation, our generation, is often criticized for not being willing to expend the effort to get the facts and express themselves constructively.
Yet, when there are plenty of eager, able, and knowledgeable young people willing to get the facts and express themselves constructively, there doesn’t seem to be any adults willing to make the 'sacrifice’ to sponsor a speech tournament.
These contests feature orations on American principles, reading of great American literary works, and debating topics of national and international significance.
Besides providing a wholesome activity, it teaches America’s youth the needed ability of public deliberation on important issues.
H Procrastinate No More One of the most amazing quirks of human nature has flourished among Hinds students again.
It was evident about this time last year, and earlier this year during football season.
The quirk is — obviously, if you listen to conversations in the grill — student attitudes toward sports and recreational activities.
More students attended and clamored to attend basketball games last week than probably have all year.
Most of the reason could have been the finals, but seemingly this sort of student attitude occurs every year.
Toward the end of any season — basketball, football, whatever — student attention is focused on the one specific activity.
No one has ever completely explained why we Americans love to put things off until the last minute.
It could not be entirely true that we are lazy, for even if we choose to do anything at the last moment possible, we usually put a great deal of effort into it.
Getting back to the main point, this week will end Hinds participation in state basketball tournaments.
Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS 1—-Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Viki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogdell, Fred Peyton The Hindsonian iis published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miiss.
PRESS _HINDS-IGHTS_ Shifting Shades Of Blue, Green Saturate 1 Being By WAYVIE McGREW-Everything was blue — the moon, the water, the earth.
He, too, would have been blue, but the green of the eyes dominated the blue.
So there he stood—green with only a distant blue and there she stood—so blue.
Make me red or green, or a soothing beige, but release me of this blue dinge.
Then I can run like a free gypsy and stamp the earth and clap my hands.
No, make me a dark brown so I can creep with the black night and be almost invisible.
Let me be a persian cat— a persian with long, silky hair, and deathly claws.
Yes, yes let me have sharp claws that bite into the flesh and leave their infernal mark.
He would be a great blue splash with two dashes of green and a monstrous red slash cross his middle.
And he would cry to the gods, but the gods cannot compete with an evil, conniving cat.
And I‘d watch him walk toward the blue waters like a glimmering sapphire.
Everything is bathed in green—the moon, the stars, the earth ,and I am blue—deathly, ghastly blue.
Earlier in the week the ""slow"" signs, normally a bilious shade of yellow, had been painted white, and no new printing had been placed on their faces.
Building and grounds men were out early the next morning trying to remove the bold black letters.
Efforts proved unsuccessful until several coats of white paint were used to cover the printing.
The board of regents approved the ban to alleviate congestion and provide for the safety of all students.
Parking is available for disabled students and for faculty and visitors.
This area of agreement is the administration’s policy in the Congolese crisis.
Since the Congo achieved independence from Belgium in June of 1960, conditions have deteriorated somewhat.
At first, the opportunists, Patrice Lumuba flirted with the Communist camp.
Later, he was gilled and replaced by Kasavubu and Cyrille Adoula in the central government.
Meanwhile, Moise Tshombe led a stubborn fight for Katangese (a province of the Congo containing 80% of its wealth) independence from the central government.
Some Americans believed the U S. should back Tshombe’s move, on the basis that he was pro-western, and financially independent.
Kennedy steered the U S. into backing the United Nation’s policy of trying to put Humpty-Dumpty Congo back together again, at U S. expense.
Looking at the first point, if this were true, then it follows, that other African nations whose national boundaries cross tribal boundaries could not have lasted either.
Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, Tanganyika, and virtually all of the former French possessions national boundaries cross tribal boundaries.
Yet none of these Africans have had any trouble maintaining their national boundaries.
So, it is seen, that the tribal trouble in the Congo has been caused by a lack of authority on the part of the central government, which the opponents of the Kennedy policy have weakened by supporting Katanga’s bid for independence.
Now, the second point, that the central government is infested with communists, so the U S. should support Katanga which has no communists.
It is true that while Lumumba was in power back in 1960 that some communists did infiltrate the Congo.
He gave the Czechsslavakian embassy officials (where the headquarters of comm units activities were) twenty-four hours to get out of the country.
Army Regulars to train his forces, convened the Congolese legislative body, and set up a stable non-communist government.
The Central Government, with the help of the U.N., backed by the i United States has been working to bring the last seceding province back into the Congo, where it belongs.
The opponents of our present policy say we are giving the whole Congo to the communists.
The truth of the matter is, that if Katanga’s wealth isn’t kept in the Congo, she will go communist.
That is the real reason for Tshombe’s resistance, He wants to keep all of his province’s wealth to develop his own domain and not share it with the rest of the Congo.
If he had succeeded in this pol icy, backed by the European owners of Katanga's wealth, this would be the same as a rich state like California, not paying taxes to the federal government, to aid poor states like Mississippi.
Congolese policy, one sees if their facts are wrong, it follows, that the reasoning based on those facts is also wrong.
Displays Possessions In Library February 27, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 By KLARE PARKER Hocks might be the term applied by an average person to the collection of minerals now on display in the Library, but James Smith, the owner of the collection, knows more about minerals than the average person.
James recently won 3 first places, 3 second places, and 2 third places for his displays of minerals in the adult division of the fourth annual Mississippi Gem and Mineral Fair.
In the major class of minerals he entered eight of the nine divisions and received eight ribbons.
James holds more ribbons from this fair than any other member of the Mississippi Geological Society.
Last summer at Durham, North Carolina, James placed Best in Show and Best in Class for his collection of minerals.
At this time he competed with collectors 18 or younger from throughout the eastern part of the United States.
The Assistant Curator of the Smithsonian Institute complimented James for having one of the best collections that he had ever seen in the junior division.
When asked if he spent his spare time hunting for minerals, he replied that he worked in his spare time so that he could afford to buy the minerals he wanted.
When James takes a vacation and he does have the time, he likes to explore for minerals.
Last summer while hunting for prehnite in North Carolina with a friend, James got trapped on a cliff under an overhanging rock.
This mineral is more radioactive than the radium on watches but not dangerous.
BOOTS FOR LADIES and CHILDREN Wellington Western Style BLUE JEANS l2,M01 $2.49 SPECIAL BEAUFONTS FOR ROLLERS 3 PIECE MATCH SET IDEAL FOR CO-ED NOT JUST ROCKS — James Smith, owner of the collection now on display in the library foyer, prefers to call his possessions minerals.
LAST TUESDAY Impressive Candlelight Ceremony Promulgates Phi Theta Initiation Phi Theta Kappa initiation was heralded by a mass of colors and a flurry of evening dress, as the impressive candlelight ceremony a evolved in the auditorium February 19.
COK * k BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK Z_Ml 881881 P PI evening gowns of red, orange, green, yellow, and blue.
All members, with the exception of of Henri Lou Coleman, president, wore blue robes.
Miss Coleman, leading the new members in their pledge, wore a robe of yellow satin.
She was accompanied by Brenda Mullins, who also provided organ selections throughout the ceremony.
To be eligible, an average of 2. for freshmen and 2. for sophomores is necessary, asserted Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor.
Mile Hikes Rather Unpopular With Local People By BETTYE SIMMONS A portion of President Kennedy’s much-talked-about physical fitness program has reached the Hinds campus.
Now a group of freshmen boys are contemplating taking the famous fifty mile hike.
We questioned several Hindsonians for their opinions concerning the President's program, and if they would be willing to walk fifty miles.
Polly Rabalais, girls’ physical education instructor, said, “I think it’s a good program.
However, so many people have misinterpreted the minimum of fifteen minutes vigorous exercise.
Miss Susan Brown, social science instructor, said, “I think we should have a physical fitness program, but walking fifty miles won’t prove a lot.
Patrick, social science instructor, answered, ""In the first place, it's not a physical fitness program.
Getting a few people to walk fifty miles achieves nothing but blisters for those people.
Leon Stewart, Crystal Springs sophomore, said, “I think it’s a good idea but is not being carried out in the right way.
HINDS HONEY — Mary Ann Hearst, freshman coed, shows the transformation taking place in the weather.
It is warm enough to sit on campus benches and soak in the sun, but not quite warm enough to shed the long winter coats. i Page 4 HINDSONIAN February 27, 1963 WHY IT PRINTS — The enlarged area taken from the photograph at left, illustrates the process used by newspapers to make pictures print.
The raised dots are covered with ink and then pressed to paper to leave the impression of continuous tone reproduction.
Without pictures a newspaper would be almost lost—alone in a world of words.
The process of printing pictures has passed through a transitional period since the invention of printing centuries ago by the Chinese.
In that time, much has changed, but the procedure is the same as it was with the first wood block prints.
When a flat surface is covered with ink and pressed to paper, it leaves its print—a solid splotch the color of the ink.
By cutting away areas that are not to print, outline pictures can be printed, as was done in the making of the first wood cuts.
But the printing of photographs requires that different tones be urinted.
So a process was discovered that would allow solid black ink to give the appearance of printing gray. through a screen, composed of lines running vertically and horizontally to form squares on its surface.
The accompanying picture shows how the sizes of the dots vary as the tones of the picture change.
In engraving—the process used to print the HINDSONIAN and most newspapers—the areas that are to be printed are left raised, and the areas not to be printed are routed out, just as in wood cuts.
But today the process has been streamlined through the use of photography as a substitute for manual engraving.
When the photograph with the image of dots has been completed, it is transposed to metal, which has been prepared with a light-sensitive coating.
The image is exposed to light, the metal is put in acid, and the exposed areas are eaten away, leaving the raised dots to come in contact with the ink and paper.
The use of color was developed on the principal that the three primary colors contain all the tones to make any color if they are mixed properly.
Since pictures speak a universal language, attract attention, arouse interest, convey ideas, illuminate and clarify text the demand for illustrations in printing is constantly increasing.
Photoengraving shows a steady growth in the number of establishments—about 1420 including newspaper plants—with an annual output valued at approximately $175 million in 1956.
In view of this fact American Photoengraving Association is constantly watching and evaluating all new inventions, developments, materials, processes, and devices that lend to better service for the public in search of still better ways of I I picture reproduction.
Enrollment In ’63 Summer Session Expected To Top Last Year’s Mark Plans released yesterday from the Registrar’s office indicate beginning work on the 1963 summer school.
According to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, even more students than last year’s 271, are expected to enroll for the summer session.
The program is designed to last ten weeks, and special courses will be offered in English, Mathematics, and reading, to aid in a strengthened background to college work.
Other courses offered in the summer are identical with those of the regular session, Summer work from Hinds is recognized wherever is is transferred, she said.
Students’ high school principal must furnish an official transcript showing grades and high school graduation date.
To be official the record must be sent directly from the high school to Hinds.
High school graduation is necessary for college admission except for students over 20 who may be admitted on the basis of satisfactory scores on the General Education Development test at the high school level.
Hinds, along with the majority of colleges in the nation, requires the American College Test score for freshman admittance.
A freshman expecting to enter Hinds should immediately contact his high school principal or counselor for details regarding the ACT test, Miss Herrin said.
Also, any student enrolled in the summer school to remove an academic suspension must be enrolled for the entire ten-weeks term, must earn 12 semester hours of credit, and must achieve a quality point average of not less than 1.0.
June 9, dormitories open; June 10, registration in morning and classes in afternoon; June 12, last day for late entries and for changing schedules; July 12, end of first term.
July 15, second term begins; July 17, last day for entry and for changing schedules.
SHONEY'S WESTLAND PLAZA Today, this is done by first rephotographing the original picture Beat Revamps Set At Friday Meeting Staff revisions will be made on the Hindsonian during the upcoming week, editor Joe White announced today.
The staff will meet Friday, 2A period in the Public Relations Office for instructions.
No drastic revisions will be made, White said, but writing positions will be classified so as to have specific beat reports each week.
All present workers and any persons interested in writing for the Hindsonian are advised to attend the meeting.
Regular meetings remain slated each Friday at the 2A period, but after next week they will be held in the new Hindsonian office, located in the cafeteria building.
INFERIORITY CAN BE FUN The second gravest problem confronting college students today is inferiority feelings.
Let us today look into the causes of inferiority feelings and their possible cures.
Let us start with the feeling of physical inferiority, perhaps the easiest to understand.
Naturally we are inclined to feel inferior to the brawny football captain or the beautiful homecoming queen.
Look at all the people, neither brawny nor beautiful, who have made their marks in the world.
What I mean is that you can’t always tell what’s inside a package by looking at the outside.
Just one glance at that jolly red-and-white package—so bright and pert — so neat but not gaudy—so perfectly in place whether you are at a formal dinner or a beach picnic—so invariably correct for any time, clime, or condition—one look, I say, at this paragon of packs and you know it has to contain cigarettes of absolute perfection.
That pure white Marlboro filter, that fine, flavorful blend of Marlboro tobaccos, will give you a smoke to make the welkin ring, whatever that is.
Then you can settle back and smoke your Marlboro and, at the same time, continue to gaze rapturously at the pack.
Take, for instance, the classic case of the Sigafoos brothers, Claude and Sturbridge, students at Wake Forest.
It was always assumed that Claude was the more intelligent just because he knew more than Sturbridge about the arts, the sciences, the social sciences, the humanities, and like that.
Sturbridge, on the other hand, was ten times smarter than Claude when it came to tying granny knots.
But no matter; everybody looked down on “Stupid Sturbridge,” as they called him and looked up at “Clever Claude,” as they called him.
But a better way to handle financial inferiority is to accept H philosophically.
True, others may have more money than you have, but look at all the things you have that they don’t —debts, for instance, and hunger cramps.
The popular rumor was quickly discredited by long-time members of the Hinds faculty.
Cattle were running loose and at some times as many as thirty or forty cows would invade the campus.
McKenzie reminisced, ""One night the cattle came in, and not having as much judgment as I have now, I got my shotgun to scare them away.
Herring, psychology instructor, recalled, “We used to have a fence around the campus.
A poor boy would have to dig a stump in order to work off ten demerits.
Well, you might say they’re a conversation piece, or unexpected traps for girls wearing heels.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES EX-ENTRANCE — Once the main entrance to Hinds’ campus, this almost deserted cattle gap is a reminder of the past.
In 1932 the arched roadway was much trafficked, but today college instructors use it as a handy parking area.
COMMITTEES MEET Attempts To Secure More Machines Planned By Vocational Department In two separate meetings this week, Hinds vocational deptrtment moved closer to securing modern training equipment for the machine shop and refrigeration curriculums.
Two advisory committees — composed of men from industry — called for government-purchased machines to be installed in the new three-building unit now being planned, and for industrydonated refrigeration equipment to be installed in the present program.
The machine shop committee, in its third meeting this year, almost completed a list of 75 mach-, ines and tools which they consider should be included in the new building.
And at a dinner meeting Tuesday, the refrigeration committee and the American Society of Heat, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers agreed that industry should furnish the college with models and cut-away samples of the kinds machines students will have to service after graduation.
As a result of the meeting Tuesday night where Charles McKeone of the American Air Conditioning — Refrigeration Institute revealed a special study called for better instructional equipment at Hinds, two pieces are already in the refrigeration department, G i b b e $ said.
Vocational Co-ordinator Walter Gibbes emphasized that both meetings were indications of Hinds established policy to keep a direct contact with industry itself.
If the programs talked about are carried through, he said, they will result in better instructional equipment and an upgraded education for better workmen.
What a traumatic age in which to live f A guy goes Pishing and what does he catch? ...his Grandmother f • © I960 BUDDY’S DRIVE IN 4105 Robinson Rd.
V' Hinds cagers landed a berth on the state Junior College Tournament roster last week when they placed second in the southern division play at Summit.
This Friday the Eagles will be matched against the host team and winner of the northern division tourney.
The opener will pit East Central, number two team from the north, against the number one team from the South, Southwest, at 7 The winners of the two contests will meet Saturday for the championship, while the losers will vie in a consolation match for third.
Hinds is ready for the action and has spent this week polishing their defensive tactics in preparation for the highscoring Ranger crew.
Coach Troy Ricks is optimistic about the game and says that despite Harlan Stanley's broken no$$ he will start him in a forward post.
Stanley suffered the broken nose in a collision early in the first half of the game against Southwest Saturday.
The Eagles missed 15 consecutive field goal attempts following the accident.
By the time they recovered, the Bears—who had been taking advantage of every scoreless rebound—were in front for good.
Getting off to a slow start, the Eagles fought a defensive battle from the first.
They never really seemed to recover from the 15-4 lead Southwest stacked up in the opening minutes of play.
The Eagles, who had been steadily improving as they added experience during the season, went into the tourney with a flurry of late-season wins pushing them on.
By a quirk of fate, they could meet Southwest again in the state tourney.
The Eagles were stunned to ineffectiveness by the loss of Harlan Stanley in Saturday’s contest.
Stanley suffered a broken nose in a mid-court collision early in the first half.
By the time they had recovered. the Bears had been stashing away security points.
Hinds managed to steal a tie-score on a 30-foot field goal by Johnny Hines, but Southwest soon stretched beyond reach.
In the second half, Southwest was red hot and further increased their lead.
If Southwest beats East Central, and I Hinds takes Northwest, the Eagles will get another chance to beat the ; Bears.
For Southwest, Jerry Travis laid in 23 points, Paul Rushing 22, and Oliver Young 16.
TWO POINTS — Johnny Hines jumps two points against Pearl River in the opening game of the South Division Tournament last Thursday.
Hinds toyed with the Wolves for 10 minutes before taking complete command.
Their biggest lead came with Larry Hill’s two charity tosses as time ran out.
Before gaining the right to play Co-Lin in the semi-finals Hinds first had to defeat Pearl River.
Barnes pumped in 22 big points for the home crew while Johnny Hines and George Puckett sacked 14 each.
The Eagles came from behind late in the first half to turn a close ball game into a rout in late stages of the contest.
Barnes, Eaglp eager with ball, dribbles in for a shot while a determined Co-Lin player tries to guard him.
JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI urn Highlights of Hinds Volume 29 — Number 19 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI Wed., March 6, 1963 Faculty’s Talents Promise Comeback In PTK Program Instructors and administrators will retaliate with the freshman Phi Theta Kappa talent show tomorrow night as they stage a comeback in Phi Theta Kappa’s annual faculty show.
According to Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor, talent will be staged ranging from vocals to group dances to imitations.
Rumors have it that the show will be visited by ""Minnie Pearl/ 7 A highlight in the evening’s entertainment will be a fashion show of the latest styles.
Freshmen who have not had the opportunity to see teachers perform other than in the classroom will be quite surprised at the versatility of their instructors.
Proceeds from the program will be used to aid in defraying costs to the National Phi Theta Kappa Convention held in Miami next month.
Thirty members from the Hinds chapter will attend the convention which will be held April 1-7.
Perkinston, Pearl River, Jones, Co-Lin, Meridian, East Central, Holmes, Delta, Northwest, Northeast and Hinds.
Foltz, who also directed the festival last year, is author of ""She Walks in Beauty/ 7 one of the selections to be featured in the closing performance.
N A select group, chosen from the massed choir, will perform the same program as will be given Saturday night for the first general session of the Mississippi Educational Association March 13.
Students and choir directors who attend the festival will be housed in campus dormitories, Reeves said.
Arrangements have been made with students whose rooms will be used, he said.
MILLION DOLLAR COST College Airport Chosen As Base For Local Fire Ant Eradication Choir To Sponsor First In ’63 Series Of Campus Movies Choir director Leslie Reeves announced yesterday that the movie “Imitation of Life,” will be shown Tuesday night, March 12, in the college auditorium.
Showing will begin at 6:30, and the 50 cent admission price will be donated to the college choir.
Terry Dusting Service of Helena, around 24 government men are.staArk., has selected the college airtioned at the airport.
Some of the port as base for a vast fire ant 1 government men are soil conservadusting program for the Terry amL tionists.
UtlCa area ' L College students enrolled in avia ‘ folk song;V‘Ain’t That'Good News The group will operate in this tlon pr °J ects ha ve taken interest in area about two months under feddus ^ n S work, with many gaththe opening rehearsal, he said.
At 11:00 and 1:00 Saturday, several choirs, including Hinds, will present three numbers each in an open informal concert.
Each choir will present one selection, and the amassed choirs will sing seven.
Bach, “She Walks in Beauty,” “Fanfare for Christmas Day” by Martin Shaw, “I Know Where I’m Goin’ ” an Irish eral funds.
Fire ant annihilation has been stressed in Hinds County since the insects infested the area last year and became uncontrollable.
Radio units have been set up to transmit location information to individual dusters.
Four pilots, a dusting service representative, an overseer, and ering daily to watch the low flying aircraft maneuver between clusters of bright balloons. a Negro spiritual, “Let Thy Holy Presence” by P Tschesnokoff, and a medley from “Showboat” by College Instructor Returns From Meet In North Carolina Mrs.
State chairmen from Kentucky, West Virginia, North Carolina, Maryland and Mississippi attended the workshop and met with national officials of the AAUW from Washington.
The theme was “How to Strengthen the Arts Program” in each state represented.
Denton led a 45 minute panel discussion on ""How to Strengthen the Relationship of Chairmen to State Branches.
Her function is to co-ordinate and report the art works of all branches.
Denton explained, “is an attempt to get schools in Mississippi below college level to introduce art and art courses, particularly junior and senior high schools.
TWO-WEEK TRIP McLendon Returns From Convention, Tells About Vocational Discussions Back at Hinds after a two-week absence while attending the American Association of Junior Colleges in Seattle, Wash., President George M McLendon said that it was the most enjoyable convention he had ever attended.
Having returned to Raymond Monday, McLendon and his wife traversed 15 states in the course of the journey.
On the way they traveled by bus, interrupting their trek frequently to view points of interest.
The return trip was made by train, following a last-minute change in plans.
McLendon, who closed an eightyear tenure on the important National Committee on Administration at the meeting, said he would continue to work with the Association in the future.
While on that committee, he worked with the developing of new junior colleges, educational facilities, and other phases of junior college administration.
He noted that one of the emphases of the meeting was vocational-technical education as it applies to the junior college.
McLendon—recognized in Mississippi as a leader in junior college vo-tech programs—has a $600,000 improvement to the Hinds program almost ready for construction.
The four-day convention included, in addition to committee meetings, special forums on the role of the Board of Trustees, transferring students, testing, and other important matters.
Cigarette Company Giving Away TV To Holder Of Most Empty Packages The empty cigarette packs bein£ collected in the grill are not t( win the Philip Morris televisior contest for the grill, but are to b< given to anybody who wants them grill manager Mrs.
Prize for the contest, which is based on the saving of empty Marl* boro.
Parliament, Philip Morris or Alpine packages, is the 19-inch Motorola Console television set displayed in the grill.
Kimball noted that Hinds was the only school in the area that did not have a winner.
Others this television set offered by Philip Morris Tobacco Compam have not counted theirs lately.
Deadline for the contest is April 2, 3:30 Page 2 HINDSONIAN MARCH 6, 1963 Welcome Choristers Students from all Mississippi junior colleges will represent their schools in the annual choral festival on the Hinds campus this weekend.
Hinds has one of the most modernistic and progressive campuses in the South — something any student would be proud to claim.
Be sure to talk with visiting students about our scholastic and extracurricular program and get information on theirs.
The opinions they gain will be carried back to all parts of Mississippi.
Take part in the activities offered this weekend and let them know that you are also interested in their well-being.
Most of all, make them feel glad that they attended the 1962-63 Choral Festival.
After completing the third week a student may still be able to get by without missing seriously the prerequisite.
It was felt that by the end of the fourth week, however, a student should know better what is expected in the class and can drop it at that time if necessary.
A second reason for dropping a class as indicated by Scott was if a student finds a course unnecessary for his program, especially if it is merely repetition of earlier classes.
The second proposal adopted by students was presented by Tom Hinthorne, forestry senator.
Undoubtedly the citizens of Mississippi were included in the statistics and well that they should, since the capital of the state has long been recognized as a center of cultural entertainment.
One of the finest Little Theatres in the South has Jackson as its home.
College players, especially the Millsaps Players, have added greatly to the city’s entertainment value.
But Jackson’s culture doesn’t begin in college; it begins in grammar school.
School libraries as well as state libraries are today better equipped than at any previous time.
Today's child is schooled in the usage of libraries and most of them use this knowledge to its greatest extent.
Not only do they learn the workings of ""the storehouse of books,"" but they also learn to love the printed word, which is the beginning of any civilization's culture.
Along with their enjoyment of books, the average elementary grade child participates in the prouction of plays and pageants.
If he doesn’t get a part, he becomes a valuable assistant behind stage.
The Mona Lisa, now on tour of the United States was visited, not only by adults, but by thousands of children who marveled at its quiet beauty.
Perhaps they didn’t understand or comprehend the artistic value of the painting but nevertheless they saw it, planting another seed to their mind’s garden.
But seeds have to be fertilized and high schools provide that fertilization.
Jackson's three high schools have long been recognized as well equipped schools and more than that, as producing well rounded students.
Art courses, choral activities, hundreds of books—all are accessible to the student.
Ask any Jacksonian about high school productions and they will tell you that they are some of the finest in the state.
You say that they are only high school productions, so they can't be too good.
They all attend, not because they know one of the actors, but because it is enjoyable, and most of all because it is a showplace of the city's talent.
See why this state, this nation is on a ""cultural kick” and plans, to stay on one.
I Once in Communist heM North Viet^ nam, and again in United States\ backed South Vietnam.
As the sun rises it shines on a strange struggle between the ideolJ ogies.
On the one hand are the communist guerillas of the North, i penetrating, it sometimes seems, as the sun’s rays, through the jungles of the South.
A rifle cracks screams out and copter and cargo sink into a swamp—forgotten, but unforgivable.
This is the sinister situation the United States finds itself in today in Southeast Asia.
Fighting the oldest type' of warfare with the newest type of weapons, and losing.
It seems if the United States and Soviet weapons systems become more sophisticated our tactics become more elementary.
In the age of Buck Rogers we find ourselves fighting like Roger’s Rangers.
Neither me nor thee relishes the idea of total nuclear involvement; alias civilized disaster.
America missed her chance, if she ever wanted to take it, of all out military activity against the Soviets.
In those days, when the Strategic Air Command was the synonym of Soviet suicide, the United States had the balance of power stretched across this nuclear fulcrum.
Today this powerful arm of free -1 world diplomacy is ill and lies dying of obselescence.
Meanwhile, Soviet surgeons are operating on their sick system and removing some of its vulnerable virus and replacing it with a jumbo size dose of intestinal fortitude.
Neither side wants a 'real war' here, and the side that realizes this first ,and uses it to his advantage, might well win on this forgotten, but if lost, unforgivable front.
To realize the importance of this \ conflict, one only has to look at a map of the area.
If the United States loses South Vietnam it also will lose Southeast Asia.
With this under the communist belt, they will have a red dagger between the ribs, attached to the backbone of free world defenses.
The day dawned twice in Vietnam this morning, and if the lesson of Cuba doesn’t dawn on Washington, and shine in Southeast Asia, the day may dawn twice in America tomorrow.
Ticket prices have been set at $1.00 for adults and 50 cents for students.
No reservations are necessary, since tickets will be available at the auditorium preceding the concert.
And Friday about 30 men from the three-county junior college district will discuss developments in a special vocational-technical training study now being conducted in state junior colleges by the Mississippi Research Commission.
Hinds’ newly inaugurated IBM program, one of the few college programs of its kind in the state, at present offers only the four basic IBM courses.
The advisory committee—a standing committee composed of men from outside the college—will discuss a more complete curriculum including advanced courses in business data processing.
Russell Levanway, consultant to the Research Commission, will consider results of a previous meeting which began studying the vocational and technical training needs in Hinds, Warren and Rankin counties.
Levanway is directing similar programs in each of the state's junior colleges.
Through these programs questionnaires are sent to industry to document their present employment and their job opportunities and projected needs.
After the documentation is complete, it will be used to plan junior college vocational training programs.
Levanway said that returns from the qestionnaires will not be complete for the Friday meeting, but a representative number of industries have already responded.
The group will study the numerical distribution of job opportunities named in those forms which were returned.
Much time will be spent comparing the needs for technicians and semi-skilled workers, Levanway said.
He noted that that 72 replies have been received from Hinds county alone.
He termed the response ""sizable"" and was confident that an even larger response would be noted during the next two or three weeks.
Questionnaires were sent to nearly all of the industry in the three counties.
Most of the major organizations in Rankin County have replied, too, he said, but even more are expected from that area also.
Only one other meeting—about the first of April—is planned for the Hinds Junior College district.
HINDS HONEY — It’s that season of the year again — when everyone’s got spring fever.
Jackson sophomore Wanda Dailey typifies this mood by standing here doing NOTHING — everyone’s goal for the month.
SET FOR APRIL Named by Senator James O Eastland for candidacy to the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., and by Senator John Stennis for the Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, N Y., Hossley is at present a preengineering student at Hinds and a part time employee of the Mississippi Power and Light Company.
He was vicepresident of the Catholic Youth Council, secretary to Warren County Safety Council and representative to Mississippi Boys’ State.
Selective Service Testers Taking Applications For Exemption Exam Application for the Selective Service College Qualification Test are now available to college students at the Selective Service local boards throughout Mississippi, Col.
The test, to be given April 18, will be held locally at Millsaps College in Jackson.
Scores made on the test will be considered with other information by the local boards in determining whether to defer individual registrants from the draft for further study.
All work done to your SATISFACTION CAMPUS AGENTS DWAYNE COX Stadium HAROLD MITCHELL Southside JERRY SMITH Eastside SONNY CURTIS Shangri-La CHARLES DUDLEY Central Laundry & Cleaners March 28.
Used since 1951 in determining questions of student deferment, the test is administered by the Science Research Associates, of McHenry, Ill.
To be eligible to take the test, the applicant must be satisfactorily pursuing a full time college course, under-graduate or graduate, leading to a degree.
Junior college students will qualify if their course of study is satisfactory for transfer of credits to a degree-granting institution.
The applicant must be a Selective Service registrant who intends to seek deferment as a student.
At present, ""Mississippi local boards reach men for induction at about age 23 and one-half,"" Col.
Such a build-up could lower the age at which local boards reach men for induction.
In such an event, a deferment might be necessary to finish undergraduate work,"" he said.
CAPRI THRU SATURDAY NEVER ON SUNDAY NEXT La Dolce Vita Page 4 HINDSONIAN MARCH 6.
A third versatile room, used for classes, film strips and exhibition gallery, is included in the new department.
Still to be completed are two outdoor patios adjoining the painting and drawing rooms.
New Art Department Looks To Future; Includes Custom Planning By Denton By BETTYE SIMMONS Art students claim it is spacious colorful, airy.
And no, they are not describing a work of da Vinci, but rather the completely new Hinds art department.
Only this school year did the department leave the cramped tworoom location in the administration building to occupy their present quarters which encompass the greater part of the ground floor level of the library.
The 14 studenta were accompanied by Andy Bond, field representative from State, and Mrs.
Frances Lee, former Hinds’ Dean of Women and present Dean of Women at State.
Bond was on campus during the day counseling with students planning to attend State next year. sive and still growing housing.
In addition to two large drawing and painting rooms, there is a versatile audio-visual room which is also used as a classroom and exhibition gallery.
Katherine Denton, art instructor, helped design the lay-out for the new department, and when it is completed, it seems lttle will have been forgotten.
The drawing and painting rooms are located so that there is excellent northern light.
These rooms are equipped with the latest art supplies, including portable individual lockers which roll out to where the students are working.
We are using the room for panel discussions in the art appreciation course,"" said Mrs.
The audio-visual room will also be used to foster interchange of work between students and college departments.
In the near future the architecture and drafting classes will display some of their work.
Even a kitchenette was built to accommodate open house guests, workshops and exhibits.
Two roomy closets contain the slide and film projectors and other visual aid equipment.
Still to be completed are two outdoor patios which will join the drawing and painting rooms.
Sketching horses are stored in the drawing room waiting to move to the patios.
Next year the department will offer twice as many courses, the instructor said.
A small group of Hinds students and two instructors attended the annual meeting of the Mississippi Historical Society last Friday in Vicksburg.
Banton, associated with the Vicksburg National Military Park, give Debate Team Wins Several Victories At MSCW Tourney * Hinds debators journeyed to the MSCW campus last Friday and returned the next day with another successful record in the debate tourney held there.
Hemphill also rated superior in several debates of individual performance.
Others in the individual events were George Tannous, who lacked 3 points making excellent, and Woody May, who needed only 10 more for excellent.
Also, Dawn Me Neil, Carol Fortier, Jane Land, Belva Watkins attended the tourney.
Art Display Hung In Hinds Library By M C Students Approximately 35 art works by students at Mississippi College went on display today in the exhibition room of the Hinds Art Department.
Presented in cooperation with Sam Gore, department head of art at Misissippi College, the exhibit gives a cross-section of the work being done at the school.
The talk was presented in the court room of the Old Court House, adding to the exciting ab mosphere.
A tour of the park followed, where the group traced both the Confederate and Union lines.
Miss Susan Brown and Thomas Stricklin, social science instructors making the trip, attended a banquet Friday evening on the Steamer Sprague.
Strode is the author of two published volumes dealing with the life of Jefferson Davis.
A portion of the group remained in Vicksburg in order to see the melodrama ""Gold in the Hills,” also presented on the Steamer Sprague.
According to the instructors, ""This was the best meeting of the Historical Society we've attended.
The workshop is designed to give students interested in music a basic vocal foundation and an idea of how a musical production is put on the stage.
Theatre students will get tips on fundamental action, stage movement, and practice in theatre production.
Charles M Getchell of the Department of Speech and Theatre will conduct the theatre wing of the workshop, and Dr.
Mark Hoffman of the Department of Music will direct the musical activities.
Jointly, the students of music and theatre will produce a total of five or six plays during the summer.
In addition, the two divisions of the workshop will present plays, concerts, chamber music and other performances separately.
Joint productions will go on tour during the summer, and will be-seen in Jackson, Vicksburg, and Meridian.
Although a student may be selected to work primarily in one phase of the program, he will have an opportunity to work in both areas during the months of the workshop.
Music students will also receive instruction in how to organize and arrange musical activities.
Theatre students will be coached in voice and diction, styles of acting, techniques of actors motivations and stage lighting.
Students interested in participating in the workshop, which will emphasize actual experience, should contact their music or speech instructor for application forms or write directly to Dr.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK DOOR TO? — “The soul selects her own society, then shuts the door,” says the poet.
Pretty sneaky soul, with a second story door; that’s really select society.
Baptist Students Readv To Attend •/ Texas Conference Three Hinds students will be among the 1500 students from 50 colleges in a dozen states who will attend the 14th annual Student Missions Conference scheduled March 8-10 at Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary, Ft.
Baker James Cauthen, executive secretary of the Southern Baptist Foreign Mission Board.
Others participating on the program will be Chester Swor, Jackson youth counselor and lecturer; Glendon McCullough of the Southern Baptist Home Mission Board in Atlanta; Ancil B Scull, Southern Baptist foreign missionary to Indonesia; and about 40 other Baptist foreign and home missionaries.
NttP THK NATIONAL FOUNDATION Two Hinds Staffers Scheduled To Speak At Secretary Meet Two of Hinds’ faculty members, Mrs.
Alon Bee and Miss Belle Lindsey, will be presented along with other outstanding speakers at the Secretarial Workshop of the Vicksburg Chapter, National Secretaries Association March 9, in the Hotel Vicksburg.
Bee will be particularly familiar to Vicksburg residents, having served as official chaperone to three recent Miss Mississippis.
Other speakers are Frank Everett of the firm Brunini, Everett, Grantham, and Quinn, who will discuss opportunities for the secretary in law; Dr.
Tom Mitchell of the Street Clinic, who will talk on the role of the secretary in medicine.
McFarland, production superintendent of Westinghouse Electric Corp., who will discuss incentives for the secretary in industry; and Maj.
Davis, president of the Mississippi River Commission, who will speak on secretarial opportunities in government.
Elnora A Cawthon from the Louisiana Polytechnic Institute at Ruston, La.
All secretaries, stenographers and students may attend for a fee of $2.50.
Sophomores Reynolds Ridgley and Bobby Dickens eject their thumbs and hold high their sign in quest of a ride to State Junior College Basketball finals in Senatobia.
Hinds Falls In Tournament Against Northern Champs Hinds’ hopes for a Mississippi Junior College Basketball Championship were dashed by the northern sector champions, Northwest, on the victor’s home court last Friday.
Johnny Franklin topped the scoring for the local crew as he bucketed 21 tallies.
Mississippi’s Junior College basketball crown for the 1962-63 season is at home in the Southwest trophy case following a Saturday night win over northern division champion and host, Northwest.
Southwest departed from their usual fastbreaking offense to a slowdown and-shoot-when-times-areright type of play.
Northwest, off their usual shooting percentage, hit only 26 percent of their field goal attempts.
During the first half the two teams see-sawed with the lead never going more than three points in either units favor.
The tournament officially closed Junior College basketball for the season.
Today let us examine that much maligned, widely misunderstood, grossly overworked, wholly dedicated campus figure— the dean.
He is a counselor and guide, a haven and refuge for the troubled student.
The dean is characterized chiefly by sympathy, wisdom, patience, forbearance, and a fondness for homely pleasures like community singing, farina, spelldowns, and Marlboro Cigarettes.
The dean (from the German Deange machl to poop a party) is fond of Marl boros for the same reason that all men of good will are fond of Marl boros—because Marlboro is an honest cigarette.
Those good Marlboro tobaccos are honestly good, honestly aged to the peak of perfection, honestly blended for the best of all possible flavors.
You too will flip when next you try an honest Marlboro, which, one honestly hopes, will be soon. 'iw it iiotddryeye in Yidh But I digress.
Wise, kindly Dean Sigafoos was visited one day by a freshman named Walter Aguincourt who came to ask permission to marry one Emma Blenheim, his dormitory laundress.
To the dean the marriage seemed ill-advised, for Walter was only 18 years old and Emma was 91.
Walter agreed with the dean, but said he felt obligated to go through with it because Emma had invested her life savings in a transparent rainhood to protect her from the mist at Niagara Falls, where they planned to spend tlieir honeymoon.
With steam billowing back at the old lady, she would find a rainhood very useful—possibly even essential.
Freed from his unwanted liaison with Emma, he married a girl much nearer his own age—Agnes Yucca, 72.
Walter is now the proud father— stepfather, to be perfectly accurate—of three fine, healthy boys from Agnes’s first marriage-Everett, 38; Wilhelm, 43; and Irving, 55—and when Walter puts the boys on a lead and takes them for a stroll in the park on Sunday afternoon, you may be sure there is not a dry eye in Yutah.
He too is happy—happy to spend long,, tiring hours in his little office, giving counsel without stint and without complaint, doing his bit to set the young, uncertain feet of his charges on the path to a brighter tomorrow.
Clarke Memorial College will host the equivalent to the traditional State Junior College Speech Festival Saturday, March 23.
Hinds forensic team and speech department will enter all events. oser Presents Versatile Concert In Artists Series m UPHOLD TRADITION — Hinds debaters selected to continue the tradition of winning the state championship are, left to right, Jane Land, Ralph Hemphill, Belva Watkins and Woody May.
Hinds’ paper was one of two junior college newspapers in the nation to receive the top Medalist “publication of distinction” award.
The Miss Delta of Delta State College won first place and The Chieftian from Itawamba Junior College made second rating.
Based on content, make-up, headlines and other phases of journalism in all papers published from Easter to Christmas this year, the award was decided by 35 school press authorities.
Hindsonian sponsor, Kent Prince, attended the convention and received the award for Hinds.
Joe White, present editor of The Hindsonian, also edited the 1961-62 publication.
Editor and business manager of the award winning Student Printz are both Hinds alumni.
Tommy Nance, editor, and Jean Rogers, business manager, were sports editor and editor of The Hindsonian during the 1960-61 school session.
Denton urged sophomores to take advantage of this opportunity since it will be the last test before students transfer to a senior college.
Another concert in the Department of Music’s Artist Series will be offered Tuesday evening, March 26, at 8:00 in the college auditorium.
Arthur Kreutz, composer, conductor and violinist, will be presented, accompanied by Mrs.
The latter part bases its main theme on a swing figure often heard on the dance drummer's ""hi-hat' cymbal.
She has appeared as concert pianist and vocalist with symphony orchestras, and has sung leading roles in contemporary opera.
Last year the festival was divided into three divisions; a north and south Mississippi tournament, and a final playoff.
This year the division tournaments were eliminated in favor the Clarke Festival as a single major event.
Co-sponsored by Perkinston and Jones, the festival was arranged a few weeks ago to fill in for the abeyant state tournaments.
Featured will be oratory; oral interpretation; after-dinner, impromptu, and extemporaneous speaking; and debate.
Jane Land and Belva Watkins will negotiate the affirmative side of the national debate question, and Woody May and Ralph Hemphill, the negative.
Frances Pickett and Mike Oliver will participate in original oratory; and Bill Forester and May in afterdinner speaking.
In the girls’ division of oral interpretation, Margaret Nunley, Frances Pickett, and Jane Land will express three selected writings.
Watkins and Hemphill will compete in impromptu speaking, in which contestants draw a topic and aire allowed 15 minutes preparation.
Dawn McNeil and Hemphill will enter exemporaneous speaking, which allows one hour for preparation.
AFTER 25 YEARS McLendon Returns As Prexy By Unanimous Vote Of Board George M McLendon, currently completing his twenty-fifth year as president of Hinds, has been electMcLendon ed by the trustees’ unanimous vote for another year with the request that the State Retirement Board grant permission for him to serve on to the mandatory retirement age.
Evans, Presley Selected To Head Hinds Magazine Spring Edition Editing the Spring Hindsonian.
All persons who have material Supplement will be Danny Evans that may be of use are urged to Jackson, with Rebecca Presley, Brandon, serving as business manager, Hindsonian editorial staff announced this week. bring to the Student Publications Office in the Cafeteria Building, Evans said.
Conclusion of the festival will be a banquet Saturday evening at which the winners in the afterdinner speaking contests will address the group.
Also at the banquet, superior and excellent awards for other categories will be presented.
Highlight of the evening will come with the announcement of debate and sweepstakes trophies.
Hinds won the sweepstakes trophy at the Southern festival last year, and a week later won state championship.
The group will he accompanied to Newton by Fred L Brooks, speech department head.
Chosen last week following submission of applications, the two will publish the magazine as a separate student publication, apart from either the newspaper or yearbook.
The only other issue of the Supplement, published at Christmas, this year, was a project of journalism students and the regular Hindsonian staff, published in place of a Christmas paper.
The initial issue of the magazine was literary in style, but the Spring edition will focus on features and news features, Evans said.
However, he noted, works with a strictly literary nature will be given important space.
The Spring edition, to feature all types of material, will be inserted in a mid-April issue of the paper.
He also pointed out that a phases of graphic arts will be used in designing the magazine so that it will have the most effective look possible.
In the Christmas issue a few pages were elaborately processed as an experiment.
HEAD MAGAZINE — Freshmen Danny Evans and Rebecca Presley, recently chosen editor and business manager ol the spring Hindsonian Supplement, have announced that manuscripts, art-work, creative photography, and other pertinent material is being accepted for the mid-April magazine Page 2 HINDSONIAN March 20, 1963 Congratulations Clark Memorial College, Perkinston, and Jones Junior Colleges are to be congratulated, if not heralded, for their recent decision to sponsor a Mississippi Junior College Speech Festival this weekend.
This event will give a lot of young peopie in Mississippi an opportunity to develop their talents.
Recently an editorial was run in this paper pointing out the fact that many eager and capable junior college students were being denied their freedom of speech.
This approach may have semed glamorized to some, but not to the people it affected.
A tip of the hat and sincere appreciation goes out to all of the judges, time keepers, and sponsors of this speech festival.
If there is anything the state of Mississippi needs now and for some time to come, it is and will be the ability to express ourselves constructively to others, in other states, throughout this nation.
H CURRENT EVENTS Kennedy Misses Argentine Boat -By RALPH HEMPHILLCasey Strikes Out A decision has been reached regarding baseball at Hinds for the 1963 season . . . there will be none.
This decision by the athletic department and the administration won’t come as a surprise to those who know the background behind the move, but to newcomers it might be puzzling.
Only two junior colleges in the state are fielding teams and a schedule this limited is out of the picture.
And since they are located near the state line, they can play out-of-state teams.
Since baseball has been removed from the Hinds campus since 1959, a complete buying spree would be necessary to equip the team with uniforms, balls, bats and other equipment necessary to maintain such a program.
Third and most important — Baseball is a spring sport that comes at a time when students should be hitting the books and not the ball.
Final exams are just around the corner and no student on campus is so secure on the academic roster that he can afford to try and participate in all the varied spring activities and be charging off on a series of trips to all parts of the state for a day or two of ball games.
Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Viki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogdell, Fred Peyton FACULTY ADVISOR-Kent Prince While Americans have been busy eyeing Viet Nam, looking over 1 the Berlin Wall, dad peeking through the Cactus Curtain at Castro, events have been moving rapidly towards chaos in Argentina.
History proves that in dealing with the communists the obvious is usually the thing to concern oneself less with.
In Viet Nam, while we built up a strong motorized military, the communists outflanked it with guerillas.
In Berlin while the United States busied itself with Checkpoint Char* lie, the communists built a wall.
While the United States concerns itself solely with ""offensive missiles/' Castro has blown up a Venezuelan oil field, throwing the whole economy into an uproar and causing the democratic government to proclaim martial law.
In Argentina the New Frontier has yet to make the scene, meanwhile, the communists are stealing the show.
The Kennedy administration seems to think that Latin America’s problem can be solved, or at least pushed aside, with the stroke of a pen; that is, the signing of the alliance for progress.
It has been in effect for two years, and throughout South America it is called everything from the alliance for chaos to the alliance for Castro.
Kennedy missed the boat in Argentina by not backing Arturo Frondizi nearly a year ago when he was ousted by a disgruntled military.
Frondizi came to power in Argentina's first democratic election in fourteen years.
He followed ten years of Peron misrule and four years of military dictatorship.
Under Peron everything from bombs to bobby-pins became government owned.
At the time of Person’s arrival Argentina had the best diet in the world.
Now they have one of the worst, Under the military, following Peron, the economy stagnated.
Buenos Aires, once one of the most beautiful cities in the world, today is drab with streets and public utilities in need of vast repairs.
Then Frondizi came in with democracy and instituted an austerity program to build up Argentina's trade credits.
He started selling the state-owned industries and businesses to private industries.
The agile Frondizi began a slow but sure policy of political stabilization through economic stabilization.
But he made the fatal mistake of stepping on the toes of the only stable force in the country, the military.
The men who had ousted the national socialist, Peron now had ousted a conservative democrat, Frondizi.
If the Kennedy administration had put diplomatic, foreign aid, and organization of American states' pressure on the militariat and openly backed Frondizi, all indications are since the Argentine military is largely backed by United States military grants, Frondizi would still be in power.
This time the United States would have been backing democracy, a man chosen in free election, in Latin America.
Those men in Washington who are supposed to know, say we need a reputation of backing democracy and reform in Latin America, but the man those men advised let it die.
It seems that now, a year after the fall of democracy in Argentina, the military fear a return of Peron (who is in exile in Spain and has three million active supporters in Argentina) more than they fear Frondizi.
This fact is indicated by the military junta asking the former president to form a popular front coalition and set up a government.
Such a front would include the Peronistas as a compromise to the military.
The Peronistas seem to prefer full legality and recognition as a political party to a coalition, though.
But here is where the cat crawls back into the bag, and Peron back into Argentina.
Legality and recognition as a political party for the Peronistas and they join the popular front.
Another national socialist, Adolf' Hitler, joined just such a coalition with other nationalists just before his rise to power.
It is also rumored that Peron has promised the military concessions, just as Hitler did prior to his becoming Chancellor.
It is also true that Peron has the organization in the streets to doublecross the military after reaching power, just as Hitler did.
If Argentina returns to the abyss of Peronism, it will be a painful blow to American prestige in Latin America.
A final thudding death to the alliance in progress, and a direct slap at the Kennedy foreign policy.
HINDS-IGHTS “Inside Shelly Berman” By LINDA BYRD Television has been called the “peeping Tom” of the 20th century and no title was so fittingly bestowed.
This weekend, however, television did more than peep—it took a good, long look at a man, a successful man in the entertainment world.
But Saturday night, Dupont forgot the masses and centered its sights on one man—Shelly Berman.
It was a commentated news report on the unseen side of the stage, the actor, the comedian.
The viewing audience looked into the innermost part of the man—the inside.
The often quiet, sometimes turbulent guts of a man who makes his living off the laughter of others.
Set in Florida, cameras followed Mr Berman for two days as he prepared to open at a leading night club in the state.
He was shown first as alone—not really talking to anyone but rather ordering them.
Those who previously thought of a “funny man’ as being a completely unorganized person learned differently via this program.
It was shown that like an intricate watch with minute moving and swaying parts the mind, body and soul of a performer must work simultaneously or he loses time and like a watch, timing is his trademark.
No longer was the audience disconnected from the entertainer but they were actually inside his thoughts and actions.
If this is a sample of what television does when it peeps then it should be allowed to peep more often.
Choir Presents Assembly Today The Hinds Choir presented a concert for the student body in this morning’s regular assembly.
The same concert will be given Friday before the students at Forest Hill High School.
Sunday evening the choir will travel to Westmont Christian Church in Jackson to present a concert of sacred music for the evening service beginning at 7:00.
The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
Every Tuesday and Thursday Bobby brings two pigeons to the Hinds campus and releases them.
Bobby and .younger brother ""Humpy"" became interested in pigeons about a year ago when they found a pair of wild birds.
They raised them from babies and when they flew away—never to return— they decided to buy the homing pigeons.
At times the boys have had as many as sixteen fowls, ""but we sometimes lose them.
Evidently, Bobby thinks, the answer is in some way related to the sun or to light since the birds never fly after the sun goes down.
Only A Few Days Left his birds have registered 90 miles from Greenville to Vicksburg.
The races start in Meridian and gradually will move as far as Augusta, Georgia.
The larger ones will fty the last races which may take two days,” said Bobby.
The Barlows have two coops for the pigeons and even a special one called the Prisoner's coop.
At present they have eight registered canines, including one field champion—""Tip Top Barlow”—who is valued at more than $1000.
Five years ago he began entering them in local field trials— running rabbits.
Later they entered the Pearl River Beagle Club and now they race ""Tip Top” in other states.
Trophies and ribbons from Ohio, Pa., Mass., La., Ind., Ala., Mo., and Miss, fill the living room of the Barlow home.
And as if they don’t care enough for the animal kingdom, the Barlows have a house dog—a stray they picked up off the streets.
STUDY OF TWO PIGEONS — Staff photographer Dan Fazekas, perceiving the innate difference between the higher order of homing pigeons and the common breed that clutter public places, composed this commentary on the Barlow birds as fair proof of his idea.
DUAL HONORS Circle K, Cheerleaders To Host Social Program Tomorrow Night A dual purpose will be served by a campus-wide social in the girls’ gymnasium tomorrow night from 6:30 to 9:30.
Circle K Sweetheart will be announced and crowned and basketball team members will be honored.
Originally it was intended that two separate functions be held, but time did not permit, officials of Circle K and the cheerleaders noted.
Circle K has during the past month nominated six girls and kept their identities secret.
Tomorrow night at 4:45 the club members will vote on the Club Sweetheart for 1963 from a narrowed-down field of three coeds.
Only three club officials will be present at the counting of secret ballots tomorrow night, so that the top selection will be a complete surprise.
The winner will accompany Circle K on its trip to the annual convention in Bosier City, La., next month.
Cheerleaders have made plans to honor the Hinds basketball team members since they were in the play-offs for state basketball championship.
Music for the dance will be provided by the Vis Counts of Jackson, a well known giroup of musicians.
Concessions will be headed by Circle K, and a varied program will be planned.
SPRING CLEANING here Have one of Jackson Steam’s courteous agents pick your clothes up in the dorm on Monday and Thursday between 8 -10 o’clock.
DWAYNE COX CHARLES DUDLEY Campus Agents JERRY ""PEANUT"" SMITH SONNY CURTIS HAROLD MITCHELL to win in the college Brand Round-up DEADLINE FOR CONTEST is APRIL 2, 2:30-3:30 P M. in the GRILL Marlboro Page 4 HINDSONIAN March) 20, 1963 s CHEDULE OF 9WEEK TE ESTS Monday Wednesday Friday Period Tuesday Thursday TEST 8:15 1 TEST TEST 9:10 2 TEST / Chapel 10:05 2A TEST TEST 11:00 3 TEST TEST 11:55 4 TEST TEST 12:50 5 TEST TEST 1:45 6 TEST TEST 2:40 7 TEST 3:35 8 Low Flying Aircraft Fight Fire Ants As War Between Man, Insect Rages By LINDA BYRD Target sighted.
No, the late show isn’t blaring the re-runs of an old war movie; on the contrary, the war is a very much a present day one.
Fought by men, the modern war doesn’t have Japan art Russia as an enemy but the enemy is most assuredly red—though I doubt he is a card carrying communist.
The first attack, related in a recently published article in this paper, listed the enemies as immigrants from at least 30 foreign countries.
Now a second aerial attack is planned against the imported enemies—fire ants.
For years the object of curseful remarks, the red devils have eaten, pricked, and bitten their way into the American home, garden, land—interrupting work, pleasure, and more often reducing the family income—especially in the case of farmers.
Now, however, farmers may rejoice, for with progress came air planes and with planes came pilots—pilots who fly at amazingly low altitudes and distribute bait material to destroy the infestious inserts.
The material, called mirex, is slow ating and is not harmful to humans, wildlife, animals, birds or fish.
Thirty four thousand acres are being sprayed with the powder this week in hopes of completely destroying the pests, who last year became uncontrollable in this area.
Applications are said to be more effective before or after the emergence of the winged forms of the ants.
Financed with federal funds, the program will take approximately two months to complete and the Hinds air base is being used as the headquarters for the dusting service of the Terry and Utica area.
Pilots, a dusting service representative, an overseer and about 24 government men are stationed at the airport now, carrying out the different phases of the program.
For those who have never seen, or rather should I say, felt a red ant — consider yourself among God’s chosen few.
Encased in mounds of earth and sand, children are especially vunerable to the inQuality RUBBER STAMPS and PLASTIC SIGNS Dixie Rubber Stamp Co.
Although an all out preventative program is best, occupants of infested areas may control the spread of the “fire” ants by using insecticides.
The red devils have no respect for money, position or social status—they would just as soon bite a rich man as a poor one.
JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI Music Instructor Presents Recital Of Mozart, Verdi Mrs.
Joan Melton Lynch, Hinds music instructor, was presented in recital last evening by the Hinds Department of Music.
Lynch appeared as a part of the Artist Series, sponsored by the music department.
Lynch’s program included '‘The Counte” aria; “Porgi amor” from Mozart’s Marriage of Figaro; three German “Lieder” by Shubert and Schumann; “Ah fors’e lui” from Verdi’s La Traviata; and ten “Hermit Songs,” by Samuel Barber.
Lynch is presently instructor of music theory and teacher of piano and voice.
Sullivan To Voice Various Selections Of Many Periods Douglas Sullivan, Jackson sophomore, will be presented in a recital by the Department of Music Thursday evening at 7:30 in the music auditorium.
Included will be “Lasciatemi morire,” by Monteverde; “Stars of the Desert” and “You Are All That Is Lovely,” by Woodforde-Finden; and “The Lady Who Loved A Pig,” by Dougherty.
March 20, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 5 tsssstssxtxit Scads Of Fads By DAWN McNEIL TENNIS TERMS — Speaking in tennis terms, blonde Barbara Coward “loves” the tennis court and the sunny spring weather Hinds is having.
Lovely Barbara, a freshman art major, serves as Spring’s first Hinds Honey.
Hinds girls dormitories resound with such conversation, and the more conservative residents look astonished at the gymnastic and child-like feats of their housefellows.
Meanwhile, male members of the campus are stuffing cars in their own version of fad-filled college life.
Three Hinds coeds, Carol Vanlandingham, Ann Goodwin, and Hendra Moudy spent an afternoon last week behind the girls gym flying a kite.
William Oakes, Hinds recreational director, unofficially lent his experience, and helped the trio overcome their difficulties.
A student claimed he stuffed 23 people in a similar car and he set out to prove his statement.
So large is the following that ""bring your own crayons"" parties have been staged in some dorms.
Typical of college pranks over the nation, these fashionable idiosynctracies are Hinds answers to UCLA students pushing a bed from Los Angeles to Las Vegas, to stuffing telephone booths, and spinning in electric dryers.
Ronnie Farmer, Hinds freshman, suggested that students use pogo sticks to travel between classes.
Students who wish to receive a junior college diploma must check out with the registrar and pay the ten dollar fee, she said.
The fee covers all costs of graduation, including diploma, cap, and gown.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITH0 NEGATIVES & PLATES grade for the semester.
Finishing sophomores who do not take part in graduation may not be exempt, she said.
Miss Herrin emphasized that participation in all graduation exercises are required for the receiving of the diploma and associate of arts degree.
Commencement will be Sunday, May 26, at 11m., and final commencement exercises will be held Friday, May 31, at 10:30m.
Newman Club Picnic Raymond Lake Lodge APRIL 1, 1963 Club Members and Dates Only P.0.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK OF MISSISSIPPI Page 6 HINDSONIAN March 20, 1963 Golf, Tennis Head Spring Sports Scene Spring has sprung, and with it the individual sports scene here has burst into full blossum.
Over the campus such sports as tennis and golf are taking oveir as after-hours activities.
Golf, a leading pastime among the male population, is the sweeping rage with the nine-hole campus course flooded each afternoon with duffers.
Both beginners and “old pros” are testing their skills on the course which adjoins Raymond Lake.
Hinds Students are permitted to play on their student activities card while visitors are charged 50 cents for the nine-hole tour.
Tennis is gaining interest as a campus sport with the recent change in weather.
Both sexes are participating in the net action and the courts on campus are kept full daily.
The scoring ace contributed 12 field goals and added four charity tosses for the total.
Following in the scoring column was Ann Strickland, playing for the losers, netting 23 points, Strickland hit on three of four foul-line shots and hit 10 two-pointers.
Judy Thompson, a former AllStater from Clinton, sacked 17 points for the winning crew while Carolyn Grafton ripped the nets for eight and Kay Beasley sacked four.
Carrie Bliss hooped 13 points in a losing cause as the Westside unit was overcome.
Carol Pounds put three two-pointers in for six points and Ann Pharr rounded out the scoring with five.
Playing at guard for the victors was Sandra Jabour, Frances Pickett, Dottie Darling, Dottie Breakfield, Marie Dollar, Susan Barrett and Kay Beasley.
Joyce Hill, Ann Graham, Jane O’Neal and Sharon Warren defended for Westside.
C031599 L*M GRAND PRIX 50 Sweepstakes for colleges only More than 50 times the chance to win than if open to the general public.
The contest, co-sponsored by Perkinston, Jones, and Clarke, was this year’s equivalent to the traditional State Junior College Speech Festival.
Receiving superiors were Ralph Hemphill, in debate and extemporaneous speaking; Margaret Nunley, in oral interpretation and original oratory; Bill Forester, in oral interpretation; and Francis Pickett in oral interpretation.
Receiving excellents were Mike Oliver, in original oratory; Ralph Hemphill, in impromptu speaking; Belva Watkins, in impromptu speaking and debate; Woody May, in after dinner speaking and debate; i and Jane Land in debate. j Debaters Ralph Hemphill, Woody May, Jane Land and Belva Watkins won four debates which gave them second place in the state.
The juniors and seniors, gleaned from Byram, Raymond, Terry, and Utica High Schools, met with select individuals from various employment VISITING CAMPUS — Officials of Tuesday’s Career Conference view Hinds between activities.
Estelle Scott, director of guidance for Hinds County Public Schools and chairman of the Conference, explained that the conference is an annual event, held for the joint benefit of the four smaller Smallwood Presents Voice Recital; Other Programs To Be Rescheduled Phi Thetas Invade Fabled Gold Coast For Annual Confab Hinds Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa today arrived in the Florida resort of Miami for the annual PTK national convention.
Leaving, Monday bdfore dawn, the 27-member delegation will participate in the honor society’s coastal meet, joining students from all over the United States.
Activities, luncheons, banquets, assemblies, and sightseeing are included in the convention’s busy schedule.
Soprano Peggy Smallwood was presented Thursday in her sophomore vocal recital by the Hinds Department of Music.
Accompanist for the program, held in the College auditorium, was Kathy Kilby, Raymond.
A joint ptrformance by Russell Harrington and Sandra Parkison was to be held April 4, and Peggy Wilbanks was to appear April 11.
These programs will be held later, according to department head Leslie Reeves.
Also included were “I Hate Music” and “I Just Found Out Today,” by Bernstein; “Solveig’s Song,” Grieg; “Thou Art the Night Wind,” by Gaul; “One Kiss,” Romberg; and “Let My Song Fill Your Heart,” Charles. individual conference.
J \ W Lee, chairman of the division of education and psychology at Mis-| sissippi College.
King, State Auditors Office, accounting; Billy Banes, Hinds Junior College, agriculture; Walter Gibbes, Hinds, auto mechanics; Mrs.
Ray Sullivan, homemaking; Sidney Pitts, State Employment Service, job opportunities in Mississippi; Sam Stafford, assistant superintendent.
Doris Bryant, Baptist Hospital, nursing; Morton Smith, Belhaven College, religious occupations; Genevieve Adams, Hinds Junior College, science; Kent Prince, Hinds, journalism; Dr.
STATE FIRST Exhibit Of Technical Drafting Scheduled For Late April Show As a result of last week’s meeting of the Jackson Association of Professional Draftsmen, an illustrated exhibit on technical drafting is being collected for showing in state junior colleges.
It will later be shown at Copiah-Lincoln, and at other schools on request.
Rayburn, drafting instructor who was among the guests at the planning meeting last Thursday.
The meeting, also attended by Walter Gibbes, vocational coordinator and Wallace Wall, drafting instructor, named as members to Hinds’ technical drawing advisory committee JADP members Mrs.
Advisory committees are 1 a regular part of Hinds vocational instruction.
Composed of persons from the professional world in accordance with state department of education specifications, they guide and suggest curriculums pertaining to their field.
Dwayne Cox Collects Television With a Thousand and One Packs Dwayne Cox, Brandon sophomore dumped 1001 empty cigarette packs on the rec hall floor yesterday and accepted the TV console given away by Philip Morris Co. in its annual College Brand Round-Up.
He announced that Philip Morris will again sponsor a contest next year, and urged everyone to be saving packs during the summer.
He did admit that he had more than the number he submitted, but said he Deadline Advances For Spring Edition Of New Magazine All copy for the spring edition of the Hindsonian Supplement must be submitted by Thursday, April 11 , Dannie Evans, editor, announced today.
Since all copy must be processed before going to the printer, the dead-line was set for next week, Evans explained.
Final allotments of space would save them for a future conhave not been made, he said, so test | any copy will be considered until the f And he doesn’t even smoke.
This phenomenon was entirely in accordance with the new Michigan Coordinating Council for Higher Education policy recently approved by the board of trustees.
Aptheker is a man of little significance to students of Michigan State.
Then, one Robert Thompson, also a Communist speaker, should have been a man of little significance to the students and faculty.
But Thompson was denied—denied because people in powerful positions beyond the boundaries of our campus refused to condone a Communist on the sacred soil of a state-suported institution.
Ultimately, the Michigan State administration did itself succumb to the pressures and banned the Red Suddenly, Robert Thompson became significant to the students and factuly.
Robert Thompson did speak, however—in the back yard of the Delta Sigma Phi fraternity.
Moreover, the two incidents clearly show how crackpots can create and warp issues.
Fortunately, the crack-pots didn t stand a chance this time, thanks to the new policy.
Many are now edging closer and closer to the end of their junior college education, and to them these last few weeks mean much.
They have the choice of raising or lowering their grade averages before the final tally is taken.
All senior colleges analyze the gradesof those transferring from junior colleges, before they are accepted or rejected.
To those who plan to begin work after completion here, the employers are also very interested in knowing what kind of work they did in college.
It is very often representative of the kind of work they will do on a job.
But often, students forget that these nine weeks are as important, if not more important, than the other 27 weeks of each school year.
Grades will soon be received for the first of this semester, and students will know exactly how they stand.
Like one rotten apple spoils a whole basket of apples, so one bad nine weeks of school can ruin a year of education.
Zke UUCUfcciOAU Mighligkts of Minds CURRENT EVENTS Spain No Longer Worldly —-By RALPH HEMPHILL The Spanish Main no longer rules dermine.
PRESS --— JOE WHITE Executive Editor BETTYE SIMMONS LINDA BYRD DWAYNE COX Associate Editor Associate Editor Business Manager ASSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGERS —-Becky Presley, Jim Toombs SPORTS EDITOR ---___ Jim Bonney EXCHANGE EDITOR _ Albert Dahduh ART EDITORS --Gary Cahill, Marcelle McLendon PHOTO EDITORS --Robert Pickenpaugh, Daniel Fazekas NEWS EDITOR ______ Ralph Hemphill CONTRIBUTING WRITERS -Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Viki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogdell, Fred Peyton the seas.
In short, Spain has descended into the deep and away from the arena of world powers.
A brief glance at this nation’s past can only reflect its importance and unfulfilled opportunities.
Spain was once, for a short while, the richest and most powerful world power.
While she drained her colonies 7 gold and parasited on their wealth, the economic base of the 'mother country 7 failed to widen.
She could buy from other European countries the goods she needed with the gold that Europe hungered for.
Britain had long before defeated the Armada in 1588, indicating a weakening of Spanish seapower.
Without the South American colonies, and their primed riches flowing back to Spain, her economy withered like a disconnected vine.
In that year, a revolution in Cuba, marked the ascendency of one new-world nation to the front ranks and the descendency of one old-world power to the lower depths of diplomatic respectability.
Then in 1935, an army general named Francisco Franco flew from Spanish Morocco in North Africa amidst wholesale anarchy against the monarchy, and organized a nationalist revolution.
On the other side were the loyalists or Royalists, backing the monarchy.
As a passing observation, here we have the communists aiding a monarchy, which today is a system they so vehemently denounce and try to unWith the help of the axis, Franco won out in 1939, and instituted a modified system of national socialism in Spain.
Next, the Catholic church was made an instrument of the state, for perpetuating itself.
The generalissimo, as Franco styles himself, utilized the differences between the allies at the close of World War II to stay afloat.
Spain's economy and currency are backed up by the new world again today—American foreign aid.
The lesson of Cuba indicates that, in the long run, the U S. cannot back unpopular tyrants just because they are pro-western and maintain a positive and agile foreign policy.
When Franco goes, those who replace him will not look kindly toward a nation that supported the regime they overthrew.
Lemmon Rates Movietown’s Top Award This Year — By LINDA BYRD — If Jack Lemmon doesn’t win the academy award this year, then you can bet the awards are fixed.
I didn’t say too much when Liz Taylor missed her deserved Oscar for “Suddenly Last Summer” and was given a subsequent one for a film hazard called “Butterfield 8,” but if the ballot men miss giving Lemmon an award for “Days of Wine and Roses,” I shall forever curse the Academy, its directors, its judges and its balloting.
Any, pardon me, fool, who saw ""Days of Wine and Roses"" and missed seeing the range of Lemmon's acting ability, is not only a fool, but a blind one.
Joe, the sweet, innocent raving alcoholic, gives Lemmon the chance to show on which side his bread is really buttered.
Granted, he’s great in comedy, his first love, but as some have always known, he is also great in drama.
Funny, in “Days of Wine and Roses,” I can barely remember what Lemmon wore in any of the scenes, for he played the whole part with his face, more specifically with his eyes.
The audience has a trick pulled on them by the camera and the great director of the film.
One scene in the movie is the couple’s wedding scene and the very next scene is one year, one baby later.
Rapidity of plot progression is a most refreshing thing today, when movies like “The Longest Day” are being made.
To get back to Mr Lemmon, one can hardly mention his name in association with the film without mentioning Lee Remick.
Several remarks were heard in the theatre to the effect that Lemmon could not have possibly been sober during the drinking scenes.
His eyes, his mouth, his movements, everything reeked with invisible liquor.
J He explained that classes will not 1 meet Friday, April 12, Good Friday, because of student cooperation m not missing any classes during second semester registration.
CTowned cirili K SvSrthearf'es^^br'T” PhaU S S a ^ UU0C ^ last sweetheart and hail, Circle K president.
Ceremonies highlighted the recent dance sponsored by the service organization OUT IN SPRING ^TS J' | 9 Organization Appoints * ~ Staff For Future Publications By Lynda Byrd “I feel out of place, but I like it , so saith Ann Stephenson, recently elected Circle K Sweetheart.
Circle K meetings may make her a little nervous, but surely not for long, since Ann will serve as the all-male organization’s official hostess.
She will accompany Circle K on its trip to the annual convention, in Bosier City, La., later this month.
When chosen Sweetheart, Anni was more surprised than anyone but added,” “I was especially happy about the honor since my brother, who attends West Point, was here and attended the dance where I was crowned.
Ann’s father teaches at Hinds and so far she has not had to take any subjects under him. °ug he teaches astronomy Ann s interest lies only in looking through the telescope-not memor izing the constellations.
The pre-med student gets plenty of practice in Mr Beemon’s Zoo 'lab—so much in fact that she may change from pediatrics to surgery.
If she decides against medicine, then perhaps teaching will claim her—either way, she likes science, and it doesn’t take a chemistry major to know she will add plenty of combustibles to raise the spirits of the Circle K members at club time.
Hindsonian Edited By Staff Freshmen In Editors’ Absence Freshmen members of the regular Hindsonian staff assumed editorial responsibilities for this issue of the paper during the absence of several sophomore heads.
Sophomore editor Joe White as sociate editor Betty Simmons,’ and news editor Ralh Hemphill are attending the week-long national Phi Theta Kappa convention in Miami.
FL 2-8331 Organization of the Phi Beta Lambda News Letter, to be published in spring and fall editions, was set up at the recent meeting I of the business fraternity.
I Kathleen Martin, Frances Brown, Elizabeth Oliver and Hintson are typists for the News Letter, which will be released May 1, according to Mrs.
In other business, Gene Jackson, Jackson, sophomore, was elected vice-president to fill that recentlyvacated post.
FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE ° Either in Color or Black and White Standard Photo from St.
H ° ney Anvone care exchange places Cameras; Photo Supplies Finishing Most Folks Say For My Money It’s CAPRI Now Showing “GENEVIEVE” STARRING Kay Kendall BRITISH COMEDY IN COLOR Bctnd, FI iSteppers Entertain Vsterans With Hospital Show Patients and staff of Veterans Administration Hospital, Jackson, formed the audience April 2 for the third annual performance there the Hinds Stage Band and HiSteppers team.
Audience response was warm for the particular show famous for having been performed about 60 times in two years without noticeable changes other than the girls themselves.
Independent Play Scheduled Here; Free Admission Men’s Independent Adult Basketball Tournament will be held April 3-6 in the Hinds’ gym, announced Coach Howard Sessums.
Tomorrow night, Raleigh and the Armstrong Corkers will meet in the first game, followed by Morton and Pelahatchie.
Thursday, Hinds will vie the Intramural All-Stars, and Raymond and White Oak will play.
Friday and Saturday will decide the winners, with semi-finals held Friday and the consolation and final games being played Saturday.
Eagle Thinclads Rolling; Win First Meet Of Year By DARDEN DAVIS Hinds track team scored an easy victory in their season’s opener Saturday against Copiah-Lincoln and Delta Junior Colleges.
They will host the Big-8 Invitational High School meet here Wednesday and will post their record again at home Saturday against Opening the season like a shot, the Eagles won 10 of 13 events for 67 total points.
Co-Lin, their closest competitor, rallied with 41 and a half, while Delta had only 25 and a half.
Percy Boell took the pole vault, and Larry Jones ran on both winning relay teams.
Third place winners for Hinds were Eddie Livingston on the mile, Leon Stewart on the high hurdles, and “Peanut” Smith on the 880run.
Co-Lin was paced by their 6-3 runner Jimmy Young who won the high hurdles, high jump, and the low hurdles.
He also scored second and third places in the pole vault and broad jump.
Larry Ethridge, the only other first place winner for Co-Lin, won the mile.
Hinds was out in front by half a lap at the finish, but because of an out-of-bounds hand-off, they were disqualified.
William Oakes, director of recreation, announced that any group or organization may field a team if they see him before Thursday afternoon.
All games will be played on the field between the tennis courts and Southside Dormitory, with the play scheduled for seven innings, Oakes said.
Contests are slated for 3:50m. following a schedule to be published weekly.
The end of any full inning which begins after 5m. will complete a game, Oakes said.
MERCHANTS & PLANTERS BANK Hinds Meets SW In Tennis Opener Season’s first tennis match is scheduled for Thursday afternoon on the east campus courts, Coach Howard Sessums announced.
Until the end of the season the courts will be held on reserve for the varsity team, he said.
The Eagles, who won all but one match last year, will meet Southwest at 3:30.
Team members are Boyd Me Phail, Billy Joe Montgomery, Tommy Axdale, Johnny Hines, Dickie Leggett, and Doug Sullivan.
NOW YOU CAN BE YOUNGER THAN SHE IS It is a scientific fact that girls reach emotional maturity earlier than boys.
For this reason freshman girls are reluctant to make romantic alliances with freshman boys, but instead choose men from the upper classes.
Thus the freshman boys are left dateless, and many is the night the entire freshman dorm sobs itself to sleep.
With upper-class men being snapped up by freshman girls, the poor ladies of the upper class are reduced to dreary, manless evenings of Monopoly and home permanents.
It pleasures me to report there is a solution for this morbid situation—indeed, a very simple solution.
True, there is something of an age differential, but that need not matter.
Take, for example, the case of Albert Payson Sigafoos and Eustacia Vye.
Blinded by tears, he stumbled upon the supine form of Eustacia Vye, a senior in wicker and raffia, who was collapsed in a wretched heap on the turf.
Two Hinds Students Injured In Collision After Class Monday Two Hinds coeds were injured Monday afternoon when their car was hit broadside on Robinson Road Extension by a speeding vehicle being pursued by a Highway Patrolman.
Second Annual Awards Day Scheduled For Early May Second annual “Awards Day” has been scheduled for May 8, and any departments, organizations, or groups who have presentations to make should contact the Public Relations Office immediately, the Eagle, sponsoring organization, said today. partments chose recipients several weeks ago, the page has already been laid out and pictures taken, she said.
John Hannon, Raymond freshman, was elected second national vice-president of Phi Theta Kappa at the national convention in Miami last week, marking the third consecutive year a Mississippian has been selected a national officer.
He will attend regional meetings this summer, and—along with the other officers—represent the national organization at the American Association of Junior Colleges and the Southern Association next year.
James Pennebaker, Perkinston, served as first vice-president this year, and last year.
Hinds student Jack Roberts, now enrolled at Millsaps, served in the same position.
Guest invitations are being sent to college women in Raymond who are not presently members.
Denton Easter Miracle | mating and campaign speeches at the second general session Friday.
In concluding his speech he expressed his beliefs in the opportunities and importance of the future activities of American youth.
Hannon said, “The symbol of juvenile delinquency is not the true symbol of young people today, but this is the one that is accepted.
We, in this scholastic fraternity, should strive to make PTK a forerunner as a symbol of young America’s progress and willingness to assume responsibility.
Sponsor of Gamma Lambda at Hinds, Miss Mildred Herrin, spoke highly of the new officer.
She reported a long distance telephone conversation Tuesday with the national executive secretary who was quite impressed with the whole slate of officers, and particularly Hannon.
A graduate of Raymond High School, Hannon has an outstanding record of effective leadership.
He was president of the student body, student council, and a member of the Beta Club for three years.
Upon his graduation from high school he received both the English and Math awards.
Other officers chosen at The national convention were Pat Lauderdale of Cameron College, Lawton, Oklahoma, president; Jerry Joyner of Chowan College, Murfresburo.
North Carolina, first viceI president; and Carol Smart of JopBaptist Hospital Tuesday reported that Linda Jacks, driver, received multiple fractures of the skull, leg, and ankle.
Kay Brasfield received multiple abrasions, but was released from the hospital Monday night.
Smith struck the Jacks’ car while being pursued by the Highway Patrol for running a stop sign.
Following the collision Smith and a companion fled their car, leaving a third unidentified person.
The two girls were returning from classes to their home in Jackson when the accident occurred.
Academic honors have already been chosen by departments, and gold plaques are being processed for the ten outstanding studenTs scholastically, officials noted.
Other awards for meritorious performance in various fields will also be made during the program.
Academic awards, which will be kept secret until the assembly, will be based on criterions delineated by the individual departments.
A representative of the department will present the award and explain its qualifications.
Last year, Awards Day was instigated to publicly recognize at one time all the excellent students in the various academic fields.
This year The program has been ^expanded somewhat, but will still keep the form of the one last year.
Next year, the program will probably come under the jurisdiction of the faculty instead of The yearbook, administrative officials noted.
Recipients of awards will be featured in the college yearbook, editor Belva Watkins said.
Since deAN EDITORIAL By JOE WHITE lin Junior College, Joplin, Missouri, historian.
This Sunday, all over the world, people will arise at the crack of dawn, dress carefully and neatly, gather their entire family and head toward some distant hill or clearing.
If they are not a\Ved at the beautiful sunrise they will be by the quiet, simple ceremony to follow.
This day has been set aside each year, just as Christmas, to honor the Saviour who proved that no mere mortals could keep God from having His way.
This miracle not only set an example of faith for the Disciples and their close followers, but for Christians of all eras.
The Bible clearly states these miracles, written by common men who were inspired to do God’s bidding.
The arising of Christ signifies that nothing is impossible as long as one has belief.
Even Jesus’ disciples had fear and misgivings, proving that no man is perfect, and that we should always keep hope.
Attending the services of your choice this Sunday, you, too, will come to know yourself and your God better.
You will certainly feel closer to your church and your fellow church members.
JOHN HANNON National Officer HINDSONI AN Page 2 April 10, 1963 BOLTING BREED CURRENT EVENTS We Will Bury You — Peacefully -By RALPH HEMPHILLExodus Multiplies There’s a time to stand up and be heard, but the middle of an assembly program is not such a time.
For months, plain rudeness and lack of manners have been shown by Hinds students in regard to assemblies.
Sophomores, who are example setters, set such examples as talking during assembly, shuffling their feet and just walking out of the program if it doen’t suit them.
Students are only proving their ignorance and their lack of training, giving a broad hint that either their parents didn’t teach them any better, or they can’t remember what they’ve been told.
Freshmen sit with their heads bowed in reverence to their history books, Birk and Birk, and other texts, but that makes them no angels.
The mass exodus at last week’s assembly was understandable, but nevertheless indicative of the boorish urge to bolt from the auditorium at the slightest provocation.
Absences should be given those who only make a showing for the “roll,” and if the exits continue, those students should be brought before the absentee committee and made to explain their actions.
Kent Prince / “We will bury . you” Nikita Khrushchev bellowed to an Indian crowd in May of 1958.
Plans are underway for a direct communications system between the White House and the Kremlin.
There is some speculation that Nikita is about to have his neck stretched by his Kremlin cohorts because of his passive policy.
Khrushchev is safe as long as he is willing to compromise, because the Red Bosses realize a purge would insinuate a shaky government, and this is hardly desirable in a dictatorship.
This group on the Presidium (the ruling body) that wishes to do away with the party boss are the holdovers from the Stalin era.
They believe in a tougher line or more aggressive approach toward the United States and her allies.
It should be pointed out that even though this later offensive may take longer, it is advantageous to the communists because it is less dangerous.
This agile style has been indicated in the Russian Premier’s speeches, from rockets to rat traps of peaceful coexistence.
To America ‘peaceful coexistence’ can only mean surrender on the installment plan.
Mao Tse Tung of Red China (a Stalinist) would assume a greater role in communist circles.
There would be a closer link between the Soviet and Chinese parties and their varying versions of Marx.
A greater emphasis would be placed on the Orient as an area for expansion.
Even more important in the long run, would be the aftermath of this tough communist line.
It would probably mean the West would return to a NATO type military alliance as a defense.
Since the West, especially in a common crisis, tightens its contacts and defenses, and is superior to the Red block miliatrily speaking, it can only mean the eventual return to the Khrushchev softer line.
Hinds Graduate Continues Study After Accident Three years ago James Robertson, then a sophomore at Hinds, was blinded in an automobile accident.
He never regained any of his vision, but he has almost overcome his handicap by sheer determination.
This is the post Stalin and Khrushchev both held before assuming complete leadership of the Soviet Union.
Polyansky, before assuming this position, was president of the Russian federated Soviet Republic.
He has had executive experience and is reported to be very alert and somewhat popular among the average laymen.
This writer realizes that the ‘experts’ pick Krichenko or Kozluv to succeed the aging Khrushchev, but these same experts never thought that the goblet shaped party crasher of Stalin’s entourage would crash the communist party either.
The future is the plaything of the present, and in dealing with the Soviet Union it is like playing with fire. power.
What’s more important, he hasn’t any known enemies among the Red ruling clique.
Surprising the 1 viewing audience as well as those who personally attended, the Oscar winners were in rare form last night.
Needless to say, Mr Sinatra is no comedian and the show lacked last year’sc.
As someone said, Sinatra has a private sense of humor and his jokes are private.
A little nervous at first, he soon relaxed and showed himself as the real pro he is.
Pros stole the show last night with long respected Hollywood citizen Gregory Peck copping the most coveted award.
Never removing his glasses but showing reserved surprise the “To Kill A Mockingbird” Mr Peck won out over the favorite Jack Lemmon and the supposed winner, Peter O’Toole.
Too bad she couldn’t have accepted for herself—her accent would have won more fans than she already has.
Supporting actor and actress went to the old and the young—the old, but great Ed Beagley, and the young and ever so talented Patty Duke.
Mr Beagley said a hearty thanks to “agent” “Who had more faith in me than I did,” and Miss Duke only muttered “Thank you” through her tears.
Having started rehabilitation soon after his accident by seeking help from the State Rehabilitation Service for the Blind, he was sent to a center in Little Rock, where he was started on “several crafts, writing, typing, cane travel, and even cooking,” he said.
He returned to Hinds, graduated, entered Southern and received a B.S. in political science with a minor in psychology.
Leon A Wilder, chairman of the political science department, said, “We feel that Jimmy is well qualified to accept the responsibilities entailed In a fellowship.
As far as studying is concerned, however, James needed some help. iA group of “readers” included women of B’Nai Brith, Junior Auxiliary members, and cooperative students.
He takes notes in class, and at test time has someone to write down his answers which he gives vocally.
But because of the support given by my family and so many friends, I can look forward to a useful career and a happy life.
True... but they seemed Pit enough, physically speaking X thought so /too... until X performed an autopsy.
General Speaks On State Rivers FOR QUALITY WITHOUT QUESTION April 10, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 In assembly today, Gen.
Army Engineer Division, Vicksburg, explained the importance and organizations of the Mississippi River.
Davis, president of the Commission and Division Engineer of the Lower Mississippi Valley Army Engineer Division, discussed flood control and navigation improvements in the Lower Mississippi River.
He also explained the watershed program of the Mississippi's tributaries over 145,000 square miles in the South-Central United States.
Flood control and navigation, worked through the congressionally established sevenman executive body of the MRC, averages $81 million; and watershed projects, worked epitome of the veteran newsman conversant'on 'anv “subject through the Corps of Engineers, av™ J * J J erages $54 million.
The work of the commission is carried out through the district engineers of three Corps Districts at Memphis, Vicksburg, and New Orleans.
Y., and earned his Master’s degree in civil engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.
Colorful and quotable, Patrick is the under the sun — especially sports, natch.
The Association handbook explains that new circulation records have been set, and new borrowers have appeared.
Appropriations have increased, and new library developments are underway.
But most of all they are people reading and using the accumulated facilities.
During the first week of April— the peak of the term-paper season —Hinds librarians surveyed the number of people using the local library.
Coming into the library in that time were 3,147 people, with the majority being accommodated between 5:30 and 7:30m. during weekdays.
In the last five years the use of Hinds’ library has doubled, head librarian Mrs.
And it is somewhat fitting, though ironical, that the term paper rush comes just before national Library Week, she added.
This week, more than 30 years later, Max “Skipper” Patrick returned to Raymond after retiring from twenty years service as Regional Sports Editor for the Kansas City Associated Press.
Patrick’s newspapering developed early, piddling around the Hinds County Gazette writing space copy for the late Tom Keith, Sr.
Patrick wrote most of the first three or four pages, which Keith Press published free of charge on the condition that he would sell subscriptions.
And eventually sponsors of campus organizations began supplying news, so the paper became schoolsupported.
From 1939-41 he was Director of Public Information at Mississippi State, and in 1942 he joined AP at Baton Rouge, launching an outstanding newspaper career.
For 19 years regional director at Kansas City, Skipper met and was associated with every kind of sport.
SHONEY'S WESTLAND PLAZA Square Dances Set For Thursday Eves Thursday nights at Hinds now feature a new addition, reported Wiliam Oakes, recreational director.
Co-sponsors Oakes and Polly Rabalais, girls’ physical education instructor, have scheduled square dances in the girls’ gym each Thursday night at 6:00m.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK Now Showing “RED SHOES” In Technicolor SUNDAY ONLY First Operetta of Series 'NAUGHTY MARIETTA 7 2:00 & 9:00 Since 1928 he’s missed only three weekends of football during season.
He’s covered games of the Athletics since 1955, and has served on the Baseball Writers’ Most Valuable Player and the Cy Young selection committee. ""i remember one year we left off Ted Williams and picked Nellie Fox.
He also remembers when Casey Stengel managed the Kansas City Blues, an American Association team.
During his four years at Hinds, from 1928-32 when the college was both high school and junior college, Skipper was bell ringer.
I had more fun at HJC—even if the girls did walk one way and the boys another.
At present he is living with his wife, daughter and grandson at their home in Learned.
Coach Howard Sessums, with 19 points, led the Raymond Rustlers to an upset victory over favored Armstrong last Saturday.
Ex-Hinds cagers Gary Carpenter, Harlan Stanley, Johnny Hines, and Johnny Franklin led the General Gas Hustlers.
Carpenter was named to the AllStar first team, and Barnes and Hines to the seconod team.
UP AND OVER — Percy Boell catapults over bar at IT 6” to rank second in the event in Tuesday’s track meet Hinds track jfeam chalked up their second win of the year when Jones Junior College hosted Peikinston and the Eagle unit last week at Ellisville.
Running neck to neck until the final event the Hinds thinclad unit managed a win and overshadowed their hosts by a mere V 2 point.
Hinds grabbeed first place slots and three seconds while Jones won all of the five field events the mile run.
FRESH AS SPRINGTIME — Hinds Honey Linda Yelverton flashes a winsome smile as sunny as the days are of late.
A Jackson freshman, Linda would be a welcome addition to anybody’s pretty picture of springtime.
Due to lack of competition three members of the Eagle unit could not enter action.
Coach Howard Sessums explained few such matchless meets have been scheduled and all should see action in later contests.
DOUBLES Roxie Noblin Ann Stephenson df Maxine Sterling Mildred Sterling 6-0, 6-1.
ALSO ""SUMMER AND SMOKE"" IEASTMANCOLOR [ CARTOONIST CREATES FAD Page 4 Zhe Kittajt-tyii/iia Highlights of Hinds DIRTDAUBERS DISLODGE DOOR Page 5 VOLUME 29—NUMBER 23 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, APRIL T7, 1963 PLANNED FOR YEARS — This is the artist’s conception of the new $300,000 building being built on the Hinds campus.
Two patios will divide the wings of the structure, which will house a library, barbershop and student center for the vocational department.
Though one roof covers the building, a covered walkway will accompany each wing.
The award was given for “excellent” work during first semester this school year.
Features rated a perfect score, with comments given on the variety and timeliness of news-features and straight features.
For accolades in printing, staffers share credit with publishers Keith Press in Raymond.
Medalist is equivalent to All-American in the ACP contest, and only one other college in the nation shared the honor with Hinds.
The contest, widely recognized as one of the most rigid newspaper rating services, is also extensively known for its service to universities and senior colleges.
Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, announced today that participation has begun for the Miss Hinds Junior College Contest May 14.
From Vhis initial judging, twelve coeds will be selected for the final contest. rews Begin Building Of Vocational Center Three Years Of Planning Climaxed With Units Set For Fall Occupancy Workmen last week began construction on Hinds’ $300,000 vocational units, climaxing over three years of planning.
McLendon proudly asserted. ■ This eliminates many of the Circle K Meeting In Shreveort Lures Sizable Delegation Hindsonian Staffers Aim High At Weekend College Press Meet Hindsonian staffers hope to again capture the top newspaper award of Mississippi Junior College Press Association during the MJCPA com vention this weekend at Perkinston.
Having last year swept first place trophies in all but two categories, the HINDSONIAN is again entering all divisions of the contest.
Attending the National Association of Women Deans and Counselors April 3-8, and the American Guidance and Personnel Association April 8-11, Miss Marshall collected some ideas which will have a direct influence on Hinds students, she said.
Both meetings stressed the dormitory as a supplement to the classroom, she said.
Other plans, some involving student responsibilities, will be presented to the administration for consideration, she said.
She explained that both meetings emphasized educating the average student instead of focusing all attention on the exceptional.
She indicated Hinds vocational department and technical division as examples of leadership in this new concept of education.
Editor Joe White, MJCPA president, Friday afternoon will open the meetings and later in the session will conduct election of officers.
The Association includes all 14 junior colleges in Mississippi, and meets biannually.
The contest and annual meeting are staged according to constitutional by-laws designed three years ago.
Other features of the meeting will be the speakers, symposiums, and seminars.
At last year’s spring meeting the Hindsonian captured the best newspaper, news, feature, and cartoon awards.
The group of 14 students will be accompanied by Kent Prince, sponsor of the paper, and Mrs.
Circle K annual district convention, to be held this weekend in Shreveport, will be attended by about 18 local members and the two club sweethearts.
According to club president Boyd McPhail, the group will leave Hinds about 12:30m.
Several members will take cars, and club sponsor Jack Treloar will accompany the members and sweethearts Hilda Bullock and Ann Stephenson.
The convention, with “Education for Freedom” as theme, will be in Shreveport-Youree Hotel.
Featured speaker for the occasion is Jim Matthews of North Carolina, International President of Circle K McPhail outlined the program, which will include a barbeque, meetings, and banquet.
He further commented, “The purpose of the convention is for new members to gain greater knowledge of Circle K activities and administrational work, as well as giving insight to new officers.” financial worries usually focused on large construction projects, he said.
This is the first time a major structure at Hinds will be built entirely by workers other than professional contractors.
JOE WHITE MJCPA Prexy A separate library, barbershop, and student center for vocational students will occupy other portions of the building.
Walter Gibbes, vocational coordinator, stated that “in all probabilities” a grill-like dispenses will be included in the student center.
He explained that the building’s srtucture will allow for additional wings and extensions in the future.
Eventually the entire vocational school will consist of new buildings and machinery, he said.
Although one roof will cover the building, a covered walkway will divide each wing.
As qualified Title VIII Division, the electronics communications, electronics industrial, aircraft maintenance technology, and drafting technology will have government aid for onehalf machine cost and one-half instruction cost.
Already the operational area for the building has been cleared and plotted.
Last week truckloads of cement from Jackson were poured into elongated moulds to form the foundation for construction.
Plans for the building were begun several years ago when a government program was initiated to help colleges build vocational units.
Hinds petitioned for aid and went to Washington to confer with officials, but help fell through.
President McLendon explained that in retrospect it was good that the early program did not develop, because the buildings and facilities would now be obsolete.
When plans for the E-shaped unit were first laid three years ago, many authorities from industry and education were consulted, McLendon said.
In many respects this class seems to be quite representative of most graduating classes everywhere.
The point to be reckoned here is there is an astounding difference between the percentage of boys that graduate and the percentage of girls that graduate.
These figures are not abnormal, for it is the universal opinion that girls are slightly mentally superior to boys.
Men are destined from the time of birth to carry on the affairs of the world.
The reason for such a low percentage on the part of the boys cannot be pin-pointed.
Procrastinatin’ Blues Six weeks of school remain and students are beginning to feel the effects of a slack year.
Reports indicate there is a general rush to college libraries at the end of each semester all over the nation.
Virginia Riggs commented last week on the fluctuation of library visits.
She noted the irony of students flocking to the library facilities only the week before National Library Week.
Of course, that would not solve the problem of student procrastination.
Most people say nothing can be done about it, and we are inclined to agree.
The fault lies within each student, individually, and he cannot be made to do'what is objectionable.
Possibly she is one of those who waits until the last min-i ute to get things done.
However, she did say that she may be most of the summer getting in her homework for this session.
W -CURRENT EVENTS “Signposts For The 60’s” -By RALPH HEMPHILLToday America is at the crossroads of her civilization.
At the end of one road lies complete centralization in the hands of the national government.
Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Viki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogdell, Fred Peyton FACULTY ADVISOR—Kent Prince drag.
We take a sharp left at Harvard, and there it is—a vast wasteland of government controls.
On our right, we see the bones of the Tenth Amendment and the skeleton of States Rights.
Now, as we go up the ramp to the intersection, we are stopped by a red light.
What do we, our generation of life’s tourists and American travelers, deThe legislative represents the will of the people ; the executive represents the will of the government; the judicial represents the will of the law.
Most modern politicians merely milk our sacred cows; Kennedy leads them off to the slaughter.
Services attended by 5,000 were held Monday at Portsmouth Navy Yard for the naval men and civilians who went down with the sub.
At the same time these lost men were being honored, other men like them were trying to unravel the strange mystery surrounding their death.
Only a few days ago the doomed men were alive and readying for their trip to the Atlantic in the recently “overhauled” Thresher.
The men carried out their duties as usual and, as the time approached to ""test,"" the accompanying ship Skylark moved in closer.
As usual new submarines or overhauled ones are accompanied by a sister ship for their first dive, which usually extends to the sub’s maximum depth capacity.
This is precautionary action taken by the navy to insure the lives of the men and to observe the new sub in action.
More important the precautionary ship keeps in contact in case of trouble.
We try to put into words what a little boy has already decided about his daddy, decided and accepted.
Great Expectations The Washington rocking chair will be quite busy this August when the first lady gives birth to her third child.
White House announcements regarding the approaching birth were released Monday.
Grover Cleveland has a presidential wife had a baby while living in the White House.
Kennedy is reported to have conceited all official engagements The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College, Raymond, Miss.
Though th< new Kennedy will be born in Wash ington, the first lady plans to spenc much of the summer on Cape Cod.
Two other Kennedy brothers an going to be passing out cigars als< this summer.
FL 2-6014 Metallics Metal Act Meets Dislike From Many Thinking Collegians Ru I VAAAM tiAAn rBy LYMAN MOORE Since no controversial or comment-worthy subjects were raging this week which Hindsonian policy would permit publishing, the editorial staff turned to a relatively unknown subject the Metallics Metal Act.
David Jones, Vicksburg sophomore, mubled, ""I don't know enough about thfi subject to make a reliable answer.
Mike Hendrix, Jackson freshman asserted, “Most of the metal in the United States is bought from other countries.
George Tannous, Vicksburg sophomore, mused, “Well, actually, I don t think it will stop the depression of the economy.
Congress may do some foolish things, but they are yet to pass a Metallics Metal Act.
Perhaps they will some day—but Hinds students have already registered disap proval.
Psych... psychotic-neurotic Pavlov... bell... lunch whew...pause take a break... things go better with Coke 1 TRADE-MARK ® Bottled under the authority of The Coca-Cola Company by; JACKSON COCA-COLABOTTLING COMPANY By BETTYE SIMMONS Northside Dormitory joined the ranks of other feminine dorms today with the completion of a spacious sun deck.
In the past occupants of the for-sophomores-only dorm have had to track across campus to either Main or Westside to partake of the sun.
The campus maintenance crew, which recently completed a fourplex apartment building for faculty now being occupied, is in charge of the project.
According to Jack Treloar, superintendent of the farm and physical plant, workmen Took time before beginning another faculty home project to supply a lacking Northside with a sun porch.
Located on the original section of the dorm, the deck is 16 by 32 feet, and can accommodate approximately 25 girls.
Steps from the old science building are being used to reach the first level, and then a small hand rail similar to the fire escape at Westside can support sun-bathers to the top level.
Treloar explained that the deck has been in the planning for more than a year A roof garden covering the entire original portion of great amount of weight.
Fences around the sun porches on Main and Westside were added last week, but not necessarily to protect girls from falls.
Completion of the sun decks is part of an $800 project which, when finished, will include a large enclosed patio in front of the campus infirmary.
This patio will extend from the end of Northside to the street corner and will be supplied with chairs, benches, and tables, Treloar said.
IRC Group Makes Plans For Varied Year-End Socials International Relations Club in a business meeting last Wednesday made plans for the annual party President Ralph Hemphill appointed a committee of Jeff Boler, chairman, Jimmy Chandler, and Dawn McNeil to check on possible dates and to plan refreshments.
Displays will be open to the public Saturday morning during judging, Frank Stephenson, district chairman and Hinds physics instructor announced.
He explained that only fifth through twelfth graders who placed in their local Fair will enter here.
The 48 place-winers will progress to the state fair next weekend at Ole Miss.
Over 20 judges from colleges and industries in this area will make the selections, he said.
They will judge on creative ability, scientific thought, applied principles and processes, technical skill, thoroughness, clarity, and dramatic value.
Science Fair is sponsored annually by the Mississippi Academy of Science.
In lieu of the regular evening service, the concert will feature selections of musical periods from baroque to contemporary.
Plans call for several more concert trips and perhaps a spring concert at Hinds.
Arrangements have been made to record several sacred numbers, including selections sung at the State Festival and at the Mississippi Music Educators Association meeting.
Should the tape prove acceptable, a small number of these albums will be available to the public for about $3 each, Reeves said.
By LINDA BYRD Cartoonist plus general artist plus shirt designer equals oceanologist—so hopeth Edmond Alexander, Jackson freshman.
Attending school in Clinton, Edmond had serious thoughts of majoring in art, but once in college turned to science.
Though he has never worked professionally, he has been editor of the Clinton annual and on the art staff of annual and newspaper.
Last week he drew the Hindsonian’s editorial cartoon and, if editors have anything to say, he will do many more before the school year ends.
MAGIC MARKER — Cartoonist, caricaturist and shirt designer Edmond Alexander applies his simple magic marker with sometimes amazing and clever results.
Wilbanks, Parkinson To Present Piano^Voice Recitals Thursday Department of Music will present Peggy Wilbanks and Sandra Parkison in a piano and voice recital Thursday, April 18, at 7:30m. in the Music Auditorium.
Miss Parkison, a mezzo-sporano, will sing “Lasciatemi morire,” Monteverde; “Quando sara quel di,” Tenaglia; “Sento nel core,” Scarlatti; “Habanera” from Carmen, Bizet; “I Saw a Little Sailor,” Warren; “Nursery Rhymes,” Curran; “I Heard a Piper Piping,” Bax; and “Pale Moon,” Logan.
Howard Wilbanks of Carthage, is a sophomore music major studying piano with Mrs.
Miss Parkison, a freshman music education major with emphasis in voice, is the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
The recital was re-scheduled for Thursday after postponement last week because of unecheduled holidays.
Spivey, chief instructor with Southern Bell Telephone Company, spoke Tuesday to Hinds Secretarial Procedures class about means of using the telephone effectively in business and social life.
In opening remarks, Miss Spivey emphasized the importance of the telephone as a medium of communication in business and social activities.
Students viewed a film contrasting the confusion created in an office from answering calls inefficiently and the smooth operation ^resulting when all personnel are trained in the telephone’s proper use.
Miss Spivey concluded the program with a recording depicting the “man-with-a-cigar-in-his-mouth voice,” the high-pitched shrill voice, the mechanical voice, the affected voice, the mumbler, the screamer and the over-anxious voice Animals, grotesque faces, snappy sayings—all are a facet of Edmond Alexander.
The shirts are usually bulky sweatshirts and, according to design complications, average time required to paint such a shirt is 15 minutes.
Beverly Tadlock, Pearl Sophomore, brought home her 46th and 47th twirling trophies last Saturday following competition in the Miss Twirlette of Mississippi for 1063 and the Hinds County Championship Twirling Contest.
Beverly explained that her former instructor, Ella Mae Belcher, insisted that she enter the contest.
Also a teacher, Beverly instructs twirling and dancing for the Jackson City Recreational Department at Battlefield Club House, Level Woods Park, and the JC Park.
Tadlock, Beverly became interested in twirling and bands early in her' life when, during her first and second years of school, she was chosen mascot of the Pearl Band.
Since attending Hinds she has been a feature twirler for the Eagle Marching Band.
Saturday’s event marked Beverly’s second time to be chosen Miss Twirlette; she also won the honor in 1960.
Pore Ole Door Licked , Comes ft 1 11*' 9 I^A mmmmmmmm lumbllll DotVTl Students Evaluate Childish Reaction To 4 See Spot Run’, —Students of the elemen■ tary education department at Long Beach, Calif., thought it would be the childish nature of college stu-, dents when they ""see Spot run."" j As THE FORTY-NINER, campus newspaper tells it, a large spotted instructive if they could evaluate dog was found and the only remaining problem was consent of campus officials to bring the dog on campus.
The committee was sympathetic ^ and felt that to ""see Spot run"" was Jg indeed important.
However, there would be a number of questions to be answered before permission could be granted.
Several committee members also questioned the good taste of unclad animals on a co-educational campus and wondered if indeed this isn’t an injustice to the dog.
It was last Thursday, not a particularly fine Thursday, but patterned after all Thursdays before it—then fate snapped her powerful fingers.
With the mute snap, the music building door fell from its majestic perch, landing with a collapsible thud — making this Thursday a Thursday among Thursdays.
Hitchcock would relish the mystery of it, for not only the door’s birth but its death was a mystery.
Probably long forgotten and nameless carpenters who received orders to supply the music building with a second story door that opened to the outside.
No matter what the reason, the white four-paned glass door has stood plastered against the music building for years, seemingly afraid of falling.
Or it just might be that it contemplated suicide all these years and only Thursday took the final step.
The coed standing under the door when it fell doesn’t know because she never looked up . . . undoubtedly she’s used to falling doors.
Other witnesses, however, noticed the blank wall that stood back to back with the door.
More observant witnesses, however,. noticed something else — something on the wall.
For years they must have tediously built their little nest, anticipating just such a day as Thursday when they would feel fresh air fqr the first time.
Dirtdauber conferences must have been held to plan the expedition that would build the nest so j big and protrude it so far as to push the door forward and down to I its death.
Perhaps it I wasn’t suicide after all . . . but I murder . . . only the nasty little I dirtdaubers know for sure.
Games are scheduled for today and tomorrow at 3:30 on the southside field.
S “ ba “ ing Practi “ the hea^S By DAWN McNEIL Athletics have always been considered a primarily male diversion, yet on H/nds campus the female sex is entering the sports scene via archery, tennis, and golf.
In all the dormitories such terms as par — bogey — and putt are becoming common talk after study hours in the lady bull sessions.
Each afternoon, girls enrolled in the physical education classes spend an hour knocking the miniature balls across the lawn behind the gym.
American scholastic round are items of interest to the lassies engaged in this series of classes.
Tennis, also gaining as a campus sport, has grown to the extent of a team that represents the college against various schools in the area.
Coached by Frank Stephenson, the unit recently won their first match of the session against Southwest.
Patsy Mussleman, Elsa Brewer, Shirley Morris, Karen Perry, Roxie Noblin, Ann Stephenson, Sandra Weaver, and Barbara Clack.
Grabbing a slim second in the meet, Co-Lin totaled 32 3-4 points while Perkinston netted 31.
In the first place slot 11 of 15 times Hinds lipped their opponents while scoringtheir fourth straight win of the season.
Percy Boell, Hinds; Jimmy Voivedrich, Perk; Ricky Hinds track team tallied their third straight victory against Copiah Lincoln Junior College at Wes son last week.
Accumulating an impressive total of 87 points, the Eagle cinder team held their hosts to only 47 in the one-sided action.
Of the 15 events Hinds copped 12 first place slots while Co-Lin grabbed only three.
Winning for Hinds was the 440yard relay team of Jimmy and Jerry Clark, Johnny Hagan and Larry Jones.
Jerry Clark won the broad jump , while Glen Yarbrough led the shot put action.
FILLING A WELL-NEEDED GAP Although my son is a college freshman, I am glad to say that In Wit Tlf ° dto chmb up on my lap and have a heartW i h ° n t , hmgs are troubling him.
From the time he was a little tiny baby he always said he wanted to be a fireman.
It is a full schedule for the young man, and that, in fact, is exactly what we talked about when last he climbed upon my lap.
He complained that every bit of his time is taken up with his major requirements.
They are each Top e bo.f h a PUre White filter and come in soft pa c k or FlipBut I digress.
We were going to take up a topic you are starLwifl «f b6 f P° v . eT . m y°ur busy academic life.
Let us of man hhnilf"" 1 ^ P '° ° f a11 -anthropology, the study Man is usually defined as a tool-making animal, but I nersonalty do not find this definition entirely satisfactory.
Still, when you come to a really complicated tool-like a fmf yPe ’ f ° r lnstan ce—you can be fairly sure it was made by ® 86 Very intelligent tiger.
McLendon has called a faculty meeting for April 25 to explain the new requirements of accreditation for the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.
This new qualitative standard is exemplified in the new teaching requirements.
Now 20% of junior college teaching faculty members must possess the equivalent to three years of study beyond a bachelor’s degree in their particular field.
An institution is to distribute those with more advanced work proportionately among the various departments.
According to McLendon, Hinds will have no problem complying with the new regulations.
The honors sweep of MJCPA, meeting at Perkinston, marked the third major disTechnical Drafting Displays, Symposium Scheduled At Hinds BEST JC PAPER — Receiving the award for the Hindsonjian as most outstanding junior college newspaper in Missisj sippi for the sixth year in a row is Joe White, editor.
The 1 Hindsonian also captured several other individual awards in this year’s MJCPA competition.
TWO YEAR PLAN Data Processing Course Expands Into Program Totaling 69 Hours At a total cost of approximately $120,000 the Data Processing course at Hinds will be expanded this summer into a full two year curriculum.
One hundred copies of the 12-inch disc will be available through reserve sale, Reeves said.
Sacred numbers and selections sung at the State Festival and at the Mississippi Music Educators Association were recorded for the disc.
Edan Holland of Meridian on her firm’s ampex equipment, the record is “a very good example of the degree of excellence that the choir has attained,” Reeves said.
At the first of the year Reeves had noted that the potential of this year’s choir was greater than any choir he had directed.
Sunday, April 28, the choir will present another in a series of sacred concerts for area churches.
Performing in the Methodist church in Madison at 7:30m. they will again present a varied program covering the definite historic periods of music, showing the variance in style of the composers. met March 2, and analyzed the program expansion.
During a special meeting April 16, of the Curriculum Committee, theie plans were submitted, at which time the program neared its final approval before going into effect.
Key punchers and other business equipment will run the figure up about $22,000 more.
The curriculum includes such technical courses as basic computing machines and electro-mechanical, including others for a total of 18 hours first semester of the freshman year.
Data processing and introduction to programming systems are two of the courses composing 17 hours for the second semester.
First semester of the sophomore year will offer the students 18 hours, including computer programming and statistics for Data Processing.
The final semesters work totals 16 hours and includes computer programming II and data processing field project.
The program will consist of 69 semester hours divided into four semesters and spread over two years.
This course is the first of its kind in the Mississippi Junior College circuit and as such will serve the whole state.
A Technical drafting display opens Monday afternoon in the academic building, marking the beginning of the first state wide tour of its kind.
Sponsored by the Jackson Association of Professional Draftsmen, the exhibit includes comprehensive studies of ten professional drafting fields and an array of modern drafting equipment including architectural, structural, medical, and civil drafting fields.
A special symposium of professional draftsmen will close the session Tuesday evening.
Open in Room 14 Monday after 1m., the exhibition will continue all day Tuesday until the symposium begins at 5:45m. in the main auditorium.
Association hopes, through the tour, to attract more girls into the drafting field.
JIM TOOMBS Elected Treasurer tinction presented the Hindsonian this semester.
Others were the Medalist Award — best in class nationwide, shared by only one other paper in the country—from Columbia Scholastic Press Association and first class award from Associated Collegiate Press.
The two-foot high gold trophy conferred on the outstanding junior college newspaper in Mississippi was brought home to Hinds for the sixth year running.
Individual citations snared at MJCPA meet were for sports and student-drawn cartoons.
Joe White, HINDSONIAN editor, received a $250 James Rutledge grant to Ole Miss.
Bettye Simmons, associate editor, was awarded a $600 assistantship in the Ole Miss department of journalism.
Linda Byrd, Hindsonian associate editor, and Dwayne Cox, business manager, were each awarded a $200 grant for the fall quarter at Southern.
Danny Evans, Jackson freshman and Hindsonian Supplement editor, lost southern vice-presidency by one vote.
Placing second in general competition for overall excellence was East Central Junior College’s Tom Tom.
Citations in feature writing, editorials, news stories were spread throughout the 14member association.
Associate editors Simmons and Byrd accepted awards for cartoon editor Marcelle McLendon and sports editor Jim Bonney.
Judges for this year’s competition were Ray Furr, journalism instructor at Mississippi State College for Women; Mary Anne Myers* editor of the Spectator at MSCW; and Gus Anderson, editor of Keesler News, Keesler Air Force Base, who was also banquet speaker.
The annual conference was attended by 14 Hinds students and Kent Prince, advisor to the newspaper.
Page 2 HINDSONIAN April 24, 1963 HINDS-IGHTS A Time To Read ‘‘The time to read is now, not hereafter.
Never put off till tomorrow the book you can turn in without a fine today.
For this is National Library Week, and in many libraries over the country, overdue books may be turned in without fine.
Students and teachers alike will flock through its doors in search of more knowledge.
Whether this knowledge is for a term paper, for class discussion, for a report, or for personal curiosity, the library will serve them well—if the books are there.
We should realize that the books we have overdue are valuable tools for a researcher.
If ever there were an appropriate time to release overdue books, it is now.
These men began drawing possibly for the purpose of preserving ideas and ideals.
Through the centuries processes of the written word have evolved into a highly skilled field, that of journalism.
When the word journalism is mentioned today, one usually thinks of a newspaper — probably because newspapers are present everywhere.
On Hinds campus the student newspaper is a news media dedicated to serving, firstly, the students and, secondly, the institution.
When a story is written,the editors must consider all sides of a question with this in mind.
Persons not connected with a journalistic staff can not feel the sense of responsibility that is naturally tagged with writing a story or stating an opinion.
Our editorial page is dedicated to presenting views of students, and only on this page are such opinions printed.
However, if students feel their newspaper is not carrying out its duty fully or in the best manner possible, they have a method of explaining their views — in letters to the editor, rather than in personal complaints to staff members or administrative personnel.
I’m sittin’ over here in Parchman Farm, ain’t never done nobody no harm.
Mose Allison may agree that ""shootin' my wife"" ain't too much, but Mississippi officials think differently.
In fact, there is an institution up in the delta that houses just such opinionated people.
Last week sociology classes, accompanied by their sponsor Miss Susan Brown, investigated the facilities for lawbreakers in the state by visiting Parchman Prison.
The most surprising thing was the students' disillusionment in prison housing.
Surprising also is the fact that “Black Annie” is still tops in discipline.
Students were corrected when referring to her as a “whip” —she is supposedly only a “strap.” j This then is supposed to straighten j out trouble makers and make them more responsible citizens.
Only as large as the smallest bathroom, it is completely dark and on occasion has had as many as 20 guests at one time.
Forgetting maternal instincts and womanly feelings, I must admit that the prison is seemingly well run and the prisoners’ natural needs satisfied.
Hinds students were treated— *nd I do mean treated—to a performance by one of the Negro bands, conducted by one of the state choral employees.
When one of the Hinds delegation asked if the band could play “Hit the Road, Jack” ... a humorous Louis Armstrong type answered “I wish we could hit the road, Jack “rf^ PAZK —-""I W oaiVtt'T fZZCOfiAMBM (AO TOO fAfr C< --CURRENT EVENTSTax Cuts Versus Stability -By RALPH HEMPHILLTax cuts versus tax stability is the discussion topic presently most common on capital hill.
Wilber Mills , chairman of the House Committee dealing with taxes, is expected to run the Kennedy tax reform bill through the mill.
Regardless of the fate of the administration’s proposal, congress is due to take some bite out of the government’s bark for revenue.
Previous proposals have seeped through the halls of congress and crawled through cloakroom committees, only to be tabled.
This time the initial bill comes from the White House, though, and has an air of urgency about it.
President Kennedy has long promised tax reform, and there is little doubt that it is needed, but not necessarily in the Kennedy form.
In 1952, the average American paid $65 a year out of his income to support the government.
In Mississippi the cost | of government to the individual was $92 last year, or $21 below the national average.
To back up their point they rely on the theory of increasing cost of government.
This theory is based on the fact that as our population increases it becomes more interrelated and dependent on the government.
While in the last 10 years our population has increased 15. percent, the tax rate per person has risen 43. percent over this same period, or almost three times the population rate of growth.
Most alarming of all is the fact that despite this rise in government income the national, state, and local debts are still rising.
The obvious conclusion is that we j are spending money we do not have j for things we could get along withI out.
Walter Heller, chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, claims that a tax cut plus I a big increase in the size of the deficit will spark an income upturn in the United States.
Looking at this scheme from a more business like point of view, would not or could not this program just as easily lift the lid of inflation and destroy overseas confidence in the dollar; while at home could it not cause the businessman to lose confidence in the economy and not expand.
The only practical approach to the problem seems to be a spending cut by Washington as well as a tax cut.
Heller argues that the economy needs government spending since it is one of America’s biggest customers.
If this beso, it is high time for a reform in government spending as well as a good time for tax reform.
Page 4 HINDSONIAN April 24, 1963 Herrington, Breitling To Present Fifth In Series Of Music Recitals Hinds department of music will present Russell Herrington, baritone, and Donna Breitling, soprano, in voice recital Monday April 29.
Danny Fazekas, staff photographer, has secretly taken a photograph, blown up its dimensions, and reproduced it for the paper.
Students may obtain entry blanks from page three of this issue if they think they have correctly guessed the identity of the picture.
These entry blanks must be filled out in front of a HINDSONIAN staff member in the student publications office before noon Thursday.
This entry must be filled out according to school time and correct to the nearest minute.
No paper staff member or instructors are eligible to enter the contest.
If no one guesses the correct entry for this week, the contest will be continued with a new picture, Fazkas said. will be at 7:30m. in the music auditorium.
Herrington, a sophomore music education major presently serving as music director for Richland Methodist Church of Plain, is a student of Mrs.
Herrington of Jackson, Herrington plans to attend Mississippi College next year.
RA^IN, RAIN — Glenda Milner, Jackson sophomore, doesn’t seem to mind wet weather at all.
SWEETHEARTS ALSO ATTEND Hinds Circle K Wins Two Awards At Tri-State Convention Recently Circle K members late Sunday j placed third in oratorical contest, returned with two awards from the j and the club as a group won the fourth annual district convention in travel award, a special recognition Shreveport.
WHAT? — Students who guess the contents of photograph may win two free 45p.m. records of their choice.
On page 3 of this issue is an official entry blank If fiHed in correctly and returned to a Hindsonian staffer in the .student publications office before noon tomorrow, the blank will be an eligible entry.
Stogner , Abernathy Head Positions In Language Group Eugenia Stogner, Tylertown freshman, has been elected president of Modern Language Club for 1963-64, and Dianne Abernathy, freshman from Vicksburg, has been chosen vice-president and program chairman.
The club at that time agreed to postponed elections of a secretary and reporter.
Program for the meeting consited of a taste of France, Spain and Mexico.
Out-going president Bettye Simmons appointed a committee to plan the annual spring outing.
A report will be presented to members at the next scheduled meeting. tance.
Having met classes on membership, administration, projects and services, and officer training, the group returned with new ideas and projects for the coming year, president Boyd McPhail said.
Easterwood, Steve Erwin, John Fitzgerald, Jack Herring, David Jenkins, Woody May, Billy Joe Montgomery, Jack McCaskill, Marcell McLendon, Mike Oliver, Fred Peyton, Clyde Pullen, Chris Pullen, Chris Sparkman, Vaughn Varnado, Bill White, and McPhail.
Band, Hi-Steppers Will Open Annual Festival Of Talent Hinds show band and an aggregation of Hi-Steppers will open the first annual Spring Festival of Talent April 26 in the Jackson City Auditorium.
The Festival, sponsored by the Jackson Federation of Women's Clubs/ will featul| entertainers from over Mississiplu in a benefit performance for the Jackson Occupational Training Center for the Blind.
Anna Bee, HiStepper choreographer and one of the directors of the Festival, tentative plans call for the Hinds group to present their complete floor show including the ""mambo,” ""modern jazz,” and ""grand exit” at which the group is particularly adept.
As in previous performances this year, the fast paced numbers will feature colorful and assorted properties, Mrs.
Bee said, but introduced at the festival will be new, flourescent costumes.
Other talent scheduled to perform include Miss Mississippi, Miss Junior Mississippi, pianists, quartets, and contortionists.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK MORE TO COME April 24,1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 Campus Invaded By High Schools For Track, Science Fair, Tests The campus has in past weeks been the animated scene of high school events including track meets, piano recitals, a science fair, and the fearsome American College Testing exams.
Last Saturday winners in District IV Science Fair were announced even as, in another part of the Hinds building complex, scores of seniors labored over the ACT queries which are required for entrance Pianists, Songsters To Exhibit Talents In General Recital On Thursday evening, April 25, a general recital of piano and voice students of Mrs.
Joan Lynch and Rex Tatum will begin at 7; 30 in the auditorium of the music building.
Performing in the general recital will be Sandra Parkison, Gary Kea, Carol Puckett, Peggy Wilbanks, Nancy Smith, Henri Lou Coleman, Peggy Smallwood, and Barbara Parkman.
Miss Parkison will play Chopin’s “Nocturne in E Minor;” Kea, Rumanian Folk Dances by Bartok; Miss Puckett, “Intermezzo in A major,” by Brahms; Miss Wilbanks, “Sonata in G major” by Haydn; Miss Jones, “Nocturne in F minor,” by Chopin; Miss Smith, “Prelude in D minor” by Bach; Miss Coleman, “Prelude in G minor” by Chopin; Miss Smallwood, “Roxalane Variations” by Haydn.
Miss Parkman will sing Musett’s waltz from La Boheme by Puccini and “Deh nieni, non tar dar” from Le Nozze di Figaro by Mozart. to most state colleges.
In the past few weeks track season has initiated both the Capital Athletic Conference and the Magnolia Athletic Conference on Hinds popular “red dog” track.
Coach Joe Renfroe has announced that even more high school meets are slated for the late spring season.
On April's first Saturday, curtain went up in main auditorium on the District IV high school piano contest.
Sixty entrants were arranged in several categories—among them five solo, duo-piano, and duet contests.
Entrants appeared from high schools in Jackson, Vicksburg, Yazoo City, and Clinton.
Swarming in a range of transportation from horses to model-T’s, they lit erally took over, routing students and teachers alike from classroom and meeting hall.
Meanwhile the campus girded itself for the post-graduation takeover of the 2000 boys starters.
CAPRI NOW SHOWING “DIVORCE ITALIAN STYLE” Starring MARCELLO MASTROIANNI HOLE NINE — A Hinds student takes advantage of free access to the nine-hole golf course which surrounds Raymond Lake.
Also available for student use is a spacious lodge complete with kitchen facilities.
Taking a quick survey of Mississippi schools, one would find very few, indeed.
Raymond Lake was built in the late thirties by the WPA and used exclusively for fishing.
The present lodge was added some years later by the Jackson Optimist Club who used it until 1948 as a boys camp during the summer months.
In the early fifties President George McLendon saw the possibility of creating a recreational area not only for the college, but for the Jackson area as well.
Upon securing the property from the county, the college sponsored an extensive program of improvement.
Caretakers were hired to be on duty around the clock, and a caretaker’s cabin was built.
Since 1955 the boat docks, bath house, beach and picnic areas have been added.
Jack Treloar, superintendent of the farm and physical plant, explained that plans are now completed to enlarge the course to 18 holes by mid-1964.
Charge for use of the course is only 50c for visitors and no charge for Hinds students presenting activity cards.
Before the opening of Lake Hico and other lake resorts, Raymond Lake was the center of boating activities in the surrounding area.
Despite its competition, Raymond Lake still has all it can safely handle.
Lodge facilities were also revamped and now include a spacious recreation room with fireplace, screened in porch, and a kitchen equipped with a stove, refrigerator and limited supply of kitchen utensils.
Organizations from Hinds have free access to the lodge, but any group can rent it for only $10.00 by making reservations with Mrs.
College groups from Millsaps, Belhaven and Mississippi College frequently rent the building, according to Mrs.
Charge for swimming is 10c with Hinds students again gaining free admittance by presenting an activity card.
Case announced the guards this season will be Steve Erwin, Natchez sophomore; Ken Johnson, Clinton sophomore; and Robert Everett, Vicksburg freshman.
Spring Supplement Nears Completion The Spring Hindsonian Supplement is in its final stages this week, announced Dannie Evans, supplement editor.
No definite date has been decided upon for publication, but it will be finished as soon as possible.
This edition of the magazine will feature a color picture on the cover and an all new inside appearance, Evans stated.
It is hoped this edition will exceed the Christmas supplement, he added.
Lane Moak Pontiac HIGH FLY — Pete Smith, Jackson freshman day student, catches an infield pop-up while patching for the Jackson day student team which went down in defeat to Southside Monday in intramural play.
Intramural Contests Continue Intramural softball has gone into full swing, and teams are playing four games a week on the field behind Southside.
Competition is close, stated Bill Oakes, recreation director, and everyone is invited to attend the 3:45m. games every afternoon.
Hinds, SW Tennis Teams Rained Out On Summit Court When the bottom dropped out, so did Southwest’s chances for a comeback victory over the Hinds racquet team.
The deluge came as Hinds was evidently heading for victory Tuesday at Summit.
With only three courts, available, the teams could only play three matches at a time.
Hinds won all three of the first matches and were ahead two out of three in the second round when the rain came.
Girls Doubles-Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson over Maxine Sterling and Sue Dunn—6-2, 6-1.
Boys Doubles —Leslie Cohter and Walter Bishop behind Buddy Addison and James Dunn—6-2, 1-1.
Page 6 HINDSONIAN April 24, 1963 Thinclads Win 5th Straight Saturday In Four-Way Meet Hinds’ thinclad unit won their fifth straight meet last Saturday at Senatobia by dropping East Mississippi, Mississippi Delta, and host Northwest Junior Colleges.
Scoring an iimpressive 61 points, the Eagle aces held Northwest to 41 and East Mississippi to 35.
Hinds grabbed nine first place slots in the 15 event match to cop the honors.
In winning, several outstanding team members showed their colors in the meet.
Coaches Joe Renfroe and Ivan Rosamond supervised and aided in most of the construction of the track.
Just last Saturday he took the 13 foot pleasure craft to Greenville and was running with the winners when a bad wave flipped the craft.
But this one accident didn’t dampen his determination, for next month a massive rally at Monroe, La., will see the 50 horsepower craft back in action.
Greenville has been my jinx I guess, I flipped there last year and again this time.
NOTICE District 6 track meet will be hosted on the Hinds track Friday, April 23.
Track teams from all A-AA and B-BB high schools will participate in activities.
The event is the first step of elimination toward state high school championships for the state.
Heaps Up Praise Only a year ago Hinds completed an $11,000 rebuilding job on the Eagle Stadium track.
Ranking as one of the finest in the state, the track this year has received praise from coaches and pressmen around the area.
Much of this praise cart only be directed at the persons responsible for this massive change from the old dilapidated black cinder surface to the present moden^fred dog"" surfacing.
In addition the broad jump and pole vault pits are completed for the first time this year.
Much of the labor was supplied by the Hinds County Penal Farm inmates; however, Renfroe and Rosamond did a lot of the work themselves.
In completing the track top competition has found its way to the new lightning fast arena and the Capital and Magnolia Athletic Conferences have used the track for their meets.
The annual district races are scheduled for this Friday, thanks to the planning of the athletic department.
Coaches from around the area have nothing but praise for the way the track has developed and it’s a sure bet that in years to come the Hinds track will be much in demand as schools of the area stage meets.
ONE OF THE FINEST EQUIPPED and MODERN OPTICAL LABS • CONTACT LENSES • ARTIFICIAL EYES FITTED FITTED AND GROUND • SUNGLASSES FL 2-7625 JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI 1000 N State HINDS SOPHOMORE Jerry Ainsworth readies boat in preparation for next month’s big race in Monroe, La.
McLendon attended a called meeting of presidents of Mississippi Junior College Association Tuesday to discuss new standards of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.
Meeting at the State Office Building, the group discussed the changing standards of accreditation and considered legislation about state association standards.
At that time legislation will be passed on conditions for eligibility of attendance in all Mississippi junior colleges.
Zhe Officials Sanction New Constitution Loflin Improving Following Injury In One-Car Crash Hinds student Frank Loflin is reported “improving” at the Baptist Hospital following serious injuries sustained in a one-car accident at Manhatten and Benning Roads last Friday evening at 7:15.
Jackson police investigating the accident said that Loflin, along with Patty Bruner, 2271 Hartfield, was thrown from a 1960 Triumph convertible after driver Stuart D Abshire, 3414 North State, lost control of the vehicle.
Highlights of Minds HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 1963 Presidents Council Will Present Proposal For Students’ Approval Hinds proposed constitution and student association received administrative sanction Monday; if passed by the Presidents Council tonight they will next week be submitted to the student body for final approval.
FOUR APPROVED Staff Considers Numerous Reports In Initial Self-Study Conference representation and participation, the Associated Student Body would go into full ooeration next fall.
A senate with almost 50 representatives from campus organizations, dormitories, and groups of day students would replace the present council.
Hinds only student government now consists of class officers and renresentatives of every campus organization, headed by president of the sophomore class.
Presidents Council constitution committee, appointed in November by president George 1 Tannous, completed proposals two weeks ago and submitted them to the administration.
Proposals passed by the senate will be submitted to the ASB president for approval.
Each commission will be headed by a student appointed by ASB president and approved by the senate.
The senate will act on all student proposals with each dorm, campus organization, and every 50 day students represented by one senator.
Lucien Hodges refused to suggest a date for Loflin's release, but saidy ""He will be all right.
Family sources stated that Loflin is still in a coma, but has revived long enough to recognize those around him.
The car skidded 94 feet to the side, hit a ditch, turned over, then i traveled some 54. feet north.
Kathy Kilby Schedules Recital Featuring Music Masters Sunday To better coordinate student activities, a steering committee will Kathy Kilby, pianist, will be pre -1 following the recital.
First president and vice president will be elected before end of this semester, replacing the respective freshman and sophomore officers.
Next year, the remaining class offices will be replaced by the new ASB heads.
Judicial council of three shophomore girls and three sophomore boys — chosen by the student officers and executive committeewill review senate proposals and executive orders for constitutionality.
The council may also submit recommendations to the executive committee.
May 5, at 3m. in the main auditorium, sponsored by the music department.
To Daniel F Fazekas, Hindsonian photo editor, who in the face of overwhelming odds carried out orders from superiors and did indeed get pictures of the annual campus bee swarming.
These committee reports will later be compiled into a projective picture of Hinds; it will then be edited and printed.
Each member of the visiting committee and the SACS will receive a copy.
For two years she has accompanied both individuals and groups in various campus performances.
District talent winner of Mississippi Farm Bureau last year and state talent winner this year, Miss Kilby is a student of Mrs.
She will perform the Prelude and Fugue in B-flat minor by Bach; Sonata in E minor by Haydn; Gen eral Lavine, La Terrasse des Audeinces du Clair de Lune, and La Puerto del Vino, preludes by Debussy; and the Rhapsody in G minor, op., no. by Brahms.
The public is invited to attend the program and the reception at the ASB president and vice president, president and clerk of the senate, treasurer, and chairman of the five commissions.
Members of the constitution committee were George Tannous, Billy Joe Montgomery, Bill Dunlap, Dottie Breakfield, Joe White, and Hemphill.
Mayo answered, “Hinds will look-1 Miss Kilby’s home in Raymond KATHY KILBY In Sunday Recital Band, Hi-Stepp ers Entertain Agents Of Insurance Firm The Band and HiStepper floor show group will perform Thursday morning for the state convention of the Interstate Life and Accident Insurance Co.
The two-day convention will be held on the roof of the Heidelberg Hotel.
The usual show will be presented. ji Page 2 HINDSONIAN May 1, 1963 CURRENT EVENTS Mans Morals Evolve In the evolution of the animal kingdom, man is not the first to judge intellectually.
Man is, however, the first, and thus far, the only animal to judge with a moral intellect.
This single factor above all others has made him superior to lower animals who act primarily by instinct.
Anderson, president of the Mississippi Academy of Sciences, concluded that the moral sciences are the most vital.
As a matter of fact, it is possible to have high morals without being Christian.
Our regard for sex, the rights and property of others, truth and honesty in all its forms — these are covered by the word moral.
The decline of the Roman Empire went along with the moral degeneration of its citizens.
It is frightening that dishonesty is either above or just below the surface in so many human beings today, especially in the young.
Of even more concern is the seeming half-acceptance of this in many quarters as apparently inevitable.
Yes, they are; they are defrauding insurance companies, embezzling funds, hiring “ghost writers,” cheating on exams.
And Hinds is no different than the rest of the world — everybody’s doing it here as well.
But the complex society we have today can exist only because enough people still live with high moral standards.
Just think, our banking system, our installment plan — both are based on the honor system.
The great wonder of man, as we said earlier, is supposed to be his supreme talent for putting himself under the disciplined control of his mind.
Again in evolution, the animal kingdom evolved part by part, not as an entirely new animal.
S “They Have Their Day And Cease To Be” Positions Wanted School is ending, and time is here for job-seekers to begin work, finding jobs.
Those who have had previous experience trying to locate jobs know that when they begin pounding the pavement all is not well with the world.
Many is the time when sought-for employers turn away applicants before they have gotten the words out of their mouths that they are seeking work.
Perhaps even more discouraging is when an applicant is led to believe that there is hope for a job, and then waits for word from that employer, only to be disappointed by no correspondence.
More and more it becomes evident that the only way to find employment is through the grapevine of influence.
Or know someone that knows someone that knows someone in an important position.
Each year more of these difficulties are found, and each year solutions are found for some of last year’s problems.
If one keeps looking for a job long enough, he will soon run out of problems and have an occupation.
E Every politician has his day, every Democrat has his way—or so it used to be in Mississippi.
Raymond Moley, nationally recognized journalist, stated in Jackson Saturday that the Governor’s race in Mississippi is the hottest political story in the country.
The reasoning behind this pivotal position is probably that Rubel Phillips is coming out stronger than first expected.
If he should win the governor's chair, this would indicate that Republican strength in the South is stronger than Republican voter appeal in the North.
Since the South is Goldwater’s, stomping grounds, and the North is Rockefeller’s roost, a win in Mississippi would forecast greater days in Dixie for the Republicans, and sadder days to come for the Democrats.
With the South in his pocket at the time of the GOP convention a year from this summer, combined with Barry’s Boosters from the West, it could be Goldwater from the word go.
Regionally, the South’s tax collections for 1963 were the largest in the nation.
In the South $5. billions were collected by state governments, but in the Northeast it was $5. billions, $5. billions in the North Central region, and $4 billions in the West.
What is more remarkable is the fact that the 1963 national average for per capita taxation ran over $112.
Despite the fact that Southern State governments have more revenue than their “rich” Northern and Western counterparts, the per person tax levy is lower.
The South has 57. million people within its bounds, or more than any other section of the country, this means more representatives in the lower house of Congress from the South than any other section.
From Virginia through Texas and from the bottom of Missouri to the tip of Key West lies an area that should be the core of America.
In the past, the South has contributed more in advancing the nation than any other section.
How best to preserve those prin-By RALPH HEMPHILLciples of advancement seems to be the problem now.
Closer unity among the Southern states is an answer almost everyone agrees on.
Our state leaders have chosen the path of nonalignment with either of the two major parties.
In the last presidential election we tried to make the South the national pivot by going unpledged.
In 1964, an opportunity affords itself in the person of Barry Goldwater.
A man whose banner of conservatism all the South will unify under, and under which a large part of the rest of the nation will sheRer itself from self-suffocating socialism and a no-win foreign policy.
When one votes for governor this coming November, remember the vote is also whether the election one year later will be worth voting in.
The first stated sin is the philoso-1 phy of Addicus Finch, head of the \ memorable Finch family.
The secj ond sin is the philosophy of an underpaid columnist whose words j appear here.
Now, in contradiction, I wholeheartedly agree with the academy's choice of Gregory Peck for the best actor of the year award.
Not only does he suit the part as perfectly as Clark Gable did Rhett, but Mr Peck has a unique way of playing the role of Addicus Finch with his face ... not his voice, but his face.
Of course this doesn’t mean there were no screaming and there were no emotions.
Mr Peck simply showed his feelings through his facial expressions and not his voice.
Sharing the spotlight with Gregory Peck is a little girl of indeterminate age, named Mary Badham.
In fact, as Scout Finch, she steals scene after scene from the professional Mr Peck.
Harper Lee, the author, must have also had Mary in mind when she wrote the recollections of a Finch child.
Even the mature voice that commentates the movie’s story, sounds very much like the outspoken one of the youngest Fin outspoken one of the youngest Finch.
Undoubtedly Robert Mulligan, director, must be a genius to squeeze so much enthusiasm from the two child actors.
Naturally the movie version is not as complete and detailed as Miss Lee’s original work.
It must be understood, however, that the movie medium and the printed word are vastly different.
If you go expecting a word by word account of the novel . . . then don’t bother buying a ticket.
Zhe KtlCL»fcCRt/ilC ——Highlights of Hinds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager \SSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGERS_Becky Presley, Jim Toombs SPORTS EDITOR ___-_-—Jim Bonney EXCHANGE EDITOR _ Albert Dahduh \RT EDITORS —-_1.
Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Funior College.
A motion was also passed by the group to delay election of other officials until next year.
She stated that two returning members will be selected by Miss Stogner next year to act as vicepresident and secretary at the initiation of new members.
At the same meeting plans were ; discussed for a Phi Theta Kappa picnic at Raymond Lake-Lodge.
Funds for the picneic will be provided through the club treasury, Miss Coleman reported.
Belva Watkins, editor of Eagle yearbook, announced today that the staff plans a summer publication date.
According to Miss Watkins, “No one likes to sacrifice quality for quantity.
The staff plans an early August | edition of the yearbook, changing to a schedule which many senior colleges and universities throughout the United States are finding convenient.
Hurley Comoany in Camden, Ar kansas will have a longer time work on the book and can take mo pains with it.
Annuals will be mailed to students who do not return this summer, she said, but plans have been made to host an annual-signing party during mid-August for students who wish to return.
Photo Contest Continues; Fazekas Revamps Rules, Time Extended Danny Fazekas, H ndsonian pho1 the winner each week to editor, announced yesterday a New rules direct students to use revamped schedule for the contin-, the entry form found on page three ued photograph contest.
Werlein’s of this issue, and fill in their guess Music Company m Jackson will as to the correct identity and locagive away two 45 rpm records to [ tion of the object.
The only formal program to be given locally by the choir this season, the concert should ""be the high point of campus musical activities this spring,"" Reeves said.
Set for evening in the main auditorium, the program will include various selections.
In last week's contest about twenty persons correctly guessed the photo's identity, Fazekas said, but Walter Bishop, Jackson sophomore, entered the most correct description.
Since Bishop’s entry was filed only one hour before deadline, paper staff members decided to revamp the contest rules.
Miss Jackie Mayer, reigning Miss America, will be guest of honor and will be feted by Mrs.
Bee will, in turn, be a guest J An added feature, he said, will be two sets of secular songs presented by the girls ensemble.
Reservations placed immediately with Reeves will insure receipt of of Mrs.
BRANCH OFFICES AT WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK Photo Contest Entry Blank Name __ Time Turned in Staffer who received guess My Guess is:_ QYerL J eiyi s for Music Netters Major Setback On Home Court Hinds tennis team suffered its first major setback of the season at the hands of Jones Junior College here Thursday afternoon.
Hinds lost five and won three of the eight matches allowed against fending state champion, Jo n e Hinds also won one of the extra matches.
Remaining undefeated in the singles are Boyd McPhail and Walter Bishop.
Billy Joe Montgomery and Johnny Hines, and Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson.
Several team members were unable to participate because of lack of competition.
However, Frank Stephenson, physics instructor and girls’ tennis coach, promises more competition in the meets ahead.
Hinds again meets Jones Thursday, May 2, and meets Perkinston Junior College the following Tuesday.
Hinds will host the Junior College State Tennis Tournament here May 11, beginning at 8:30 LOOKING BACK TO SEE — Johnny Hines suspends in midair to check a passed ball in Thursday’s meet here with Jones.
Eagle Trackmen Run Over Opposition In Home Meet Hinds Eagles soared around their new “red dog” track yesterday and captured top honors in a six-way thinclad invitational.
Running what might have been a preview of things to come in the State Junior College meet to be staged at Hinds next month, the Eagles walked away with a total of 63 points for first place honors.
Jones Junior College tallied 41V2 for second while Holmes J.C., gathered 35V2.
None of the times recorded were below the state junior college records, however.
Only one entry got his name in the first place column more than once during the affair, Jerry Clark, fleet-footed Hinds ace, grabbed wins in three individual events and ran with the three winning relay squads.
He later copped a tie for the blue ribbon in the high jump with a leap of 5 feet 9 inches.
Perkinston claimed 3 first place ribbons in the meet while Holmes gathered 2 and East Mississippi 1, Hinds Thinclads Capture Sixth Win; Score 69 Points In Canton Track Meet By DARDEN DAVIS Hinds Junior College track team scored an impressive victory in their sixth meet of the year at the Canton Junior College Invitational meet last week.
Holmes was in second with 42, East Mississippi was in third with 41; Mississippi Delta, fourth with 37, and Co-Lin last with 31.
The most impressive times in the running events were turned in by Hind's relay teams and Woody Martin's half mile effort.
The three relay teams consist of Johnny Hagan, Larry Jones, Jerry Clark, Jimmy Clark, and Darden Davis.
The times on the 440, 880, and mile relays were 44.6, 1:31.7, and 3.28. seconds consecutively.
He turned in a time of 2:03. and has high hopes of lowering it to the one-fifties.
Johnny Hagan, a Hinds freshman, won the low hurdles for the first time this year.
The pole vault ended in a duel between Jimmy Boatner of East Mississippi and Percy Boell of Hinds.
Boatner wound up in second place in the pole vault, but got a first in the high jump.
The weight men battled it out in the discus and shot put, but George Benton and Glenn Yarbrough of Hinds were victorious.
Jimmy Boatner, East Mississippi; Jerry Clark, Hinds; Larry Nix, Co-Lin; Billy Ellis.
HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITH0 NEGATIVES & PLATES P.0.
The cover of this week’s special edition of the Hindsonian features the court house in Raymond, built entirely by slave labor in 1857-59.
The building was also used as a hospital for Confederate soldiers during the Civil War.
S'.nce this week Raymond commemorates its Civil War battle the Hindsonian naturally fell into the frenzy of interest and decided to publish a special eight-page edition.
Thanks go to citizens of Raymond, business establishments and college instructors and students who provided information for this edition.
A town so full of pre-war relics as Raymond provides a natural setting for memorable commemorations.
Each year townspeople gather to honor the soldiers who fought for individual rights and for their homeland.
To those honored individuals we dedicate this issue of the Hindsonian along with our respect and gratitude.
We are a UNITED States of America and now combine efforts with all areas of the country to make and keep this the best country possible.
Extra numbers are being printed of this issue to be inserted in the Hinds County Gazette, Edwards Hummer and Utica Advertiser.
Anyone who tries to answer this question in its stated form is a complete imbecile, and those that ask it are hopeless.
Not only is the question poorly stated, but its word usage is deplorable, gg Only depraved anima^i celebrate a date which brought death to thousands.
Is this what the Southern people are? . . . depraved beings who cheer and laugh on a date when a hundred years ago, there was no cheering or laughing, only silent trickles of blood down silent faces.
I hardly think the Southern people or the so-called Yankees think of themselves as such inhuman machines It’s true that during the I Centennial of the Civil War, Southerners open antebellum homes, invite visitors to pilgrimages, wear hoop skirts and add extra syllables to their already elongated drawls.
There is something in war worth honoring, however ... the men and their causes.
The men who fought the battles, the men who walked the miles, the men who N were hungry, and the men who died.
Some never went more than five ' _ j tniles from home and yet they j . . . they fought at home.
Their cause was not slavery as the world thinks, but these grey clad soldiers 1 real cause was ""state's rights."" -CURRENT EVENTS What Saith The Loser? -By RALPH HEMPHILL“War is hell,” has not been said burg.
Then on the nights of April yet, but the events causing its ut-1 16 and 17, something happened terance are taking shape.
Grant I that changed the course of the war. has come down the Tennessee 1 Seven transports slipped under the Zhe PRESS —highlights of Minds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager ASSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGERS ___Jim Toombs, Billy Lee SPORTS EDITOR-Jim Booney, Asst.
Dannie Evans, Virgil Leonard, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogdell, Fred Peyton River, and the South has lost at Shiloh, Chattanooga, Knoxville and Memphis.
It might have been better for the South if Forrest had been at Vicksburg, instead of General Pemberton, who was a political appointee more than a general.
The campaign against Vicksburg was an integral part of overall Northern strategy.
First, an “ironclad” blockade of all Southern ports, to cut off aid from Europe.
Second, split the South in two parts, using the Mississippi River as the dividing line.
Situated high on its loamy bluffs, it is a natural fortress guarding its river passageway.
Seemingly, nature had long before placed and planned the most decisive battle of the Civil War.
Thousands of years before, she had caused wind storms that picked up dust from A cow turned over a lantern in,■Chicago, turning that city into a Tennessee, West Virginia, and some blazing hell.
In the war between * Northern sTates and deposited it at _ J _ i tv i the states, the slavery issue acted as the cow and the blazing tongues of Congressmen played the part of the fiery long time burning lantern.
This then is what we ""honor""— not ""celebrate""—as we look at the rows of white crosses that house the unknown.
The men and their cause ... we are a part of those men and a big part of their cause.
The South had dusted off the North before, but Grant, with his side-kick Sherman, were determined to put the “Union Label” on this mound of dust.
On his fourth visit he came down through Arkansas and Louisiana, to a point South of Vicksburg, in the proximity of ■ Port Gibson.
Confederate batteries overlooking the river and on the 30th of April began ferrying troops into Mississippi at Bruinsburg.
There were only four welcoming brigades to greet Grant as he slipped behind Pemberton’s left flank.
Some historians say that Pemberton could have blocked Grant by moving South to meet his advance before all the Union troops could cross the river.
At the same time, Grant and the boys were making tracks toward the Vicksburg-Jackson Railway, Pemberton’s lifeline.
With the arrival of Johnston in Jackson, however, Grant perceived a large force gathering there.
He cut loose from his base and marched with his whole force, living off the land as they went, upon Jackson.
On May 16, Whiskey-Whiskers struck Pemberton’s field force at Champion’s Hill and drove it into the fortifications of Vicksburg.
Johnston tried to regroup and collect a force large enough tc break through and connect with Pemberton.
Time and troops wail for no man, and the South was oul of both as Pemberton capitulated Vicksburg's vital position to the Yankees on July 4, 1863.
Later Grant was shifted north and paired off against General Lee Sherman drove like a tank, and split the soft under-belly of the South.
As he was maneuvering his forces across the Pearl River swamps around Jackson, Sherman was heard to comment, “War is Hell. ,1 If it is hell to the victor, it’s anyone’s guess as to the condition ol the loser.
FL 2-8331 By BETTYE SIMMONS The cannons roared, the rifles fired; 3,000 Union soldiers advanced on Raymond.
Within the town local citizens began spreading^ffg ton bales on the floors of the Episcopal Church and the Courthouse, preparing for the wounded and dying.
This was the scene, one hundred years ago this week, when the sleepy little town of Raymond was the site of a savage and bloody battle.
On the days preceeding May 12, 1863, ordinary routine ceaosed; it was replaced by anxiety, a growing fear that only people who are facing impending death can know.
The little town itself was unimportant—but it lay in the path o f Grant's inland march to Vicksburg, an objective which was extremely imporant to the Union cause.
Grant took his Army of Republic down river to Bruinsburg, where they landed on May 1, 1863.
The Union army of about 20,000 men advanced up the Big Black, taking Port Gibson on May 2.
He immediately fell back and sent the 2nd Illinois Cavalry to the front.
Both sides suffered casualties before the Confederates began j to retreat.
The Union forces drew nearer, this area when on May 9, Grant made Rocky Springs Church his headquarters while General McPhearson and McClernand camped at Reganton.
C 1 a rk Wright, USA, advanced toward Utica, skirmishing with a few Confederate Cavalrymen for an hour before taking the town.
Neither side suffered casualties, and soon McPhearsin moved through Utica toward Raymond, camping at Week’s and Roaches’ Plantations, while Osterhaus moved into Cayuga, thus splitting the Union forces in their advance against Raymond.
During this time, the Confederate forces had given ‘ little resistance.
Scattered fragments of General Bowen’s army, along with Wirt Adam’s Cavalry, skirmished frequently with the Union but only in a hitand-run type warfare.
Early on the morning of May 12, Fourteen Mile Creek, on the old Dillon Plantation, was the scene of one such skirmish.
The fighting occurred near the present Natchez Trace Overpass, eight miles out of Raymond, on the Old Port Gibson Road.
The creek is shallow but flows through deep, steep banks in what was then a heavily wooded area.
Just as his two Cavalry units, the 2nd Illinois and the 4th Iowa, started across the bridge, they fell under heavy and unsuspected fire from Wirt Adams’ Confederate Cavalry.
Heavy fighting ensued for over an hour, during which time Adams burned the bridge.
The Southerners reported no losses, while the Union reported four wounded, four killed and 24 missing.
After finally crossing Fourteen Mile Creek, the Union army advanced toward Raymond and met the Confederate forces.
Gregg, two miles southwest of town at the forks of the j Utica and Old Port Gibson roads on May 12, 1863.
Gregg, with about 3,000 men, had been encamped at Clinton, when Pemberton ordered him to ad-1 vance toward Raymond.
He arrived in Raymond late on May 11, and was rather surprised to find that the Union forces were so near, j Gregg established Bledsoe’s artillery, consisting of three large guns, \ at the forks of the road.
Directly behind him was the 1st Tennessee and the 7th Texas with the 3rd Tennessee advanced as skirmishers in front of the battery.
To the right Gregg placed the 10th, 30th, and 10th Tennessee divisions, with the 41st Tennessee in reserve.
CONFEDERATE DEAD — Raymond’s memorial Confederate Cemetery today marks the spot where Yankee and Rebel forces clashed on May 12, one-hundred years ago.
Citizens of Raymond regularly pay tribute to the Confederate dead killed in the Battle of Raymond.
As the 2rd Indiana advanced through the woods between the roads, they were attacked by the 7th Texas, who were entrenched on the edge of the hill.
The 23rd fell back, and then were reinforced by McCook's 31st Illinois.
The 24th Illinois, who were bringing up the rear, moved around to the right to attack the flank of the 3rd Tennessee and 7th Texas.
On the left of the Old Port Gibson Road, the 20th Ohio charged across a field and attacked the 10th, 30th and 10th Tennessee divisions.
They were backed up by the 8th Illinois, who helped them push through center.
The 41st Tennessee rushed to aid the 3rd Tennessee, but after two and one-half hours fighting the Confederates began to fall back.
The Texas 7th held their ground, but the 10th and 50th Tennessee retreated into the woods.
The 30th Tennessee charged, ""yelling like savages,"" but failure of the other two divisions to attack ended in miserable failure.
The 7th Texas, practically deserted and out of ammunition, brought up the rear as the 31st Illinois assaulted them again and again.
By 2 the Confederate troops had retreated into Raymond, splitting up, some going towards Edwards, some toward Clinton, and other toward Crystal Springs.
Gregg requested a short truce in order to bury the dead and care for the wounded, but this request was refused.
Bledsoe's Battery has long been silent, and the Army of Tennessee has become history.
The Confederate Cemetery now marks the spot where the cannon once roared and men bled and died.
Here the people of Raymond buried the Confederate dead killed in the Battle of Raymond.
The families of these soldiers simply waited, waited, and waited longer.
Front row from left were Kathy Kilby, Margaret Nunley, Joy Ferguson, Rosalind Healey, and Frances Pickett’ this program was the second annual Awards Da y for Hinds students.
Officers of president and vicepresident of ASB. will be filled Thursday, May 16, in a college election.
Both men and women will vote for president, but only women are eligible to vote for vicepresident, since she will also be president of the Women's Student Association.
If necessary, a second voting session will be held Friday, May 17, as final run-off.
Persons interested in becoming 'candidates for the two posts may obtain applications in the Student Publications Office.
The applications are to be completed and deposited in the mail slot of the post office no later than noon tomorrow.
Nominating speeches are to be made by each candidate's campaign mana| 9 er • Presiding at the session will be sophomore class president George Tannous and vice president Ralph Hemphill.
Jiml my Chandler was chairman of the | committee which coordinated the j typing , and distribution.
Members of assembling committee were Bill White, Leon Stewart, James Bond, Virgil Leonard, Mike Oliver Howard Quin, David Jenkins, and Jimmy Collins.
Hinds Junior College, in its only program for academic recognition, today at Assembly singled out 12 students to receive plaques for departmental honors.
Six other awards for outstanding achievement were also presented, and several students were recognizd for individual achievements.
Kent Prince, public relations director, conducted the program, introducing department heads who in turn presented a plaque to the outstanding student in that department.
Lynda Berry, Art Award; Francis Brown, Business; Rosalind Healy, English; Sammy Bridges, Engineering; Joy Ferguson, Home Economics.
Frances Pickett Physical Education; Kathy Kilby, Music; Carol Killingsworth, Science; Ralph Hemphill, Social Science; Margaret Nunley, Speech; and Gwen Martin, Vocational.
Walter Bishop, Phi Beta Lambda president, presented President G M McLendon an honorary key and lifetime membership to the club in recognition of his work in advacing business department standards.
Recognition was also given to students taking part in intramural sports by William Oakes, Hinds recreational director.
Best Actor, Warren Nybo; Best Actress, Paula Hopson; Best Supporting Actor, Robert Everett; Best Supporting Actress, Carol Maxwell; and Best Back Stage Worker, Pat Donovan.
Next year’s program will be in the hands of a faculty committee rather than the public relations department.
Cheerleaders Training For 7 64 In Weekly Clinic A clinic for prospective sophomore cheerleaders was held Tuesday night in the girls’ gym, announced Mrs.
The giris are being prepared for final try-outs by Barbara Clack, Pearl freshman, who has had experience in cheerleader clinics.
Included in instruction are several cheers which the girls may enter in the contest.
Tomorrow night, contestants will be viewed by a screening committee and will be voted on in next Wednesday’s assembly.
Six of the contestants will be elected to represent next year’s sophomore class.
A second election will be conducted next year to choose freshrpan cheerleaders.
Regina Goodwin, Circulation i Librarian, announced today that the last check-out day for library books I is May 20.
Tom Lew is Peyton, the eldest son, received hisn^dical degree and returned to J^fHrnd a doctor.
And that's exactly how it was in 1834 when the John Bronaugh Peyton family of Fairquier County, Va., moved into Waverly, a history-fill-, ___ ^ ed abode which still stands north a flu epidemic.
Little did the family of Raymond on Clinton Road. j realize that four years later the John Peyton was a civil engineer J approaching Civil War would have who had come to Mississippi to ( taken Frank and Harry Peyton, survey.
He met and married Mary John Peyton, the last son, was reLewis and in 1831 the couple beleased from a Vicksburg camp afgan construction of Waverly, livter the war and allowed to walk tng in a log cabin during the three home.
Undernourished and ill-kept years of building. even his close friends did not rec Life at the Peyton Place was relatively calm, except for an occasional duel.
Truthfully, only one occurred—and the event causing it was the choice of a new capital for Mississippi, then located in Washognie him on sight.
General Ulysses S Grant and his subordinate officers made the present sun room temporary headquarters during Grant's inPage 5 y uctiuquarrers during uranr s inT r/. a “ e “ b lL 0f to Vicksburg.
Judge Isaac Caldwell, a Clinton resident, was anxious to have it located there.
Jackson supporters won by one single sources claim he was there on May date of the battle of Raymond); others include May 13.
Caldwell promptly challenged j Father Peyton to enter the army Peyton, who selected rifles as corral to reclaim his animals, weapons.
Fortunately for both par-j Surviving the war, the Peyton ties, the only damage was a slight j family continued to occupy Waverflesh wound on Judge Caldwell's 1 ly until 1936.
In the summer of 1957 Erwin Peyton, great-great-grandson of John Peyton, began a complete renovation of the house.
He credits the project to his wife, the former Opal Brumfield of Bentonia.
Peyton has studied, traced, and uncovered vivid details of Waverly’s past.
Renovation turned out to be almost rebuilding, the floor was out of level six inches.
The 14 feet wooden panel ceiling is being restored in the original manner.
Amazingly, the ten feet high windows still contain the original panes, some broken, scarred, or personally autographed by one of the Peyton children.
Mississippi Intercollegiate Council T‘ this weekend at the biannual meet-lSTSofRavmoST T ine in HattiosWcr I „ t0Wn of Raymond conducts a City Of Raymond To Commemorate Hundredth Year Of Famous Battle ing in Hattiesburg Hinds, notified of eligibility by MIC last Week, attended the conference last fall to satisfy the membership requirement of attending at least one meeting as an observer.
This delegation has been instructed to pay dues and assume obligations of membership.
Beth Ponder, Carole Weathersby, and James Scoggins, students of Rex Tatum, will present a piano recital Thursday evening, May 9, at 7:30 in the Music Auditorium.
Miss Ponder will perform a Bach Prelude and Fugue in C minor, a Schubert Sonata in A first movement, Faure’s Fantasie and Chopin’s Prelude in G minor.
When completed (possibly next year) Waverly will possess seven bedrooms, four baths, living room, dining room, kitchen, sun room, office, hall ways, side porch and sun porch.
The Peytons and their three children will have ample room to live in—and to care for.
As a member, the school will have voting power and authority to run candidates and discuss issues.
Organized in 1919, its membership includes all senior colleges and four junior colleges in the state.
According to Ralph Hemphill, vice-president of the sophomore class and head of Hinds delegation, value of membership lives in the potential of the growing state organization.
It was on May 12, 1863, that 73 Confederate soldiers were killed in the Battle of Raymond.
Ceremonies will include, in adedition to the memorial service at the Courthouse — a commemoration at the Confederate Cemetery, a tour of the Battlefield, and a Centennial Ball.
Master of ceremonies for the program will be James H Adams, mayor of Raymond.
Featured speaker will be Herschel Gower, co-author of Pen and Sword, and Life and Journals of Randal McGavock, Colonel McGavock, CSA, was killed in the Battle of Raymond.
Also speaking will be Edwin Bearss, historian for the National Park Services in Vicksburg.
Raymond High School Band, directed sissippi Greys, will march to the Confederate Cemetery and officiate while flowers are placed on each grave.
Sunday afternoon the public will have a chance to view Waverly as a part of the Raymond Memorial Observance.
The Peytons hope to open the house for a fee during the pilgrimage season after its completion.
Waverly—today serves as a reminder of a glorious past, of a rich-heritaged family, of a beautiful archaic home.
TAYLOR’S GROCERY Salutes CENTENNIAL WORKERS Shop TAYLOR’S DOWNTOWN RAYMOND entertainment, channel scholar-i by Thomas Christopher, will pro ships, and serve as a sounding, the musical tributes, board for college problems,” he said.
Other members of Hinds delegation are George Tannous, president of the sophomore class and co-head of the group; and freshman Harlan Stanley, Billy Lee, and Johnny Franklin.
Officers for the next six months will be elected during the closing gneral session.
During the discussion sessions, Hemphill explained, Hinds plans to distribute copies of the newlyadopted Associated Student Body constitution.
At the fall meeting, when Hinds was only an observer, much discussion time was centered on Hinds proposals; Hemphill said this weekend Hinds, a member with the constitution adopted, should create some furor.
Members of the Sons of the South Artillery, Sons of Confederate Veterans Mississippi Grey unit, will also assist in the observance.
A Centennial Ball will be held at the Raymond Lake Lodge on Saturday, May 11 from 8 to 12 m sponsored by the Raymond Civil War Centennial Committee and the Raymond Fencibles.
During the past years, with the cooperation of the Vicksburg Centennial Commission, the town of Raymond has sponsored similar observances.
Erwin H Peyton is chairman of the committee, with Thomas H Keith serving as publicity chairman Citizen Council Speaker Lashes Forced Integration In Schools “I’m Medford Evans, not Medford Evers,” laughed the Hinds assembly speaker on May 1.
In his speech Evans discussed the control of the nation by the colleges and universities, saying, The attack on Mississippi's .institutions is a most destructive force.
Integrationists feel that if they can smash Mississippi, the most adamant of the 50 states, the rest will also fall/' In an interview following the speech Evans stated that if token Hinds, the result would be approximately the same as at Ole Miss.
Evans shunned any comment on the recent integration strife in Birmingham both in his speech and in the intervew following.
Evans instead spoke on the possibility of Mississippi stopping the “one-world trend toward peace” by standing integration were ever forced onup for states’ rights.
Page 6 H'NDSONIAN May 8, 1963 Hinds Hosts State Meet Saturday OnNewTrack It’s been seven years since Hinds copped the State Junior College track championship, but with an unspoiled season record, the 1963 version of the Eagles will be favored to win when the annual affair gets underway here Saturday.
Hosting the event on the new ""Red Dog"" track, the Eagles will be looking for their twelfth win since 1940 and their fi^t since 1955.
New records will be almost nonexistent in the meet despite the lightning fastness of the track because of low marks set in previous years.
Benny Shows of Perkinston sped around the oval in 1:59. to write his name in the books.
Since 1940 (previous records were lost) Hinds has won the event 11 times and Sunflower JC three times.
Hinds won seven times in succession, 1946-52 for the longest winning streak on the books.
Last year Perkinston won the affair and will return to the meet as the defending champs.
TRACK TWINS — Jimmy, and Jerry Clark served as top' men in last week’s mile relay j track contest. j I Softball Men Surge Ahead Intramurals are continuing to grow in interest as the season progresses and records of the teams become more interesting.
Several teams are still tied for first place, and each game becomes more important.
Results of last week’s play saw Eastside defeat the Staff 18-9, Wednesday.
Monday, Eastside scored 23 runs while the Jackson Day Students pushed across 14.
Everyone is invited to attend all games, urged Bill Oakes, recreational director.
CAPRI NOW SHOWING “LONG DAY’S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT” KATHERINE HEPBURN Curtain 8:15 Admission SI STARTS MONDAY “PHAEDRA” MELINA MECURIO Second Loss Suffered By Netters In Play Against xMississippi Delta Playing their last match before the State Junior College Tennis tourney May 11, Hinds suffered their second loss of the season against Mississippi Delta here Saturday.
The Trojans scored a 3-1 win over the Eagle net unit and ended their season with a 5-0 record.
The championship matches will be staged here Saturday starting at 8:30m.
HINDS HONEY — Sandra Wier, Jackson freshman, exempimes the feelings of the average Southern student during the hundredth anniversary of the Civil War.
FLeetwood 5-4501 The steady growth of our business in the Central Mississippi and Northeastern Louisiana area has made necessary this new and greatly expanded Sales and Customer Service Center DESIGNED TO PROVIDE MORE CONVENIENT CUSTOMER SERVICES MECHANICAL MAINTENANCE ★ OPERATING SUPPLIES ★ PARTS ★ EMBOSSING I PHOTOPLATE MAKING A Broad Line of ADDRESOGRAPH-MULTIGRAPH Business Machines Always on Display—Always Ready to Demonstrate that Cutting Costs Is Our Business This ad sponsored by the Sophomore Class in gratitude for technical services rendered in the printing of the Constitution.
Baby Maroons Tie Eagles In Three-Way Track Meet May 8, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 7 Hinds thinclad unit almost got caught in the squeeze last Thursday when the Mississippi State freshmen and Marion Institute invaded the Raymond track for a triangular meet.
State's Baby Maroons tied the Eagle team for first place with a score of 51 points each.
Mississippi State enteredpmly a partial team failing to take part in some events.
Herb Hunter, Mar. , °N ™ E WAY George Benton, Hinds field event ace, hurls the discus m the triangular meet staged here last ThurspeUtiorf Saturday. part ’ c ' pate >"" * he State Junior College comion; 2.
State (Tom Moss, Walter Becker, Jerry Blazer, Gary Perkins), Marion Time — 1:32.55.
Contestants are Jones, Perkinston, Southwest, Delta, Northeast East Mississippi and Hinds junior colleges.
Johnny Hines and Billy Joe Montgomery serve as first team doubles and Walter Bishop and Douglas Sullivan as second team doubles.
First singles player is Boyd Me Phail and second singles participant is Tommy Axtell.
Third Photo Quiz Has Rules Change To Calm Students New rules for the third in the series of photo contests sponsored by the Hindsonian, were announced by Danny Fazekas, photo editor.
Provisions give day students a fairer chance, by eliminating the time element, Fazekas explained.
The rules are as follows; Entries must be on the entry blank from the Hindsonian.
The winner will be posted on the window of the Student Publication Office.
Due to the increased interest in the contest, it shall be continued for the remainder of the year.
Last week’s photo was the hole in a pencil sharpener where the pencil is injected.
Never has a novel so accurately begun and a character so exquisitely created* The novel is # of course, the American masterpiece, “Gone With the Wind""; the character, the egotistical Scarlett O'Hara; and the author, the ""character-laden"" Margaret Mitchell.
And character laden Miss Mitchell was, not only with Scarlett but with the undeniable Rhett Butler, angelic Melanie, flower-like Ashly, all-knowing Mama, Irish-brogued Gerald and lewd Belle.
This spicy analysis of 19th Century characters helped to recently put the book into its 70th printing and helped sell more than six million copies in this country, plus 10 million In all nations.
Although in the Civil War saga the host of characters speak English, no matter how drawlish, many people enjoy Rhett’s flippant manner and Miss O’Hara’s forked tongue in other languages.
In fact, the Pulitzer Prize winner enjoys such world-wide popularity it has been translated into 24 foreign languages.
HoUyvrood intervened in the novel’s popularity and by hitching itself to Margaret Mitchell’s band wagon turned out the finest piece of film ever to be edited.
Produced by David O Selznick and directed by Victor Fleming, the movie starred Clark Gable as Rhett and Vivian Leigh as Scarlett.
Seldom have actors been so remembered for their respective roles as these two.
Claiming the leads was not easy, however, since Joan Fontaine had been seriously suggested, as had Gary Cooper.
Clark Gable, long-time manabout-town, was given the tile of “King” after Gone With the Wind.
How a producer could dream of anyone besides Mr Gable for the part is beyond me.
There were many more—such as Olivia de Havilland, who gave depth and a gentle sweetness to Melanie; Hattie McDaniel, who gave Mama a sharp, witty tongue; and Leslie Howard, who reeked with the manners of a Southern gentleman named Ashly.
The words of Margaret Mitchell, the eyes of Clark Gable, the Southern drawl of Miss Leigh, and the bloated figure of Hattie McDaniel —these made the movie great.
Producers claim the movie has been showing somewhere, every day, since it opened.
Adolph Hitler supposedly had a private print which he played frequently and England's famed Winston Churchill sent congratulations to the film's makers.
Now that the film is 24 years old, most of the cast and many production men are dead.
These are living j and playing at neighborhood ' theatres around the world.
And as long as they do, Clark Gable will live, Leslie Howard will live, and Vivian Leigh will remain forever young.
William T Sherman’s army today houses Raymond’s industrious Keith Press.
The press, which has been in operation since 1843, has for the past 28 years published the Hindsonian.
Legend tells that a Negro slave confided to a Yankee guard that there was a treasure hidden under the floor of the building.
That night the guard shielded himself with a blanket in the back of the building where the supposed treasure was hidden and chopped a hole in the floor.
No treasure was found by the disappointed guard, but the floor j still bears the scars of the soldier’s | chopping.
The crude hole was never repaired, and it is now covered by one of the two large flat bed Lee Presses.
The building in addition to being used as a hospital, once served as court house offices, a skating rink, and before Keith Press moved there in 1925, a garage.
Thomas Keith, Sr., began publishing the HINDS COUNTY GAZETTE in that year, buying the newspaper from Manship and M Ney Williams of Raymond.
George W Harper, an outstanding Whig, and ranks second to the WOODVILLE REPUBLICAN as the oldest Mississippi newspaper.
Thomas and Billy Keith, present owners of the plant, stated that, to their knowledge, the Gazette has never missed an issue.
Blanche Keith, wife of Billy, was the “main working force” to keep the paper going.
Several monthly magazines and programs for various occasions are issued from Keith.
The plant, which usually employs eight persons, is never out of operation, since it doubles on all machines.
In operation are 1 two Linotype machines, two large flat bed Lee presses, two smaller presses, and two folders.
Two tons of paper, fifty pounds of ink, and almost three tons of lead are required per month for the tremendous amount of material coming from the Keith presses.
Twelve Girls Vie For Campus Title Preliminary judging to select Miss Hinds contestants has almost reached completion despite a week’s postponement of the event to give the contestants time to perfect their talent.
Twelve girls will soon be chosen on schedule to compete in the pageant May 21.
Anna Bee, HiStepper director and coordinator of the contest, three-minute talent acts are being used to narrow the field to pageant-size.
Last year Sharon Bearden, reigning Miss Hinds, was one of the ten finalists in the Miss Mississippi contest.
Hinds contest is an official preliminary pageant following the rules of the Miss America Pageant.
Contestants will enter swim-suit, evening gown, and talent competi* tion.
Winner of the contest, which begins at 7:30 in the main auditorium, will represent the college in the Mississippi Pageant at Vicksburg this summer.
Woody Assaf, Jackson television personality, will serve as master of ceremonies, introducing each of the fifteen contestants in three phases of competition—talent, swimsuits, and evening gown.
Contenders will meet with the five judges at an afternoon party sponsored by Pepsi, one of the national sponsors of the Miss America Pageant.
Selection of the top five finalists and the winnner will climax the evening.
The 1963 Miss Hinds will be crowned by Sharon Bearden, current Miss Hinds, who ranked among the top ten at the Miss Mississippi Pageant last year.
Vying for the crown this year SEEKING TITLE — Contestants in the Miss Hinds Junior College Pageant gather around the piano to vocally relax during practice for their talent presentations.
Barbara Baile y> Jackson soph Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Hilda Bullock, Paula Jo Hopson, Carmen Cotton, and Sandra Weir. omore The contest will be held Tuesday night.
Choir Head Cancels Concert As Result Of Tight Schedules Spring concert by Hinds choir has been canceled because of conflicts in schedules of various organizations.
Reeves explained the move as not only a yield to conflicts, but also an effort to give choir members more time for examination preparation.
He explained that the choir has spent time alloted for concert rehearsals in preparation for the final appearance in the Sunday evening tour series.
The last concert will be presented this Sunday at Crawford Street Methodist Church in Vicksburg.
In addition to numbers usually featured on the program, several new works have been readied for Sunday’s concert.
Final Self Study Session Covers Questions Monday One meeting of the faculty and' a few instances, administration remains in the current college self-study program.
McLendon all is on schedule and the finished reports will go to press on schedule.
The meeting next Monday afternoon—the fourth in the series—will summarize the entire study and leave time for all pertinent questions before the various committee reports go to the final editing committee for polishing.
All committees, both academic and physical, have had reporji approved by the general faculty.
Dean of Instruction Dr, Janies Sparkman noted that some reports uncovered certain needs, but that corrections are already being made in RUN-OFF FRIDAY Students Cast Ballots Tomorrow In First Primary ASB Elections Two ballots will be issued each voter Thursday in the first Associated Student Body elections.
Kathy Kilby, Brenda Mullins, Beth Ponder, and James Scoggins will audition on piano, and Peggy Smallwood, Barbara Baily, and Douglas Sullivan will sing.
Leslie Reeves, and Rex Tatum. women will be given vice-president ballots since ASB vice-president will head the Women’s Student Association.
First primary is scheduled for Thursday, May 16, with polls open from 8:00 until 3:30.
If run-offs are needed, a second primary is slated for the following day.
All students who present their blue second semester identification card will be allowed to vote once.
Five boys are campaigning for ASB president, four girls for vicepresident.
Presidential candidates are Joe Campbell, Jack McCaskill, Douglas McCool, Billy Joe Montgomery, and Harlan Stanley.
Candidates for vice-president are Connie Roediger, Klare Parker, Vicki Hazzelrigg, and Carmen Cotton.
President McLendon said the administration is “highly pleased with the progress of the study and hopes to wrap it up Monday.
The committee reports will be published this summer in bulletin form, to be examined by a committee from the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. sing; Hilda Bullock, Jackson sophomore, comedy skit; Kaye Bullock, Jackson freshman, sing; Randa Bumgarner, Clinton freshman, jazz dance; Carmen Cotton, Florence freshman, twirl; and Margaret Downing, Jackson sophomore, dance.
Also, Paula Jo Hopson, Opelousas, La., sophomore, dramatic reading; Bobbye Kitchens, Jackson freshman, dance; Jo Schaeffer, Jackson sophomore, song and dance; Gloria Shirley, Jackson freshman, reading; Jan Simpson, Jackson freshman, comedy read ing; Peggy Smallwood, Jackson sophomore, sing.
Ann Stephenson, Raymond freshman, song and dance; Margaret Thomas, Jackson sophomore, dance; Sandra Weir, Jackson freshman, sing; and Linda Watson, Forest Hill freshman, sing.
Anna Bee, Hi-Stepper director and coordinator of the contest, recently talked with the present Miss America, Jacqueline Mayer, at a pageant in Houma, La.
Helpful information was gained to make this pageant an even larger success than last year’s event, Mrs.
First prize is $100, with a chance to compete for the national best local pageant award.
Admission will be one dollar for adults and fifty cents for students presenting an activity card.
Proceeds will offset expenses of sending the winner to the state pageant, paying entrance fees, buying trophies, awards and crowns presented at the local contest, printing of programs, and tokens of appreciation to the judges.
Federal Funds Awarded Hinds For Purchasing IBM Machines Hinds was notified this week that federal funds and a donation from International Business Machines will help purchase $120,000 IBM equipment needed for the new twoyear extensive course in data processing.
Hinds payment will be $26,000, Dean of Instruction James Sparkman released.
IBM instructor Harry Brister announced today that several machines—including a 16/20 computer —have already been designated for shipment to Hinds around June 15.
The data processing program— the only one of its kind in the state—will begin in summer school this year.
Hinds curriculum had to meet certain standards of the State Vocational Office.
IBM deducts 60 per cent of total cost for machines to be used for educational purposes.
Of the remaining 40 per cent Hinds pays 20 and the federal government 20.
Most IBM training is done through companies or commercial firms which only have time to teach machine operation.
The new two-year course will be equally divided between data processing and academic courses.
In data processing the more advanced students will actually go into nearby businesses and corporations, operating that company’s machinery.
Academic courses will include English, algebra, accounting, statistics, social science, and a course in industrial organizations.
To accommodate the expanded course Hinds has ordered a highspeed IBM 16/2*0 computer, five key punch machines, and three verifiers.
The IBM computer, one of the most advanced IBM machines, will solve problems in milleseconds.
Definite entrance standards will be set which will necessarily be stiffer than those for regular entrance in Hinds.
In this course the major emphasis will be placed on business applications rather / than science or engineering applications.
Delegation Pleased With Membership In College Group “Pretty Sharp” was the way Ralph Hemphill described Mississippi Intercollegiate Council leaders who could serve as favorable outside influence on Hinds’ student leaders.
The organization of college governments later also extended membership to Northeast Junior College and Wood Junior College.
The bi-annual meetings present leaders of state student governments opportunities to discuss problems and compare difficulties.
Hemphill noted that the valut of the organization will be realized in the future when it has had time to grow some more.
Year’s End Social Set For Thursday In New Girls’ Gym Presidents Council Activity Committee announced plans yesterday for a year-end social Thursday night, May 16.
Ralph Hemphill, head of the committee, said the dance would be held from 6:30 until 9:30 in the girls gymnasium.
Plans were not announced sooner, Hemphill said, because of indefinite information on exact date and time elements.
With these words, one dissatisfied freshman voiced his felings on the upcoming Associated Student Body elections.
Sophomores and freshmen will vote Thurday on next year’s officers for the student body.
There must be a good, sensible reason for this privilege extended the sophomores.
There has to be a starting point for the change in procedure, and this is as good a time as any.
The same interview uncovered the bare facts of the real reason sophomores are voting.
On the recent election for approval of the new constitution, freshmen were sparsely represented.
Only 66 freshmen voted on the important measure, out of a freshman class of 764.
We may assume that in the future sophomores will continue to show more responsibility than freshmen.
E HINDSIGHTS Lamentations If you want to see something upsetting, look at the face of the fellow on your right.
Chances are that he’s one of the many students who are behind in their work, and having all kinds of trouble getting it done before final exams.
When there are less than two actual weeks of school to go, and over nine weeks of work to be done, there is much lamenting and sorrow, for either the work will be done and the student passed, or curtains.
Never procrastinate, under any circumstances, especially from laziness.
If this lesson is learned from such a situation, the situation might be forgiven and even praised.
There is no excuse for idleness, and idleness causes one to get behind in his work, and may even lead him to a life of dependence on others, rather than the necessary independence.
College is the laundpdng pad for successful living in the modern world.
But tjpF student may never make it off the ground if his fuel line Becomes congested with debris such as laziness.
E Zke PRESS Highlights of Hinds BETTYE SIMMONS Associate Editor JOE WHITE Executive Editor LINDA BYRD Associate Editor DWAYNE COX Business Manager ASSISTANT BUSINESS MANAGERS _Jim Toombs, Billy Lee SPORTS EDITOR____Jim Bonney, Asst.
For instance, when viewers are confronted with the first scene of the movie they seem to feel that something is out of place.
After a few moments, realization comes . . . the title would indicate an Oriental theme, naturally, and it does center around hundreds of women working rice crops in irrigated fields.
That's what makes the rice-planting songs so strange, they're Italian, too.
Once the basic preliminaries were over, though, characters vividly portrayed the personages they were, even to the point of overacting.
The plot later revealed that she was his daughter from a previous common law marriage.
The individual characters portrayed wonderful parts which could easily have been left out, leaving the movie with a basic 30 minute showtime.
Some of the actresses were evidently misplaced from a Naked City show, such as one worker who had terrible trouble with the illness of her child, whom she should have left at home in the first place.
Their initial intention of ""making some money for my family which is so poor"" was disqualified when they went to town on weekends and blew their pay on gay times with gay blades.
It seems that if these second rate movies are going to be turned out in droves and bad droves at that, the producers should at least try to co-ordinate the plot with the actions of the characters.
An Italian cast in an Oriental background, singing Italian songs, ... it’s too much for the average college student to comprehend.
Personally, I would be delighted to-own the sound track from this movie.
A hauntingly beautiful theme song was played at appropriate places and the combined chorale of female voices very well done.
In fact, I think I would have enjoyed the movie far more with my eyes closed.
TriOUGW Of TAKING AN AfcT CO/JKSE CURRENT EVENTSVoodoo Leader Rules Haiti By RALPH HEMPHILLA land where everything that is not forbidden is compulsory will best described Haiti today.
Francois Duvalier, witch-doctor President, uses every trick there is to keep tight-fisted control over this pintsize Caribbean outpost of the eighteenth century.
He not only keeps his oppostion hopping, but keeps his friends hopping 'after his opposition.
Tousant LeOvervure, a Negro statesman, then set about unifying the island, which ended with the conquering of the other half of Santo Dominigo, the Dominican Republic.
Under Teddy Roosevelt, at the turn of the century, United States Marines were stationed in Haiti.
With the end of WW II, and the birth of foreign aid, the United States took a renewed interest in the internal affairs of this tiny tornado of a nation.
Then came Castro and Communism to the Western Hemisphere, landing in Cuba only 50 short miles from Haiti.
Since Castro's arrival, strange things have been happening in the Caribbean.
He was replaced by a more liberal and seemingly democratic regime under President Juan Bosch.
The plot of the people and the state of the economy has gone from bad to worse then.
This, combined with Duvalier’s terror tactics to stay afloat, has caused the United States to withdraw support and money from Haiti.
Today the Duvalier regime finds itself between an invasion from the investigation by the Organization of American States, with the worst still to come.
His troops have been stationed along the Haitian border for a week now.
American semi-intervention is the only thing that has stopped them from crossing it thus far.
He has guaranteed not to molest foreigners or people seeking asylum in embassies.
Bosch wants him to promise safe exits to those desiring to leave Haiti.
No matter what Duvalier does now, time is gradually running out for him.
The only thing that keeps him in power today is his use of Voodoo on the ignorant natives.
If any dictator has used fear and terror as a weapon of the first resort, Duvalier is this man.
On the other side of the coin, he will probably be removed before the year is out, by these same tactics in reverse.
Though the decision has been made and sophomores will have an opportunity to vote, we decided to ask an assortment of people — freshmen, sophomores, and faculty —for their opinions on this matter.
Easterwood, Jackson sophomore, voiced, “No, I don’t think e should vote since it will not be our school next year.
Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, responded, “Yes, because they are a little older, and are still interested in the future of the school.
Miss Susan Brown, social science instructor, mused, “No, because they had their chance last year and in all probability the freshmen are more aware of their candidate’s qualifications.
Patrick, also a social science instructor, commented, “I would say so, since so few freshmen voted last week.
A vice presidential nominee stressed, ""From the speeches sophomores can see which candidate is more qualified.
The four candidates, meeting with Dean of Women Fay Marshall to discuss organization of the women’s governing body, publicly expressed hopes for success of the new constitution, no matter who is elected.
Carmen Cotten, Vicki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, and Connie Roediger, will be voted on by full-time women students during first ASB elections Thursday.
According to the constitution, only women students are eligible for ASB vice-president because of the double nature of the office.
Since ASB veep also acts as president of women’s government, only women students can vote for vicepresident.
Politics ruffled campus conversations this week despite a lack of platform conflicts among candidates for first president of Associated Student Body.
In interviews with the Hindsonian before formal campaign speeches in assembly today, the five presidential candidates displayed simi lar attitudes toward the authority of ASB president and toward a first plan of action if elected.
All agreed on the need for more social activities and increasing stu dent participation, which would result in a rise in campus spirit.
Final decisions about voting are expected to come from speeches in Wednesday’s assembly, and from leadership ability, personality, and popularity.
Candidates are Joe Campbell, Jack McCaskill, Douglas McCool, Billy Joe Montgomery, and Harlan Stanley.
A former president of his senior class, Campbell was a Boys Stater, a Junior Rotarian, recipient of the DAR Good Citizenship and American Legion Leadership awards.
McCaskill, structural engineering major from Vicksburg, believes “The President’s main job, this first year, is going to be familiarizing students with the constitution and gathering student support for it; because ... the hope of a better tomorrow lies in the Constitution.
McCaskill has a varied background in athletics, journalism, and class offices.
He is a member of Hinds band, plays bass with the Jerry Lane Orchestra, and has played three years in the Jackson symphony.
President of the freshman class, Montgomery was chosen a favorite, served on Presidents Council, was a delegate to MIC, and was chairman of student assembly committee.
He is a member of Circle K and is a member of state junior college tennis doubles champions.
Stanley served as delegate to MIC, and has been elected BSU president for next year.
In high school he was a member of the Beta Club, Hi-Y, student council three years, and was elected Most Dignified and Most Likely to Succeed.
Notice Students expecting to transfer to another college at the end of this semester are requested to check with the Registrar’s office about transferring academic records.
All college entrants from a junior college must present complete transcript records, Registrar Miss Mildred Herrin stressed.
Many students have already notified the office to send transcripts to senior colleges, Miss Herrin said, but a written applicaion must be made for transferring transcripts complete with this semester’s record.
VEEP HOPEFULS — Consulting with Dean of Womer Fay Marshall are the four ASB vice-presidential candidates From the left they are Vicki Hazzlerigg, Carmen Cotton, Klare Parker, Connie Roediger, and Miss Marshall.
Bat Campaigns Still Raging Page 4 HINDSONIAN May 15, 1963 Gill Family Ends Season With Twelfth Hinds Grad By BETTYE SIMMONS The parents of Kenneth Gill don’t play baseball, but they nevertheless have a perfect 1.000 batting average for a season ending May 31.
The game originated long ago— in 1943, as a matter of fact, when Earl, oldest of the clan, earned his diploma from Hinds.
He was followed by four brothers, Guy, Fred, Grady and Kenneth; and by seven sisters, Lucille, Ruth, Sarah, Helen, Dot, Jean and Carolyn who graduated in 1961.
All twelve successfully paid their own expenses through school, most of them working in the cafeteria as does Kenneth.
This is the profession Kenneth hopes to enter upon completing his studies at Southern, where he intends to go next year.
Joby Harris, political science instructor who taught most of the twelve, said, ""The Gills are the salt of the earth and deserve all the credit in the world.
Nine students will attend Ole Miss; six, Millsaps; four, MSCW; three, Belhaven; two, William Carey; and two plan to attend Delta State.
One student plans to attend Peabody College, and one will attend Springhill.
There are several students who plan not to continue their education, but to instead work.
CONTINUOUS COLLEGE — Kenneth Gill, Johns sophomore completes preparations for a meal in the Hinds cafeteria.
The party featured entertainment, a Who’s Who contest, and refreshments.
Caroline Bowen, house mother; Best Looking, Bobbye Jean Kitchens; Cutest, Merrilyn Mitchell; Friendliest, Margie Bingham; Most Dignified, Henri Lou Coleman; Gruesome Twosome, Gloria Bickham and Ann Bostick; Best Dressed, Sandra Warrington.
Entertainment chairman Sandra Weir reported that Gloria Bickham, Donna Breightling, and Mary Ber ryhill sang for the girls.
Jan Simp son did a monologue and the Twist, and Linda Miller did the Limbo.
Food chairman was Carolyn Christian; Entertainment, Sandra Weir; Who’s Who, Ann Williams; and Kay McBride and Vicki Hazzlerigg were in charge of decorations.
Photo Contest Entry Blank Name_ My Guess is:_ Last week's picture showed the mandible, canine teeth, premolars, papillae, taste buds, and tongue of a four legged animal commonly known as a dog.
Most Intellectual, Rosalind Healy; Wittiest, Judy Fikes; Silliest Sophomore, Sandra Vaughn; Greenest Freshman, Shala Azordegan; Two Favorites, Judy Fikes and Shala Azordegan; Swingingest One, Kay McBride; Best Dancer, Jan Simpson; Most Talented, Sandra Weir; and FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY OUR SERVICE ° Either in Color or Black and White ■Standard Photo Write or call for Free Film Mailers Bailey Featured In Recent Recital Miss Barbara Bailey, sophomore music major, was presented in a voice recital Tuesday evening in the Music Auditorium.
Miss Bailey studies voice with J L Reeves and was accompanied by Miss Brenda Mullins.
For her group of English lyrics Baily performed ""The Swan"" by Grieg; Loveliest of Trees"" by Duke; ""Velvet Shoes"" by Thompsin; ""My Love is a Fisherman"" by Stricklin and ""The Lilac Tree"" by Gartlan.
Ioo& 9iom nfirft \ A IKi Page 5 r/oe ONE OF THE FINEST EQUIPPED and MODERN OPTICAL LABS • CONTACT LENSES • ARTIFICIAL EYES FITTED FITTED AND GROUND • SUNGLASSES FL 2-7625 JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI 1000 N State Jones Wins Tennis Meet; Hinds Squad Is Second MERCHANTS & PLANTERS May 15, 1963 Regin Again As State Champions HONEY — Eugenie Stogner, sophomore interior decoration major, smiles happily as she anticipates the ending of the school year and the start of summer vacation.
Hinds took second in both boys and girls events in total number of points.
Perkinston, Southwest, and Holmes each scored three points while Mississippi Delta scored two.
In girls division, Perkinston placed second again, and Northwest and Southwest tied for fourth with three each.
Billy Joe Montgomery and Johnny Hines of Hinds defeated Vernon Sauls and Billy Joe Schoenwitz of Perkinston to win the Number Two doubles.
The same Perk pair had edged them last week in the last of regular season play.
Shirley Morris of Hinds won the Number Two girls singles by defeating Barbara Glass of Jones, while Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson won girls Number One doubles from Jones’ Margaret Buxton and Pat Moody.
Perkinston broke across just a foot ahead and was named winner; Hinds was spotted next just 0. second behind; then Jones (all gold) and Scooba.
Jones (Sonny Walters, Dayton Pridgen, Charile Robinson, Watts Davis); 2.
Perkinston (Phil Carriere, Bvron Rasco, Teddy Roberts, Larry Plumlee); 4.
Jones (Chariel Robinson, Walter Merrill, Dayton Pridgen, Watts Davis); 4.
While Hinds placed first in only four events, they racked up nine second place berths for 57V2 points —enough to almost double their nearest opponent’s scoring.
In addition they almost won individual scorer's trophy and barely missed cracking the oldest state record.
Jerry Clark of Hinds was nosed out of the trophy of top individual by Allen Bruton of East Mississippi.
Had Martin been able to shave three-tenths of a second off his two minutes flat time, he would have broken the 25-year old state record, 1:59.7.
Holmes’ mile relay team of Alton Wright, Roger Bynum, Elton Wright, and Johnny Vaughn bettered by only one-tenth of a second the record of 3:27 set by Hinds in 1961.
TILL WE MEET AGAIN With today's installment I complete my ninth year of writing columns in your college newspaper for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes.
In view of the occasion, I hope I may be forgiven if I get a little misty.
In fact, I would not believe that so much time has gone by except that I have my wife nearby as a handy reference.
Most of my friends w T ho were married at the same time have wives who chase cars all day.
I myself have never had this trouble and I attribute my good fortune to the fact that I have never struck my wife with my hand.
During this period I had the airmail edition of the Manchester Guardian flown in daily from England.
The airmail edition of the Guardian is printed on paper so light and flimsy that it makes little or no impression when one slaps one s wife.
Mine, in fact, thought it was some kind of game, and tore several pairs of my trousers.
I was saying what a pleasure it has been to write this column for the last nine years for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes—a fine group of men, as anyone who lias sampled their wares would suspect.
They are loyal, true, companionable, and constant, and I have never for an instant wavered in my belief that some day they will pay me for these last nine years.
But working for the makers of Marlboro has not been the gr. . ast of my pleasures over the last nine years.
The chief satisfaction has been writing for you —the college population of America.
It is a rare and lucky columnist who can find an audience so full of intelligence and verve.
To those I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will find the world outside a happy valley.
To sophomores I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will become juniors.
To freshmen I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will become sophomores.
To those of you going on into graduate school I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will marry money.
Whatever your status, whatever your plans, I hope that success will attend your ventures.
WAA Top Girls Plan Journey To Gulf ) Coast By JAMES K SMITH Sophomore and freshman girls with the highest point scores in the Womens Athletic Association will vacation this weekend at the Mississippi Gulf Coast.
The girls won their points by participation in various athlttic activities.
Girls are awarded five to ten points for participation in the activities sponsored by the association.
Francis Pickett, student gym assistant, commented that the card and checker tournaments have recently been replaced by tennis, archery, golf and softball, the main activities of the closing weeks of school.
The freshman girls defeated the sophomore girls 11 to 9 in the first softball game Monday afternoon.
The second game will be played Wednesday afternoon at 3:30 north of the girls gym.
Color processing this week darrants some special mentioning since from track meet to printed picture involved little more than four days.
Spurred by photo editor Daniel Fazekas, the pictures were taken and air-mailed to Dallas by midafternoon Saturday.
Dynacolor processed the slides, returned them by early Monday morning, and Hayes Graphic Arts processed separations Monday night.
A rush at Mississippi Engraving detained the finished plates until late Wednesday afternoon.
Keith Press ran the color on their hand-fed Lee flatbed, and by noon Thursday the finished papers were being circulated on campus, a little behind schedule, but in defiance of those who would dawdle.
SLIGHTLY SECOND —Hinds trackster Jerry Clark copped first place in th broad jump division of the state junior college track meet held here last weekend.
Jerry was ‘siightly second in the position of individual top scorer by only 11/4 points.
SOUTHSIDE SECOND Eastside Holds Slim Lead In Intramural Softball Play Eastside dormitory leads the intramural softball standings as the eight teams head into their final week of play.
Close behind in second place is Southside with the day students only one game behind.
Oakes, recreation director, said the final action will be completed next week and the champions announced.
JACKSON COCA-COLA BOTTLING COMPANY McLendon Lists Main Speakers For Graduation President George M McLendon announced today that H V Watkins, prominent Jackson attorney, will deliver the 1963 commencement address, and Dr.
Kelly Unger, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church in Meridian, will deliver the baccalaureate sermon.
The baccalaureate sermon will be held Sunday, May 26, in the college auditorium at 11m.
Commencement exercises are scheduled for Friday, May 31, 10:30m., also in the college auditorium.
James Scoggins, organist, will play the processional and recessional for the baccalaureate sermon, with Kathy Kilby and Brenda Mullins playing for the commencement exercises.
W T Mangum, pastor, Raymond Methodist Church, will deliver the invocation and benediction Sunday, with Dr.
Jerry Breazeale, pastor Raymond Baptist Church, delivering the same at the Friday service.
Beemon, sophomore class sponsor, advised graduates at today's practice during the 2A period of the next rehearsal at 2 m.
The time was postponed in order for the graduating list to be as definite as possible.
President McLendon will award the diplomas at the commencement exercise.
MM Mighlights of Minds VOLUME 29—NUMBER 28 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI WEDNESDAY, MAY 22, 1963 Una Schaeffer Crowned Miss Hinds RADIANT WINNER — Miss Una Jo Shaeffer smiles tearfully following her crowning as the new Miss Hinds Junior College.
First alternate Hilda Bullock and second alternate Sandra Weir stand beside Hinds’ representative to the Miss Mississippi Pageant.
Hinds Coed Given Miss Pearl Title For the third year in a row a Hinds coed captured the title of “Miss Pearl” in the annual citywide contest in Pearl.
The winner will participate as an official entry in the Miss Mississippi Pageant.
Nora Holder, freshman coed, was recently crowned in the annual pageant held in the Pearl High School Auditorium.
At Hinds Miss Holder is a member of the college choir and girls' ensemble.
While in high school she was cheerleader for two years and captain of the Pearlettes, precision marching group.
Miss Holder received her title from Dot Lyons, 1963 winner, who is now a sophomore at Hinds.
Sophomore Beverly Tadlock preceded Miss Lyons as Pearl's representative to the Miss Mississippi Pageant.
COMPOSITION DEFINED Proposed Student Center Receives Ideas Through Presidents Council The new proposed Student Center took a step towards reality with the Presidents Council compiling a list of suggestions as to its composition.
A committee of Ralph Hemphill and Harlan Stanley conferred with President McLendon Tuesday afternoon and acquired an overall idea of the proposed building.
Wednesday evening, Hemphill -and Stanley presented their report to the Presidents Council and asked for further suggestions.
These suggestions will be formally submitted to the administration Thursday.
Preliminary plans call for construction to begin during the next academic year, with completion soon afterwards.
Bullock, Weir Named Alternates With Stephenson Chosen Favorite Representing Hinds at the 1963 Miss Mississippi Pageant m Vicksburg this summer will be Miss Una Jo Schaeffer, a 21-year-old raven-tressed co-ed whose ambition in life is to become a clothes buyer.
Jo was crowned last evening in the college auditorium at the Miss Hinds Pageant.
First alternate was Hilda BuiKiwanians Host Season s Finale Of Hi-Steppers A troupe of forty-five band members and sophomore Hi-Steppers made their last performance of the year Friday night at the Indianola Country Club.
The group performed for the annual Ladies Night of the Indianola Kiwanis Club.
As a result the group was invited to perform for the Kiwanis State Convention on the Gulf Coast in August.
This week, at the request of several bowl officials, a color sound track movie will be made of the band and Hi-Steppers.
Alon Bee, Hi-Stepper director, the movie will be produced to be shown at bowl committee meetings this summer.
Selected main editors for next writing would be used, year’s Hindsonian were Dannie | Toombs emphasized the tremenEvans and Jim Toombs, both Jackson freshmen.
He is a graduate of P'rovine High School in Jackson and served for two lock, 19-year-old sophomore, the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Second alternate was 19-year-old Sandra Weir, a freshman from Jackson and the daughter of Mr and Mrs.
The new Miss Hinds charmed the audience with a rendition of ""Spanish Rose,"" sparked with an accompanying dance.
Brought to tears when announced inner, she cried, ""I just can't believe it.
Also named to the top five finalists were Barbara Bailey, Jackson sophomore and daughter of Mr and Mrs.
Chosen by fellow contestants as Miss Congeniality was Ann Stephenson, without a doubt the crowd’s favorite for the evening.
She literally brought the house down with a roaring song and dance routine.
Jo was crowned by President George McLendon and Miss Sharon Bearden, out-going Miss Hinds j who earned a position in the top ten at last summer's Miss Mississippi Pageant.
Ed Cox, of Vicksyears on the award-winning ""Provine Rambler,"" school newspaper.
Public Relations Director Kent Prince expressed confidence that the 1964 Hindsonian would be larger, more attractive, and better planned than ever. eant directors; Mr and Mrs.
Wayne Terry Lamar (former Patricia Chadwick), of Jackson, who served as Miss Jackson and 1st alternate Miss Mississippi.
Anna Bee, Hi-Stepper director, was coordinator of the pageant, assisted by Miss Annice Ray Jernigan.
NORA HOLDER 1963 Miss Pearl Buck Pruitt, manager of two Jackson threatres, will present a free Hirids Appreciation Showing tonight at the ’51 and Varia DriveIns.
Present showing at the '51 Theater is ""The Giant,"" starring Jimmy Dean, Rock Hudson and Elizabeth Taylor.
Showing at the Varia Theatre is ""Elvis at the Worlds Fair,"" starring Elvis Presley and Joannie O'Brien.
According to Pruitt, the theatres will probably sponsor another free appreciation night next year.
He served as assistant business manager this year for the newspaper and business manager for the spring magazine supplement.
He is also a graduate of Provine High School and served two years on the Rambler staff.
Both Evans and Toombs have extensive experience in the journalistic field, and plan to direct a portion of their schooling to nalistic efforts.
Evans will serve as execunewspaper would not be changed, tive editor, with Toombs assuming responsibilities of business but that a more varied style of manager.
Mingled with regrets of leaving junior college, many of us find a more predominant thought in mind — that of leaving the Hindsonian.
As each staffer arises each morning his thoughts naturally shift toward the college newspaper.
Perhaps we have not done exactly as everyone would have us do, but we have done our best.
One of the best traits that Hinds possesses is that of quality in personnel.
Without qualified newspaper sponsors the Hindsonian would never have been as successful as it has been.
As we complete our last year at Hinds we have only single files of each issue of the Hindsonian to link our memories back to two years’ work.
Each back issue will remind us personally of events which impressed only us as a group.
Only direct newspaper workers can feel the sense of completeness when an issue is finished and being printed at the press.
A small staff feels a unified pride in accomplishments, however small they may be.
We leave an open letter of appreciation to the many individuals, instructors, administrators and students who have helped us in making the Hindsonian the most outstanding junior college newspaper in Mississippi and one of the top in the nation.
In questioning graduating sophomores we found that one answer reigns supreme—people.
Frances Pickett, Utica, replied, #,/| l remember the friends I've made and working in the PE department.
Since I've been teaching some of the classes, I feel especially close to some of the girls.
Another phase in the lives of 1500 people has come to a close, and the curtains go up on another scene in the play of life.
Others — in fact hundreds of others, will return to complete their two years of junior college education.
The departing ones find themselves going down different paths in the maze of life.
Some take the straight paths to success; others find themselves trapped in a one way avenue.
Still others, after much struggling, succeed in finding the goal they have sought.
Without these two rare qualities, a person might very easily find the going rough.
The actors must perform their roles to perfection, or be unsuccessful in their parts.
Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, slowly answered, ""I don’t think I’ll forget anything.
P'^ph Hemphill, Jackson, seriously considered, “It all boils down ■o the thing that makes Hinds great, the people who attend here.
Henry Lou Coleman, Mendenhall, responded, “I’ll remember most the people with whom I have worked and studied, and what they have meant in my growth as an individual.
Doug Sullivan, Jackson, answered, ""People and friends I've had the opportunity to meet and the experience I have gained.
I'll never ^roet the band and Hi-Stepper trips"" Charles Dudley, Natchez, promptly said, “I’ll remember the silly room checks and lights-out we had.
Earsterwood, Jackson, summed up the average sophomore feeling, however, when, he answered, “I really don’t know.
Mississsippi’s dry politics moistened up a bit with the re-introduction of “legalized liquor” versus “moralized liquor” into the gubernatorial race.
Charles Sullivan, Clarksdale attorney, who seemed to base his whole 1959 campaign on legalizing liquor, seems to be adding additional planks to his platform in preparation for a long hot summer against his rivals.
First, enter the 1959 race late with a vote-taker platform and run a good race.
This strategy seems unsound, because the state cannot be divided into logic-tight compartments.
Coleman seems to be, from Sullivan’s point of view, his chief opponent.
Sullivan has constantly sought, with great vigor, to hang Coleman’s chances on the tree of the New Frontier.
Coleman will stand on his previous record as Governor, and go forward from there.
Chances are, the voting public will witness one of the hardest fought political campaigns in this state's history as these two veterans close ranks and try to out-maneuver each other.
If a house divides against itself (Sullivan and Coleman) it cannot stand up against Johnson’s third bid for this office.
In 1960, who won the office of Lieutenant-Governor on the first ballot over numerous opponents—Paul Johnson.
If Johnson can stay out of the fight, yet stay in the ring, the chances are he will be the one to square-off with the GOP candidate, Rubel Phillips, in the fall.
Should such an event occur, the Republicans, in their estimation, would be m a much better position to capture the Governorship than if either of the other two were their opponents.
In the past, nationally and locally, the Republicans have lacked a grass roots organization, and instead, have depended on the great man theory to bring in the votes.
Phillips has tht advantage of possessing a semblance of a precinct level organization plus a good reserve of political sex appeal.
It seems that Sullivan will have opposition right in his own back yard, since Phillips has also come out for legalized liquor.
At present, Johnson and Coleman are sticking with the status quo on liquor.
Probably neither feels he can afford to rock the boat if he wants to be pilot.
May 22, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 Harlan Stanley Elected Head Of ASB; Admits Close Finish Caused Worries By BETTYE SIMMONS Hinds’ Harlan-State-Trotter hoofed into the 1963 presidency of the Associated Student Body in last week’s run-off election.
Regular basketball starter Hartman Harlan Stanley, Jr., was born in 1944 at Oakdale, La., from whence he moved to Oakgrove, La., to Leland, Miss., to Vidalia, La., to Adel, Ga., to Lake Charles, La., to Plain, Miss., his current home town.
Harlan's father, a district manager of General Gas, was transferred to Plain just prior to his son's senior year at Florence High School.
The active youth, nevertheless, had time to make the basketball and baseball teams.
His good grades earned him membership in the Beta Club, and in Who’s Who elections he was voted Most Likely to Succeed and Most Dignified.
Good grades and its components have made an outstanding place for him on the Hinds campus.
Marking \a 2. quality point average for first semester:, he was initiated into Circle K and chosen presidentelect of the Baptist Student Union.
Harlan also champions the underdog, listing the Philadelphia Phillies as his favorite National League team.
In his interview with the Hindsonian, Harlan explained his reason for seeking the presidency.
ANNOUNCES PLANS Staff Members Darling And Jordan Selected Co-Editors Of ’64 Eagle Editor Belva Watkins of the Eagle publication staff, announced this week that co-editors had been selected for the 1964 publication of the yearbook.
Selected were Dottie Darling and Wendell Jordan, both present staff members.
Miss Watkins stated, ""Both editors were chosen with rigid requirements in mind.
She was a member of the Helm newspaper staff for two years at Gulfport High School.
This year she belonged to the Women’s Athletic Association and Wesley Foundation.
Next year she will be program chairman for the Wesley group and cheerleader.
Jordan, an Automotive Engineering major and Biloxi High School graduate, was also a member of Wesley Foundation this year and will serve as club president for the 1963-64 school session.
She added that unusual picture processing will be included, such as was used in the ""Hindsonian"" magazine supplement this year.
However, an entirely different cover design will be involved, in keeping with the secret theme of the yearbook, he added.
Actual work on the student publication will begin the latter part of this summer.
Already under consideration are outstanding students, including former opponents, for/positions in the ASB cabinet.
Harlan quieted unrest that his dual positions of president of BSU and ASB might at some time have conflicting interests.
With good men working behind pie in the cabinet and senate, it should work out well.
Harlan complimented outgoing officers of the Presidents Council with, “I’ll do good to stand any where near this year’s officers.
From all indications, the Hinds student body will be supporting its new leader on the basketball court as well as in the Associated Student Body.
CO-EDITORS — Wendell Jordan and Dottie Darling are interrupted during work on the final stages of the Eagle yearbook.
They served as co-editors of the club section this year, and oddly enough are steady daters.
Presidents Council Holds Final Social To Climax Session Last week the Hindsonian erroniously listed Ralph Hemphill as chairman of the Presidents Council dance committee who set up the campus social Thursday night.
The Thursday night social was held from 6:30 to 9:30 in the girls' physical education gymnasium.
Ralph Hemphill, Jimmy Chandler and Joe White took charge of the ticket sales, while individual Circle K members ran the concession stands.
Music was furnished by the Darden Davis Dance Band, and vocal selections were provided by Mary Berryhill, Wiley Magee, Woody Martin, and Steve Erwin.
BIG WHEEL — Harlan Stanley strikes a relaxed politician’s pose after winning the election for president of the newly-formed Associated Student Body government for next year.
Stanley is also president of the Baptist Student Union and participates in many other campus activities.
Denton, freshman class sponsor, announced the ushers and program girls for the Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday, and the graduation exercise May 31.
Head ushers will be freshman class president Billy Joe Montgomery and vice president Bill Dunlap.
Students may now begin preregistration for summer school sessions, Miss Mildred Herrin, Registrar, said this week.
Hinds dormitories will open Sunday, June 9, at 2:00m. and regular class registration will begin at 8:00 the next morning, Miss Herrin stated.
Miss Herrin noted that students would not be allowed to enter or change schedules afer June 12.
Second term will begin Monday, July 15, and the last entry or schedule change date will be July 17.
Courses scheduled will not be taught where the enrollment is not sufficient to justify their being taught.
Additional classes will be organized where there is sufficient demand for them.
All classes will meet five days a week—Monday through Friday, and students may earn 12 semester hours in the ten-week session or 6 semester hours in a five-week term.
Expenses for dormitory students from Hinds, Rankin, and Warren Counties total $120 for the summer, while day student fees for students from these counties totals $30.00.
Mississippi students whose parents live outside of Hinds or Rankin or Warren Counties will pay upon entrance a $15 out-of-county fee.
Students whose parents live outside the state of Mississippi will pay upon entrance a $50 out-of-state fee.
A $10 graduation fee is required at the end of the summer for students who take diplomas.
Miss Herrin noted that students wishing dormitory accommodations should make the proper reservation.
This can be done by writing for an Admission Blank or by calling in person.
Schedules for summer school classes are available in the Registrar’s office, and dormitory reservations should be checked through the Dean of Men.
Notice Hinds business office has announced that it will make room deposit refunds Tuesday afternoon and all day Wednesday and Thursday.
A check out slip, signed by the Head Resident of the dormitory must be presented before the refund is made.
This is only for dormitory students who will not return to Hinds next year.
JOHN’S GROCERY AND CAFE One mile from Raymond on Bolton Road Good Meals and Groceries Come eat with us at JOHN’S Page 4 HINDSONJAN May 22, 1963 Miss Lindsey Reincarnates Literature; Hypnotizes Students With Presentation By LINDA BYRD In a world of common and proper nouned people, I/aura Bell Lindsey is a verb.
Because of the scarcity of such ag element, few verbs are born, and they are born—no dangling participles turn into a verb.
Surely if people were classified in the same manner as sentences are diagramed, results would show that there are millions of common nouns, thousands of proper nouns and hundreds of adjectives and adverbs.
The same study will prove that verbs, people and words that move sentences and life are few and far between.
Hinds, however, has a verb lurking in its midst, in the form SUKI — Miss Laura Bell Lindsey seldom remains seated or calm during English literature class lectures.
In fact, her classes are so ‘caught up’ with enthusiasm they speak their thoughts out loud.
Miss Lindey has her own masterful way of teaching, and the students hardly know they’re being taught.
College Display Artists Works VALUABLE OBJECT Miss Brown’s Soapbox Espionaged; Students Urged To Aid In Search Connecticut housewives swear Tide “brings fresh air in” but Miss Susan Brown, social studies instructor, cleanses air without soap — just a soapbox.
Expounding on everything from patriotism to “learning for the sake of learning,” the notorious Miss Brown found a deep comfort in the wooden structure.
In its place, the once-tall statue of the educationalized femme fatale is now bent, unable to respond to the subconscious urgings that scream at her very being, making her taunt and anxious.
Truly the words of a “troubled mind,” for once one has the good fortune to own a soapbox—a beautiful little soapbox with “magic gold footprints” — it is futile to think of existing without it.
The Hindsonian is especially sympathetic to the loss of such a valued instrument, for it now seems Miss Brown is unable to answer simple survey questions without first finding an elevated spot on which to stand.
Thus one more suffering human has been added to the race of Hinds Junior College faculty members.
If any of you out there can find it in your hearts to search for Miss Brown’s soapbox, she would be eternally grateful — as would Mr Reeves and the Hindsoman.
Students of Miss Brown especially need to uncover the mystery of the missing soapbox, for as she said, her grouchiness will get worse.
This display, which is a result of months of student effort and achievement, is annually sponsored by Alpha Rho Tau, campus art club.
Every style, technique, manner and size is represented, with scenes varying from churches to bar rooms, from Negroes in a cotton field, to Poncho Villa with a cigarette.
Several students, after studying respective artists in their art appreciation and art history courses, have attempted to imitate the styles and manners of the more renowned painters.
Thus, visitors can expect to view impressionistic designs, designs dealing with prospective, palette knife experiments, “drip and splatter” attempts.
Of special note are the works of Lynda Berry, a prolific young artist who recently was named most outstanding student from the department at Awards Day.
Miss Berry has made constributions to almost every style contained in the exhibit.
Katherine Denton, art instructor, emphasized that the exhibit is open to all students, faculty and interested outside visitors.
Parents and relatives will have an opportunity to view the products Sunday, since the gallery will be open before and after graduation exercises. of Miss Lindsey, English instructor.
They do this of course behind her blonde back, though I doubt this comes as a surprise to her.
In conjugating the life of Bell Lindsey facts are irrelevant, only the woman herself is of importance.
PRESENT TENSE — At present, in the diagram of life, the verb is placed on the Hinds campus.
To be more specific she is placed in the left wing of the top floor of the old library building whose windows face the highway and the road home.
They do not live in the deadness of a textbook, but Tennyson, Pope, Byron and all the rest, live together in the mind of Miss Lindsey.
PAST TENSE—Coming from a family of 11 children, whether Miss Lindsey is the fourth or fifth child is unimportant.
The real importance of her family of 10 brothers and sisters is that Bell used that relationship to gain a foothold into the minds of others.
Having a unique trait, the small verbal woman is able to hold the attention of twenty-year-olds as easily as other teachers dismiss a noisy class.
To the composite of twenty yeared people that make her classes, Miss Lindsey holds a different place to each.
In this classroom and during the eight years she has been at Hinds, one thing is remembered by all —Miss Lindsey likes opinionated people.
FUTURE—Students will probably in years to come leave Hinds and never remember what they did while they were here, who they knew, and why they knew them.
Students of the “verb,” if they follow true to form, will be exceptions.
Over the past year, Miss Lindsey has received letters, phone calls and visits from previous students.
One such student wrote Miss Lindsey while he was in flight training school during the second World War.
He was depressed because he didn’t know the meaning of the words used in flight training, and was sure he would never get his wings.
If there were an Indefinite Tense, there would be no use in conjugating “the verb” further, for— there is nothing indefinite about Bell.
Stuart Strenger Georgia State Stanley J Foust 1). of.Oklahoma Judson K Farnsworth Northeastern U Raymond T Joyce, Jr.
Laps 1,2,31 FIRST LAP Hubert F Tett Iowa State Billy D Farris Sam Houston State William L Bradley Louisiana State Charles Perry, Jr.
Providence College SECOND UP John M Mulcahy U of Connecticut Michael B Reed Ursinus College Baxter Myers, Jr.
John N Bierer The Citadel William P Martz Kent State Lucy Lee Bassett Emory U SECOND LAP Richard L Smit U of Michigan R Montgomery, Jr.
Jose M Martinez Gonzaga U Roger A Kueter Loras College Earl F Brown Colgate Cdt.
Lane Moak Pontiac 5 -JR HANDING OFF — George Puckett and Tommy Axtel practice a hand off for the intramural track meet here Thursday.
Intramural Contest Initiated On Track BillO akes, recreational director, announced today that there will be an intramural track meet held on Thursday afternoon at 3:45 on the “Red Dog” track.
There have been no preliminary try-outs fo rthe meet, and all boys are invited to participate in the events.
WA A Vacations On Gulf Coast By JAMES K SMITH Twelve members of the Women’s Athletic Association journeyed to the Gulf Coast last weekend on a year’s-end pleasure outing, related Mrs.
Leaving Hinds Friday afternoon the girls arrived at Gulfport in time to go swimming before retiring after the long ride.
The weekend was spent near the beach and around the court's cemented pool.
Softball replaced swimming for several hours and was followed by lunch.
Rain Saturday afternoon did not darken the spirits of the girls who played cards and checkers indoors.
The group was treated to a picnic at Dotty Darlings 1 boyfriend's house Saturday night.
After the picnic, the girls toured Gulfport and went to an amusement park at Biloxi.
The freshmen girls won the second softball game last Wednesday afternoon by default.
Frances announced a meeting of the Women’s Athletic Association for Wednesday afternoon in the girls’ gym to elect next year’s officers.
Hinds Ends Sports Year, Letters Total Of 65 Men Page 6 HINDSONIAN May 22, 1963 By JAMES K SMITH Hinds Junior College lettered 65 boys for their participation in the major sports of football, basketball, and track during the ’63 season.
The Eagles turned in a fair record in football this year with four wins, five losses, and one tie.
In a field of 12 teams Hinds Eagles tied for fifth with Northwest, there were only eight slots for the 12 this year due to ties for second, third, and fifth.
After getting off to a slow start the Hinds Eagles sparked up at the end of the season and won their last three games.
Passing played a major role in these victories and Coach Renfroe will probably rely on an aerial attack next year. 45 boys lettered in football and six Eagles copped Honorable Mentions in the All-Star vote.
Sophomores Rick Thrash, Bobby James, Mike Vincent, and George Benton along with freshmen Oscar Teasley and Mike Mahoney received the honors.
Coach Ricks' basketballers turned in a winning season this year with a record of 13 wins to 10 losses.
The Eagles won their first two games and then lost five out of six on the road.
Even though Hinds lost to Southwest they copped second place in the South and went to the State Junior College tourney at Senatobia.
Sophomores who lettered were Will Wade, Johnny Hines, and George Pucket.
The thinclad unit of Hinds ended a truly victorius season this year by capturing the Mississippi Junior College Track crown here two weeks ago.
Jerry Clark barely missed the trophy for top individual scorer in the tourney, losing by only 3/4 of a point.
Johnny Hagan, Jerry Clark, Jimmy Clark, Larry Jones, George Benton, Percy Boell, Woodie Martin, Darden Davis, Bill Dunlap.
Hinds did not give letters in tennis, but tournetters placed second in the state tourney held here May 11.
Boyd McPhail, Billy Joe Montgomery, Johnny Hines, Shirley Morris, Roxie Noblin, Ann Stephenson, Barbara Clack, and Kerry Perry were the mtstanding players.
Tony’s main trick is jumping through a hoop of fire with a six foot clearance.
John has appeared with Tony on T.V. and in rodeos and horse shows throughout the state.
Tony does other tricks with poles of fire and John does trick riding with him.
After Tony became accustomed to the fire John started raising the pole gradually to difQuality RUBBER STAMPS and PLASTIC SIGNS Dixie Rubber Stamp Co.
When the height of the pole reached four feet John decided to make a spectacular act with Tony.
As Tony accepted the fire on his sides the length of the sides was increased.
John now uses an elipse six feet high and three feet wide supported on oil drums.
The performance will include Tony shaking hands with John, Tony counting to two and telling his age, Tony playing dead and stretching out.
John will do trick riding and the act will close with Tony jumping poles of fire and finally jumping through the hoop.
They will charter planes for all needs, rent planes to any licensed private pilot, and give qualified instruction to beginner flying students.
Nygren Air Service Raymond Air Port HINDSONIAN SUPPLEMENT ^ This is the second of a series of Hindsonian supplements which will be issued at the end of each semester.
Published at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by and for students at Hinds Junior College.
Raymond, Miss., this magazine does not necessarily express the views of the faculty or administration of Hinds Junior College.
The natural beauty of springtime is consummated in this picturesque view of Raymond Lake.
Accenting this beauty is Margie Lee, Jackson freshman, who seems astonished herself at the wonders of Nature's paint brush.
With spring as our theme, what could better illustrate the season's most common feature . . . natural beauty.
Darwin seemed to think the fairest “male” came *. from the great apes, but his theory didn’t include women.
High, wide, loose and bushy, the teased hair styles fit into the present metropolis as easilv as chickens into a back yard.
Then we strutted about the yard, displaying our elegant robes and ordering JoJo to pick more clover—though his little black fingers were already flying.
Sometimes—if you didn’t want to play king anymore_ you would come to life and say, “You ain’t no Queen, and you don’t have on no robe.
But that usually evoked a sermon on her part, so I just mostly sat by the fireplace and hurled matches into the hot cinders.
JoJo was a dispatcher, you were a captain, and I was always the Jap that had to die in a painful, agonizing ashion.
After I died, we always changed games, PAGE 8 SPRING SUPPLEMENT so I didn’t mind playing—but I surely would have liked being a captain, or even a dispatcher.
Sometimes we didn’t play at all—we just walked around, getting on each other’s nerves, and wishing the other one would go home.
Every two hours we all trooped to the field, under that assumed commission, carrying water to JoJo’s mama.
Actually he never asked us to go, but we did since Aunt Lit always gave us candy.
Aunt Lit was an old mulatto who was famous to us because of her “streak-of-lean-and-streak-of-fat candy” _ as she called it.
Sometimes, if we happened to be in the field, we’d go sit on the turn-rows and watch Lit eat her collards—her standing menu.
Invariably I would stare as she ate, for I was certain that she ate differently from us.
Well, she ate no differently from anyone else; in fact, she even took out her false teeth and washed them when she finished eating . . . just like I’d seen my own grandmother do.
Being overly attentive to midwivery gossip, Lit, one day, forgot to replace her teeth.
They were lying on a broad cotton leaf, grinning inanely when I found them, and imtin aeciaea to maKe act with Tony.
He n a short story by Way vie McGrew mediately I petitioned my mother to let me carry them back to her.
The petition was granted, so off I trotted with Lit’s great white teeth all bound up in a handkerchief and pinned to my pocket.
By the time I had gotten to her shack, eaten two bars of “streak-of-lean-and-streak-of-fat candy,” and nodded my head to her superstitious chatter, it was well past time to go home.
During the last candy bar, I had begun to dread the solitary hike home, and finally swallowing my pride, asked Lit to walk back with me.
Lit was a garrulous soul if nothing else; she kept up a constant prattle without any sort of connection or sense.
I was hardly paying any attention to what she was saying until I realized that she was explaining how to kill someone.
She hadn’t even finished the last phrase before I automatically began to walk faster.
Visions of myself, throat cut and floating atop some slimy green slough were churning through my head.
At that time she caught the flesh at my throat and gave it a tug, accompanied by one of her terrible rasping growls.
In my state of mind, hysteria, I delicately dabbed at my throat, beseeching God to prolong my life—if but a little while.
And God must have heard my prayers, for my throat was not one bloody mutilation as I had expected.
I even resolved that Lit was some sort of ole grouch that just wanted to scare me—so I wouldn’t want any more of her candy.
My courage was back again, I would have slain Goliath, . . . and had I not suddenly heard some loud baritone voice permeating the trees and very darkness.
Though it was dark, and I could not see, I perceived that already Lit was fumbling at the front of her dress for her razor . . . and I also realized that the baritone voice was that of my grandfather, drunkenly singing some raucous barroom ditty.
At that moment, I realized that I was born to be a Jap—just an ole cowardly Jap.
My mild hysteria was no longer mild; I was running, screeching, and quoting Bible scriptures all in one breath.
Ole Lit must have thought I’d SPRING SUPPLEMENT PAGE 9 DON / T run out of gas.
Before you leave on those week-end trips go by MITCHELLS TEXACO and gas up While there, have them check the oil, tires, transmission, muffler, and trunk.
When you get a car wash they pay special attention to white walls and radiator cap At Mitchells you can find everything from seat covers to hamburgers There it's the little things that count. i s § i 8 MITCHE RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI ENGRAVINCi COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES PAGE 10 SPRING SUPPLEMENT gone mad, or seen the devil swooping down on us with fire and brimstone.
She had the most horrified expression — like any minute she would go shrieking off into the netherlands, beating her bony hips and bellowing santification.
She stared at me for a while, the white of her eyes looking like two great pearl buttons just hanging in mid-air; then she was gone.
I didn’t know’ if she had just faded into the rest of the blackness or if she had actually been taken off by the devil — my curiosity was too frightened to inquire.
Sometimes, when I was not in the mood to play war with you and JoJo, I would try to solve hit’s disappearance—but I never could.
You were just small dark shadows pursuing one another . . effervescent clown sprinting through clover ... funny clowns with ridiculously long arms and legs.
At other times, Adventure, A view of unknown Minds and times— A student’s scourge, A scholar’s love— Literature Is written now And famous later.
PAGE 12 SPRING SUPPLEMENT ^ 4 ^ Shadows Of The Past Along one of Mississippi’s backroads lies a small community called Learned.
In its early history, Learned almost equalled Jackson’s importance as a trading center.
Just before sundown, when the town is deserted, Learned resembles a still picture of a town taken from a western movie.
At one end of Learned’s old main street stands a store preserved from the fate of the other decaying buildings of its age.
The store, which is still doing business, belongs to the Gibbes Family.
The building of a rectangular floor plan is constructed of edge-grained pine on the inside.
The high walls on the sides are lined with shelves, and a ladder is used to reach the top shelves.
Shelves extend perpendicularly from the back wall to an open space, centered by an old fashioned pot-bellied stove.
The Gibbes still sell kerosene, gas lanterns, long johns, and blue jeans.
Old-fashioned scales, candy jars, and can-laden counters exhibit thriving business.
High-topped shoes contrast to city-dweller's heels The more conservative shoes are still available in Gibbes' establishment.
Potbellied stove, which provides warmth in cold weather, typifies the antiquated store.
The most modern music lessons are available at SKEET’S GUITAR SHOP located in the Westland Circle Shopping Center.
S BAND LUUlX hNSTRUMENT REPAIR SERVICE repairs all band instruments for Mr McWilliams at Mr Barnett’s shop in the Masonic Lodge in Raymond.
For fast efficient service call or go by SKEET’S GUITAR SHOP in Jackson.
Remember if it’s musical then Mr McWilliams has it or Mr Barnett can fix it.
Skeet’s for the best in music. button and high-laced shoes, still being sold.
For sale in, the dry goods section are plastic collars worn during the early Twenties.
Not far from the collars are cotton stockings which ladies used before the advent of nylons.
Sales indicate that the horse collars are more in demand than the Model T parts.
Mr Walter Gibbes, a member of the Hinds faculty, and his brother now manage the store.
The store was purchased by Mr Gibbes’ father just after its construction and has been in the family ever since.
They are now making plans to restore the building to its original state by displaying more antiques.
Almost anything the customer wants to trade is accepted as payment for goods Grain bins behind the store are reminders that in the early days, as well as today, the Gibbes accepted grain for payment of bills and then ground the grain themselves.
It served as a storage place for ice and as a refrigerator for newly slaughtered pigs and cows.
Mr Walter Gibbes estimates that the store includes more than 1000 articles.
It is fairly safe to say that these articles are representative of the goods sold from the store’s early history to the present time.
SMITH-CORONA GALAXIE * 10 day touch typing course Galaxie features modern design, fullsize office keyboard, mar-proof finish, and all-steel frame.
And through the air floated the chilled tinkle of cymbals, as though light raindrops were striking the metal, then slipping off the edges.
Beacons of fine cedar glistened above her, and the mural-painted walls caught the translucent light and scattered beautiful pastels against the beveled glass lanterns.
From the windows draped curtains of green velvet, which dropped to the floor, appearing to be dark pools of ink slowly moving with the wind.
Lengths of amber satin shrouded the floor, and in the folds of the slick amber lay mandarins — still yet strangely vital mandarins that seemed to sink further into the folds of the satin.
The cymbols lost their light tinkling sound, and as they did, the muffled beat of a drum could be heard accenting their last fading quiver.
The sounds of the cymbals being lost, the drums began a feverish throb, and'the placid young girl arose, and draping about her head a veil, silently glided toward the center of the room.
Her body erect and her face immobile, she knelt on the floor, and pulling back an amber fold of satin, withdrew a small gold basket.
And from the windows came the strained sound of a flute whistling a low, charming melody, the notes rising and falling as in a dirge.
As the music grew louder, she slowly began to weave two and fro, with her hands folded The most recent of a series of writing exercises By WAYVIE McGREW beneath her chin, and her eyes staring emptily at the frail murals.
The lining of the basket began to tremble, and slowly, cautiously, the head of a beautiful snake appeared.
Its eyes held the pastels, the greens, the ambers of the room all embraced in the enchanting, ominous music.
Slowly it inched upward, erect and daring, until its eyes intercepted the vacant stare of the girl.
Then, as if intranced with her rhythmic sway, it began to move in the same willowy pattern.
Two and fro, again and again, they moved through the air, like two supple trees bent in the wind, sometimes touching their heads to the satin floor.
And, the cymbals again growing faint, the snake began to coil back into the basket, its sleek skin glittering as it descended.
The satin ceased to tremble, and pushing the basket under the amber and mandarins, the young girl flung the veil from her head and arose from the floor, vibrant and yielding, The drums now rumbled and, becoming more distinct, they sounded like great tom toms prophesying fate.
As the brutal drums reverberated, she began to duck her tiny neck and slinging her agile body about the room, her profile appeared to be a slender whip slashing through the incensed air.
Faster and faster her body jerked, almost as if it were being pierced with sharp, tiny needles, and as she cut through the tense atmosphere, her lithe form began to spin.
Whirling, she seemed only to be a vague whiff of smoke rising from the floor.
And as the smoke began to drift away, the tiny little form slithered to the floor, lying cold and motionless.
You get more for your money here finest the market offers Standard Photo (2ci Cameras fiAo ^ plies finishing 'Serving Mississippians over a third of a Century"" PAGE 16 SPRING SUPPLEMENT V Somewhere— A cry in the night, j A hand Clutching the air, A heart J Longing to listen, A soul Waiting for prayer.
Who’ll carry the light To feed * The hungering soul, To halt The cry in the night. dianne me clung j LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS EVERYBODY GOES TO SHONEY’S AMERICA'S FAVORITE RESTAURANT AND DRIVE IN COMPLETE TAKE OUT SERVICE SHONEY’S WESTLAND PLAZA SPRING SUPPLEMENT PAGE 17 I The time is 8:00 in the morning.
A large blue and white crosscountry bus is already slowly coming down the drive between the N girls’ tennis courts and Northside dormitory.
It pulls up next to a small, lonely tree; the door opens, and suddenly — mass confusion.
Some of them leap from the bus and make a head-on dash toward the grill, while others slowly walk down the steps and drag their way towards the science building.
Not the ones on television, but real honest to goodness nurses who have dedicated their lives to helping others.
These are the ones who are destined to become poor, over-worked, under-paid, domantic figures enslaved in hospitals throughout the world.
But at the moment, they are “just fifty different women trying to maintain a C average,” as George Davis, one of their instructors, puts it.
The other six are divided between four hours of hospital classes and two hours of practical work.
Among the hours at Hinds are four classes that have been added as a special treat for nurses only.
The rest of their time on this campus is spent in the ordinary classes of English, psychology, and sociology.
In spit of all these complicated courses, their vigorous study, and hard-spemt hours, they are not half finished with their extensive training.
They have two more long industrious years of classroom and clinical work before they are ready to extend their helping hand to others.
A ray of fun, laughter, and relaxation does shine into their hardworking lives.
At the dormitory of the Gilfoy School of Nursing in Jackson, they find time to engage in enjoyable activities such as basketball, bowling, and swimming.
Besides all this the school also looks out for their religious welfare.
They attend church on Sunday and regular vesper services every Wednesday.
No, the nurses are not leaving; in fact they will be here longer, and have more time for relaxation.
They came at 8:06 in the morning on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and left at noon.
This arrangement was made so they could also attend classes at the hospital.
It can easily be seen that this does not leave much time for their classes at the hospital.
That’s because they will no longer have any classes except those at Hinds.
Next year at 3:15 every week day between 50 and 60 girls will congregate by the solitary tree behind the grill and patiently wait for the large blue and white cross country bus to come and take them back to the hospital.
Want for better things pushes the weight of the work back a little farther.
Thy mind Was cluttered, Twisted, tangled and torn And yet, Thee claimed clear-headedness.
