April 7, 1950 National Security Council The President’s News Conference of June 29, 1950 June 29, 1950 Harry S Truman ""Checkers"" Speech in Los Angeles, CA September 23, 1952 Richard Nixon Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
April 12, 1949 Harry S Truman Speech on the Marshall Plan December 04, 1947 Charles W Vursell Speech on the Truman Doctrine March 13, 1947 Henry A Wallace Excerpts from Sources of Soviet Conduct July, 1947 Excerpts from The Cold War 1947 Walter Lippman Speech on the North Atlantic Treaty July 26, 1949 Sen.
July, 1947 Nathaniel Peffer Letter to Eleanor Roosevelt March 16, 1948 Harry S Truman St.
January 10, 1952 Harry S Truman The President's Duties February 18, 1952 Harry S Truman Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
June 12, 1952 Federal Civil Defense Administration Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
March 08, 1948 Hugo L Black Dennis United States June 04, 1951 Felix Frankfurter Beauharnais Illinois April 28, 1952 Felix Frankfurter Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
June 20, 1980 Harry A Blackmun Roberts United States Jaycees July 03, 1984 William J Brennan Jr.
August 22, 1968 Robin Morgan “For the Equal Rights Amendment” August 10, 1970 Shirley Chisholm The Need for the Equal Rights Amendment September, 1973 Ruth Bader Ginsburg Roe Wade 1973 Byron R White Anti-ERA Demonstration 1975 Acceptance Speech at 1980 Republican Convention July 17, 1980 Ronald Reagan A Christian Manifesto December 31, 1982 Francis Schaeffer Roberts United States Jaycees July 03, 1984 William J Brennan Jr.
Following this, Mr McCone called on Mr Cline to give the most recent intelligence estimate conclusions of the United States Intelligence Board.
Mr Cline did so on the basis of three papers which were distributed to the group.
Mr Katzenbach said he believed the President had ample constitutional and statutory authority to take any needed military measures.
From the standpoint of international law, Mr Katzenbach thought United States action could be justified on the principle of self-defense.
I did not think a declaration of war would improve our position, but indeed would impair it.
I said that a defensive quarantine of Cuba would involve a use of force, and this had to be considered in relation to the United Nations Charter.
The Charter contained a general prohibition against the use of force except in certain limited kinds of situation.
One of these was “armed attack,” but the situation in Cuba did not constitute armed attack on any country.
Another exception was collective action voted by the competent United Nations organ to deal with a situation under Chapter VII of the Charter.
And it seemed quite problematical whether we could obtain a recommendation from the General Assembly.
Thus a case could be made under the Charter for the use of force if it were sanctioned by the American Republics acting under the Rio Treaty.
The Organ of Consultation, pursuant to Articles 6 and 8 of that Treaty, could recommend measures, including the use of armed force, to meet a situation endangering the peace of America.
As to the prospects for securing the necessary two-thirds vote in the Organ of Consultation, Mr Martin would have something to say about that.
If the contention were advanced that a defensive quarantine voted under the Rio Treaty constituted “enforcement action” under Article 53 of the United Nations Charter, and therefore required the authorization of the Security Council, we would be able to make a reasonably good argument to the contrary.
While our ability to persuade seven members of the Security Council to vote with us on this issue might be uncertain, we would in any event be able to prevent a vote going against our position.
He thought the majority could be increased within 24 hours to 17 or perhaps even 18 or 19.
He was hopeful in regard to Ecuador and Chile, and believed there was a good chance of getting Mexico.
The Attorney General said the President would be placed in an impossible position if we went to the OAS and then failed to get the necessary votes, or if there were a delay.
He asked if we could be perfectly sure of the outcome before seeking OAS concurrence.
Mr Martin said he hated to guarantee anything, but he had a lot of confidence about this.
You couldn’t go to the American Republics in advance without loss of security, but he felt that a last-minute approach to heads of state, laying the situation on the line, would produce the votes.
The Attorney General again expressed his great concern at the possibility of a slip.
There followed a discussion covering the meeting held the night before with the President.
One participant looked back on the meeting as having arrived at a tentative conclusion to institute a blockade, and thought the President had been satisfied at the consensus by then arrived at among his advisers.
General Taylor quickly indicated that he had not concurred and that the Joint Chiefs had reserved their position.
Mr Bundy then said that he had reflected a good deal upon the situation in the course of a sleepless night, and he doubted whether the strategy group was serving the President as well as it might, if it merely recommended a blockade.
He had spoken with the President this morning, and he felt there was further work to be done.
This would be made more difficult by the prior publicity of a blockade and the consequent pressures from the United Nations for a negotiated settlement.
An air strike would be quick and would take out the bases in a clean surgical operation.
He favored decisive action with its advantages of surprises and confronting the world with a fait accompli.
Mr Acheson said that Khrushchev had presented the United States with a direct challenge, we were involved in a test of wills, and the sooner we got to a showdown the better.
He favored cleaning the missile bases out decisively with an air strike.
This wasn’t just another instance of Soviet missiles aimed at the United States.
Here they were in the hands of a madman whose actions would be perfectly irresponsible; the usual restraints operating on the Soviets would not apply.
So far as questions of international law might be involved, Mr Acheson agreed with Mr Katzenbach’s position that self-defense was an entirely sufficient justification.
But if there were to be imported a qualification or requirement of approval by the OAS, as apparently suggested by Mr Meeker, he could not go along with that.
General Taylor said that a decision now to impose a blockade was a decision to abandon the possibility of an air strike.
A strike would be feasible for only a few more days; after that the missiles would be operational.
If it were to take place Sunday morning, a decision would have to be made at once so that the necessary preparations could be ordered.
For a Monday morning strike, a decision would have to be reached tomorrow.
Secretary McNamara said that he would give orders for the necessary military dispositions, so that if the decision were for a strike the Air Force would be ready.
He did not, however, advocate an air strike, and favored the alternative of blockade.
Under Secretary Ball said that he was a waverer between the two courses of action.
The Attorney General said with a grin that he too had had a talk with the President, indeed very recently this morning.
He thought it would be very, very difficult indeed for the President if the decision were to be for an air strike, with all the memory of Pearl Harbor and with all the implications this would have for us in whatever world there would be afterward.
Thousands of Cubans would be killed without warning, and a lot of Russians too.
He favored action, to make known unmistakably the seriousness of United States determination to get the missiles out of Cuba, but he thought the action should allow the Soviets some room for maneuver to pull back from their over-extended position in Cuba.
Mr Bundy, addressing himself to the Attorney General, said this was very well but a blockade would not eliminate the bases; an air strike would.
After a pause, Mr Martin replied that, of course, a good deal might be different after a strike, and Castro might be toppled in the aftermath.
Others expressed the view that we might have to proceed with invasion following a strike.
Still another suggestion was that United States armed forces seize the base areas alone in order to eliminate the missiles.
Secretary McNamara thought this a very unattractive kind of undertaking from the military point of view.
Toward one o’clock Secretary Rusk said he thought this group could not make the decision as to what was to be done; that was for the President in consultation with his constitutional advisers.
The Secretary thought the group’s duty was to present to the President, for his consideration, fully staffed-out alternatives.
Accordingly, two working groups should be formed, one to work up the blockade alternative and the other to work up air strike.
Mr Johnson was to have with him Ambassador Thompson, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, Mr Martin, Mr Nitze, and Mr Meeker.
Mr McCone, when asked to serve with the air strike group, begged off on the ground that his position and duties on the United States Intelligence Board made it undesirable for him to participate in the working group.
Mr Katzenbach was detailed to the Johnson group, later visiting the Bundy group to observe and possibly serve as a devil’s advocate.
Mr Sorensen commented that he thought he had absorbed enough to start on the draft of a speech for the President.
There was some inconclusive discussion on the timing of such a speech, on the danger of leaks before then, and on the proper time for meeting with the President once more, in view of his current Western campaign trip.
Before the whole group dispersed, Ambassador Thompson said the Soviets attached importance to questions of legality and we should be able to present a strong legal case.
The Attorney General, as he was about to leave the room, said he thought there was ample legal basis for a blockade.
They then reconvened and were joined once more by the cabinet officers who had been away in the earlier afternoon.
The Johnson group scenario, which was more nearly complete and was ready earlier, was discussed first.
There was again a discussion of timing, now in relation to a Presidential radio address.
Mr Martin thought Sunday might be too early, as it would be virtually impossible to get to all the Latin American heads of state on Sunday.
Ambassador Thompson made the point that 24 hours must be allowed to elapse between announcement of the blockade and enforcement, so as to give the Soviet Government time to get instructions to their ship captains.
More than once during the afternoon Secretary McNamara voiced the opinion that the United States would have to pay a price to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
He thought we would at least have to give up our missile bases in Italy and Turkey and would probably have to pay more besides.
At different times the possibility of nuclear conflict breaking out was referred to.
The point was made that, once the Cuban missile installations were complete and operational, a new strategic situation would exist, with the United States more directly and immediately under the gun than ever before.
A striking Soviet military push into the Western Hemisphere would have succeeded and become effective.
The clock could not be turned back, and things would never be the same again.
During this discussion, the Attorney General said that in looking forward into the future it would be better for our children and grandchildren if we decided to face the Soviet threat, stand up to it, and eliminate it, now.
The circumstances for doing so at some future time were bound to be more unfavorable, the risks would be greater, the chances of success less good.
The implication of his statement was that he favored blockade rather than strike.
In the course of the afternoon discussion, the military representatives, especially Secretary McNamara, came to expressing the view that an air strike could be made some time after the blockade was instituted in the event the blockade did not produce results as to the missile bases in Cuba.
The Attorney General took particular note of this shift, and toward the end of the day made clear that the firmly favored blockade as the first step; other steps subsequently were not precluded and could be considered; he thought it was now pretty clear what the decision should be.
After a few minutes, Secretary Rusk asked him if he had some views on the question of what to do.
When queried as to them, he said that in view of the course the discussion was taking he didn’t think it was necessary to express them then.
He went on to say he thought we must look beyond the particular immediate action of blockade; we need to develop a plan for solution of the problem—elements for negotiation designed to settle the current crisis in a stable and satisfactory way and enable us to move forward on wider problems; he was working on some ideas for a settlement.
One possibility would be the demilitarization of Cuba under effective international supervision, perhaps accompanied by neutralization of the island under international guaranties and with UN observers to monitor compliance.
Once again there was discussion of when another meeting with the President should be held.
It was generally agreed that the President should continue on his trip until Sunday morning.
