Sunday, October 21Kennedy discussed in more detail about the blockade and air strike.Sunday, October 21Kennedy discussed in more detail about the blockade and air strike.
Wednesday, October 24The Soviet ships stop at the blockade and the military alert is raised to DEFCON 2.
Americans discovered Cuba building secret missile bases off the coast of Florida.
If no one stopped them this could lead to a nuclear catastrophe.If no one stopped them this could lead to a nuclear catastrophe.
President Kennedy told Nikita S Khrushchev to remove all missile bases from Cuba.President Kennedy told Nikita S Khrushchev to remove all missile bases from Cuba.
Khrushchev ordered to the Soviet field commanders to launch missiles if the United States invaded.Khrushchev ordered to the Soviet field commanders to launch missiles if the United States invaded.
He died November 22,1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him.He died November 22,1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him.
He was born in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, He died November 22,1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him.He died November 22,1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him.
He was born in 1894, the son of a miner.He was born in 1894, the son of a miner.
He was known for his temper tantrums.He was known for his temper tantrums.
He also agrees that these planes can be observed and counted as they leave.
Inasmuch as this goes a long way toward reducing the danger which faced this Hemisphere four weeks ago, I have this afternoon instructed the Secretary of Defense to lift our naval quarantine.I have today been informed by Chairman Khrushchev that all of the IL-28 bombers now in Cuba will be withdrawn within 30 days.
Inasmuch as this goes a long way toward reducing the danger which faced this Hemisphere four weeks ago, I have this afternoon instructed the Secretary of Defense to lift our naval quarantine.
Outline U.S.A. nuclear deployment USSR responds Timeline of the crisis.
