Double, perhaps even quadruple that number of Soviet, Eastern European, and Chinese citizens perished, and no one had any reliable data on how many Western Europeans, Africans, Asians, Australians, and others were killed by the radioactive fallout as it enveloped the globe.
In 1957 Australian writer Neville Shute described its denouement in his eerily tranquil apocalyptic novel, On the Beach.
Adapted for the screen by Stanley Kramer in 1959, On the Beach premiered simultaneously in major United States cities and Moscow.
There were reports of viewers sobbing as Gregory Peck, Ava Gardner, Fred Astaire, and Anthony Perkins stoically prepared for the arrival over Australia of the deadly radioactive fallout from a nuclear war in the northern hemisphere.
They were the last surviving humans, going quietly into the endless night.
The Pentagon, opposed to any film that might undermine public enthusiasm for nuclear weapons, refused to cooperate.
While participants and historians of the crisis never tire of recalling its details and its dangers, the majority of the generation that lived through it, and subsequent generations, never became emotionally engaged with its potential consequences.
It was neither Vietnam nor Watergate, nor was it Dallas on November 22, 1963.
It was just the most devastating event in world history . . . that somehow didn't happen.
The terrifying realization in 1962 that nuclear armageddon was merely a stumble away profoundly influenced Cold War behavior for the next 27 years, until the collapse of a wall in Berlin ushered in a second nuclear age.
Nuclear War Possible The public learned that nuclear war was an imminent possibility on Monday, October 22, 1962, at 7m.
Kennedy went on to explain that Soviet officials had repeatedly lied about the buildup.
He said the United States was demanding that all the offensive missiles be removed from Cuba forthwith—or else—and announced that a ""quarantine"" of Cuba was only the first step toward forcing the removal of the offending weapons.
The blockade of Cuba, and the other responses detailed in the President's dramatic 20-minute speech, had been devised by a select group of advisers during the previous week in secret meetings that often lasted late into the night.
Officially designated the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , its members were assembled at the President's request on Tuesday morning, October 16, after National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy informed him that a U-2 had photographed the ""unmistakable evidence"" that he referred to in the first paragraph of his speech.
Refer to CaptionEnlarge The final, signed, page of the Quarantine Proclamation or Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba.
The ExComm was initially composed of 16 members, the most influential being the President's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy.
Among the others were Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Presidential speech writer and counsel Theodore Sorensen, Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze, Under Secretary of State George Ball, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen.
Maxwell Taylor, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union Llewellyn Thompson, and Bundy.
All the Joint Chiefs attended one meeting, as did President Harry Truman's Secretary of State, Dean Acheson.
Despite McNamara's view that the Soviet missiles did ""not at all"" alter the ""strategic balance,"" the option of accepting their deployment as a fait accompli was rejected out of hand.
Even if they did not pose a serious military risk, their presence was deemed politically unacceptable.
Several months earlier, Kennedy had directed the Secret Service to install recording systems in the Oval Office and the Cabinet Room, the location of the majority of the ExComm's meetings.
Writing about the decision-making process from the perspective of ""a fly on the wall"" was irresistible, and the new information revealed who said what, to whom, when, and how.
It lay bare the dynamics between senior advisers and contradicted many of their recollections.
It exposed their confused views of Soviet objectives, revealed their analytical instincts , and exposed whether they had what can only be referred to as good sense.
And it raised deeply troubling questions about the judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The transcripts also indicated that the committee members were divided, inconsistent, often confused, and appropriately frightened.
The seriousness of the encounter they were embarked upon, and their lack of confidence that any proposed strategy would accomplish their goal, led most of them—along with the Joint Chiefs—to initially favor some form of military action—to strike, as it were, like cornered animals.
The list of incorrect assumptions, false information, and bad judgments that ran through the committee's discussions is alarming.
When trying to discern Khrushchev's motives and intentions, the State Department's leading Soviet experts, former ambassadors to Moscow Charles E ""Chip"" Bohlen and Llewellyn Thompson argued for a military strike on the assumption that Khrushchev intended to use the missiles in Cuba to force the Western powers out of Berlin.
Former Secretary of State Acheson, perhaps the nation's most experienced Cold War diplomat, gave equally dangerous advice.
Invited to the October 18 meeting at the President's request, he merely repeated the old canard that military force was the only way to deal with the Soviets and urged an immediate surprise assault to destroy the missiles.
When his recommendation was challenged, he declined to attend further meetings.
Not only had the agency missed the deployment of the mediumand intermediate-range missiles until it was almost too late to respond, but it was also unaware that the Soviets had on hand 35 LUNA battlefield nuclear weapons that would have devastated any American landing force.
The CIA's best estimate of the number of Soviet ground forces in Cuba was 10,000–12,000; in fact, more than 40,000 battle ready Soviet combat troops were prepared to confront a United States assault.
If the President had approved an attack on Cuba, Guantanamo Bay's reinforced garrison was primed to participate.
But the Soviets had moved a battlefield nuclear weapon into range of the base with the intention of destroying it before a single marine could pass through the gate.
While the ExComm Debated, Chaos Proved Troublesome Other near disasters, oversights, and accidents added to the chaos within the crisis.
Several anti-Castro groups, operating under a CIA program directed by Robert Kennedy, went about their sabotage activities because no one had thought to cancel their mission, which could have been mistaken for assault preparations.
Authorities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California were seemingly oblivious to the crisis.
At the Pentagon, no one dealing with the crisis appeared to be aware of the scheduled test to assess whether the Soviets might misinterpret the launch as a hostile action.
And, most extraordinarily, the commander of the Strategic Air Command, Gen.
Obviously trying to intimidate the Soviets, his behavior was confirmation of Gen.
Also on Saturday morning, October 27, the tensest day of the crisis, a U-2 pilot was killed when his plane was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile.
All of the ExComm's members assumed that the order to fire had been issued by Moscow; in fact, the decision was unauthorized and had been taken by the local commander.
Refer to CaptionEnlarge A P2V Neptune United States Navy patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter.
The response of the Joint Chiefs was to pressure the President to bomb the offending SAM site, but he had the good sense and will to reject their insistent requests.
And, as if following an improbable Hollywood script, that very afternoon, a U-2 flying on an air-sampling mission to the Arctic circle—which also should have been scrubbed—accidentally overflew Soviet territory when the pilot made a navigation error.
The Soviets could have interpreted that reconnaissance flight as anticipating an attack.
But the most dangerous moment of the crisis occurred late on Saturday afternoon, and the United States did not learn about it until almost 40 years later.
Four Soviet submarines were being tracked in the area of the blockade line, but no American knew that each had a 15-kiloton nuclear torpedo aboard that their captains were authorized to use.
Savitskii, convinced that he was being attacked by the practice depth charges and grenades that United States Navy anti-submarine warfare forces were dropping to force him to surface, loaded his nuclear torpedo and came within seconds of launching it at his antagonists.
Had he fired that weapon, there is no doubt about the devastating consequences that would have followed.
The fundamental flaw in the concept is that accurate information, the most important element in coping with any serious crisis, is invariably unavailable.
Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the crisis, the ExComm's discussions became the central focus of historians' efforts to understand the process that led to its peaceful resolution.
The members of the committee, as well as the President, promoted that idea, touting its work as a classic example of the administration's ability to skillfully manage international challenges.
A collection of early histories that relied on interviews with participants supported the view that the ExComm had been composed of ""wise men"" who had diligently worked through the most sensible policy options to reach the most appropriate decisions.
And in 1968, Robert Kennedy published a memoir of the crisis, Thirteen Days, that continues to reinforce that view.
This attention to the words of ""the wise men"" led to many misconceptions, but initially, and in particular, to two historical distortions.
The first was the incorrect impression that ExComm decisions had dictated the President's policies.
The second was to isolate the crisis from its broader historical Cold War milieu.
War was prevented for two reasons, and the ExComm's members were responsible for neither.
His objective was to protect Castro's government by deterring, not fighting, the United States.
The second reason that war was avoided is that the President, not the members of the ExComm , insisted on providing Khrushchev with a politically acceptable exit from his failed gamble.
The challenge was to find a resolution that gave the Soviet leader options other than capitulate or fight.
To do so, it was necessary for the President to empathize with his adversary, to see the crisis from Khrushchev's perspective.
He was encouraged in this by two unsung, consistently level-headed advisers.
Inclined toward military action early in the crisis, the President quickly grew increasingly wary of its unpredictable consequences.
Forced to maintain his schedule, so as not to raise suspicions that something untoward was occurring, he missed many of the meetings during the week preceding his speech.
But within 48 hours of being briefed by Bundy, he privately told his brother to back away from the military option and bring the committee members around to support a blockade.
It is clear that Khrushchev's crude deception had, at least initially, trumped any inclination the President had to seek a diplomatic exit from the crisis.
But what restored his commitment to diplomacy is less clear, although circumstantial evidence suggests that the cogent arguments presented to him by Under Secretary of State George Ball and Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson contributed to turning him against a military assault.
Expanding on McNamara's view that the missiles were not strategically significant, Ball condemned the idea of igniting a war on their behalf.
His alternative was to begin the process of eliminating the missiles with a blockade.
Having fortuitously arrived in Washington on October 16 to attend a White House luncheon, the President briefed him after lunch about the missiles and the conclusions of that morning's ExComm meeting.
Stevenson pointed out that while the United States had superior force in the Caribbean, any military action against Cuba could be countered by the Soviets in Berlin or Turkey, and that process would most likely escalate rapidly out of control.
The problem with this interpretation is that Kennedy intensely disliked Stevenson, for both political and personal reasons.
They suggested that Stevenson was a coward, not cut from the same heroic cloth as the Kennedy brothers.
But, in fact, Stevenson had been heroic in his dissent and, during those first confused days, had provided the clearest analysis of the dangers the crisis raised and the range of possible peaceful solutions.
Like it or not, however—and Kennedy hated it—the Stevenson view made a lot more sense to him than the war whoops of the Joint Chiefs and the ExComm's majority.
The psychology is complicated, but despite the President's personal dislike of Stevenson-the-man, Stevenson's intellect had spoken clearly, directly, and persuasively to Kennedy's intellect.
That ""conversation"" planted the seed for a diplomatic solution that Kennedy would cultivate and harvest as his own over the next 12 days.
But it was a gamble based on 17 years of nuclear experiences going back to Hiroshima.
A review of his reasoning reveals the historical roots of his thinking and its crude mimicking of United States nuclear policies.
This included how each nation tested and deployed them, how they figured into diplomatic exchanges, and how strategists and generals promoted their use in war.
This state of affairs tempted Khrushchev to bet that their secret deployment to Cuba would solve many of his problems.
But the attempted deployment also motivated Kennedy to demand their removal lest their existence, even if unused, destroy his presidency.
Refer to CaptionEnlarge Soviet Premier Khrushchev responded to President Kennedy on October 24, stating that You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us.
The plan was bizarre, vintage Khrushchev, a wild gamble that promised a huge payoff for both his domestic and foreign policies.
He had thought of it himself, and so he pushed it through the presidium, manipulating the doubters with alternating displays of reasonableness and combative confidence.
He began by enlisting the support of the equally facile enthusiast, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, his minister of defense.
Khrushchev had become consumed after the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion with the need to protect Castro's communist government.
Thinking about Cuba in these terms had the effect of shifting it from the periphery to the center of Soviet priorities and, in Khrushchev's mind, inextricably linking Soviet leadership of the Socialist world to the survival of Castro's government.
That conundrum appeared to be insoluble until Khrushchev alighted on the idea of emulating United States missile deployments to its NATO allies.
He assumed that while the United States could destroy most of his missiles before they could be launched, he also knew that the United States could never be certain that it could destroy them all.
That, he reasoned, provided Cuba with a second strike, an idea that had been promoted for almost a decade by America's nuclear strategists.
Soviet Presence Grows To Protect Missiles When Khrushchev reflected on the balance of United States and Soviet nuclear forces, what impressed him most was the imbalance of fear.
The proximity to his country of United States nuclear forces in Europe heightened Soviet fears of a nuclear strike far beyond what Americans experienced.
Khrushchev's assessment of United States caution in the face of a possible nuclear strike was confirmed years later by McNamara, who said that Kennedy chose the blockade option as a precaution against the possibility of even a lone nuclear warhead being fired from Cuba at an American city.
Missiles that could devastate a few United States cities would be secretly shipped to Cuba, and when they were ready to fire, he would announce their presence.
But as the process of organizing the mission evolved, the plan took on a life of its own.
Simplicity gave ground, one decision at a time, to increasing complexity, as military planners added requirement upon requirement.
For purposes of deception, the enterprise was designated Anadyr, the name of a well-known river in the frozen far northeast of Siberia.
It was launched with the decision to ship 24 R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles , each with a range of 1,100 miles, and 16 R-14 intermediate-range ballistic missiles capable of traveling 2,500 miles.
This array of nuclear firepower would provide almost total coverage of the United States.
Of course, those troops also had to be protected, especially against an air attack, and so antiaircraft batteries were added.
Other significant weapons that followed included IL-28 bombers, MIG-21 fighters, an array of battlefield nuclear weapons that included about 80 short-range FKR-1 nuclear-capable cruise missiles , several dozen LUNA tactical nuclear weapons , and submarines armed with nuclear torpedoes.
If deterrence didn't work, Khrushchev's Cuban brigades were prepared for nuclear war.
A Dangerous Confrontation on the High Seas The crisis that resulted from this deployment was a deadly confrontation between three countries, their governments, and their leaders.
By this time—five days after Kennedy's speech—it was apparent to Khrushchev, Kennedy, and Castro that the military activities of each passing day exponentially increased the danger of an incident escalating out of control.
Along with potential clashes on the quarantine line, tension had been increased by the well-publicized buildup of United States forces in the United States and Europe.
The three contending leaders became acutely aware, and worried , that at any moment events could slip from their control.
Over the past week, Castro had become increasingly enraged, apparently beyond worry.
In response to Kennedy's speech, he ordered general mobilization and commanded his antiaircraft batteries to shoot down United States aircraft that overflew his island; several low-flying Air Force reconnaissance jets had close calls.
Certain that he could do little to prevent an assault, he became grimly fatalistic, determined to confront the inevitable head-on regardless of the consequences.
Embracing Armageddon as an act of retributive justice, he urged Khrushchev to prepare to strike first.
Castro's letter struck Khrushchev as yet another warning that the situation in Cuba was slipping out of control.
Desperate to avoid Armageddon, or anything approaching it, he was, nevertheless, determined not to remove his missiles without receiving a quid pro quo.Moreover, he considered the blockade an illegal, outrageous act of war.
The folly of degenerate imperialism . . . act of aggression that pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war,"" he had angrily written to Kennedy on October 24.
He appeared determined then to dare the Americans to sink a Soviet vessel.
He was 9,000 miles from Havana but only 32 minutes from an intercontinental missile launched from the United States.
Mr President, we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied.
At times he was not sure if he was being too cautious, too aggressive, too flexible, too rigid, or simply too worried.
He was infuriated with his military chiefs for their cavalier attitude toward war, and he had lost patience with his advisers, who continued to offer contradictory recommendations.
Kennedy and Khrushchev were enemies, ideological and military adversaries, who blundered into a dangerous confrontation that neither wanted nor anticipated.
Each was aware that an accident, or even a misinterpretation, could set off a nuclear conflagration.
Yet the circumstances of their political and international obligations, as well as their personal interests, compelled them to press their goals despite their recognition that nothing they could achieve was worth the consequences of a nuclear war.
Yet, by this night, they had nudged each other so close to the edge of the nuclear precipice that terror had entered their calculations.
The first was to combine an earlier public pledge that the United States would not attack Cuba with a secret United States commitment, delivered that night by Robert Kennedy to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, to remove the offending Jupiter missiles in Turkey within several months.
Kennedy would accept the offer, allowing him to avoid his commitment to the Joint Chiefs to begin military actions.
But Khrushchev had looked deeper into the abyss on Saturday night, and fearful that the ally he was seeking to protect was on the verge of starting a war, he precipitously ended the crisis on Sunday with a surprise announcement over Radio Moscow.
Five decades of research also reveals why, absent revision, history petrifies into myth.
The crisis was the transformative event in U.S.-Soviet and U.S.-Cuban Cold War relations.
It not only assured Castro's survival , but it reset the unstated rules of the U.S.-Soviet nuclear relationship.
Nuclear deterrence could no longer be viewed as a stable condition that allowed governments to brandish nuclear weapons for diplomatic advantage.
The crisis had exposed deterrence's fragilities, requiring that it be managed openly as a delicately balanced process.
The crisis fits all of those definitions, but as the historical lens is widened, more complexity, more politics, more miscalculations, more unintended consequences, and more understanding enter the narrative.
Expanding the boundaries of the 13 days to Castro's revolution and the failed Bay of Pigs invasion explains the circumstances that made room for the crisis but does not deal with its root cause.
The root cause was the central role that nuclear weapons had come to play in the American-Soviet relationship.
Disregarding how those weapons were seen and valued by Soviet and United States leaders during the 17 years that preceded the crisis is analogous to explaining the cause of the American Civil War by focusing solely on Abraham Lincoln's election in 1860 while ignoring the history of slavery.
The Soviets called it the Caribbean Crisis, the Cubans labeled it the October Crisis.
But it was also a Berlin Crisis, a NATO Crisis, a Sino-Soviet Crisis, a Sino-Indian Crisis, and a crisis in which the Organization of American States and the United Nations played major roles.
Refer to CaptionEnlarge Kennedy immediately replied to Khrushchev that he consiedered the premier s Radio Moscow message an important contribution to peace.
The literal fright that the crisis engendered put an end to serious considerations of limited nuclear war.
Having faced the possibility of such an outcome, most nuclear strategists recognized that a limited nuclear exchange would be more analogous to stumbling on a slippery slope than climbing the rungs of an escalation ladder.
That recognition also brought an end to Khrushchev's efforts to eliminate West Berlin as a viable western enclave; it had been made clear that the dangers associated with such an effort could too easily slide out of control.
The crisis also exposed the multiple poles of the so-called bi-polar international system.
The United Nations, for example, played a far more important role in leading to its resolution than either the United States or Soviet governments were willing to acknowledge.
By providing a world stage, it transformed the crisis into a public international Cold War drama that increased pressure for a peaceful resolution.
The crisis even contributed to Sino-Soviet hostility on the one hand, and on the other, to a readjustment of the ties between the United States and its European allies.
The energetic effort to gain the OAS's approval for the blockade gave the nations of Central and South America a sense that they were being taken seriously, perhaps for the first time.
It was a unique moment because, in effect, the United States pleaded for the support of its southern neighbors.
The effort to enlist the support of the OAS, and the Kennedy administration's choice of the UN as the forum for presenting its evidence of Soviet duplicity—the U-2 photographs—highlighted the importance of the nonmilitary dimension of the Cold War, the contest on both sides of the iron curtain for hearts and minds.
It exposed the limits of what great powers could do alone and demonstrated the influence that small states could exert—whether clients or enemies.
Cuba was a major player in every aspect of the crisis, although no United States policy maker was willing to consider that Khrushchev was paying very close attention to what Castro was saying and doing.
It can even be argued that technology took the lead in both creating and resolving the crisis.
It made things possible, and because they were possible, they were attempted.
Enlarge The final, signed, page of the Quarantine Proclamation or Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba.
Enlarge A P2V Neptune United States Navy patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter.
Enlarge Soviet Premier Khrushchev responded to President Kennedy on October 24, stating that You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us.
Enlarge Kennedy immediately replied to Khrushchev that he consiedered the premier s Radio Moscow message an important contribution to peace.
The Triumph and Tragedy of J Robert Oppenheimer , won the 2006 Pulitzer Prize for Biography.
The John F Kennedy Presidential Library is the central depository for researching the American story.
But documents that alter what is generally believed continue to be extracted from government files around the world.
Since the end of the Cold War, many Soviet sources describing Khrushchev's decision to ship missiles to Cuba, the details of Operation Anadyr, and the negotiations that concluded the crisis, have become available.
Even Cuban sources, the most difficult to obtain, have enriched our understanding of the role that Castro played and specifics about the actions and activities of the Soviet Anadyr forces in Cuba.
Some of the best Soviet and Cuban information emerged from the remarkable October 1992 Havana Conference that brought together U.S., Russian and Cuban senior veterans of the crisis for a detailed discussion and review of the events.
Japan, China, Hungary, France, Israel, Holland, Yugoslavia, Switzerland, and elsewhere.
