No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the copyright owner.
DK INDIA Design Manager Managing Editor Arunesh Talapatra Rohan Sinha Senior Designers Senior Editor Sudakshina Basu, Balwant Singh Soma B Chowdhury Designers Editor Anjana Nair, Mini Dhawan, Rahul Ganguly Pallavi Narain Assistant Editors Assistant Designers Sudeshna Dasgupta, Showmik Chakraborty, Himanshi Sharma Arushi N eS"" DTP Manager Nfelafomevarelanare Balwant Singh Production Manager Pankaj Sharma DTP Designers Dheeraj Arora, Jagtar Singh Shankar Prasad SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION a me) wel fat140) g Ellen Nanney ACIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Jane McIntosh THE CLASSICAL AGE Philip Parker Historian and writer; books include [he Empire Stops Here and DK Eyewitness Companion to World History.
REFORMATION AND EXPLORATION Thomas Cussans Author and contributor to [he Times newspaper; previous titles for DK include Timelines of World History and History.
Sally Regan Contributor to several books for DK including History, World War II, and Science; awardwinning documentary maker whose films include Shell Shock and Bomber Command for the UK's Channel 4.
National Air and Space Museum The Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum Is one of the world’s most popular museums.
Its mission is to educate and inspire visitors by preserving and displaying aeronautical and space flight artifacts.
July 1, 1916, when my grandfather, serving as an artilleryman, lost several of his closest friends on the first day of the Somme offensive.
From the earliest times, history was cast as a grand chronicle of events and actions, the work of often larger-than-life protagonists, and was intended to enthrall and capture the imagination in the Same way as a great novel.
Most often the events were battles, treaties, and political struggles, a narrative that excluded the lives of the great majority of men, women, and children.
In reaction to this, historians focused on cultural, social, and economic continuities, looking for their evidence in everyday objects, trading records, accounts of childhood and old age.
The result was certainly a richer and more diverse account of human experience, but one that often left little sense of change over time.
As the present book shows, history constructed on a timeline does not have to be a narrow account of war and conquest, treaties and treason.
All of these feature here, but so do the dates of intellectual and technological innovations, the creation of key works of art, crucial shifts in patterns of agriculture, Lost city of the Incas Perched 7,970 ft (2.430 m] above sea level, in the Peruvian Andes, the Inca citadel of Machu Picchu was probably constructed in the 15th century, and abandoned in the 16th. exploration, and commerce.
This is an exhilarating and comprehensive account of human creativity as much as its destructiveness, of discovery and understanding as well as natural disasters and human folly.
Spectacularly illustrated and succinctly explained, key events in history from the first beginnings of agriculture to the most recent astrophysical discoveries are laid out along what is probably the most comprehensive timeline ever assembled.
No less exciting for me in helping to compose this book and to choose from all facets of human history to build up the timeline, is the contribution that History Year by Year makes to an understanding of global history.
Throughout the book, events, discoveries, and achievements occurring In Europe and North America are set against the equally momentous and significant events in the Mideast and East Asia, India, Africa, or South America and the Pacific Rim.
This is a history that stimulates awareness of a wider world by placing events from across that world side by side and reminding us that progress and discovery, feats of social organization, and challenges toa political status quo are no monopoly of the Western world, but as likely to originate in India or Egypt as in France and Spain.
The design of this book offers a unique opportunity to appreciate a global history of mankind in all its facets. | hope that you enjoy reading History Year by Year and using itasa reference as much as we enjoyed planning and writing it.
Over seven million years later, we appeared and developed the skills—including sophisticated toolmaking and agriculture—that allowed us to colonize the world. —4.
While all of these species seem to have walked on two legs like us, it is not certain whether any were actual ancestors of humans.
Because species are constantly evolving, and individuals of those species can vary, It is difficult to tell from isolated and often poorly preserved fossils which species they should be assigned to, or how these are related to one another.
OLDOWAN TOOL 2-1.8MyA ULTIMATELY, THE PARANTHROPINES’ WAY OF LIFE was unsuccessful and they became extinct after about 1.
These early Homo species were not very different from australopithecines.
H ergaster was tall and slender, and may have been the first hominin [a term used to describe humans and their ancestors] without much body hair.
Their brains were larger than those of their ancestors, and they lost the last of their adaptations to tree-climbing to become fully adapted to walking and running.
ACHEULEAN TOOL Many animal species use natural objects as tools, but the manufacture of stone tools is unique to hominins.
These are known as Oldowan” tools, after Olduvai Gorge, where they were first found.
Another close relative of Homo ergaster, Homo erectus, lived in China and Indonesia perhaps not long afterward.
Some archaeologists believe that earlier groups of hominins may also have left Africa, as some of the skulls from Dmanisi and from the much later site of Liang Bua in Flores, Indonesia, (currently known as Homo floresiensis) resemble those of Homo habilis and Homo rudolfensis.
Living farther north would have required a different way of life ® Narmada ® Zhoukoudian 1.6-1.
MYA ~Hexian _ "" 7 e® Nanjing Lantian @Yunxian 1.5-1 MYA ’ Trinil Sangiran, 8 Mojokerto Ngandong KEY and Eurasia, and demonstrate the ability to learn complex skills from one another and pass them down over generations.
To make these tools, knappers had to think several steps ahead in order to select a suitable stone and to ACHEULEAN HANDAXES made by Homo ergaster and H erectus were produced across most of Africa prepare and place each strike.
Handaxes were used for a wide range of activities, including butchery, but they might also have been important for personal or group identity, demonstrating their makers’ strength and skill.
The End of a Beginning in Natural History, 2002 While Homo Erectus continued ' to thrive in Asia, Homo antecessor : had appeared as far west as : northern Spain and Italy by 1.
Marks on their bones at the site of : Atapuerca in Spain suggest they practiced cannibalism.
Homo erectus Homo ergaster 59 cubic inches (969 cubic cm] HOMININ BRAIN SIZES Homo sapiens 90 cubic inches Humans have a disproportionately large brain for a primate of their size, but archaeologists disagree about how and why this expansion happened.
Switching to fatty and calorific foods such as bone marrow and meat may have “powered” brain growth, and also demanded more complex tools and effective hunting and foraging skills.
Social skills were also a part of this process, as increasing group cooperation and pair-bonding were necessary to sustain the longer periods of childhood that infants needed for their larger brains to develop. were almost certainly very accomplished hunters.
They were also highly skilled at making stone tools and heavy thrusting spears with which they tackled even large and dangerous animal prey, such as horses and bison.
However, despite burying their dead—which may have indicated ceremonial practices or belief in an afterlife—Neanderthals do not seem to have created more than the most limited art or used any symbols, as all modern humans do.
Whether or not they spoke ina similar way to modern humans Is also difficult to establish.
The first traces of modern humans beyond Africa come from fossils in Israel and possibly from stone tools found in Arabia.
A fF OS ie YEARS AGO y F, 12,000 f YEARS AGO y Buttermilk Creek y y Cactus Hill y f Meadowcroft | i Homo sapiens colonization of the globe involved many stops, starts, and sometimes retreats, as well as waves of different groups of people in some areas.
Archaeological evidence suggests that people may also have taken a “southern route” | across Arabia into southern Asia.
However, these finds remain controversial, and most scholars favor later dates here.
Genetically, the North American colonists are likely to have originated in East Asia.
They probably traveled across the plain of “Beringia” — | now beneath the Bering Straits between Siberia and Alaska, but exposed by low sea | levels at the height of the last Ice Age.
LATE ARRIVALS Tracking language The islands of Oceania were some of the last parts of the The spread of languages can often be tracked to reflect the globe to be colonized, via the Philippines, by movement of people.
The shows the spread of Austronesian more remote northern and eastern Islands of Micronesia speakers across Oceania.
An alternative “multiregional” theory suggests that Homo sapiens evolved simultaneously in many different parts of the world, from ancestors who had left Africa much earlier.
Most cave ar are > from a similar period, though some were created by the earliest Homo sapiens to arrive in western Europe, around 32,000 years ago.
DNA analysis of living humans suggests that the common ancestor of all living humans (known as Mitochondrial Eve] lived in Africa around 200,000 ya.
An Ethiopian fossil WHEN HOMO SAPIENS FIRST APPEARED skull from 160,000YA is almost modern in shape; this has been identified as a subspecies of modern humans, Homo sapiens idaltu.
Humans moved north into Western Asia some time before 100,000 yA, but they do not seem to have stayed there for long.
It is debated whether uniquely human behaviors such as language and the ability to use symbols evolved before or after modern human anatomy.
Prepared core and flake : Neanderthals and other hominins : prepared a stone core before : striking off a sharp flake to use. : In Europe this technology is : known as the “Mousterian.” 2 time and, in such harsh conditions, ' complex modern language and : symbolism would have allowed ' groups to exchange resources : and information with one : another, which could have made : the difference between survival : and extinction.
In Europe, modern humans appeared in Turkey from 40,000yYA, and in western Europe shortly afterward.
These dates suggest that the earliest modern humans in Asia may have encountered groups of Homo erectus, who survived in China until at least 40,000 years ago.
Flores date to less than 38,000 years ago, and seem to represent : specialized, extremely small : forms of Homo erectus, or perhaps even the descendants ' of earlier hominins.
NEANDERTHAL anatomically modern human skulls , but they had lower, more sloping foreheads and a double arch of bone over their eyes that created heavy brow ridges.
How and why Neanderthals died out Is one of the most intensely debated topics in archaeology.
There is little evidence of violent interactions between the species, and comparison of DNA increasingly suggests that there may have been some exchange of mating partners between the groups.
Early humans may have outcompeted their relatives for food and raw materials in the rapidly changing environmental conditions.
Environments at the time were highly unstable, so even a Slight increase in competition could have been significant.
KEY « Modern human sites : Neanderthal and human ranges : Modern humans and Neanderthals : coexisted for several thousand : years.
Farther south, huge areas of grassland with few trees offered good hunting for groups of humans able to survive the cold.
THE “GRAVETTIAN” CULTURE OF Europe and Russia (28,00021,000 YA) is known for its elaborate sites, which often have complex structures and burials, as well as large amounts of shell jewelry, and sculpted bone and antler.
Also found at Gravettian sites are some of the earliest known clay objects, including some of the famous “Venus” figurines.
These may have been fertility or religious charms, or part of a system of exchange between social networks across the region as the Ice Age intensified.
The Magdalenian (18,00012,000 YA) is famous for its beautiful art objects, engravings, and cave paintings.
Globally, many groups probably died out, but some held on in | more sheltered regions.
To survive the harsh conditions, much time and effort was invested in hunting.
Although little evidence survives beyond finely worked bone needles, people probably developed sophisticated clothing to keep them warm.
Perhaps more importantly, hunters would have worked hard to predict and intercept the movements of herds of large animals, ensuring the hunting success that was the difference between life and death. been a magical or ritual activ | ; | r | | | | | | | IN EUROPE, SOPHISTICATED BONE and antler points, needles, and “Magdalenian” technologies that most depict animals that were represent a magical means of show information about the best ways to hunt different species.
Paintings of imaginary half-human, half-animal creatures and the inaccessibility of some cave art | suggest that painting may have perhaps practiced by shamans | or during initiation or religious ceremonies.
Developments around 3300 CE included the construction of stone circles, such as this example at Castlerigg in northern England.
However, in the Americas promoting the spread of forests and grasslands and providing new opportunities for hunter-gatherer communities.
Coastal areas decline in the availability of wild drowned by rising sea levels were cereals.
This prompted some rich sources of aquatic foods, as West Asian villagers to turn to were lakes and rivers.
Many early farming ' villages in West Asia grew to a considerable size.
Native (naturally occurring pure] ' copper and gold were being : shaped into small objects by cold : hammering before 8000 BCE in : West Asia.
They removed the flesh, reassembled and reinforced the skeleton, stuffed the skin with plant material, coated it in clay, and painted it with black manganese or red ocher.
In addition to being functional aids to survival and subsistence, the objects made by prehistoric peoples would also have been important in their social lives.
Different groups develop their own ways of manufacturing and decorating objects, and distinctive designs may become badges of identity or status symbols.
ORIC PEOPLES Prehistory is traditionally divided into the Stone, Bronze, and Iron ages, but many other kinds of raw materials enerne nee ng such as wood, hide, and plant fibers were also used in early technologies.
Little evidence of these survives. carefully carved antler leather or sinew binding flint head set into wooden long, thin sleeve blade | Y; je reproduced wooden handle 2.6-1.
MYA @ AFRICA 100,000 BCE ONWARDS e WIDESPREAD The earliest stone tools were Early modern humans produced uniform, simple, sharp-edged flakes of narrow blades that would have been fitted stone, made by striking a stone to wooden and antler handles or held in the cobble with a hard “hammerstone.” hand, as tools for many different purposes.
Antler harpoon SOQQBCE e UK This harpoon head is attached to a long handle for spearing fish—a key source of food when sea levels rose as the last Ice Age ended. from antler barbed head made thick base Is easy to hold Flint hand-ax 200,000BcE e UK Hand-axes, such as this one from Swanscombe, were skillfully made and used for a wide range of activities, including woodworking and butchery.
They enabled hunters to throw features “ spears farther and with greater force.
Neolithic flint blade Lespugue Venus set in reproduction 24,000-22,000BCcE ¢ FRANCE handle This ivory figurine from Lespugue in the Pyrenees is one of many “Venus” figurines—depicting women who are pregnant or obese, or whose female features are greatly exaggerated.
Mummified head 7000-3000BCcE e PERU In very dry climates, bodies can become mummified.
Loom weights sickles like these, until they were during the Neolithic to held vertical threads taut; bone superseded in most places by the stamp decorative designs shuttles were used to weave invention of the combine harvester. on to skin or cloth. horizontal threads in and out.
EARLY CIVILIZATIONS 3000-700sce This period saw the emergence of complex civilizations.
An early earth enclosure and a circle of wooden posts were later replaced by the outer circle of stones seen here.
DURING THE LAST HALF OF THE FOURTH MILLENNIUM BCE, the world’s first civilizations arose, first in Western Asia, then North Africa and South Asia.
By 3000 bce, the world’s first urban culture had begun to develop in southern Mesopotamia, in what is now Iraq.
By 3500 Bce, farming communities were growing into towns and then cities such as Ur, Uruk, and Eridu.
Around 3200 sce, Sumerian THE POPULATION OF THE CITY OF URUK 2300 BCE ' smiths began manufacturing bronze.
Nile formed a narrow strip of : cultivatable land, floodplain, as the : is credited with founding : the Egyptian capital at Memphis and Egypt's first dynasty.
The Early Dynastic Period : was already : characterized by many of the : celebrated aspects of Egyptian culture: hieroglyphic writing, a ' sophisticated religion (including : belief in an afterlife], and : preserving the dead using : mummification.
Egyptian kings—later known as : pharaohs—ruled with the help of : governors (nomarchs], and a : huge staff of lesser officials including priests, tax collectors, : and scribes.
Bronze Age in Europe seems to have developed separately from around 2500 Bce, using ore sources from the Carpathian Mountains in Central Europe.
This era also saw the beginnings of the Minoan civilization on the Greek island of Crete around 20008BCE, with trading links to the nearby Cyclades Islands and the wider Mediterranean.
SOUTHERN MESOPOTAMIA was a patchwork of over 40 city-states, among which Ur, Uruk, Nippur, and Kish were the most important.
Trade flourished using a network of rivers and canals, and trade links extended to Anatolia (modern-day Turkey], Iran, and Afghanistan, with grain, minerals, lumber, tools, and vessels traded.
In Ur, Uruk, and other centers, people lived in clustered mud-brick houses.
Pref eee Ee Fe eee Fe SoS SF , a wal ee ee ly a alls —,,, —E— a : mound—provided the focus for : religious ceremonies, and grain panels—one depicting war, the other | was kept in storerooms within the ' temple precincts.
From around 2500sce, some citizens of Ur were ' buried in tombs along with ' treasures such as the Standard , of Ur.
Southern Mesopotamia became densely populated, putting pressure on natural Cuneiform tablet Over time, the inventory of signs regularly used in cuneiform script was greatly reduced.
Early Dynastic times, kings had : been buried beneath rectangular : mud-brick platforms called : mastabas.
The region's prosperity was based on farming, mining, crafts, and trade.
Mohenjo-daro and Harappa were well-planned cities laid out on agrid system.
The residential areas were seemingly divided by industry, one-piece cart wheel | The ruined citadel of Mohenjo-daro was made up of various buildings.
It was built on a platform to guard against flooding of the Indus River.
Indus civilization : Excavations suggest that the Indus : civilization covered an area far larger than : Mesopotamia and Egypt combined. : such as pottery, bead-making, ' and metalworking.
Indus cities and towns had the ' most advanced plumbing system 2 in the ancient world, with enclosed wells and covered drains.
Merchants supplied craft products from the valleys to Agrarian lives A clay model of a bullock cart found at Mohenjodaro, dating back to 2500-1900 BCE, gives an insight into farming life in the Indus civilization.
By around 2500BCE, an Indus ' script of hundreds of signs ' appeared on seals and pottery.
A NEW POWER AROSE IN MESOPOTAMIA 23348CE, King Sargon from the northern region of Akkad defeated Lugalzagesi of Umma to become the ruler of Sumer.
Through subsequent campaigns to the Levant, Syria, and Anatolia, Sargon carved out the world’s first , empire—the Akkadian Empire— stretching from the eastern Mediterranean to the Gulf.
Sargon’s exploits were recorded in several documents, such as the Sumerian King List.
His name means ‘legitimate king,” which led some scholars to believe that he took power through force.
Sargon spoke Akkadian, a Semitic language that replaced Sumerian as the official language of the empire.
JJ Lugalzagesi, king of Sumer, defeated by Sargon 2316 BCE Akkadian rule was enforced through regional governors who collected tributes and taxes.
The of defensible borders, and it came under regular attacks from neighboring hill tribes.
Sargon’s Silbury Hill in Wiltshire, England, is one of the tallest man-made chalk mounds in Europe.
Bronze provided a hard metal for forging armor, weapons, and tools such as this hand ax.
To the south of the first cataract on the Nile, the kingdom ' of Nubia also grew more empire’s weakness lay in its lack | around the city of Kerma at the ' third cataract.
F . r , . . ij e i Relief sculptures in Egyptian tombs represented everyday life and religious rituals.
This carving from im the Sixth dynasty shows boys with sticks, on the left, and youths wrestling, on the right.
Sumerian states such as Kish, Ur, and Lagash took the opportunity to reassert their independence.
For the next 80 years, the city-states vied for control in Mesopotamia.
The armies of Ur overran eastern Mesopotamia and Elam, and regained much of Sargon’s empire.
Ur-Nammu founded the Third dynasty of Ur, which witnessed a revival of Sumerian power, as well as an artistic and cultural renaissance.
Sumerian scholars devised a method of | counting, based on units of 60.
Ur-Nammu also commissioned the first ziggurat in Ur—an imposing stepped platform topped with a temple.
The ziggurats later became a characteristic of ancient western Asian architecture.
In 2181 BCE, Egypt's Old Kingdom collapsed following a series of natural disasters, including famine.
Herakleopolis in central Egypt vied for control with Thebes : in the south.
In China, the Neolithic Longshan culture (see 3200 BCE] Longshan pottery This elegant pottery tripod pitcher has tapering legs . and swirling patterns, characteristic of the Longshan culture. been found to confirm the existence of a centralized state in China at this time.
Europe's first civilization was : emerging on the Mediterranean : island of Crete, which lay at the : heart of Mediterranean trade : routes.
HesiSbetas, a — hieratic script reads Pictures painted on walls of caves up to 25,000 years ago are considered a precursor to writing, recording information that could then be understood by others.
Cuneiform The first true written script is developed by the Sumerians of Mesopotamia.
Writing with a reed stylus creates a wedge-shaped impression on tablets of wet clay, which then dry hard.
Through the Roman Empire, this alphabet spreads across Europe and is used for personal as well as official correspondence.
This script begins as a form of picture writing, and includes signs for words and also sounds.
They include the Phoenician alphabet, which spreads to the Greeks through trade, who add vowels.
Chinese script involves 50,000 characters that stand for words. processed animal skins, parchment becomes a popular medium for writing around the 6th century BCE, taking over from papyrus, a paper made from reeds.
Chinese parchment scroll Mesopotamian tablet Chinese paper scroll N The development of writing was an amazing breakthrough, as it allowed people to communicate over distance and record information for posterity.
Some scholars think that prehistoric cave paintings featuring images and symbols constitute a form of writing.
Soon, a number of different ancient cultures had developed writing, usually to keep economic records or keep track of time.
As writing developed, it was commonly used to reinforce the authority of rulers.
Many early texts, including monumental ones in stone, glorify the deeds of kings and attribute their success to divine approval. 7th century Arabic script The Arabic alphabet is used to write down the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam.
Its use spreads with the Islamic faith to become one of the world’s most widely used scripts.
Medieval Qur’an Italy 7th-9th centuries Illuminated manuscripts In early medieval times, the use of writing spreads through the copying of Christian texts.
Illuminated manuscripts are highly decorative, with ornate capital letters and marginal illustrations. 4th century The codex The codex, or manuscript in book form, gradually supersedes the roll of parchment.
Originally developed by the Romans, the use of codices spreads with the Christian religion.
In logographic scripts, each sign stands for a whole word; Chinese writing is an example, although it also uses syllabic signs.
A smaller but still large number of signs are needed—700 in Babylonian cuneiform.
For years, the spread of writing was limited by the labor involved in hand-copying texts, but this changed with the Invention of printing.
In the late 20th century, writing became electronic with the invention of word processors.
In the 1990s, the spread of information was again revolutionized by the arrival of the Internet. — Ancient texts in the digital world Nowadays, ancient texts can be viewed digitally.
Here, a student examines a digitized page of the Codex Sinaiticus, handwritten in Greek over 1,600 years ago.
The invention of printing using movable type makes writing far more accessible.
Some scholars do not consider pictograms to be true” writing, since the symbols do not convey the sounds of words in any language.
For example, the pictures above—from a house in Roman Pompeii dating to 79cCE, and a modern sign—convey the same warning.
The symbol can be read in any language—for instance, as canis, chien, Hund, or dog.
Those words convey the same idea but reproduce the sounds of different languages—Latin, French, German, and English.
Pictograms have limited use but remain widespread, appearing, for example, on street signs, maps, and clothes labels. 1990-present Text messaging In the 1990s, the first text messages are sent via mobile phones.
In 2009, more than 1. trillion text messages are Sent. in Waterman fountain pen Smartphone 1965 Writing enters the digital age In the mid-1960s, the first electronic messages are sent from one computer to another.
Emails become popular with the spread of personal computers in the 1980s. em Abe Egyptian hieroglyphics involved the use of pictorial signs.
It is thought that Crete’s prosperity was based on the export of pottery, gold, and bronze, as well as possibly grain, wine, and oll, to Egypt, Cyprus, and Palestine.
The Minoans established colonies in many parts of the Aegean, including the islands of Kythera, Thera, Melos, and Rhodes, and at Miletos on the Turkish mainland.
Egypt's eras of strong, centralized : rule only began with the reign of Amenemhetl, from about : 1985Bce, during the Middle : Kingdom.
Charging bull Minoan rituals included a bull-leaping ceremony, in which athletes grasped the bull's horns and vaulted over its back.
It is inlaid with turquoise mosaic, believed to represent a dragons scales.
According to legend, China's first dynasty was the Xia, but current archaeological evidence points to Shang as the first dynasty.
Babylon in the southeast—which 2 were to dominate Mesopotamia : for the next 1,500 years.
In 1813BCE, it was taken over ' by the Amorite king ShamshiAdad, who carved out a kingdom in northern Mesopotamia.
Sumerian hero from the Old Babylonian the Epic of Gilgamesh, previously passed down in the oral tradition.
During his reign, Assyria declined, allowing the state of Babylon to come to the fore.
During the reign of ShamshiAdad, Babylon was probably a vassal state of Assyria, but as Assyria declined, King Hammurabi a wider kingdom.
Between 1763-1762BCE, he defeated Elam to the east and Larsa, which controlled Sumer, to the south.
In 1757-1755BCE, King Hammurabi conquered much of northern Mesopotamia and took the city of Eshnunna after diverting its water supply.
Hammurabi introduced the Babylonian law code in the region under his control.
The Law Code of Hammurabi is famous for punitive Laws that meted out punishments in the same Set in stone Hammurabis code was inscribed on stone pillars called stele.
Urban society was consolidated in Western Asia in the 2nd millennium, and powerful states vied for control of lands; in contrast, in South Asia, towns disappeared.
The exceptional agricultural productivity of the Nile, Euphrates, Indus , and Yellow [see 31) river valleys undoubtedly played a part in the precocious emergence of civilizations in these regions.
So did international trade, which was also important in the development of the first New World civilizations.
High-level diplomacy was essential to the smooth operation of international trading networks and to success in inter-state power struggles.
Royal letters found in the Egyptian capital, Akhetaten , provide a fascinating picture of relations between the 14th-century BCE rulers of the rival great states of the eastern Mediterranean.
In the Americas, large ceremonial complexes with residential suburbs provided the focus for the communities of the wider region, strongly connected by shared religion and trade.
Settlements clung to the Nile delta and riverbanks, beyond which lay arid desert.
The great mineral resources of the flanking desert regions and Nubia, which included gold, were any exe)micJahan ecelaamcelemelelanl-s-10[emUl-1-m-Taremce) support international trade.
SAHARA ATLANTIC OCEAN Cyprus -_ We nae “iterranean Se Elephantine NUBIA SATJU YAM ue Y As eo"" Old Kingdom 2686-2181 BCE Rulers exercised centralized control and commanded impressive resources, as shown by the pyramids at Giza.
Oe LR yy — a a ut SE: “7” WPPER capital pe EGYPT 2055-1985 BCE and1650-1550 BCE NUBIA WAWAT £ “i, \b 4 oe, ay.
NU ee A D KUSH Middle Kingdom 2040-1640 BCE Decorated tombs record prosperous life under the stable 12th dynasty, but the state disintegrated under later rulers.
Cyprus x ee — ys oe “Viterranean 9&4 Per-Ramesse (Qantir] Akhetaten (Amarna] ""Tg % Yeo Waset i sc.
At the same time, other powers were on the rise, such as the Hurrians of Mitanni in Syria, and the Hittites of Anatolia in Turkey.
By 1650BCE, the Hittites had built an extensive kingdom in central Anatolia, with its capital at Hattusas.
Later, as technology developed, iron was used to create superior weapons.
Man and beast The Hittite Empire was known for its bronze craftsmanship.
During this time, Egyptian rulers assumed Egyptian religion was very > complex.
Mycenaeans, after the fortresspalace of Mycenae, believed to be » the home of the mythical king Agamemnon from Homer's Iliad.
A succession of warrior kings campaigned to expand Egypt's boundaries once more.
Tuthmosis | drove the Nubians back in the south and recaptured Sinai and parts of Syria and Palestine.
This detail from the pharaoh’s throne shows him being anointed by his wife Ankhesenamun.
They had migrated THRACE _ areligious reformer, became | pharaohs had been buried in from the Balkans or Anatolia on” Sea of _ Egypt’s pharaoh.
After the collapse capital between Thebes and ' British archaeologist Howard Islands Gulf Of Cop.
He named it Akhetaten, Carter found Tutankhamun’s P iheMicenteane okorerceverl| yeenaa ag ee 0 a meaning ‘horizon of Aten.” . tomb virtually intact.
After 1400BCE, they also took li Lai ""Fee unpopular, especially with the : coffin and mummy with a solid over Minoan trade networks and established settlements inherited Minoan arts and crafts, adapting the Linear A script to write an early form of Greek known as the Linear B script.
Shang capitals were surrounded Séa or Crete Thera Rhodes ® Mycenaean site ® Mycenaean major palace : by defensive walls.
Shang rulers’ practice of : consulting their ancestors on : important decisions.
In this relief carving _ (modern el-Amarna], he influential priestly elite.
Tutankhamun Is believed to have died under mysterious circumstances at 18, and was hastily buried in a minor tomb.
It was thought for years that blow to the head, but the latest evidence suggests he died of blood poisoning after breaking his leg ina chariot crash while out hunting in the desert.
The other rooms contained jewelry, furniture, on Rhodes, Kos, and the ve Chania ® aekene Tutankhamun ascended the golden statues, and musical Anatolian mainland. oho throne at the age of nine.
O° QP ah"" 2 Or ae & OR ENS OD e ene > eS eo® wet a x ee Ne SS 99 as xO os Ye Ny) @ The facade of the temple of Ramesses II at Abu Simbel features four colossal seated statues of the pharaoh, but the statue second from left has crumbled.
TOWARD THE END OF THE 2ND MILLENNIUM BCE, the eastern Mediterranean and Western Asia were a mosaic of empires, which comprised Egypt, Babylonia, Elam, Assyria, and the Hittites in Anatolia.
Borders fluctuated as each kingdom strove to gain ascendancy over its neighbors through conquest or diplomacy.
In war and peace, vital trade routes, through which tin and copper for bronze reached the region, remained intact.
Through a combination of war, diplomacy, and strategic marriage, Ramesses sought to extend Egyptian influence to Western Asia.
Ramesses claimed : victory at Qadesh, the ' battle is believed to 2 have been inconclusive, and the Hittites held on to the region. 13th century BCE, Pharaoh Setil and | : further campaigns in ' Syria, Ramesses tried : a different tactic, and : negotiated a pioneering peace _ treaty with the new Hittite king, ' Hattusilis Ill.
Following the treaty, Ramesses : kept up a friendly correspondence ' with the Hittite ruler, which was ' recorded on clay tablets in 2 Akkadian cuneiform script.
In 1259BCE, after two Hittite princesses In marriage Ramesses also embarked 2 on an extensive program of » monument-building.
He founded ' anew capital at Per-Ramesses in ' Lower Egypt, although Thebes in Upper Egypt remained an ' important center.
Shalmaneser | and Tukulti: Ninurta I, continued to gain : territory, expanding the kingdom's borders west to conquer eastern | Mitanni and briefly, from 12251216BCE, southeast to Babylonia.
S 5 e° Gr aw oO <o a vw of | The boulders used to make these walls, now in ruins, at Mycenae on the Greek mainland were so huge, later civilizations believed they were built by giants.
BETWEEN 1250 AND ABOUT 1050 BCE, many of the powers that had dominated Western Asia for centuries went into decline, and some disappeared altogether.
The eastern Mediterranean entered a time of turmoil, and many coastal cities were laid waste by unknown invaders—written records of the period give few clues as to their identity.
By 1180BCE, Hittite possessions in the Levant were lost and the empire fragmented.
Danube region in 1300BCcE, and spread to Italy and central and ' eastern Europe in the following : centuries. known collectively as the Sea Peoples.
These warlike peoples came from many different areas, including Sicily, Sardinia, Greece, Libya, and Anatolia.
Whatever their origins, their movements through the eastern Mediterranean inc.00-1100BCcE led to attacks on Cyprus, Egypt, Anatolia, and Canaan and Syria in the Levant.
By 11008cE, most of the Mycenaean palaces had been sacked and abandoned.
JJ An inscription by Ramesses II , referring to the Sea Peoples Krishna Yajur Veda lron rapidly replaced bronze in tools and weapons, signaling the end of the Bronze Age.
The Olmecs built ceremonial centers, including San Lorenzo, constructed temples and houses on earthen mounds, and carved huge stone heads clad in helmets.
Stone warrior Monumental carvings from temples at Cerro Sechin on the Peruvian coast show warriors, torture victims, and human sacrifices.
THE CLOSE OF THE 2ND MILLENNIUM SAW MAJOR CHANGES in the power politics of West Asia.
Historians believe that the power of the pharaohs had been eroded by a priestly elite who had gained control of many areas.
By 1000BCE, all of the territories won by New Kingdom pharaohs had been lost.
In Mesopotamia, there were frequent wars between the Babylonians, Assyrians, and Elamites; the region was also subjected to devastating raids by Aramaean nomads from the west.
A Semiticspeaking people, who called themselves Canaanites, had inhabited the Levant for centuries, living in city-states that controlled the surrounding territory.
They were Skilled seafarers and played a major role in international trade.
They traded cedarwood from Lebanon, glassand Ivory-ware, metal ores, and, most important, an expensive purple dye made from murex shellfish.
Zhou territory was divided into fiefs held by trusted noblemen, in return for military allegiance.
But many aspects of Chinese tradition already present in the Shang period continued in the Zhou, including ancestor worship and the use of oracle bones for divination.
Meanwhile, in Japan, the Jomon culture, named after the cord patterns [jomon) that decorate its pottery, continued.
The Jomon people were still hunter-gatherers, albeit prosperous and sedentary.
In this example of late-Jomon : pottery, the bowl and stand bear : the distinctive rope patterns that : give the Jomon period its name. sacred writings.
Sanskrit, an IndoEuropean language related to lranian and almost all European languages, Is also the ancestor of modern languages such as Hindi and Urdu.
Vedas were transmitted orally During the first era, the Zhou capital : : Although the Vedas are largely in Sanskrit for many centuries. religious writings and hymns, the geographical information that they contain not only describes the gradual spread of farmers and pastoralists from the Punjab to the Ganges basin, but also gives some information about conflicts with other groups, and local life at the time.
Qh oS LHe i aN eo ey or 37 3000-700 BcE | EARLY CIVILIZATIONS neck is circled by a collar Perpauty and his wife Statue with stele 1360 BCE A carved figure representing a high priest of Amun holds a stele, or carved slab.
ANCIENT EGYPT A REMARKABLE CIVILIZATION REVEALED THROUGH EVERYDAY ITEMS AND TREASURES Artifacts manufactured over some 2,000 years bear witness to the skills of Egyptian craft workers.
They also reflect Egypt’s wealth and its trade network, through which ebony, lapis lazuli, and turquoise were imported.
Many of the objects shown here were used in daily life by well-to-do Egyptians.
They reflect belief in the afterlife and the practice of burying possessions that it was believed would be used by the dead person's spirit in the afterlife.
Saad | Shabtis 1292-1190BcE Statuettes of servant-figures called shabtis a ge were commonly placed in tombs.
The Egyptians ee | coma believed they would come alive to serve the | dead person's spirit in the life to come.
Funerary mask 1500BcE This mask would have been placed over the head k of amummy.
The Egyptians mummified bodies siitthaon ; , i because the deceased spirit could not survive HI ; a unless there was a body for it to return to.
This side shows Perpauty and his wife being offered gifts by their offerings son and three daughters.
Duck-shaped flask 1700BcE This jar is carved in the shape of a duck, which appears to be trussed and plucked.
It probably held cosmetic paste, such as eye-paint, which was likely removed and applied using a stopper/applicator, now lost. material is the rare blue stone anhydrite Mummiform shabti 1300BCcE This large shabti figure was carved from wood.
The tools the figure carries are traditional symbols of kingship, while the scarab represents the god Khepri. scarab ornament on chest modeled in paler wrappings lapis lazuli inlay Mummified jackal or dog 600BcE Jackals and, from the 8th century BcE onward, also dogs were mummified in honor of the jackal-headed god Anubis, who presided over funerals and embalmings.
ANCIENT EGYPT Ear studs and earring 1550-1069 BcE Once the basic shapes for these studs and earring were made, strands of glass in a contrasting color were wound around them.
Necklaces 1550-1069 BcE Egyptian craftsmen had access to many semiprecious stones and precious metals.
Wooden comb 300BCcE This double-sided comb has a row of longer and shorter teeth.
Wy, al ce backing for / Uy f i mirror > gold band purple amethyst ibex symbolizes grace and mastery over the natural world Cosmetic spoon 1360BCcE This spoon for cosmetic paste was carved from schist in the shape of an ibex, with its head bent over its back, so that its straight horns touch the bowl.
This originally held a polished charm was placed on mummies bronze mirror disk.
The handle to protect the dead person's is carved in the shape of a spirit in the afterlife.
It also papyrus column topped with symbolized regeneration. the god Bes—a popular deity.
Male figure amulet Frog amulets 2200BcE 1360BCE This golden charm shows a Frogs were a symbol of life kneeling male god clasping and fertility.
It was found rebirth and was worn as jewelry in the tomb of King Tutankhamun. in ancient Egypt.
IN THE 10TH CENTURY BCE, THE PERIOD OF DECLINE in the major powers of Western Asia continued.
There, they came into conflict with the local Philistines and Canaanites.
Around 1000BCE King David united the Israelite tribes and established his capital at Jerusalem.
David's son Solomon (r.5-928 BCE] increased Israelite territory and built a magnificent palace and temple In the capital, but on his death the kingdom split in two.
Eventually Israel and, later, Judah became , part of the Assyrian Empire.
This black limestone obelisk commemorates his deeds and those of his commander-in-chief, DayyanAssur.
It details, in cuneiform, the enforced tributes paid by the people he conquered.
After San Lorenzo was destroyed inc.O0BCE, La Venta to the northeast became the main Olmec center.
This larger settlement was dominated by a 111ft high pyramid, the forerunner of Mayan temples.
Their influence spread across Mesoamerica, impacting on other cultures that were starting to emerge at this time—the Zapotecs and the Maya.
In eastern North America, the Adena culture was developing in the Ohio Valley.
It was characterized by ritual earthworks and burial mounds containing objects of fine craftsmanship.
Far to the south, the Chavin culture had appeared in the Peruvian Andes by 1200BcE and spread to the coast.
Mediterranean region Caereg: Pithekoussai __ * Corinth a Carthage AFRICA Grave goods This Iron Age brooch i was discovered in a grave at Hallstatt : in Austria.
ASSYRIA CONTINUED ITS POLICY OF AGGRESSION through the 8th century BCE, conquering rival states in Western Asia and reducing them to provinces.
Assyrian success was based on a disciplined, technically advanced army and an efficient bureaucracy.
Conquered peoples had to pay costly tributes, and revolts were ruthlessly crushed.
Following a period of weak rule in the first half of the 8th century BCE, Tiglath-Pileser III (r.4727 BCE] recouped Assyria’s losses.
Iron tools increased ' efficiency in agriculture and food ' production.
Amenirdis |, sister of Shabaka [r.6702 BCE}, is shown holding a flail—a traditional symbol of Egyptian rule. for their own language, and not long after, Homer's epic poems the /liad and the Odyssey—hitherto transmitted orally—were probably written down.
In the 8th century BCE, central Italy was a mosaic of small states ruled by the dominant Etruscans—ltaly’s first indigenous civilization— and Italic tribes such as the Latins, Umbrians, and Sabines.
The impact of Classical developments In science, art, and politics ts still felt to this day.
IN CHINA, THE CITY OF LUOYANG IT TOOK A CONCERTED CAMPAIGN THE 44 TAHAROA THE GODLESS HAD FALLEN TO THE SHEN in 771BCE, and the Western Zhou capital was transferred east to Chengzhou.
From around 7OOBCE the Zhou were ruled by puppet-emperors, while real power lay with the ba (“senior one”) among nearby states.
After Huan Gong's death the competition for power between his five sons weakened Qi, and Jin Wen Gong [r.5643 BCE), the ruler of Jin, rose to become ba.
In the Near East, the Assyrians , continued their expansion, confronting Egypt, whose intermittent support for rebels drove the invaders out.
Their language remains undeciphered, but lavish tombs indicate a rich material culture.
This was not the last rebellion against the Assyrians—only ten years later, the vassal king of Sais, Psammetichus | (r.4-610BCcE}, revolted against his Assyrian masters, driving them out and founding the 26th Dynasty, under restored.
In Greece, the rise to preeminence of a number of city states, notably Athens, Sparta, and Corinth, began.
Ashurbanipal initially shared rule over Assyria with his brother, Shamash-shuma-ukin.
His latter years saw none of the military successes of his early reign.
At his death a dispute between his two sons further weakened the Assyrian Empire.
Honshu eastward to establish ' his kingdom near Nara are legendary, but may echo real ' events of the Japanese Yayoi ' period after 100Bce, when tribal . chieftains began to consolidate : their territories.
The Assyrian Empire : From its core around Assur and : Nineveh, the Assyrian empire grew to : encompass Babylonia, Media, Elam, : Urartu, Syria, and Egypt. ' led the war against neighboring : Alba Longa, which ultimately led : to that city’s destruction and the : deportation of its population to Rome, in the first major Roman ' expansion.
Ancus Marcius , expanded Roman territory toward the coast, and founded Rome's : great port of Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber.
Tarquinius Priscus : was the fifth king of Rome and one : of the city’s greatest kings.
Priscus won a series of victories : over the Sabines, the Latins, and the Etruscans, who all : competed with Rome for : dominance over central Italy.
THE ASSYRIANS HAD FINALLY CONQUERED BABYLON in 69158CE, partially destroying the city.
It took four years of war to suppress the Babylonians and their Elamite allies, and the fighting drained Assyria’s ability to hold on to its empire.
By 630BCE, Assyria had lost Egypt and Palestine, and in 626BcE the Babylonians regained their independence.
The alliance with Assyria survived into the reign of his son Madyes, but ' around 615BCE the Scythians switched sides and played a key role in Assyria’s destruction.
To the south of Egypt the state ' of Napata became a power of the first order, conquering Egypt ' under Piankhy and ' controlling it under after the death | of Taharqa . stylized body The flowing lines and realistic depiction of the stags muscled flanks in this late 7th century shield ornament are typical of the art of the Scythians.
THeEet Cave paintings in Dunhuang, China, illustrate a variety of Buddhist parables.
HAVING HELPED DESTROY THE ASSYRIAN EMPIRE, Nabopolassar (r.6-605 BCE}, first king of the neo-Babylonian dynasty, embellished the city of Babylon.
The last neo-Babylonian king, Nabonidus , moved his royal court to the Arabian oasis of Tema, but discontent rose among the Babylonians during his reign.
But by the 550sBcE, ' Media was under pressure from the Babylonians to the south and the new power of Persia.
Babylonian expansion to the west. : In 597BcE, Nebuchadnezzar took » Jerusalem and deposed King : Jehoiakim.
Afraid of the increasing power of Persia, the Lydians under King Croesus opposed Cyrus, but he struck west and in 947BCE, on the Halys River, defeated the Lydian army and annexed western Asia Minor.
I HAVE WON THEM. jg Lawgiver and reformer This image shows the Greek statesman and lawgiver Solon teaching.
His reforms began to undermine the power of the aristocracy in Athens. re The Behistun inscription of Darius was not well established.
Cambyses defeated the Egyptian army at Pelusium in 525BCE and then captured the royal capital at Memphis.
The ' wealthiest class fought as cavalry, ' the higher classes as heavy infantry, and the poor as light auxiliary troops.
He was the ruler of the kingdom of Pars when he led a revolt against his Median overlord Astyages.
He then continued to expand Persian influence with the conquest of Lydia.
Cyrus adapted local ideas about kingship to cast himself as an ideal ruler in the cities he conquered.
While the Greeks created magnificent monumental art, smaller pee items such as jewelry, musical instruments, weaponry, and Ay ey nal vases show the Greek love of intricate forms and decorative adornment throughout all periods of their history.
Greek art underwent a series of phases that were reflected in all aspects “yf of artistic production, but particularly on vases.
This one is decorated using the black-figure technique, which predates the red-figure method.
After he won a victory in a sporting contest using it, he dedicated the discus to the gods Castor and Pollux.
This blackfigure vase shows the goddess Athena beating a giant to his knees.
This south-lItalian vase has its base decorated with a pattern of white chevrons.
Thermopylae became a byword for heroic defiance against overwhelming odds.
In 490sce, Darius! : to Sparta for aid, the only help and protector of Gautama Buddha of Persia decided to take revenge they received came from Plataea, (c.3-c.
Persian winged-lion rhyton split Rome irreparably, so the patricians ceded some political power.
The fall of Miletus to the recruit allies for a planned ' Persians that year and the death ' of Aristagoras undermined lonian unity and, after a great naval ' defeat at the Battle of Lade in | 494ece, the revolt fell apart.
Greek states chose to submit, : but Athens and Sparta patched ' together a league of southern ' states.
Themistocles , ' the Athenian fleet inflicted a ' serious defeat on Xerxes’s naval ' force at Salamis.
Further Greek THEMISTOCLES (c.4-460 BCE] A clever politician and strategist, Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to use the wealth of a silver mine discovered at Laurium in 483/2Bce to double their fleet.
However, after the naval victory at Salamis, he became the object of increasing jealousy from political rivals.
Persians possessed : vastly superior numbers, the : Greek forces were motivated : to win crucial land and sea : engagements.
The Grecoae : Persian wars _ : Although the core. : victories followed in June 4798BceE, : on land at Plataea in Boeotia and : at sea at Mycale off the lonian ' coast.
An attempt by the island of Naxos to leave the Delian League around the same time led to an Athenian expeditionary force that powerfully suppressed the breakaway movement.
Pericles , the Athenian statesman largely responsible for making Athens the political and cultural focus of Greece, tried but failed to prosecute Cimon in 4638cE, on a charge of having neglected a chance to conquer Macedonia.
From this maneuver, Pericles’ vision and ideas of expansion for Athens were already evident.
When the leading figure among the democrats, Ephialtes, was assassinated in 461.
Periodically, the Persians had tried to bribe the Spartans into diversionary attacks on Athens, initially to little effect.
In 464BceE, a revolt of the Messenian Helots in the western Peloponnese further distracted the Spartans from any attempt to stem the rising power of the Delian League.
Athenian treasury at Delos : All members of the Delian League had to deposit funds at treasuries on : Delos, but the contribution of Athens was the most important. and by 462.sce their last stronghold at Ithome had been reduced.
Br” eh PW og so Qe In the late 5th century, the Mexican city of Monte Alban began to build its public buildings—the ancestors of its later magnificent pyramids, shown here.
IN THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, the two social classes—the patricians and the plebeians ]— were still divided.
In Oaxaca on Mexico's Pacific Coast, a new center arose shortly before 450sBce at Monte Alban.
The Athenian Empire had the naval advantage as it included most of the island and coastal states around the northern and eastern shores of the Aegean Sea.
DANGEROUSTO LETIT GO. 99 central Greece, as well as Corinth, Thucydides, ancient Greek historian, relating a speech by Pericles to the led an alliance of independent states from the Peloponnese and and had the strongest army.
Despite the Thirty Years Peace of 446sce, tensions remained high between Athens and Sparta.
The Shishunaga dynasty lasted after the death of Ajatashatru AFTER ITS VICTORY IN THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, Sparta found itself embroiled in a quarrel with Persia over whether the lonian Greek cities should regain their autonomy.
Through the 390s BCcE, Sporadic fighting and abortive peace talks diverted Sparta from a weakening position in mainland Greece.
The “King’s Peace, a definitive treaty with Persia in 3868ce, deprived the lonians of autonomy but allowed the Spartans to quash any threats to its supremacy.
Xenophon, the Greeks marched to the Black Sea coast and safety near Trapezus (Trabzon in modern-day Turkey), a feat their commander immortalized ' in his book Anabasis.
In Italy, the Romans widened ' their territory and annexed the city of Veil in 396BcE, whose submission represented the end of any Etruscan threat.
The ancient Greeks adopt the Idea and spread it around the Mediterranean.
Greek coin A V they still permeate every aspect Around 7000Bce, naturally occurring metals, notably copper, began to be used for small items such as pins in western Iran and eastern Anatolia.
Heating copper to make it more malleable was _ probably discovered by accidentally dropping the metal in fire, but it was the introduction of smelting ina crucible around 38008ce that led to the _ large-scale use of metals.
Made by smelting tin and copper together in a crucible, bronze is stronger and more easily worked than either of its individual constituents, and It remained the principal metal for tools and weapons until the invention of ironworking around 12508ce.
NOKKIN( Since their earliest known use in the 8th millenniumBCE, metals have played a crucial role in the production of a vast range of objects, and even today, with the availability of sophisticated polymers and composites, The Verdun Altar of modern civilization. together in a furnace.
This method of production continued until the introduction of blast furnaces in Europe in the 15th century.
The Industrial Revolution in the 18th century brought new techniques and the use of coking coal in blast furnaces, but it was English inventor Henry Bessemer’s Invention of the Bessemer converter In 1856 that permitted the large-scale production of steel, a strong, high-quality, iron-carbon alloy.
Later in the Industrial Revolution, further advances made it possible to produce other metals, such as aluminum, magnesium, and titanium, whose light weight and strength played a vital role in the development of the aviation and space industries.
WHEN COPPER [IS ALLOYED WITH TIN, THIS DROPS TO 1,742°F 15th century Weapons from cast metal Cast iron is developed.
Because it is strong and can be used to make shapes such as tubes, it finds an immediate use in making artillery.
Medieval cannon 1810 Tin can English inventor Peter Durand patents the tin can for preserving food.
His patent was for a can made of iron and coated with tin to inhibit rusting of the iron.
Many metals occur naturally in alloyed form, but synthetic alloys were not produced until around 3000 BcE, when copper was melted with tin to produce bronze.
The technique spread, reaching Mesopotamia soon after 3000BcE and Egypt by 2000 BCE or possibly earlier. 1950s Titanium aircraft Because of its high strength-to-weight ratio, titanium starts to be used extensively in military aircraft.
Lockheed Blackbird 1910 Aluminum foil The first aluminum foil is produced.
It was made possible by the invention in 1886 of a method of massproducing the metal by passing an electric current through molten ore. including the crocodile-headed Sobek.
Nectanebo Il (r.0-343 BCE] succeeded Nectanebo |, and continued to meddle in the Persian civil wars.
In response, Artaxerxes Ill of Persia marched 11,000 SPARTANS Battle of Leuctra At Leuctra in central Greece, the Thebans exploited the tendency of the Spartans to shift right by concentrating their attack on the left, enabling them to defeat an enemy with larger numbers than theirs.
Sacred Band supplemented the ' mercenaries who largely fought Greek city-states wars by this : period.
ALTHOUGH THE ATHENIANS brokered a general peace in Greece in 371BCE, the Thebans did not participate.
As a result, Messenia was finally detached from Spartan control, but further Theban success was hampered by the temporary deposition of Epaminondas, who was tried for allegedly sparing the city of Sparta in exchange for a bribe.
Once Epaminondas was back in control, the Thebans won Persian backing for their anti-Spartan alliance in 367BCE, and a further invasion of the Peloponnese in 366BCE gained recruits for the Theban coalition.
Philip Ill began to transform the position of what had been regarded by other Greeks as a very minor kingdom.
He became involved in the Third Sacred War (356-346 BCE}, which was fought over perceived violations by Sparta and Phocis of the sacred oracle at Delphi, using this to cement his position as an important player in the power politics of central Greece and the Peloponnese.
In the 340s, Philip strengthened his position in Thessaly and became involved in petty disputes between the city-states, as rival factions turned either to him or to Athens for support.
Just two years later, at Chaeronea in Boeotia, Philip defeated the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus Mausolus was the Persian satrap (governor] of a region of southwestern Turkey.
PHILIP OF MACEDONIA (382 Philip Il reformed the Macedonian army and forced the Greek states to joina League of Corinth under Macedonian control.
Ow o Ros okay haar opeceee 2 3 x so ab oe xy 2 C oN x0 Q ao ‘ vs \ ac mem ot Sas oY pa raageaen AF ge S Oo oF eo x RO at oe 57 Despite being heavily outnumbered at Issus, Alexander the Great, depicted here on his horse Bucephalus, made brilliant use of his cavalry to win a stunning victory over King Darius Ill.
Alexander reacted swiftly; the Thebans were defeated and their city razed.
In 334BceE, Alexander hurried to Anatolia, where a Macedonian army was already established, totaling perhaps 43,000 infantry and 6,000 cavalry.
Although this figure was dwarfed by the forces of the local Persian satraps , Alexander’s cavalry smashed the lines of the satrap Arsites at the Granicus River in northwest Turkey.
Finally, in Sogdiana, north of the Oxus River, the local nobles, led by the Sogdian warlord Spitamenes, betrayed Bessus and handed him over to Alexander.
His army reached central Persia Alexander the Great’s conquests Alexander penetrated the farthest corners of the Persian empire.
ALEXANDER THE GREAT had not provided for an orderly succession after his death in 323BCE, and his most experienced generals were also dead—except for Antipater, who had been left as regent in Macedonia.
Alexander's wife Roxane was pregnant, and he who was, unfortunately, mentally unstable.
In reality, this military clique carved up the empire between themselves and four other generals.
Perdiccas emerged as the main power In the center; Antipater and Craterus took Europe; Antigonus Monopthalmus was given Phrygia; Ptolemy got Egypt; and Seleucus and Cassander were promoted to senior military commands.
He then retired to become a Jain monk, ultimately ' starving himself to death.
IN ITALY, A THIRD WAR broke out between the Romans and Samnites in 298BCE, apparently provoked by Samnite harassment of their neighbors, the Lucanians.
He arrived with an army more than 25,000 strong, including war elephants.
Around eight years later, he launched a campaign against Kalinga (modern Orissa], which was so bloody that around 100,000 people are said to have died.
After | @ Archers Buddhist concept of dharma, OF YEARS THE PTOLEMAIC DYNASTY RULED EGYPT The equally vast Roman army—at 45,000, the largest they had ever fielded—was threatened with defeat until the Roman consul Publius Decius Mus (d.
BCE] dedicated himself and the enemy army as Sacrificial victims to the gods of the underworld and led a suicidal charge that shattered the Samnite line.
Roman territory now stretched across the Italian peninsula to the Adriatic Sea.
He set up a series of edicts carved in rock throughout the empire—many of them on pillars topped with a lion—promoting his adherence to dharma.
Under his patronage the Third Buddhist Council met at Pataliputra around 250BCE, and Ashoka sought to export his ideas abroad, exchanging diplomatic missions with foreign rulers, such as Antiochus II of Syria and Ptolemy II of Egypt.
In their homes, Romans had shrines to household gods and the spirits of their ancestors. him the master of all China.
The same year he proclaimed himself the “First Emperor” as Qin Shi Huangdi, and the first ruler of the new Qin dynasty.
BCE], civil war broke out between the king’s widow Berenice and h : former wife Laodice.
Carthaginians had possessed ' colonies since the 8th century BCE, : was at the root of the First Punic : War , a conflict ' between Rome and the North : African power of Carthage.
However, after they ' had built their first-ever fleet, the © Romans’ fortunes changed.
This defeat caused Hamilcar Barca, the ' Carthaginian general, to sue for ' peace.
The dispossessed aristocrats and nobles of Qin’s former enemies were moved to the capital Xianyang to keep them under close control.
To further encourage a sense of unity, Li Ssu commissioned a single script and a standardized system of weights and measures for China.
In 213BCE, he ordered the “burning of the books,” by which the writings of philosophers opposed to the Qin state were burned, and in 212BCE he had many intellectuals who opposed him brutally killed.
Suppressing opposition This watercolor-on-silk painting shows Shi Huangdi, China‘s first emperor, overseeing the burning of books and the execution of scholars.
Despite their victory in the First Punic War, the Romans’ position in northern Italy was still weak.
In 225BCE, the Celtic Insubres and Boii tribes tried to drive them out.
The king of the Boii was killed in single combat against a Roman consul, and their capital Mediolanum captured.
The Romans established colonies in the Celtic territories in 218BCE, including at Piacenza.
He then offered his service to a succession of Rome's enemies before poisoning himself in Bithynia.
A number of new kingdoms broke away from the center, while the anti-Qin forces found a talented military leader in Xiang Yu.
By 206BCE, the Qin Empire was fragmented and Xiang Yu and Liu Bang were at war with one another.
With Hannibal making little headway in southern Italy, the Romans embarked on a policy of picking off the allies of Carthage.
In 211BCE, the Romans allied with the Aetolians, who fought the Macedonians on land while the Romans launched naval attacks.
Cornelius Scipio (c.6-183 BcE] to Spain, where he captured the : Carthaginian capital of Carthage : Nova.
In 207BcE, Hannibal's brother Hasdrubal was defeated and ' killed at the Metaurus River in northern Italy, denying Hannibal crucial reinforcements.
It was also stamped with the Greek letters for “ATHE” to identify the city of its origin.
In China, common tools are cast in metal, punched with holes (for stringing several together], and used as money.
The state of Lydia produces the first true coins, made of electrum (an alloy of gold and Emperor Augustus reforms the Roman coinage system and issues a new version of silver) and stamped with the standard gold coin, iW Knife an image of a lion or stag.
Money was created to fulfill this role, and it evolved from cattle to precious metals, and finally, to coins and bank notes.
Today, money is exchanged more abstractly, through credit cards or electronic transfers.
The earliest forms of money—used in ritual code mentions loans paid in silver.
For thousands of years, system had been adopted, with coins of gold, precious metals were used, often in the forms of silver, and bronze [of least value) circulating across bars and ingots.
All had the head of the ruler stamped on them, for propaganda as well as fiscal use.
Subsequently, the “real” value of Pic allen) ee iG eis ie eae YEAR notes and coins became nominal, relying instead on in any other city where the bank had a branch.
The debasement of Roman coins a sense of trust that they could be exchanged for Great Italian banking houses, such as the Medici, Due to inflation, excessive expenditure, and weak control goods.
The growth of credit cards from 1950 took were rich enough to fund the military campaigns ee ate ea ee this a stage further, as the purchaser passed on of European kings through their loans. . nothing save the promise of payment at alaterdate.
The Jin dynasty Song standard in the its first bank notes, operate as electronic issues the first true bank dynasty Spanish and Austrian Joachimsthal backed by the bank’s cash (without deferred notes around 1189. note Habsburg empires. thaler own gold reserves. payment) appear.
First one dollar bill SS Ss Gaozu was one of the few Chinese rulers to come from a peasant background.
THE FIRST HAN EMPEROR OF CHINA, GAOZU, died in 195BCE, when his successor, Hui Ti, was just 15.
Indo-Greek dynasty emerged in India, and became powerful : under Menander I (c.5130 BcE), an important patron of : Buddhism.
THE THIRD MACEDONIAN WAR ended In 168BCE, when Paullus defeated Perseus at the Battle of Pydna.
A purge of anti-Roman elements swept through the Greek cities, and Macedonia was broken up into four republics to prevent it recovering its strength.
By 148BCE, the Macedonians had been defeated and the Romans turned their attention to the Achaeans.
The Roman consul L Mummius quickly routed the Archaeans and took Corinth, which he razed to the ground.
Initial Roman s 0 . to as high as 600,000 people—and Campaigning achieved little Romans Macedonians except the alienation of their COMBATANTS Yayoi vase ae Ul Battle of Pydna The Yayoi period in Japanese history (c.
Philip V of Macedon'’s army was completely destroyed at the Battle of Pydna.
N < ENS <0 » a Se ° Ms e A oS er e Oe 6b 6b ‘ < NYY fe) : After the end of the Second Punic: : War, in 202BcE, the Romans had : allowed their ally King Massinissa : of Numidia to encroach on : Carthaginian territory.
Carthaginian embassy in 162BCE ' even resulted in Carthage being Carthaginian government sent a : military force to relieve a town that : had been besieged by Massinissa, : and the Romans reacted by : declaring war.
Over time the consuls came to be supported by other magistrates (praetors and quaestors], and tribunes of the plebs who had a special role in protecting the rights of the lower orders.
Later elections for the consulate became bitterly contested as the office provided great potential for enrichment and personal and family glory.
After Augustus became emperor in 27 BCE the office of consul lost any real power, being increasingly awarded to imperial favourites.
Zhang Qian was held captive by the Hsiung-nu for some years during his journey before he was able to make an escape.
Under emperor Wu (141-87 BCE] the Chinese launched several offensives against the Hsiung-nu, particularly in 121BCE and 119BCE, after which the frontier was quiet for almost 20 years.
Numantia, the main center of the ' revolt, finally fell to the Romans ' after a bitter siege.
The last Carthaginian defenders : died in an inferno in the city’s ' main temple.
After Maues died , the Saka kingdom collapsed, but it was revived under his son Azes | , who conquered much of northwest India.
It comes from Amravati in Andra Pradesh, southeast India, one of the capitals of the Satavahanas.
However, during the reign of John Hyrcanus (r.4-104 BCE] it recovered much of the ground that had been lost.
Alexander Jannaeus [r.3-76 BCE) enlarged the kingdom until it occupied most of modern Israel and the West Bank.
After defeats by the Nabataean king Aretas III in 84BCE and internal strife following Alexander's death, the Hasmoneans were ay increasingly vulnerable ~.} to Roman interference.
The ' Romans ordered the kingdom be divided between Micipsa’s nephew © Jugurtha and his sons.
Jugurtha and Adherbal, Jugurtha ' renewed his attack on his cousin : and the Romans became involved.
Gaius Marius changed this by opening the army to those who fell below the normal property qualification.
The eagle became the universal legionary standard for the first time, and the legions themselves were reformed as a heavy infantry force.
From this point onward Roman light infantry and cavalry were organized into “auxiliary” units, which were recruited from noncitizens. , reached 80,000.
Captured in stone : The Danzante carvings at Monte : Alban, Mexico, were once thought : to be of dancers, but they are now : believed to represent the mutilated : bodies of enemies captured in war. ' by beginning civil service ' examinations.
Alban’s control began to reach beyond the immediate vicinity of : the Valley of Oaxaca, and many ' large stone platforms and public : monuments were built in the city.
AFTER HIS VICTORY AT VERCELLAE, Marius became Rome's dominant politician, but the brutal behavior of his ally Saturninus, tribune of the plebs, provoked the Senate.
As Marius’s power waned, discontent rose among Italians without Roman citizenship.
A protégé of Marius, Lucius Sulla (c.8-78 BCE], took a key role in suppressing the revolt, which was largely over by 88BCE, albeit with some concessions offered by Rome to the rebels.
That same year, while waiting to sail with his army to Greece to counter the threat posed by the king of Pontus, Mithridates VI (134-63 Bc_E], Sulla heard that the 70,000 SPARTACAN REBELS 6,000 Spartican rebels crucified The rebellion by Spartacus Crassus crucified slaves along the Appian Way, which led to Rome, as a warning to any others who might plan a similar insurrection.
Marians, packed the Senate with his supporters, and curtailed the : powers of the tribunes.
AY rP Fr it ' A isearieeiesiont of na Roman ramparts at Alesia, where Caesar forced Vercingetorix to surrender.
Mound City, Ohio contains a cluster of more than 20 Hopewell earthwork burial mounds.
When war broke out with Mithridates of Pontus again, the Romans, under general Lucullus, forced Mithridates to retreat to Armenia, which was ruled by his son-in-law Tigranes.
By DOBCE, Caesar had subdued most ' of Gaul and had acquired a vast replace him.
The Huo family, which had dominated the government for decades, was removed from power, and its leading members executed.
Caesar responded by ) crossing over to Britain in 55 BCE | with two legions.
Hopewell bird Clay pipes, often in the shape of birds, are one of the most characteristic products of the Hopewell culture.
Caesar's second expedition to : Britain, another revolt in Gaul, this 2 time led by the Senones, wiped out : much of the Roman force there. : After putting down the revolt, : Caesar's attentions were diverted : to Rome, where political violence : had resulted in the murder of his : former ally Clodius, and where : Pompey had been elected sole consul in 52BCE, rupturing the : Triumvirate.
Vercingetorix also defeated Caesar 2 himself at Gergovia, but was then : trapped at Alesia in September : 52Bce.
The Senate ordered Caesar to disband his army or be declared an enemy of the state.
Caesar annexed the kingdom of sons Gnaeus and Sextus escaped : King Juba of Mauretania, who : 49BCE, he forced the Pompeians : there to surrender.
Kharavela expanded Kalinga far to the north and east, ' conquering the Sunga capital of ' Pataliputra in Magadha.
Jainism, Kharavela established , trading contacts as far afield as Southeast Asia. : Murder of Caesar : Conspirators struck Caesar down : with daggers.
IN ROME, THE PERIOD AFTER THE ASSASSINATION of Julius Caesar saw rising tensions between Mark Antony and Octavian, whom many viewed as Caesar's rightful heir.
The two almost came to blows early in 43BCE, when Octavian marched to raise the siege of Mutina (Modena, Italy], where Mark Antony was besieging Decimus Brutus, one of Caesar's assassins.
When the Senate voted to transfer Octavian's legions to Decimus Brutus, Octavian realized he was being sidelined and formed a three-way alliance with Mark Antony and Marcus Lepidus, the governor of Transalpine Gaul.
The Triumvirate conducted a war against Cassius and Marcus Brutus, two more of Caesar's assassins, who had seized much of the territory in the east.
Antony stayed in the east until 4OBCE, when he returned to Italy to try to undermine the 7, growing power of Octavian.
Battle of Actium : Octavian's fleet outnumbered that of : Mark Antony and Cleopatra, with : smaller more manoeuvrable ships, : and fresher, better trained crews. : sufficient resources to besiege it. : In 33BCE, the Triumvirate : expired and Octavian had the : Senate declare Mark Antony a : public enemy.
HAVING DEFEATED HIS ENEMIES, Octavian did not take on the title of dictator, as Julius Caesar had.
He instead ruled informally as the princeps—the first man of the state.
Having acquired control of Antony's legions, he now had an army of about 500,000 men.
He disbanded more than half of these, retaining 28 legions (about 150,000 soldiers), settling the remainder in colonies in Italy and abroad.
In 27BCE, Octavian gave up all his powers, ostensibly restoring the Republic.
The Senate responded by granting him personal control of Egypt, Gaul, Germany, Spain, and Syria.
Although the Senate was, in theory, the supreme authority in Rome, in practice no one could match Augustus’s power, and he Is seen as the first Roman emperor.
North Africa had been a center of strong resistance to both Julius Caesar and Augustus, who settled many army veterans there.
Juba, whose wife was the daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, proved a reliable Roman ally.
In western Asia, the ruler of : Galilee, Herod I, was allowed to : retain his position by Octavian, : even though he had supported : Mark Antony.
La Maison Carré, in Nimes, southern France, is one of the finest surviving Roman temples.
Augustuss own appointed heir had died in 25BCE, so he adopted Agrippa’s children, renaming them Gaius and Lucius Caesar.
The end of the Republic and the reign of Augustus saw a golden age in Latin literature.
The orator Cicero and the historian Sallust marked the height of late Republican literature.
After Augustus's rise to power, the poets Virgil , author of the Eclogues and the epic poem /he Aeneid, and Horace , author of the Odes and Carmen Saeculare, both flourished under the patronage of Maecenas, a close confidant of Augustus.
Some semi-independent kingdoms that the early Han had suppressed began to reappear.
Yuandi and his successors Chengdi and Aidi also created numerous marquisates, many of which were granted to the sons of the new kings, weakening the state's central control.
Gradually, the Romans became entangled in campaigns in the Italian Peninsula and beyond.
By the 1st century CE, the Roman Empire had become the largest Europe had ever seen.
The early growth of Roman territories was slow, with wars their military successes to bolster their position in Rome. against neighbors often threatening the survival of Rome itself.
The quest for security along the existing frontiers then North Africa itself. resulted in the frontiers being pushed even farther forward.
Victory in the First new territories in northwestern Europe Dacia, and made small advances Punic War (264-241 BCE] Pata aya and western Asia. into western Asia, but the empire territory in Sicily, but the Romans still faced began to contract after 250CE. resistance to their rule in northern Italy.
He strengthened his influence by marrying his daughter to the young emperor.
On Ping Di's death, many of the THE NUMBER OF DIFFERENT ISSUED BY WANG MANG nobility rejected Wang Mang’s choice of successor and rose up in revolt.
Wang Mang easily put them down, and in 9 he took the title of first Xin emperor.
Chang'an fell, Gengshi became : the first emperor of the restored : Han dynasty.
Consolidating ruler : Rather than extending Roman territory through foreign : conquests, Tiberius concentrated on strengthening the existing empire.
He alienated the Red Eyebrows and angered many of China’s nobility and bureaucrats by moving the capital from Luoyang back to Chang’an.
Much of China had already slipped from Gengshi's grasp by 25, when Chang’an was sacked by the Red Eyebrows.
The emperor was deposed and replaced by Guang Wudi , who Is regarded as the first Eastern Han emperor.
The new ruler had first to face a civil war; by 27, he had defeated the Red Eyebrows, but it took him until 36 to overcome the last of the warlords who opposed him.
In 37, he abolished all except three of the kingdoms that had sprung up MONGOLIA Sea 0 Japan KOREA JAPAN ia East China Sea Taiwan South China Sea KEY Qin China in 206BcE Territory added by Former Han Dynasty 206BCE-9cE — Great Wall under the Han Chinese Han Empire When Guang Wudi began the Eastern Han Dynasty in 25, Chinese control extended deep into Central Asia.
This ornamental brick from China’s Eastern Han period shows 14 a procession that includes horse-drawn carriages.
BCE-33 CE] Jesus, a carpenter from Nazareth, began his ministry in his early 30s.
He taught in the Jewish tradition, calling for the reform of the Temple and for the love of one’s neighbour to take precedence over the strict observance of religious law.
Jesus gathered a group of twelve disciples around him, but was targeted by Jewish conservatives afraid of his growing influence.
QP 9 SOM Wr _ xe 2.0mm SO Ce Oe Otek ee ee DA OP A pH Q92' WP ad a® oe BANS eh 0 oo <O oe NY wo eo O Soe.
Although few details of Kujula’s reign are known, he minted coins in imitation of both Greek and Roman models, demonstrating that Bactria and northwestern India remained very much a cultural crossroads.
In 43, the new emperor, Claudius , sent an invasion force of four legions led by Aulus Plautius, governor of Pannonia, to conquer Britain.
The Romans landed unopposed at Richborough, pushed on to London, and then captured Christian catacomb, Rome At first, Roman Christians did not have their own cemeteries.
In 47, the Romans paused briefly: in their conquest of Britain, having | ' reached a line roughly between ' the Humber River in the east and ' the Severn River in the west.
Ostorius Scapula invaded Wales, where Caractacus was continuing the resistance.
Caractacus over to the Romans, ' and Roman Britain remained ' relatively trouble free during the ' following decade.
A charismatic preacher, Paul also wrote a powerful series | of epistles to various fledgling Christian groups.
The young emperor's reign began well when he promised the senate he would avoid making any arbitrary measures.
However, the first sign of Nero's tyranny surfaced in 59, when he had his mother Agrippina murdered.
In 62, a new praetorian prefect (commander of the imperial bodyguard), Tigellinus , took office.
Tigellinus pandered to the less desirable side of Nero's personality, whose rule became increasingly despotic.
Following a fire that destroyed much of Rome in 64, Nero is said to have taken terrible retribution on Rome's small Christian population, who proved convenient scapegoats.
Later, during the reconstruction of Rome, Nero alienated senators by seizing their land to build himself a new palace.
He also ordered additional taxes in Palestine, which sparked a Jewish revolt in 66.
When the king of the Iceni died, he left his lands to his queen, Boudicca.
Britain, was away on campaign in : Wales, and by the time he : returned, Camulodunum had ' been sacked by the Iceni.
It is said the Iceni lost 80,000 warriors and Boudicca herself was captured, though she died, possibly poisoned, soon after. the ground. which began in 66.
Tiridates was allowed to keep the throne, as long as he travelled to Rome to seek Nero's approval, which he eventually did in 66.
Nero’s position as emperor became increasingly precarious when Calpurnius Piso led a conspiracy in 64, which prompted Nero to order further governor of Gallia Lugdunensis. é Shortly after the —_. many senators.
In early 68, a revolt broke out, led by Gaius Julius Vindex, legion based In Spain proclaimed the governor, Sulpicius Galba, as emperor.
In April 69, the armies of ' Otho and Vitellius clashed at Bedriacum near Cremona in ' northern Italy, and the Vitellian ' army won.
BY THE MID-70S, CIVILIS’S REVOLT had fizzled out and the rest of Vespasian’'s reign was largely peaceful.
With a reputation for frugality, he restored the empire's finances, imposing levies ona number of provinces, including Egypt.
In Britain, the Romancontrolled area continued to ' expand, with governor Petillius ' Cerialis occupying the ' northern English kingdom of ' Brigantia.
By 86, Domitian had . defeated the Dacians, under their ' new king, Decebalus.
Domitian had never commanded armies and was unprepared for the exercise of supreme power.
He had some success in his early campaigns, but he over-extended himself against the Dacians, and in putting down a legionary revolt led by Saturninus, the governor of Germania Superior.
This distraction allowed Decebalus, King of the Dacians , to renew his war against Rome, and Domitian was forced to pay off the Dacians with an annual subsidy.
The conspiracy of Saturninus led Domitian to become paranoid and he had many senators executed for treason.
In September 96, he was murdered in a palace conspiracy and the Senate chose the aged M Cocceius Nerva to replace him.
The Senate then voted to destroy all statues of Domitian and to recall those he had exiled.
However, in 97 Nerva faced a mutiny of the praetorian guard, who demanded the punishment of Domitian’s murderers.
To rectify this he adopted M Ulpius Traianus , the governor of Upper Germany, a man with a strong military backing.
Ban Chao ' became protector-general of the Western Regions in 92, and 2 reestablished control over the key ' oases along the Silk Route.
Trajan’s Column, in Rome, gives a visual account against Decebalus in the Dacian Wars.
EMPEROR TRAJAN WAS FROM A ROMAN FAMILY who had settled in Spain—he was the first emperor to come from a Roman province rather than Italy.
From a base at Viminacium , he pushed into central Dacia, and fought a major engagement at Tapae, in which both sides suffered serious losses.
When Trajan’s legions neared the Dacian royal capital at Sarmizegetusa Regia, Decebalus sued for peace, agreeing to give up his army's weapons and siege equipment, and to demolish his remaining forts.
The Dacian Fortune : The large amount of treasure Trajan : acquired in Dacia allowed him to : build impressive monuments to : commemorate his Dacian victory.
Gulf near modern Basra, Iraq, : where he is said to have remarked that, had he been younger, he ' might have pressed on to India.
In 109, Trajan appointed the : historian Pliny the Younger ' (61-c.2] as his personal ' representative to govern Bithynia: Pontus on the Black Sea coast of Anatolia.
Pontus for at least two years, ' trying to sort out the finances of the main cities, which had fallen : into confusion.
The central wall occupies a high position that vastly enhances its defensive value.
In 122, Hadrian visited Britain, where there had been frontier troubles.
He ordered the building of a huge barrier from the Solway Firth in the west to the Tyne River in the east.
It took governor Aulus Platorius Nepos two years to complete Hadrian’s Wall (part in stone, and part in turf), which ran 76 Roman miles (113km], and was equipped with a series of forts and milecastles for its garrison.
Hadrian's Wall acted as the northern frontier line of Roman Britain for the next 40 years.
He was mocked by some for his grecophile tendencies, and was the first emperor to sport a beard—a Greek fashion.
The city was planned on a grid, with two huge pyramids—of the Moon and the Sun—at either end of the main street.
Hadrian had adopted Antoninus | Pius as his son and successor, a stop-gap until Antoninus’s relative, Marcus Aurelius , was old enough to rule, but Antoninus survived Hadrian by 23 years, and became Roman emperor in 138.
MARCUS AURELIUS SUCCEEDED TO THE ROMAN THRONE jointly with Lucius Verus in 161.
Marcus was the more capable of the two, but it was Lucius who was sent, In 162, to rescue the situation in the east after the governor of Cappadocia was defeated and killed by the Persians following a disastrous invasion of Armenia.
Langobardi and Obii tribes crossed the Danube to attack the : Roman province of Pannonia.
Pannonia later in the year to ' launch a massive offensive : across the Danube.
Marcus, the war dragged on for ' another 10 years. : In China, the eunuch faction at ' court had become increasingly : powerful and had even engineered the murder of the emperor Shaodi : in 125.
From their bases in the Peruvian valleys of Moche, Chicama, and Viru, these people spread to dominate almost the whole northern coastline.
They were skilled workers In gold and their pottery has an extraordinarily realistic quality.
The Roman Empire was in crisis in 170—the Marcomanni and Quadi had occupied parts of northern Italy, and an invasion by the lazyges and Costobocci had overun large parts of the Balkans.
The Romans trapped the Marcomanni as they returned across the Danube and killed many of them.
The Quadi sued for peace later in 171, but the Marcommani remained recalcitrant, forcing a new offensive in 172.
In May that year, rumors that Marcus Aurelius Moche stirrup jar This jar has a typical Moche “stirrup” attached to the back of it.
There were suggestions that Marcus's wife Faustina encouraged Avidius, as she feared for her husband's health and worried her own son Commodus was unfit to rule.
Free from the distraction of Avidius’s revolt, Marcus Aurelius returned to the Danube in 177.
ANCIENT ROME THE ROMANS SPREAD A RICH MATERIAL CULTURE THROUGHOUT THEIR VAST EMPIRE gold in the form of a leaf As Roman political control steadily expanded outside Italy, in its wake came the Roman way of life.
Roman surveyors laid out new cities, local elites took up Roman practices, and the masses attended gladiatorial spectacles.
On a domestic level, Roman fashions in clothing and accessories also spread.
Although many of the territories that the Romans conquered initially resisted, the populations of these provinces, particularly the former ruling classes, gradually adopted many Roman customs.
Influential men became Roman citizens, towns were given new public buildings such as baths and courthouses, Roman legionary garrisons were established in strategic places, and new trade routes brought luxury goods from Rome.
Ocean baths The most important Roman baths were adorned with lavish mosaics, such as this one of Oceanus, the ocean god, from Sabratha in Libya.
Plumb line This bronze weighted plumb line was attached to a groma, an instrument used by the Romans to survey straight lines. bronze weight cart carrying worshipers Bronze dividers and foot rule Dividers allowed engineers to copy scale plans or models at twice or half their size—the gap between the lower points is always twice that between the upper points.
Graters such as this one were invented to allow cheese to be used as a topping on other foodstuffs. strigil for scraping Amphora Bathing tools The Romans transported liquid At the baths, a Roman's skin goods such as oil and wine was oiled and then scraped to in amphoras, a type of large, remove sweat and dirt.
Short sword The Roman military sword, or gladius, had a i short blade—ideal for attacks at close range.
It was used by soldiers and some gladiators. short blade ivory grip satyr carrying cymbals Military javelin Each Roman legionary carried two of these pila . long iron handle shaped for The javelin’s iron head was designed to break off on shank throwing impact to prevent an opponent throwing it back.
Imperial coins Coins bearing the head of the current emperor (here Augustus and Claudius) acted as powerful propaganda tools across the empire, showing even the masses an image of their ruler.
Proof of citizenship Noncitizens who served 25 years in the Roman army were awarded citizenship and given bronze diplomas such as this one to record the grant.
Sling pellets Roman legionaries normally relied on their swords, but auxiliary light infantry used other weapons to devastating effect, such as these metal sling pellets. gridded visor to protect face small size would have offered little protection Gladiator helmet Bronze gladiator shield Roman gladiators bore a variety of arms Thracian gladiators—a class of lightly and armor.
This sort of helmet was armed gladiator—carried lightweight, worn by a Thracian, a type of gladiator round shields such as this one for whose equipment was modeled on defense, and a scimitar, with a short, that of ancient Thracian warriors. curved blade, to attack their opponents.
In this engraving by Giovanni Stradano, Emperor Commodus shoots an arrow to subdue a leopard.
Another uprising fueled by the Five Pecks of Rice sect then succeeded in taking over Sichuan in the southwest.
Although the Yellow Turbans had been largely crushed by early 185, the control of the Han emperor was ever weakening.
After Lingdi died in 189, he was replaced by his younger half-brother Xiandi but he never exercised real power.
Instead, control of the empire fell to Han general Cao Cao, who contended for 30 years with a series of rival warlords, notably Liu Bei in the southwest and Sun Quan in the south.
Aureliuss son, was the first : Roman emperor to succeed his : father for 90 years, but he proved : to be a disastrous choice. |n 182, ' after an assassination attempt on ' him, apparently organized by his : sister Lucilla, Commodus became : increasingly despotic.
Papirius Dionysius, engineered a ' shortage that led to Cleander's 2 downfall.
This was followed by rival claimants to the throne engaging in an auction outside the praetorian camp to decide who would be emperor.
A prophecy had predicted that she would wed an emperor, and so it turned out.
Forceful and intelligent, she failed to mediate between her sons Caracalla and Geta after their father’s death and to prevent Geta’s murder.
Kushan rule finally collapsed under Vasudeva when Persian invaders | swept through northwestern India.
Although Kushan kings continued to rule a much-reduced realm for a further century, their influence was purely local and their heyday was at an end.
OR: | ainia ePELUNANAINIR. yi K at LINININT ) ONG ery AM SICKO ING, PTVNE | He SIORNINA | i if ef m FACTS) TT ANNO Xx MST AA ORS AVE) Oy HAART RATA ares EWE ff INIT RY Ney IICLNIN ih, 1A / RINE i Ni a ley WECALLE: LEO NEON STE PENIM, Fay uh LONI IN OMT X : which citizenship was granted to 2 almost all free males in the ' empire.
For some 2 unknown reason, he became » enraged and ordered the massacre of the citizens of ' Alexandria.
His praetorian prefect Opellius | Macrinus came to suspect that : Caracalla wanted him dead, so he ' persuaded a disaffected soldier to murder the emperor.
When the two fell out in 222, the army backed Alexianus and Elagabalus was murdered.
In 207, N\ > tact the kingdom had been Bronze diploma Diplomas were issued to ' auxiliary soldiers in the Roman army, granting them citizenship.
Arch of Caracalla : Originally the arch : was topped bya : figure of the : emperor riding ina : Chariot.
Ardashir | was then declared king | as the first ruler of _ the Sasanian dynasty.
Cao Pi forced Xiandi to abdicate. : Within two years Cao Pi, Liu Bei, ' and Sun Quan would each declare ' himself emperor.
The uprising’s ringleader, Maximinus Thrax , an officer from a humble background, was proclaimed emperor, but he spent most of his reign raising funds to reward his troops for their support.
China under the Three Kingdoms : Although the Wei kingdom faced the : greatest challenges among the three : kingdoms, it would eventually : conquer the Wu and the Shu Han.
Balbinus and Pupienus were killed soon after, leaving Gordian II to rule alone.
Compounding the Roman Empire's difficulties was the appearance of barbarian confederacies among the Germanic peoples of the Rhine and Danube frontiers.
In 244, he won a decisive battle against Gordian Ill at Misiche near Ctesiphon.
Philip made peace with Shapur but had to pay a large ransom to escape Sasanian territory.
The Romans were left Relief of Shapur | In this relief, Shapur | triumphs over the Roman emperors Gordian III and Valerian.
In Japan, the Yamato kingdom : emerged on the plain of Nara [in : central Japan) around 250.
Ge AS eG Sf The main colonnade at Palmyra, which grew rich on tariffs paid by merchants I ad } i who plied the desert route that passed through the Syrian city.
Valerian’s son Gallienus , struggling to contain an invasion of Italy by the Germanic luthungi had no resources to reinforce the Rhine frontier, which was being breached by Alemmanic and Frankish raiders.
The Governor of Germania Inferior, Marcus Postumus, revolted and killed Gallienus’s son Saloninus, who had been left in charge of Gaul and The Gallic Empire Postumus began the Gallic Empire in control of Gaul, Germany, Britain, and Spain.
In 274, Tetricus was captured near Chalons, and the ' Gallic Empire was reabsorbed.
However, the wars of the Three Kingdoms period had impoverished the state and as the tax burden rose, many peasants fled to landowners for protection, resulting in the rise of private armies.
In 285, he defeated Carinus (the then emperor of the Western Empire] and started a radical reorganization of the empire, reforming the army, and subdividing provinces.
Constantius Chlorus [r.3-306) to assist Diocletian in the Western Empire and Galerius (r.3-311] to be Maximian’s junior in the East.
Fis Apostolic Palace in the Vati aN the emperor Constantine is said to have seen a Christian monogram in a dream predicting his victory.
SINCE PERSECUTIONS IN THE 250S AND 260S, THE CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY had experienced some 40 years of tranquillity in the Roman Empire.
Devout Christians could not accede to these demands, and many of them were martyred.
Battle numbers at Milvian Bridge : Maxentius'’s forces outnumbered : those of Constantine, but his : army became trapped between : Constantine's men and the river.
CHANDRAGUPTA I ASCENDED TO THE THRONE of a small kingdom in the western Ganges Plain in 320.
Emperor Constantine (r.0-337] 2 found that Christians themselves : were far from united in doctrine or organization.
THE NUMBER OF TYPES OF PURE-GOLD COINS ISSUED BY SAMUDRAGUPTA IN 335, SAMUDRAGUPTA ([r.575) SUCCEEDED HIS FATHER Chandragupta | as ruler of the Gupta domains in northern India.
An inscription he set up in Prayaga Survives, recounting a series of campaigns he fought in Uttar Pradesh and Mathura, both of which were annexed to the Gupta kingdom.
He also made conquests down the east coast of India, as far as Madras, and subdued West Bengal as well as parts of Rajasthan and the Punjab.
Various other regions acknowledged his suzerainty, making him the most powerful Indian ruler since the Mauryas.
Constantine died in 337, having accepted Christian baptism only on his deathbed.
Constantine Il held Spain, Gaul, and Britain; Constans ruled Italy, and Constantius Il (r.7-61] : governed the Eastern Empire. : Their reigns began with a massacre at Constantinople in which almost all of their father’s : other male relatives were killed in order to remove any possible ' rivals.
Gaul as Caesar, where he proved surprisingly effective at combating ' Frankish raiders. < s : eee 6 5 ADs 6 Nd <@ 3.
IN ETHIOPIA, THE KINGDOM OF AKSUM became one of the earliest states to embrace Christianity outside the Roman Empire.
The Mayans developed a hieroglyphic form of writing that survives on many of the stelae (carved stone slabs] they set up to commemorate important events; in ' Tikal the first such dated monument is from 292.
The first named king of Tikal Is Siyaj Chan K’awiil | , and by the reign of Chak Tok Ich’aak | (r.078), Tikal was by far the largest and most powerful of the Classic Maya cities.
RY ° 2 Po ar es oe on . ee ie Foyer or oS SO 2 < aS ox 9 os Q r 9 3 i, J ei in. — ea hats yee <A ‘Here Emperor Julian is seen in religious debate.
He attempted to sow discord among Christians by decreeing the return of those who had been exiled for religious reasons.
IN CHINA, THE EASTERN JIN DYNASTY brought comparative stability to the south of the country.
Although many of the emperors were short-lived, the bureaucracy in the southern capital of Nanjing functioned efficiently and the period saw a cultural flowering.
Artists such as Gu Kaizhi painted masterpieces such as the Admonitions of the Instructress to the Palace Ladies, as well as producing works on the theory of painting.
Northern China, on the other hand, was highly unstable, divided between the Sixteen Kingdoms, most of them ruled by nomadic groups. [he Eastern Jin emperors alternated between a defensive stance towards the Sixteen Kingdoms and aggressive campaigns, notably under Mudi who retook Sichuan and Luoyang.
When Julian unexpectedly became emperor in 363, he tried to restore paganism In the empire, including banning Christians from teaching literature.
He became known by Christian writers as “the Apostate” for his perceived betrayal of Christianity.
An officer of the imperial bodyguard, Valentinian , was then raised to the throne, and he selected his brother Valens to be his co-ruler.
Valentinian spent much of his reign along the Rhine dealing with Frankish and Alemannic invaders.
In the Eastern Empire, Valens was forced to spend most of the early 370s in Syria to contain the Persian threat, but growing trouble with barbarians along the Danube later forced him to turn to the Balkans.
The Huns, a new nomadic group from Central Asia, were at their rear, and the Goths feared being squeezed between them and the imperial frontier.
Emperor Valens did not wait for reinforcements before marching out to meet the Gothic army.
On August 9, 378, near Adrianople, the Romans met the Goths, under Fritigern.
Misled by the temporary absence of the Gothic cavalry, Valens attacked but his army was surrounded by the returning barbarian horsemen.
Valens was killed and the Eastern army destroyed, leaving the Balkans open to the Goths.
Gratian reacted by turning to Theodosius, a Spanish military officer, who he appointed as his imperial colleague.
For the next three years Theodosius patiently negotiated, bought off some groups, and struck militarily where he could.
He also made an astute marriage alliance that extended ' his realm to the southwest.
This iron pillar at Qutb complex on : the outskirts of Delhi is said to have been erected on the orders of : Chandragupta II. a St.
Jerome completed the Vulgate, \, the first definitive translation of the Bible into Latin, 405.
His arrival, which may represent a military conquest, led to the death , of Tikal’s ruler Chak Tok Ich’aak and the destruction of most of Tikal’s public monuments.
Siyaj Kak installed a new dynasty on the throne of Tikal, possibly drawn from the ruling house of Teotihuacan, with Yax Nuun Ayiin as the first ruler.
In the Western Roman Empire, Gratian had spent much of his time since the Battle of Adrianople in northern Italy, where he continued to act against pagans in Rome, ordering the removal of the Altar of Victory from the Senate House In 382.
In 383, he led an army north to face an invasion of Gaul by the Alemanni, but was then faced with a revolt in Britain, where the legions declared their commander Magnus Maximus emperor.
Theodosius, fearful of trouble with Persia or a Gothic revolt in the Balkans if he moved west, recognized Maximus as his colleague.
Influence over Theodosius |. freed Theodosius to react when : Maximus invaded Italy in 387.
August 388, he marched swiftly : into northern Italy, capturing | Maximus near Aquileia and : having him executed.
Theodosius’s side at the Battle of : the Frigidus River and felt they had not been sufficiently rewarded for their losses.
Despite an attempt by Stilicho » , the half-Vandal ' commander of the Western Roman army, to suppress them, the Goths escaped and marauded throughout Greece in 396.
Stilicho ' moved against Alaric again in 397, ' but once more failed to defeat ' him.
Roman government to magister ' militum (a senior general. a middle-ranking official, emperor.
To gain support in the Senate—where paganism was still strong—the Christian Eugenius revoked all of Theodosius'’s anti-pagan laws.
But, in August 394, he was defeated by the Theodosian army at the Frigidus River near Aquileia.
Theodosius did not enjoy his rule as sole emperor long, dying in January 395.
Sn, ; “» 1 ™ a4 ox Peninsula Wee tar) ital LD 2 > q Séa Taprobane ya i/NODILAN OCEAN Socotra <é Emporen World trade go elnele Trade routes1CE criss-crossed the whole of the classical world.
The means of transport used depended on location— Bactrian camels were used in Central Asia, while horses, bullocks, and yaks were used elsewhere.
Maritime trade was also extensive—there was an active trading network around the Indian Ocean.
HAN TRADE The establishment of Chinese control in Central Asia from the late 3rd century BCE opened up a series of routes through Persia to the Mediterranean, which became collectively known as the Silk Route.
However, it also involved the Han emperors In continuous and costly defense of their new territories.
ROMANS IN THIs WAY, MADE IT THEIR OWN... oJ Procopius, Byzantine scholar, from History of the Wars, III iv 1, 500—550 ee fo.
They may represent the group that founded the city—their flat headdresses denote high status.
ALTHOUGH THE WESTERN ROMAN EMPIRE SEEMED RELATIVELY SECURE IN 400, within a decade it had suffered a series of disasters.
Then on the last day of 406, hordes of Vandals, joined by two other barbarian groups, the Alans and Sueves, crossed the frozen Rhine near Mainz, sacked Treveri (modern Trier, Germany] and Remi (modern Reims, France}, and forced their way southwest until they reached the Pyrenees.
Meanwhile, the armies of Britain had raised up a series of usurpers as emperor from 406.
There he smashed the Alans and the Siling Vandals, but allowed some of them to settle in southern Spain and left the Asing Vandals and Sueves in possession of northwestern Spain.
Wallia was rewarded with official possession of much of southwestern Spain.
A colorful Buddhist mural from the Yungang ca under the Northern Wei 450.
THE EASTERN JIN DYNASTY IN CHINA HAD ENDED IN 420, with Gongi's abdication.
His successor, Song Wudi (r.0-22], a former fisherman, had risen to become a general and founded the Liu Song | dynasty.
Although Song Wudi had strengthened the central bureaucracy, the growing power and wealth of the Buddhist and Daoist monasteries weakened the economic basis of the state.
The Northern Wei ruled over northern China, until its split into two in the early 6th century following a revolt against the imposition of Chinese dress and language on the Wei nomads.
Visigoths under Theodoric : : occupied sections of ' the Mediterranean shore of Gaul, : before they were pushed back ' southwest in 430.
Valentinian III in the Western Roman Empire did not provide any stability as he ascended to the throne as a child and never asserted himself until Northern Wei horse The art of the Northern Wei often evoked their nomadic origins, as in this beautiful terra-cotta horse.
He used these contacts to gain influence and rose to further prominence in the late 420s.
The deaths of patricians Felix and Boniface [in 433) left him with unrivaled dominance.
Saxon, and Jutish raiders began 2 to occupy parts of the former Roman province.
Complex irrigation systems began to appear, and rulers built ever larger burial mounds, such as the 1,600 ft(486 m-] long Nintoku mound.
Ojin founded a new line of kings, who exercised firmer control over Japan's main islands from a royal center in the Kawachi-Ilzumi area.
He was . | captured, and only released after +} leaving his son as a hostage.
Ricimer replaced him with ' Libius Severus (r.1-65], who he later had poisoned.
Clovis’s baptism made him an easier diplomatic partner for the eastern Roman Empire than his Arian neighbors.
IN 456, THE VISIGOTHS, encouraged by the western Roman emperor Avitus, had invaded the Iberian Peninsula.
The Visigothic king Theoderic Il defeated the Suevic ruler Rechiarius, who was threatening the Roman province of Tarraconensis, and the remaining Sueves retreated.
Theoderic took most of Spain for himself, but left the Romans parts of the east coast.
This policy was reversed by his successor Euric , who overran the remaining Roman territories in the late 470s.
By the time of Alaric Il the Visigothic kingdom encompassed almost all of Spain, as well as Aquitaine and Provence in southern Gaul.
In Gaul, ' Euric conquered almost all ' remaining Roman territory in the © south by 475.
Olybrius and Glycerius ' (r.3-74] on the throne in quick succession, but, despairing of the ' empire's frailty, he then left for : Burgundy.
Interests of the Germanic : barbarians in the army were being : ignored, Orestes’s deputy, Odoacer, revolted and deposed : Romulus in September 476.
In 507, he defeated the Visigoths at the Battle of Vouillée and drove them out of most of southwestern Gaul.
In the late 490s or early 500s, Clovis converted to ‘THEODORIC THE GREAT Son of Thiudmir, a king of the Ostrogoths, Theodoric spent 11 years as a Roman hostage, to guarantee the good behavior of his father.
He returned home to become king of the Ostrogoths in 471, and for the next 17 years alternately allied with and attacked Roman territories in the Balkans.
Zeno In Britain, the : faced the challenge expulsion of Roman of the new officials had been : Germanic rulers of : Saxon brooch : Anglo-Saxon art in the : 5th century valued abstract : geometric patterns, as seen : on this brooch. followed by a period in which petty kingdoms vied for power.
S-~—\) < ha) cer . ° oY Ne “Oe % pee <Shechai Qe x o> be \@ K» ra QO oe 2 © ey Oo” S O ae s) ® ‘s) N O) ; N24 ‘ NG wo Tishaa vir) Se \ x 6a & «> ~ ne Se se S ~& x5 \e xe xa < ie) » xNo \e ra.
He amassed a vast financial surplus, which his successors spent on expanding the Eastern Roman Empire.
More serious were problems on the eastern frontier, where the Persians insisted on Byzantine financial subsidies to pay for the defense of strategic passes in the Caucasus against barbarian incursions.
In 502, the Persian ruler Kavadh began a war over the issue; the slow Byzantine reaction allowed him to capture Amida as well as several towns In Armenia.
Byzantine forces retook Amida in 505, and Kavadh— preoccupied with a Hepthalite invasion in the east—agreed a truce, which lasted until 527.
Anastasius gained popularity by abolishing the chrysargyron tax for traders and craftsmen.
Prosperity continued and over his reign his treasury amassed a surplus of 320,000 pounds of gold.
Monophysite, which led to serious ' rioting in 512, and the revolt of an : army officer, Vitalian, in Thrace in 513.
Chalcedonian Christianity and : developed good relations with the : Ostrogoths of Italy and the : Vandals of North Africa.
Clovis’s kingdom was divided among his four sons—Theuderic, : Childebert, Chlodomir, and : Chlothar.
THE REIGN OF THE BYZANTINE EMPEROR JUSTINIAN began with important reforms.
In 528, he commissioned a new law code to replace the confusion he had inherited.
The rapid conquest of the Vandal || kingdom encouraged Justinian to ’ intervene in Italy.
He took Naples after a three-week siege, causing the Ostrogothic king, Vitigis, to retreat northward.
Persia entered a new period of : and their followers to serve by greatness under Khusrau | ' paying salaries.
He attacked | movement—had caused serious again, in 544, but a siege of ' social tensions.
Further outbreaks of plague occurred in the 6th and 7th centuries, sapping the vitality of the Byzantine Empire.
In Italy, the Ostrogoths made rapid advances after the departure of Belisarius.
Belisarius was recalled to retrieve the situation in 544, but Justinian starved him of resources and Rome fell in 546.
Although the Byzantines retook Rome in 547, it fell once more to Totila in 550.
Justinian sent two huge armies under Artabanes and Narses to finish off the Goths.
Artabanes entered Ravenna in June 592, and in July Narses defeated Totila at the Battle of Busta Gallorum in the Apennines.
There was still some Ostrogoth resistance, but the war in Italy was effectively over. the high level of workmanship in the of Italy.
By 558, Chlothar I , who ruled the area of Francia around Soissons, had absorbed the Rheims kingdom and the region around Paris after their rulers Merovingian ruler of Francia for three years, until his death in 561.
Francia was once again divided, with Charibert | receiving Paris, Guntram getting Orleans, Sigibert Rheims, and Chilperic Soissons.
Ajanta cave art The Ajanta caves, a Buddhist holy site in Maharashtra, India, experienced a second major phase of use during the 6th century.
The next emperor, Sushun (r.6-93], had a Soga mother, reinforcing the family’s dominance.
Wendi was now the country’s sole ruler and the first emperor of the Sui dynasty; after three centuries of division, China was finally united.
Wendi disarmed private armies and established agricultural colonies along China's frontiers to strengthen central control in remote areas.
He implemented a major land reform that increased the number of households liable to the land tax from 4 million in 589, to almost 9 million in 606.
In 582, Emperor Maurice | succeeded Tiberius II (r.8-82] ' as the Byzantine emperor.
A man of great ability and energy, he was involved in resistance to the Lombards in Italy in the early part of his papacy, but he maintained good relations with the Merovingians In Francia and the Visigothic rulers of Spain.
In 584, Maurice renewed the war with Persia, appointing Philippicus to oversee it.
When the Avars moved into the region inc. the Slavs were pushed farther south.
Gregorylsenta ' mission to Britain ' to revive : Christianity, ' following the ' invasions by pagan : Anglo-Saxons in the : 5th and early : 6th centuries.
Bertha, the wife of : the Kentish king : Aethelberht, was : already Christian. : After Aethelberht was baptized : a Christian, Augustine was able to : establish a church in Canterbury.
Meanwhile, in the New World, great civilizations reached their peak. “a A coin depicting the Eastern Roman emperor Heraclius. an unusual traveling companion.
Phocas became emperor but Chosroes Il of Sasanian Persia took advantage of the eastern empire's weakness, while the Avars invaded from the north.
In 606, in northern India, Harsha acceded to the thrones of Thanesar and Kannauj, establishing the last native Indian empire of ancient times.
By 618, Constantinople was besieged by the Avars, and their Slavic subjects.
In 620, Heraclius bought off the Avars In order to focus on repelling the Persians.
His Edict of Paris, issued in 614, introduced reforms to the Merovingian church and state.
Hostility from the Meccan authorities forced Muhammad to flee to Medina with his family and followers in 622.
Taizong, consolidated Tang power by suppressing rebellions ' across the empire.
Taizong forced his father to step : down and inaugurated a golden : age of trade, prosperity, and : cultural exchange.
Born in Mecca, Muhammad ibn Abdallah worked as a merchant and shepherd before growing discontented and retiring to a Life of contemplation.
In 610, he received the first of a series of divine revelations—these became the Qu'ran.
BY THE TIME OF MUHAMMAD'S DEATH IN 632, the young Muslim community—united by Islam, which transcended traditional rivalries—was ready for expansion.
The first caliph, Abu Bakr , suppressed an Arabian rebellion, reestablished Islamic dominion over Arabia, and began the conquest of Syria.
By 637, Umar controlled Jerusalem and Damascus, and, in the same year, Arab forces conquered Persia (modern Iran and Iraq], occupying the Sasanian capital at Ctesiphon.
KEY i : ™® Xuanzang’s route INDIAN orneo OCEAN as : The travels of Xuanzang : The young monk left the Tang : capital, Chang an, in around 630. : He crossed Central Asia and : reached India in 645. affiliation—those recruited for : fighting were made dependents of tribal members; and a taxation ' system that favored Muslims and ' encouraged conversion but allowed Christians and Jews to ' follow their religions.
Buddhism became increasingly | influential in Tang China; the ' Buddhist monk Xuanzang ' journeyed far and wide in search ' of wisdom.
Conversion of the population to Islam proceeded slowly but steadily over the following centuries.
The Arabs met with similar success in Egypt where the Byzantines offered only token resistance.
The fall of Alexandria came in 642, the same year that the Muslims founded the military settlement of Fustat, which later became Cairo.
Christian king Oswald of : Northumbria, hitherto one of the ' most powerful kingdoms, was : slain by the pagan king Penda of ' Mercia.
One of the last burials of this type in England, the ' artifacts comprise a fusion of Christian and non-Christian ' elements, suggesting transition as Christianity gained in ' popularity and strength.
THE SPLIT BETWEEN SUNNI AND SHIITE MUSLIMS was the outcome of fierce disagreement over how succession to the caliphate ought to be decided; either by selection (as in the case of the first three caliphs) or by hereditary descent.
As Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law—next in line by descent—Ali enjoyed unique status in the Islamic world, but he faced many challenges.
In 657, the Umayyad emir of Syria, Mu’awiya, asserted his claim on the caliphate; Ali was also challenged by the Kharijis, a sect that objected to the application of the hereditary principle.
In 661, Ali was murdered by a Khariji, opening the way for Mu’awiya to declare himself caliph, instituting the Arab Umayyad dynasty.
Ali's supporters formed a party of their own, which evolved into a distinctive branch of Islam, the Shiites, in opposition to the Sunni.
The rapid Arab expansion continued throughout : the latter half of the 7th century.
Korea brought to an end the long Three Kingdoms period, with the help of Tang China.
Arab incursions into Stoneware bird This gray stoneware incense burner dates from the Silla kingdom, which was on the verge of becoming the dominant power during Korea’ss late Three Kingdoms period.
INIS Mask was : bringing six centuries of growth gel elilitoaitt : and dominance to an end.
In 705, with the help of Bulgar allies, the deposed emperor Justinian Il returned from exile , regained the Byzantine throne, and exacted brutal revenge on those who had mutilated him.
By 705, Zoroastrian refugees fleeing the Islamic conquest of Persia established communities in India and became known as the Parsees.
Persian Zoroastrian emigration continued during the following centuries.
Ruins of Lindisfarne Priory The Benedictine Priory, built in the 12th century, replaced an earlier church founded by St.
IN '710, THE VISIGOTHIC KINGDOM OF SPAIN had descended into civil war, presenting a tempting prospect to the Islamic armies now established tn North Africa, just a short distance away across the Straits of Gibraltar.
In 711, a Muslim army under general Tariq ibn Ziyad, landed at Gibraltar.
According to tradition, Tariq defeated the Visigothic king, Roderick, at the Battle of Guadalete, and by the end of the year most of the Iberian | peninsula was under Islamic control.
Only the northwest, known as Asturias, managed to 12th century, which chronicles the history of the Byzantine Empire.
This Tang dynasty scroll shows Xuanzong watching his concubine Yang Guifei mount a horse.
Se) & co R\ aw An iconic image of Christ held by Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople.
The success of this settlement of the Hohokam, an ancient people of the Sonoran desert in modern-day Arizona, lay in a watering system that allowed a range of crops to be grown, despite the arid environment.
The Hohokam lived here for more than a millennium; they were known as “canal builders” because of their sophisticated irrigation technology.
Casa Grande was at the center of a trade network that stretched from the Pacific coast to Tucson and to the Gulf of Mexico.
The earliest structures at Casa Grande were probably pit houses; the “great house” that gives the site its name came much later.
In 725, the Khazars, a Turkic people of Central Asian origin, established their capital at Atil, on the Volga delta at the northwestern corner of the Caspian Sea.
From here they controlled trade routes to all corners of Asia and built an empire that would control a huge swathe of Eastern Europe and Western Asia for centuries to come.
In Byzantium in 726, the emperor Leo Ill instituted a policy of iconoclasm [smashing images deemed sacrilegious] in response to the idea that God was punishing Christian Byzantines by their loss of land to the Arabs and Slavs.
Othe Frankish kingdoms to : present a unified defense. The Maya city-states Pi : overtaxed the surrounding ecology and exceeded their ability : to cope with drought.
Tiwanaku was the center of a civilization that THE POPULATION DENSITY OF TIKAL SINCE CONQUERING SPAIN, ISLAMIC FORCES had made regular raids across the Pyrenees, striking deep into modern-day France before retreating to al-Andalus.
In 721, an incursion into Aquitaine—a dukedom nominally in vassalage to the Frankish kingdom—had been checked by Duke Eudo at the Battle of Toulouse.
But in 731, Eudo was unable to halt a fresh invasion of Islamic forces under Abd al-Rahman I, emir of al-Andalus.
After defeat at the Battle of Arles, Eudo was forced to appeal to Charles Martel, the Frankish mayor of the palace, for help.
Martel raised an army and met the Islamic forces on the banks of the Loire, between Tours and Poitiers, in 732.
Statue of Chaak, Mayan god : Mayans would have sought : help from god of rain and : thunder, Chaak, for their : crops.
In 747, revolt broke out in Persian Khorasan, stronghold of the Abbasid clan, who traced their descent back to Muhammad through his uncle, al-Abbas.
In 749, Abu al-Abbas al-Saffah was proclaimed caliph at Kufa in Iraq, and the following year at the Battle of the Zab he defeated Marwan Il, the last Umayyad caliph.
Marwan fled to Egypt but his head was sent back to Damascus, whereupon al-Saffah instigated a general massacre of the Umayyad clan to remove potential opposition.
THE DEATH OF PEPIN III IN 758, In Europe, the Carolingian Pepin II ) } deposed the last Merovingian king, Childeric Ill.
With the pope's support Pepin was crowned and was soon able to return the papal favor.
When the Lombards conquered Ravenna, the last Byzantine territory in Italy, the Lombard king, Aistulf then set his eyes on Rome.
Pepin Ill Also known as Pepin the Short, Pepin Ill was the first Carolingian King of the Franks.
RY ca < Roland bids farewell to Charlemagne, ) in this medieval illustration on vellum.
Sasanian capital), the new city was carefully laid out ona circular plan and was connected ' to the Tigris and Euphrates rivers by canals.
His intent was to extend Frankish hegemony, foster a close relationship with the papacy, and reform the Church to ensure divine support for the Frankish Kingdom.
The following year he launched a series of bloody campaigns with the aim of bringing the peoples east of the Rhine back under Frankish rule—they had been subject to the authority of the preceding Merovingian Dynasty.
At this time the various Saxon tribes were still pagans, and Charlemagne was determined to convert them to Christianity and thus bring them under the hegemony of the Frankish state.
In the late 770s, he attempted to project his power into Spain by taking advantage of infighting among the Muslim rulers.
In 785, Offa of Mercia , effective overlord of Britain, started constructing the monumental earthwork known as Offa's Dyke, on the border between Wales and Mercia.
Originally 89ft wide and 2é6ft high, the purpose of the dyke is unknown, and it probably fell into disuse soon after its completion.
The “Vikings” (possibly from the Old Norse language] originated in Scandanavia.
In Tang China, the influence of Buddhism continued to grow, signaled by monuments such as the Leshan Buddha, a giant statue of the seated Buddha carved into a bluff next to the confluence of several major rivers.
In Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul), the emperor invited his mother Irene to become co-ruler in 792; four years later she had him blinded and declared herself empress.
Functional and stylish brooch : Skillfully crafted out of gold, this : Viking brooch was not only beautiful : but also practical, used to fasten : cloaks or other clothing. : more or less complete loss : of authority in Africa west of Egypt.
Its influence In Central Asia was indicative of Tang China's weakness in the region.
Meanwhile, in northern India, the Gurjara-Prathihara dynasty, which had united the region and held back the advance of Islam, continued to grow in strength with the conquest of Kanauj in modern-day India by Nagabhata II, around 801.
The Temple of Borobudur, a Buddhist monument in central Java, Southeast Asia, was completed in the early 9th century.
The colossal structure, which Is the largest Buddhist monument in the world, contains over 2 million stone blocks and is covered in almost 21,500 sq ft of carvings.
Its construction was an epic achievement, and a testament to the power of the Srivijayan Empire , which had grown rich from the extensive maritime trade of the region.
For much of this era, Srivijayan influence extended over the Southeast Asian mainland, including the Mekong basin kingdom formerly known to the Chinese as Funan.
CONFLICT BETWEEN THE BYZANTINES AND BULGARS continued through the early part of the 9th century.
Nicephorus was killed and Krum had his foe's skull lined with silver for use as a drinking cup.
Two years later Krum attempted to besiege the Byzantine capital Constantinople, but was unable to breach the walls and so retreated, devastating Thrace instead.
Islamic scientists made great advances In fields such as alchemy (, medicine, toxicology, metallurgy, mathematics, and astronomy.
Civil strife in the Carolingian | Empire resulted from ' tension between Louis the Pious and his sons over their inheritances.
Louis was deposed, and although : Lothair’s misrule saw his father restored by the autumn, the older : man’s authority was compromised : and the scene set for worse ' conflict to come.
Moravia began around 830, with the establishment of the Principality of Moimir, to the west of the White Carpathians, ' under the rule of Moimir I Moimir was one of two Slavic : polities to establish themselves ' in the power vacuum left by the collapse of the Avars in 805; the : other—to the east of the White Carpathians, in what is now Slovakia—was Nitra, under the : rule of Prince Pribina.
O 9 <) oe St een es Ww’ oar OY Kr we OO Pg oe Nove AN » xs COCR \ aman Ne OP Ww the Aghlabid invasion of the island.
Hindered by outbreaks little headway until 831, when Palermo fell after a year-long siege.
The city then became the capital of Islamic Sicily, although total conquest of the island did not happen until 902.
After the death of Louis the Pious in 840, his three surviving sons embroiled themselves in further conflict over land.
In 842, Charles the Bald and Louis the German teamed up and swore oaths to impose a settlement on Lothair that saw the Frankish Empire divided into regions.
Coffee plant : The coffee bush is native to the : mountains of Ethiopia and Yemen, : where it was first recorded in use in : the mid-15th century. : for protection from Vikings and ' other raiders. : In around 848, the Burmese ' city-state of Pagan was founded : in the Irrawaddy Valley.
A combination of drought, famine, disease, and social upheaval were probably responsible, as overpopulated cities and their overstretched resources reached a tipping point.
Although slower to reload than a longbow, the crossbow, or arbalest, required little training or strength to operate.
Po | ‘tA ts ; KHAZAR EMPIRE The Caspian Sea Is still known in the region as the Khazar Sea for the empire that ruled the area between it and the Black Sea from the 8th to 10th centuries.
A contributing cause to the empire's decline may have been a rise of 23ft in the sea level.
The landscape of Iceland offered scant welcome, yet Vikings settled here by 874.
ALFRED THE GREAT OF ENGLAND, an educated man who had spent time in Rome with the Pope, acceded to the throne of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex in 871.
During the reign of his elder brother Aethelred | (r.5-71], Danish Vikings had invaded Wessex, but Alfred had helped defeat them at the Battle of Ashdown in 870.
Originally named Constantine, Cyril and his brother Methodius were sent to convert the Slavs in Moravia by Byzantine emperor, Michael Ill in around 862.
Cyril devised a new ‘Glagolitic” script to translate the Bible into Slavic; this later became Cyrillic script.
According to the popular legend, Alfred was here given shelter by a peasant woman who, unaware of his identity, left him to watch some cakes that were cooking on the fire.
Preoccupied with the problems of his kingdom, Alfred let the cakes burn.
King Alfred : A statue of King Alfred was erected : at his capital, Winchester, in 1901. : His sword doubles as a crucifix, : emblematic of his militant faith. 67 glorious periods of Byzantine Christianity and agreed toa history.
Early Cyrillic script i This wax tablet contains psalms of : David, written in the early 11th : century.
Politician, on King Alfred, 1956-58 ' throne pillars overboard and ' following their drift.
The city would become the capital of Kievan Rus, a loose federation of territories, until 1169.
The Danelaw—the part of England in which Viking law was upheld—was formalized by the Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum in 886, following renewed attacks by Guthrum.
Alfred would keep the south, including London, while the area to the north of a line between the Thames and Lea rivers went to the Danish, who would live under their own laws.
In 887, Charles the Fat , the last Carolingian king to rule both the primary Frankish territories, West and East Francia (modern-day France and Germany), was deposed.
Charles, already king of the East Franks since 879, had been elected king of the West Franks In 884.
Slavonic-Viking Jewelry : Viking invaders conquered : territories along Russia's waterways, : establishing a hybrid culture that mixed Slavonic and Viking styles.
However, this merely provoked the new khan, Symeon , to mobilize the Pechenegs—a tribe that had recently arrived on the Dnieper—to invade Magyar lands.
The Magyars were forced to migrate west, settling in presentday Hungary, from where they launched extensive raids on Frankish territories for years to come.
Valley of Mexico, founding a ' capital at Tula 900, and forging : a militaristic empire that inspired their descendants, the Aztecs.
AV sn a oe ; 7 t — ar — Vf 2) ot This stone relief is from the Chinese Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.
Breakdown of central authority in the period led to economic contraction.
Zhuwen (c.2-912] was a warlord who had originally been part of the Huang Zhao uprising and then instrumental in the rebel defeat.
Dynasty was short-lived (907923}, with a succession of groups ' seizing control of the Huang He region and founding dynasties of : their own, but proving unable to : hold on to power.
Cluny became the center of a monastic empire of great power, governing around 10,000 monks.
Frankish emperor unwilling or : unable to help, the East Franks : elected regional “dukes” to | defend against the incursions.
ABD AL-RAHMAN III BECAME THE NEW UMAYYAD RULER of the Cordoba emirate on the death of his grandfather, Abdallah, in 912.
His territories had been reduced by rebellions and he quickly set about regaining much of his lost kingdom.
Charles spent much of his reign 2 engaged in civil war with Odo and his descendants.
Frankish kingdom, Louis the 2 Child, died in 911, after which : Conrad, duke of Franconia, was ' elected as king.
On his death he ’ nominated his strongest rival, ' Henry, as successor. ro ao\ ry _ the center of the oldest parliament.
THE WANING AUTHORITY OF THE ABBASIDS IN BAGHDAD prompted Abd al-Rahman III to declare himself the true caliph in 929, thus amending his kingdom from emirate to caliphate.
During the 10th century, his capital, Cordoba, became the largest and most developed city in Western Europe.
In 930, Icelanders started meeting to decide on justice and legislation at an outdoor assembly on the plains of Thingvellir.
All free men who had not been outlawed could attend the Althing, making it the oldest representative assembly in the world.
During what archaeologists call the Pueblo Il phase, the Pueblo peoples of Chaco Canyon, North America, were thriving.
Al-Rahman also waged a successful war against the Christian kingdoms of Leon and Navarre on his northern borders, forcing them to acknowledge his overlordship.
Wang Kon had acceded to power in the Three Kingdoms state of Koguryo In 918, renaming it and leading it in successful military ventures against the Kingdom of Paekche, who were conquered in 934, and the Silla.
During his reign, T’aejo consolidated power by incorporating Silla nobility into his new ruling bureaucracy.
In one of the bloodiest battles ever fought on British soil, the Anglo-Saxon king Aethelstan (c.3-939] crushed an alliance of forces in 937, cementing his control of Britain and his kingship of a the now unified Anglo-Saxon realm of England.
In 946, the Persian Shi'ite ' Buwayhids took Baghdad and ' forced the caliph to recognize » Ahmad ibn-Buwayh as supreme commander.
X \ rr"" 49 xX Onn xy se Nh AO 2 oe & er o \ YW at 2 2 haar lai 7nd slaargcnemnncaarers <° So, £27.
Thor was the Norse god of thunder. a P| eee Statue of Frey The Vikings worshipped Frey, the Norse god of fertility.
Silver figure of horseman This stylized metal figure from Sweden probably represents a warrior on horseback.
Between the 8th and 11th centuries, the Viking world spanned Europe, from the Pontic Steppes in the south and east to the shores of North America in the west and north.
This realm was tied together by a culture of arts and crafts. buckle plate for securing baldric The unifying motifs of Viking art and crafts were elaborate ornamentation, interlacing patterns, and stylized animals.
The material culture of the Vikings was mostly utilitarian yet finely crafted.
Common, ceremonial, baldric (slinglike shoulder strap] and military objects were ornamented heavily.
Techniques such as etching, engraving, and inlaying and the use of metal beading helped to create patterns of interweaving tendrils, gripping beasts,” and stylized limbs.
Wooden shield Shields were made from spruce, fir, pine, or linden wood with iron handles behind an iron boss.
This Danish ax has a metal blade and a wooden hatft. were fine horsemen, but they preferred to travel by ship. ends of ring are in shape of cat heads Silver brooch/pin This gold-coated silver brooch or cloak pin from Sweden is highlighted with » niello, a black metallic compound. double-edged blade Sword | Swords were rare and extremely valuable for the Vikings.
This sword could be easily drawn out from its sheath and wielded with one hand. ornate etching lion figure indicates wind direction Buckle plate This metal plate was fixed to a Viking’s leather belt so that it could be buckled.
THE VIKINGS Gilded weather vane Weather vanes were originally mounted on the prows of ships and later on the tops of churches.
This gilded weather vane was found In Sweden. ae hat a — a A yt a | je.
A fe Aaa ae OME Of @ vf OS SOTO SE SIS * l << silver and gold inlay work stylized great beast with sinuous limbs Early Danish coins Originally, the Vikings used looted coins, hack silver , and barter in place of their own money.
Trading weights Found in Sweden, these brass-coated iron weights were used to measure quantities of goods and the value of hack silver. dragon head used to terrify enemies symbol indicates weight carved scale patterns Drinking horn Vikings believed they would use drinking horns like this in Valhalla, the heaven for warriors, If they died in battle.
This drinking vessel was used In feasting. carved from an animal horn beech panel with tin and iron studs Sledge Ship’s prow ornament This oak-and-beech sledge is Elements of Viking culture were from a ship burial in Oseberg, derived from and prefigured in Norway.
Sophisticated agricultural and irrigation techniques had allowed Tiwanaku to support a population of up to 60,000 people, with up to 1. million in the wider region, according to some estimates.
A prolonged drought is believed to have been responsible for its decline, and archaeological evidence suggests that the main city was abandoned as citizens Bronze Mirror This intricately decorated mirror from the Song dynasty illustrates the artistic sophistication of China in this period.
Kaifeng in northern China, the 2 dynasty was founded by Zhao ' Kuangyin , who was a : general under the Late Zhou, the | last of the Five Dynasties.
Emperor Otto I, “the Great” , defeated the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955.
EUROPE ® Bordeaux Tunis @ IBERIA 4 a ¥, % # Seville GREECE Constantinople Asia Minor Athens@ | O/ ,' /te@ anean Sea AFRICA Viking sea routes By the late 10th century, Viking seafarers had penetrated to every corner of Europe and beyond, reaching as far as Greenland in the north.
In 961, Otto made an expedition to Italy in response to a plea for protection from Pope John XIl, and in Pavia he had assumed the Italian crown.
The following year he went to Rome to receive the imperial crown and assert his authority over the fractious papacy.
In 965, the King of Denmark, Harald Bluetooth, converted to Christianity, and the religion spread rapidly through the Nordic region.
ATTEMPTED UNUSUAL DEEDS JJ Leo the Deacon on John Tzimisces, late 10th century 33% protecting rowers 33% rowing 33% ready to attack Longboat crew in battle By keeping part of the crew at the oars, Viking raiding parties maintained an aggressive posture without sacrificing mobility.
DURING HIS SHORT REIGN, JOHN TZIMISCES, nephew of Nicephorus Il , won a string of victories.
Having fought off a revolt by general Bardas Phocas in 971, Tzimisces crushed a Campaign by the Kievan Rus leader, Sviatoslav, and conquered Bulgaria as far as the Danube.
In 972, he campaigned in the East, taking Edessa, Damascus, and Beirut, reaching the gates of Jerusalem in 976.
In 980, the Vikings started raiding England again, though they suffered a reverse In Ireland, where Malachy Il forced Viking Dublin to pay tribute.
Venice’s modern splendor is the result of control of the lucrative trade routes between Europe, the Byzantine Empire, and the East in the 10th century.
IN 981, THE ISLAMIC FORCES OF CORDOBA defeated the Christian kingdom of Leon in Spain, under the leadership of Al-Mansur.
This 17th century oil painting depicts’ : : Al Mansur, or Almanzor to his : Christian subordinates.
The Toltecs, who ruled a state centered on Tula in modern-day Mexico, were notable for their aggressive militarism, which changed society in Central America, paving the way for militaristic states such as the Aztec.
Toltec art and architecture, characterized by monumental masonry and giant statues, was greatly influential in the region.
THE WEIGHT IN SILVER OF THE DANEGELD NGS Sa IN 991, A FORCE OF ANGLO-SAXON WARRIORS made a stand against a much larger army of Vikings at the Battle of Maldon in East Anglia, England.
The English king, Aethelred II, “the Unready” , was forced to pay a tribute known as the Danegeld, to buy off further incursions.
Byzantine emperor Basil II launched the first of a long series of campaigns against his greatest enemy, the Bulgarian czar Samuel, in 996.
Basil had won major victories in Syria the year before, but it took him nearly 20 years to finally defeat the Bulgarians.
From around 1000, the inhabitants of Easter Island, or Rapa Nui—an island in the Pacific Ocean—began to carve monumental statues known as moal.
These ruins at Pueblo Bonito in Chaco AROUND 1000, THE ANCIENT PUEBLO CIVILIZATION centered on Chaco Canyon in southwest North America reached its climax.
The Anasazi used sophisticated dryland agriculture and hydrology to thrive in the arid environment, and controlled trade routes that extended as far as the Pacific coast of present-day California and the Valley of Mexico.
They achieved impressive feats of architecture, most notably the construction of Great Houses such as Pueblo Bonito, one of 13 such buildings in Chaco Canyon.
It probably functioned as a ceremonial center, storage depot, and elite residence.
Well-maintained roads—some with stone curbs—connected Chaco Canyon to thousands of smaller Anasazi settlements across the region.
Meadows, in northern : Newfoundland, attest to Viking ' presence in North America.
According to one account, he was returning from a visit to Norway in 1002, where he had been converted to Christianity, and was blown off course, landing at the place he called Vinland because of the grapes growing there.
HO) g®” @ “ x ka Qc 2 5 Ss sie ones Ne ~~ AY OW dn 09 opr . we OL A ot no Ay 0 & ® MURASAKI SHIKIBU (LADY MURASAKI) wrote the novel Genji Monogatari in installments between 1011 and 1021.
It is regarded as the first Japanese novel, and possibly the first psychological novel in world literature.
In 1014, Brian Boru, High King of Ireland and self-styled Emperor of the Gael, defeated a coalition of Dublin Vikings and Celtic Leinstermen at Clontarf, lreland.
Although the Norse kingdom was crushed and Viking incursions into Ireland halted, Brian Boru was killed in the battle and his dream of a united Irish kingdom fell apart thereafter.
Earning the name Bulgaroktonos , he put out the eyes of 15,000 captured warriors before sending them home.
The Brihadishvara temple was built by the Cholas in their capital Tanjore.
IN 1025, THE CHOLA KING RAJENDRA CHOLADEVRA launched an audacious naval expedition against the maritime empire of Srivijaya in Sumatra, also sacking the Pegu kingdom in Burma.
Rajendra had inherited a strong kingdom from his father, Rajaraja |, who had conquered Sri Lanka and instituted a program of Hindu temple building centered on the Chola capital of Tanjore.
Under Rajendra, the Cholas expanded their kingdom to include Bengal, and shattered the power of Srivijaya, securing control of the lucrative IndianChinese trade routes.
Cnut (also known as Canute] was the son of Sven Forkbeard, king of Denmark and Norway, who had invaded England and driven the AngloSaxon king, Aethelred Il, into exile in Normandy in 1013.
After staging his own successful invasion In 1015, Cnut was accepted as overlord of all England in 1016, and went on to expand his empire.
By 1030, it included Norway, Denmark, and the Faroe, Shetland, and Orkney islands.
Chola sculpture of Shiva The Cholas were staunch Hindus and enthusiastic temple builders.
Shiva, one of the major Hindu deities, is depicted here as a young and handsome man.
A wise and capable king, Cnut IN 1037, THE SELJUKS, UNDER ' managed conciliation between his | CHAGRI BEG AND HIS BROTHER : Danish and Anglo-Saxon subjects.
Dandangan, winning control of eastern Persia, the first step on the road to creating anew Oghuz Turks, originally nomads from Central Asia who had converted to Islam and moved to Transoxiana, where they served as mercenaries in the region, before turning their attentions to Khurasan.
In 1031, 40 lesser dynasties were founded on the shattered remnants of the Cordoba caliphate, in Spain.
Known as the Muluk al-Tawa if , these short-lived dynasties took control of different provinces of Cordoba after the strife that brought down the Umayyads following the execution of Abd al-Rahman Sanchol, son of al-Mansur, in 1009.
He was the last capable leader of the caliphate, but his attempt to move out from behind the throne and take the crown led to his downfall.
Subsequently, the Berber faction nominated their own candidate for caliph and Cordoba descended into civil war for 22 years.
In 1031, the death of Hisham Ill, the last Umayyad caliph, who had already lost control of several provinces, led to the | The Seljuks are shown here battling the Byzantines, Islamic empire.
King and Emperor : Ferdinand | was the first ruler of : Castile to call himself king.
Ferdinand inherited Castile, and in 1037 he killed his brother-in: law, the king of Léon, and made himself emperor there in 1039.
Bantu-speaking people spread from here to the east and south and Bantu became the dominant language family in sub-Saharan Africa, although whether this indicates conquest, colonization, or simply cultural influence is less clear.
The Bantu expansion started in the Late Stone Age, accelerating as the Bantuspeakers acquired iron technology and cattle-husbandry skills.
By the mid-11th century, Bantu tribes had become sophisticated pastoralists, able to sustain high population densities and complex social and economic networks.
This in turn led to the emergence of chiefdoms, and Bantu speakers dominated Central and southern Africa.
AFRICA Lake Victoria | Lake Tanganyika Nigeria and northwestern A poe At Nee Cameroon, Bantu-speaking people spread east and south, through the tropical 1000 alanarl forest, eventually spreading aes to all parts of central and 1000 southern Africa.
In 1056, the Almoravids well established by the mid-11th began the Islamic conquest of century.
Ife is most famous for its artistic achievements, most notably terracotta and bronze heads.
West Africa, where a number Ife bronze head This head probably dates from the 14th century, but it represents an artistic tradition stretching back to the 11th century that was at least as sophisticated as any in contemporary Europe.
IN 1066, AT THE BATTLE OF INVESTITURE CONTROVERSY HASTINGS, William Duke of Normandy defeated Harold Godwinson [c.22-66), the last Anglo-Saxon king of England.
England had fallen into the Norman orbit earlier, with Edward the Confessor spending his youth in exile at the Norman court while Cnut ruled England.
William claimed that Edward had promised him the English crown, but when Edward died, in 1066, Harold was elected king.
He marched north to defeat a Norse invasion, before dashing south to Hastings to face William, where he was killed and his army shattered.
William the Conqueror quickly took southeast England, then the southwest, and suppressed a great uprising in the north in 1069.
This 12thcentury manuscript illumination shows Henry IV requesting mediation from Matilda of Tuscany and Hugh of Cluny.
Emperors had derived great income and power through their and Emperor Henry III had gone further still, in 1046, insisting that it was the emperor's right to appoint the pope.
Pope Gregory VII represented the opposite view; he held that only popes had the right to invest clerics.
In 1075, at the Lent synod, Gregory issued a decree forbidding lay investiture.
The emperor, Henry IV (10501106), who was fighting to reduce the power of German prelates, defied the decree.
Seljuks established the Sultanate : of Rum there, while other conquests brought them Syria : and Jerusalem.
Under the leadership of the charismatic Hassan-i Sabbah, this group recognized the claims of an infant called Nizar, and were therefore known as Nizari Ismailis.
Forced to flee Cairo, Hassan led the Nizaris to his homeland in Persia where they captured a fortress known as Alamut in the mountainous region of Kazvin and made it the base of a born the group later known as the Assassins—a name derived from the word “hashashins,” a label applied by their enemies who claimed they used intoxicants such as hashish to brainwash devotees into blind obedience.
Defeating Alfonso at Zallaka 2 in 1086, they annexed most of © Islamic Spain.
This mechanical astronomical clock was 30ft high, and was water-driven with an armillary sphere, which showed the position of celestial objects.
In 1094, a Castilian who had served both Christian and Islamic Masters, Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, known by the Moors as El Cid , captured Valencia in eastern Spain and established himself as ruler.
At the Council of Clermont in 1095, Pope Urban, a French Cluniac , preached to an assembly of mainly Frankish clerics and nobles about Muslim “defilement” of the Holy Land, urging his audience to take up arms in a holy war.
Urban had been entreated by the Byzantines for help against the Seljuks, and Saw a way to channel the energies of European nobility away from constant infighting and toward a Christian expansion that would benefit the papacy.
Other nations were either in conflict with the papacy or indifferent, so the First Crusade was a largely French affair.
Saracens—the generic term used by Europeans to refer to their Muslim disarray in the Muslim world, three: groups of Crusaders under Godfrey: foes.
The Siege of Antioch Islamic forces at the Siege of Antioch outnumbered the Crusaders considerably.
SOMETIME AROUND THE START OF THE 12TH CENTURY, OMAR KHAYYAM , an astronomer and mathematician in the service of the Seljuk sultans, composed a series of four-line poems, or “roba’iyat,” which became famous thanks to the translation made by Edward Fitzgerald in 1859.
At Samarkand, in the early 1070s, he was able to pursue his mathematical studies thanks to patronage from a local jurist, and under the strong Seljuk sultan Malik Shah , Khayyam was invited to Isfahan in 1073 to set up an observatory and lead a team of top scholars.
In this period he made many mathematical and astronomical breakthroughs, including an unprecedented accurate measurement of the length of the year to 12 decimal places.
Much of the current reputation of the work derives from the very free translation by Edward Fitzgerald.
But a prolonged zeal, civic pride, and drought, followed by the personal ambition catastrophic flooding, led of potentates.
In the early 12th Romanesque and century, the state recovered Gothic styles was given from the convulsions of the expression in the great 11th century and rebuilt cathedrals, but each around a new capital at region developed its Tucume.
New temples were own, distinctive idiom. built and the capital flourished In Novgorod, for until its conquest by the instance, the Cathedral Chimu , by which of St.
Nicholas (started time there were 26 mounds in 1113] was given and accompanying enclosures. domed cupolas.
Henry IV's failure its monumental capital, emerged to reconcile with the papacy had as the most significant regional helped bring about his downfall; power.
A kingdom of the Shona concerned that the ongoing peoples that emerged around 900, dispute was undermining royal Mwene Mutapa was initially based authority, his own family had on cattle herding, but from around conspired against him, and he 1100 it took control of the lucrative was Imprisoned.
The new king of Jerusalem, Baldwin II (cousin of Baldwin | and his successor as count of Edessa], assigned them quarters in part of the Temple Mount compound, next to the site where the Temple of Solomon had once stood.
Accordingly, they Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon—also known as the Knights Templar.
Welf and Hohenstaufen dynasties, wou IN 1121, MOHAMMAD IB-TUMART, A BERBER LEADER from the Atlas Mountains, was hailed as the | al-Mahdi (the Muslim messiah— | see 874) and led his forces, known as the Almohads, in a campaign | of conquest against Almoravid territories in Africa.
A synod at the German town of Worms, in 1122, presided bya papal legate drew up a concordat ending the Investiture | Controversy—although not ' the imperial-papal rivalry.
A compromise was agreed along the lines already adopted between Henry | of England and Anselm , under which the emperor would be involved in investiture but not control it.
Scholasticism was an approach to learning that used a method of formal discussion and debating.
RY ee J ste “ a ay I oe t a 4 Lr i a e A mosaic shows Roger I being symbolically crowned by Christ.
IN 1126, THE JIN—the Jurchen dynasty established by Aguda [see 1115) in Manchuria—turned on their erstwhile Chinese allies, overrunning northern China and seizing the Northern Song capital at Kaifeng.
The Jin took control of northern China and moved the capital to Beijing.
However, a Song prince, Gaozong, escaped to the south and established the Southern Song dynasty in Hangzhou in 1127.
During this papal schism, Roger Il, count of Sicily, recognized Anacletus as pope—his reward was the throne of Sicily.
Song dynasty porcelain ware The Qingbai glaze on this ewer is characteristic of Song dynasty porcelain from southeastern China, where the dynasty survived the Jin invasion.
Alban’s Chronicle shows Matilda P ePONek le 1F0EE PANLE CO Ee FORE celle nit rom cunt totultt a4 ar of England holding a charter.
His only male heir died in 1120 while crossing the English Channel, and although Henry had made his nobles swear allegiance to his daughter, the Empress Matilda , she had spent little time in England and her second husband, Geoffrey of Anjou, was unpopular with the English nobles.
On his uncle's death he immediately went to London, secured the support of most of the nobles and the Church, and had himself proclaimed king.
In 1133, Lothair Il went to Italy to intervene in the papal schism, installing Innocent Il.
In return, the Pope confirmed the Matildine inheritance (the vast estates of Matilda of Tuscany, which she had willed first to the papacy and then to the emperor, sparking a dispute that would become tied up with the Guelph versus Ghibelline contest— and crowned Lothair as emperor.
In 1135, Lothair pacified his rivals, Conrad of Hohenstaufen and his brother Frederick of Swabia, apparently securing the German crown for his son-in-law Henry the Proud, of the House of Welf. ea a An illustration from a 15th-century copy of the History of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffrey of Monmouth, shows Brutus the Trojan setting sail for Britain.
Conrad set about reversing the grants of Lothair, taking Saxony away from the Welfs, which promptly sparked renewed civil war.
In 1139, Matilda entered England to reclaim her crown from the usurper Stephen of Blois.
IN 1141, JOHN OF SEVILLE TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC the Epitome of the Whole of Astrology, while in 1142 Adelard of Bath translated an Arabic version of Euclid’s Elements of Geometry, one of the founding texts of mathematics.
Henry engaged in a vigorous renewal of German expansion to the east, where his Pot helm helmet This type of helmet was typical of those worn by Crusader knights.
Made of steel, the pot helm helmet completely covered the head except for two small eye slits.
Campaigns against the heathen » Slavs were given the status : of Crusades. » |n 1144, the atabeg of Mosul, Imad el-Din Zengi » , founder of the Zengid dynasty, took advantage | of feuding between the Crusader F principalities to seize the : Crusader county of Edessa.
She did not have the authority to settle a dispute between Antioch and Edessa, and Imad el-Din besieged Edessa until it fell to him.
Crusaders who helped AfonsoHenriques, Count of Portugal, take Lisbon from the Moors in 1147.
Conrad and Louis took different routes to the Holy Land, their armies meeting equally disastrous fates as they struggled through Anatolia.
Rather than pitch their Mosque, built by the Almohads 25,000 20,000 15,000 CRUSADERS 10,000 5,000 French German French and German Crusaders The German force outnumbered the Crusade.
The Koutoubia reflects the mercantile success of : Almohad Marrakech, where book, cloth, and other sougs flourished. : depleted forces against the : powerful Zengids, they decided ' instead to launch an attack on : Damascus, the only Muslim state : that was friendly to the Crusader kingdoms.
Crusade marked the beginning of : the decline of the Frankish : Crusader kingdoms.
A\ |V Islamic arts and crafts were shaped by religious restrictions, cultural heritage acquired through conquest, and the elaboration of unique features, notably the use of ornamentation and color, and inclusion of Arabic script.
Through its rapid conquest of a huge empire, the Islamic caliphate was intaid with ornate exposed to a diverse mix of cultural styles and heritages; Islamic art foliage inscription reflects these while maintaining a high degree of homogeneity due to reads “Allah, seat . ‘ sia . wesc msancs Muhammad, religious uniformity.
This jade necklace is made from 10TH CENTURY © ORIGIN UNKNOWN home five pieces, all different in shape Islamic physicians made huge ae and engraved with verses from advances in medicine and surgery, bs the Qu’ran.
The lace of highlighted detail lends kings—lions and cheetahs symbolized power. adept at combining baser metals like a meditative quality to the design.
The head tilts to allow insertion of charcoal. brass with silver and gold inlay.
Calligraphy scissors 1700-99 e IRAN These scissors were used for shaping pens and brushes.
Pen case 1700-1899 e ORIGIN UNKNOWN This hexagonal case for carrying pens bares geometric shapes, a typical feature of Islamic design.
Divan of the Persian poet Hafez from 19th-century India has typical Kashmiri painted lacquer covers.
It has been estimated that it took 15 million baskets of earth to make it.
The most remarkable feature of Cahokia is the speed with which it came into existence.
Until around 1050, Mississippians lived in small villages and had never built on anything approaching this scale.
Its cultural and economic influence spread across the Midwest, from the present Canadian border to the Gulf Coast.
Mississippians, Cahokia would : decline rapidly, within around 2 a century, with a return to low| density farming communities.
Energetic and ambitious, Frederick | was determined to make Germany the dominant state in Europe, and to reassert authority over all the imperial lands in Italy.
Aware of the historic context of his office, he desired to restore the imperial crown to Roman-era glory, and began to style his realm the Holy Roman Empire.
WITH ORIGINS DATING BACK TO PERHAPS 1088, BOLOGNA CLAIMS to be the oldest university in the Western world — In the sense of an institution specifically designated as a universitas, as opposed toa studium generale, as centers for teaching had previously been known.
Early universities tended to specialize in one field of study, and Bologna was dedicated to law.
In 1159, Alexander III (c.00-81] was chosen as pope, although his election was opposed by the emperor, Frederick I Frederick had once again invaded Italy, this time intent on assuming his full imperial inheritance.
With the aid of the League of Pavia (Bresci, Parma, and others}, he had subdued Milan and its associated cities, but at the Diet of Roncaglia, in 1158, he went too far.
Harking back to the Roman era, Frederick insisted that ancient law gave him the right to appoint an imperial podesta (local governor] to rule each city.
Milan was pushed into revolt, and other cities joined them in forming a Lombard League under the auspices of the papacy.
Alexander III would earn the title “the Great” for leading this anti-imperial rebellion.
The Bodhisattva Guanyin This 12th-century Chinese statue depicts the Buddhist deity Guanyin, who protects those in danger— perhaps accounting for his popularity.
IN 1161, THE SOUTHERN SONG REPULSED AN INCURSION by the northern Jin , securing their kingdom from invasion.
A peace treaty of 1165 recognized an uneasy truce between the two powers.
Canonized in 1173 , Becket became one of the most popular English saints.
Although he swore that he had not ordered the crime, and was absolved of responsibility by Pope Alexander in 1172, Henry’s famous outburst (see above) had prompted the action of the knights.
Votive tablet This votive tablet from the trading empire of Srivijaya is engraved with Buddhist figures.
The ruling Sailendras were ardent Buddhists. ig Muhammad of Ghur, traveling by elephant, leads his army in the Islamic conquest of India.
THE GHURIDS WERE A DYNASTY FOUNDED IN 1151 by Ala-ud-Din Husayn, who conquered much of Ghaznavid Afghanistan and founded a new state based at Ghur in western Afghanistan.
In 1173, Ghiyas-ud-Din became emir, making his brother Mu izz-du-Din, better known as Muhammad of Ghur, co-emir.
Together the brothers brought most of Afghanistan under their control, and in 1175 Muhammad launched the Islamic invasion of northern India.
The Spanish rabbi Benjamin of Tudela was the first recorded European to have approached the borders of China, In an epic journey he made from 1159 to 1173.
His account, The Travels of Benjamin of Tudela, recounts many exotic legends, including Noah’s Ark resting on Mount Ararat.
In the medieval period, the city of Pisa, in Tuscany, became the center of a thriving city-state.
Its cathedral was constructed In the 11th century, but in 1173 work began on a separate bell tower.
Even during construction the foundations sank and the tower began to slant.
The battle marked one of the earliest occasions In the medieval era when cavalry were defeated by infantry.
This had class implications as knights on horseback generally belonged to the feudal aristocracy, while footmen with pikes represented freemen of the rising bourgeoisie.
In 1176, the army of Byzantine emperor Manuel Commenus was destroyed by the Turks of the Sultanate of Rum at the Battle of Myriocephalum. never again able to send land forces to help the Crusaders.
Charcoal was still the main source of power for iron forges, but deforestation caused wood shortages.
As a consequence, demand for coal increased and scavenging for sea coal was increasingly supplemented by mining.
Europe was deaf to entreaties for Crusader reinforcements, and the Christian Byzantines were preoccupied with other matters, such as war with Norman Sicily.
Saladin mobilized his army, : intent on punishing Reynald, but ' his progress was checked by : Frankish fortresses and another ' prolonged famine.
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and : his Italian foes was ratified as the Peace of Constance, but although The Battle of Dannoura of 1185 marked the climax of the Gempei | Wars.
Yoritomo, the founder of the shogunate, destroyed the Taira in : Saladin, sultan of Egypt and Syria : Saladin escapes from battle on : acamelin this 18th-century : engraving.
ON JULY 4, 1187, THE CRUSADER ARMY WAS DEFEATED by the forces of Saladin.
The Crusader forces were led by the new king of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan, who had seized power on the death of the infant Baldwin V in 1186.
Baldwin's regents had negotiated another truce with Saladin, but Battle of Hattin 3:2 Saladin’s troops outnumbered the Crusaders by 30,000 to 20,000, yet his success was owed to his tactics and the Christians’ desperate thirst. once again, Reynald of Chatillon had broken it, raiding a caravan of pilgrims and provoking Saladin into a final campaign to sweep the Holy Land clear of the Christian principalities.
Goaded by Reynald, King Guy led a combined force of Crusader knights, Templars, Hospitallers, and English a waterless plateau in the blazing heat to take up a position on the Horns of Hattin, an extinct volcano.
Between them and Lake Tiberias—the main source of fresh water for the thirst-crazed knights—lay the well-rested and provisioned army of Saladin.
Tyre, 2 Antioch, Tripoli, and a few castles ' were all that remained of the Crusader kingdoms.
European assistance for years and the fall of Jerusalem in ' 1187 finally prompted Pope ' Gregory VIII to preach a new ' Crusade.
THE THIRD CRUSADE was hampered by infighting among the European factions of the Crusaders of Outremer, and although Richard the Lionheart won most of his battles, he was unable to achieve his sworn aim of “liberating” Jerusalem.
The Crusade had already gotten off to a bad start [see 1186-90), and when, in 1191, Richard stopped to conquer Byzantine Cyprus.
He sold the island to the Templars, who would later pass it on to the diminished Crusader kingdoms, where it became one of the main supports for continuing Christian presence in the Holy Land.
On arriving in Palestine, Richard joined Philip Il of France in the dd siege of Acre, which was Guy had laid siege to the city on his release from captivity , but Saladin had then encircled his forces.
Acre was taken by the Crusaders in July and Th} much of the population i was massacred.
Philip II * returned to France, but Richard | had sworn to liberate Jerusalem, and marched along the coast, retaking towns and defeating Saladin at Arsuf in September.
In 1192, the Ghurids of Persia defeated a Hindu rebellion at the Battle of Taraori near Thanesar in India.
POPE INNOCENT III HAD PROCLAIMED A NEW CRUSADE in 1199, intent on restoring papal supervision to the crusading movement, and hoping to reunite the Greek and Latin churches to fulfill his vision of a single Christian dominion under the papacy.
In 1201, envoys met Enrico Dandolo, Doge of Venice, to arrange passage to Egypt for the Fourth Crusade.
Under the Peace of Venice , the Venetians agreed to transport 33,500 men and 4,500 horses fora , payment of 85,000 marks.
In addition, they would supply 50 war 7 galleys in return for half of the Crusaders’ conquests.
When the Crusaders gathered in Venice in 1202, it transpired that there were too few of them, and they could not pay the agreed bill.
Instead, they agreed to help Venice by taking Zara, Dalmatia— a rich source of wood for Venetian galleys.
Constantinople, where relations ' with the Byzantines quickly : soured; the city was taken for the ' first time in its history, and was ' brutally sacked.
Empire of the East was : proclaimed under a new emperor, 2 Baldwin of Flanders, while Venice ' was awarded nearly half the city, : numerous Mediterranean islands, : and other territories.
Byzantine emperors relocated to 2 Byzantine Nicaea, the Fourth : Crusade marked the end of the Byzantine Empire as a true power, : which discredited the Crusading movement and helped the Turks. : Inthe late 12th century, the » Mongolian and Turkic nomads of : the steppes were fearsome but 2 disunited.
Genghis Khan, was a minor 2 leader who became a nokhor ' to Toghril, Khan of ' the Kereits, the dominant tribe in Central Mongolia.
Jayavarman VII : This bronze statue of King : Jayavarman VII, in Mahayana : Buddhist style, portrays a serene : and contemplative king. : neighboring Tartar tribes in 1202, ' but inciting resentment among : other Kereits so that in 1203 he clashed with Toghril himself.
Europe to Hindu numerals Peterhouse College, Cambridge, was founded 75 years after the university.
BY 1206, TEMUJIN HAD UNITED ALL THE TRIBES OF MONGOLIA into the Khamag Mongol Ulus, “the All Mongol State,” reorganizing tribal society into an army grouped ona decimal system.
Their teachings challenged the worldliness of the established church, while their anticlericalism attracted nobles keen to appropriate church lands; the Cathars, for instance, were under the protection of Raymond of Toulouse, who ruled much of southern France.
Latinized version of an Arabic | abu CHINA ®Ningbo Khan 1227 : : j Ae Patnae _Dalie an : word that, in the Venetian AFRICA ieee INDIA — — Silk road : dialect, became agalls Hanoi : ; Arabian z ; 5 : Sea ae Map of Genghis Khan’s empire Zero in algebra, Sea Temujin would go on to unite the Mongol : addition, and tribes and conquer a huge empire.
PETER II OF ARAGON AND ALFONSO VIII OF CASTILE defeated the Almohads [see 1146-50) at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212.
Alfonso had earlier been crushingly defeated by the Almohads tn 1195 but had fought off invasions by the other Christian Spanish kingdoms and rebuilt his army.
After this decisive victory, the Spain, leaving only local Muslim the Christian advance.
King John’s barons were forced to concentrate on England, where they had cause for discontent.
Thanks to a dispute with the pope, the king had been briefly excommunicated.
John was forced to sign the Articles : of the Barons, known in history as : the Great Charter or Magna Carta. : Although this mainly concerned the ' rights of barons, its statement that : the king was not above the law was : animportant milestone for human rights.
The Magna Carta : Of the 63 clauses contained in the : original Magna Carta, only three : survive as laws today.
THE HEIGHT OF THE WALLS OF ANGKOR THOM JAYAVARMAN VII DIED INAROUND 1220, having seen his greatest creation take shape.
At Angkor, In modern-day Cambodia, he created a new city, Angkor Thom, centered on the great temple of Bayon.
The temple comprises towers decorated with huge sculpted faces; the identities of these are disputed, although they may include Jayavarman himself.
Having conquered most of Central Asia and northern China, Genghis Khan's empire (see 1201-05) now bordered the Khwarazm Empire of Persia.
After archers had decimated the enemy, fighters with hand weapons would close in.
In 1203, he had gone to Rome to ask permission to do missionary work with the Tartars , but was sent to France to preach to the Cathars of Languedoc instead.
However, like Francis of Assisi , he had created a new kind of monastic order—the Dominicans—adapted to the new urban culture.
The Dominicans and Franciscans were mendicant friars, mainly recruited from the middle classes, living off charity rather than farming, and devoted to preaching and charity in towns and cities.
A largely ineffective affair, the Fifth Crusade was the fruit of Pope Innocent’s determination to reboot the Crusading movement.
Targeting Egypt, the Crusaders took that but then lost Damietta, and failed to account for the Nile floods, which foiled their advance on Cairo.
They high-handedly rejected a treaty offered by the sultan that would have given them Jerusalem, and left Egypt in 1221 having accomplished nothing.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE KILLED DURING THE ALBIGENSIAN CRUSADE THE RENEWAL OF THE ALBIGENSIAN CRUSADE (see 1206-10) in 1226 was in spite of the Pope declaring an “official” end to the Crusade at the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215.
In reality, the battle for the south of France descended into vicious guerrilla warfare.
Cathar stronghold The Cathar castle of Peyrepertuse in the Pyrenees was located ina strategic defensive position on the French-Spanish border.
This 14th-century image shows Pope Gregory IX receiving a list of heretics.
IN 1231, POPE GREGORY IX established the Papal Inquisition, a campaign by the church against heresy.
Mongolian expansion continued, although Genghis Khan had died In 1227 while suppressing a rebellion in Xia Xia in China.
He was succeeded by his second son, Ogodei (c.86-1241], who was still more ambitious.
Ogodei sent armies to the east and west, leading the final assault on the Chinese Jin Empire (see 112630), which was conquered by 1234.
The Southern Song had aided the Mongol advance, but when they tried to seize Kaifeng in northern China in 1235, the Mongols turned on them.
In 1235, Sundiata, king of the Keita, a Mande people from sub-Saharan Mali, defeated the Susu king Sumnaguru at the Battle of Kirina.
Se meee 5, Phen —* a Steppe landscape; little changed since the days of the Mongol Empire.
ON HIS DEATH, GENGHIS KHAN had informally divided his empire among four of his sons.
Given authority over the west, Batu Khan established the Kipchak Khanate, also known as the Golden Horde Khanate.
In the winter of 1237, when the frozen rivers allowed his cavalry to cross, Batu invaded Russia.
Over the next four years, his armies conquered the Russian principalities and blazed a trail of destruction deep into Central Europe.
Under the overlordship of Ogodei , the expanding reach of the Mongol Empire had important implications for pan-Eurasian trade.
The Pax Mongolica or “Mongol Peace” achieved in the lands under Mongolian control made the perilous passage across Central Asia and the silk road increasingly viable, enabling the first direct contact between Europeans and the Chinese since Roman times in around 1240.
By 1236, the Teutonic Knights—a military order formed in 1198 by German merchants serving at the Hospital of St.
Mary of the Teutons in Jerusalem—had completed the subjugation of the Pomeranians, a pagan tribe In Prussia.
AS @ Or KN Cease ev wy * oF 3 vye we Eee oe Se ge eo no” NO) NY Ki OE @ xy.
S 5 This miniature from the Annalistic Code of the 16th century depicts the “Battle of the Ice,” fought on the frozen waters of Lake Peipus, Novgorod.
IN 1241, THE GERMAN TRADING TOWNS OF LUBECK AND HAMBURG formed an alliance to protect the Baltic trade routes.
Lubeck quickly became the center of expanding German trade in the Baltic region, which extended along the Russian rivers as far as Novgorod, and linked to the European trading centers of England and Flanders.
In 1242, the efforts of the Teutonic Knights The notion of the Reconquista—the Christian reconquest of Islamic Spain— as a Single, continuous project, is a myth, first created by clerical propagandists in the 14th century.
Medieval trade : A manuscript : {llumination of the port : of Hamburg, a founder : member of the : Hanseatic League, : which had its roots in : analliance of 1241 : with Lubeck. to extend their ' Livonian territories ' eastward and launch : the conversion of the ' Russians from the Greek to the Roman church were checked ' by defeat at the |: Battle of Lake : Peipus.
Alexander Nevski, : prince of Novgorod, | : the Russians ms. _ checked the knights’ progress and : Lake Peipus thereafter served as : the eastern limit of Livonia.
The Mongols had reached the : gates of Vienna when, in 1242, the ' news reached them that Ogodei, : the Great Khan, had died.
Egyptian sultan, Ayyub, was : engaged in a contest with the 2 Syrian branch of the Ayyubids ' at Damascus, which had allied itself with the ' Christian Crusader kingdoms. : In 1244, Ayyub’s forces overran | Jerusalem and expelled the : Christians.
In this 16th-century painting, Ferdinand Ill, King of Castile and Lon, accepts the surrender of the city of Seville from the Moors in 1248.
IN 1247, FERDINAND III OF CASTILE AND LEON (c.99-1252] laid It fell to him in 1248, and with it the last Moorish kingdom in Spain—with the exception of Granada.
Louis IX of France was much respected throughout Europe and had a reputation for justice.
Under his reign, royal control was extended to the Mediterranean, and the previously autonomous realms of Languedoc and Provence would become part of French Capetian territories.
Theobald of Navarre had ' launched a crusade in 1239, but siege to the Moorish city of Seville. | ' not usually recognized as an : ordinate crusade; Louis’ crusade | of 1248 is accounted the : Seventh, the last Crusade of this “a ' magnitude ever undertaken. ™ — established the Nasrid dynasty in : | 1230.
Damietta without opposition, but ' in 1250 his army was destroyed ' by the Egyptians at Fariskur and : he was taken captive.
Constant tribe, made most Aztec gold jewelry. mask was a votive offering. warfare was a way Of Life.
The artifacts they created dazzled the medieval European invaders and still fascinate today.
Obsidian knife AZTEC Long-bladed, razor-sharp obsidian knives such as this one were used by warriors and in the gory human Sacrifices practiced by the Aztecs.
The conquistadors had a devastating effect on these Ber netionmenc tect nrecaliran ian “ Americans used obsidian [volcanic glass] to form cutting edges.
The maquahuitl—a wooden club fringed with obsidian blades—was a common Aztec weapon. cultures, but the artifacts that survive are a testament to their rich heritage.
Much of Incan culture came from client states, such as the Moche, while the Aztecs and Mayans derived theirs from older cultures, such as the Olmecs.
Sun stone AZTEC This sun stone, or calendar stone, is the largest Aztec sculpture ever found.
BY THE MID-13TH CENTURY, THE MEXICA TRIBE—better known today as the Aztecs—were established in the Valley of Mexico.
Aztec legend suggests that they migrated from the ancestral homeland of Aztlan in the early 12th century.
Settling at Chapultepec, near Lake Texcoco, Mexico, in around 1250, they were soon expelled by the Tepanecs, one of the tribal confederations competing for dominance in the wake of the Toltec collapse in the early 12th century.
Although the Mongols had conquered most of the Russian principalities [see 1236-40), and the Golden Horde Khanate had claimed authority over Russia, surprisingly little changed for the Russians.
In return for tribute and military service, the Russian princes were left in power and the Russian Church was not interfered with.
Alexander Nevski , the prince of Novgorod who had led the Russians to victory against the Teutonic Knights in 1242, became the dominant Russian noble, appointed Grand Duke of Vladimir after his brother was driven out by the Mongols.
Under the support of the new Great Khan, Mongke , his brothers Kublai and Hulagu renewed the Mongol expansion.
HULAGU KHAN CONTINUED HIS CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE SELJUKS and other Islamic powers.
In 1256, he crushed the Order of the Assassins , taking their stronghold at Alamut in Persia.
In 1258, he sacked Baghdad and executed the Abbasid Caliph—the figurehead of Islam—in just one of countless atrocities committed by Mongol invaders who massacred hundreds of thousands of Muslims during their campaigns.
In 1259, Hulagu penetrated deep into Syria, but as with Batu’s campaign in Europe 18 years earlier , his progress was halted by news of the death of the Great Khan, and he withdrew his armies while he returned to the Mongolian capital to help select a new leader.
Taking advantage of Hulagu’s withdrawal, the Mamluk general al-Zahir Baybars marched north and struck at the Mongol garrisons in Syria.
At the Battle of .. i Ayn Jalut in Palestine, A General Baybars P defeated the ») 99 Mongols and 7 expelled them from Palestine and Syria. he murdered the sultan and took his place.
Distracted by dynastic struggles, and later by a protracted inter-khanate war, Hulagu was not able to KUBLAI KHAN The grandson of Genghis Khan, Kublai spent eight years campaigning In southern China before succeeding his brother Mongke as Great Khan in 1260.
Mamluks gave refuge to a fugitive ' Abbasid prince, setting him ' up in Cairo as the new caliph. : Recognized as guardians of the ' Islamic faith, the Mamluks were and international links. : formally made sultans of Egypt, Syria, and the Levant.
He oversaw ' the final expulsion of the » Almohads from © Spain in 1257.
ITALIAN NOBLEMAN AND LATER DOMINICAN MONK, THOMAS AQUINAS became one of | the most important philosophers — in the history of Western thought.
Renowned for his work in uniting faith and reason, Aquinas's period of greatest productivity occurred between 1258 and 1273, when he penned his two bestknown works, the Summa contra Gentiles and the Summa Theologiae.
He had already secured an alliance with the Bulgarians, and was now poised to achieve his dream of re-taking Constantinople from the Latin Empire (Constantinople and environs, fF. captured from the Byzantines | during the fourth crusade], and reconstituting the Byzantine Greek Empire.
In July 1261, a Byzantine army took advantage of the absence of the Venetian fleet to cross the Bosporus strait and take Constantinople.
Paleologus would campaign : tirelessly to restore lost Byzantine lands.
Lewes in 1265 and summoned the ' first European parliament that : included elected representatives.
COST OF PAPER Cost of paper versus parchment After paper-making technology was introduced to Italy, the cost of vegetable-based paper fell to 1/6 of the cost of animal-based parchment.
THE SOLOMONID DYNASTY IN ETHOPIA was founded in 1270 by Yekuno Amlak, displacing the previous Zagwe dynasty, and claiming to have restored the legitimate line of the ancient Christian kings of Aksum.
Amlak claimed descent from the biblical Solomon, via the possibly Ethiopian Queen of Sheba.
The town of Fabriano in Italy lies close to the Adriatic port of Ancona, which was notable in the 13th century for trade with the Muslim world.
This is probably how paper manufacture became established there in the 1270s.
Use of animal gelatin in place of more degradable vegetable gel made Fabriano paper more durable, and the town became the principal paper manufacturing site in Europe.
In 1270, Louis IX of France made another attempt at crusading, but on the request of Charles of Anjou, the Eighth Crusade was diverted to Tunis, where disease killed Louis and his army.
KHANATE OF THE} CHAGATAL EMPIRE KHANATE OF THE aon aa i GREAT KHAN EUROPE MALI AFRICA Travels of Marco Polo To reach China, Marco Polo traveled through Anatolia, Iran, and Afghanistan.
Arriving at Kublai Khan's court in 1275, the Great Khan employed Marco Polo in various capacities.
In 1292, he escorted a Mongol princess to Persia, returning to Italy three years later and writing a travel memoir while a prisoner of the Genoese.
Polo’s memoir, The Travels—known by Italians as ll Milione, because of the belief that it contains a million lies —is a fascinating portrait of the Mongolian Empire at its height.
The Pax Mongolica allowed freedom of movement through lands under the authority of Il-khanate, and it was said that a virgin with a pot of gold on her head could pass unmolested from Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul) to Beijing.
IN SOUTHERN INDIA, KING KULASEKHARA I expanded the empire of the Pandyas to its greatest extent.
Under Sundara [r.51-68) the Pandya empire had expanded dramatically and reduced some neighboring states to vassalage.
Master craftsmen were believed to channel the voices of the spirits and ancestors, and intricately carved posts and lintels adorning structures around the marae (sacred space] Guglielmo Berardi da Narbona was killed at the Battle of Campaldino.
IN THE 1280S, A TRIBE OF TURKOMAN NOMADIC HORSEMEN and raiders based in northwestern Anatolia, known as the Ottomans, elected Osman as their chieftain.
Meanwhile, the Byzantine Empire had been successively reduced and broken up by Seljuk and Latin encroachment.
Osman was able to lead his tribe ina the last Chola king, Rajendra Ill, | of colonization climaxed with the | 150,000 men in two huge and waka territorial expansion, rapidly and annexed his territories.
S e accumulate and pass on mana . cities, had developed into a largely autonomous republic or commune.
It was typically easier for the German emperors—the notional feudal overlords—to grant cities powers of self-government than try to control them directly.
This Guelph-Ghibelline conflict had gripped the Italian city-states, providing a vehicle for the expression of local class tensions as well as national and international politics.
When one faction gained the upper hand ina city, the other was typically expelled.
In the 1280s, the Guelphs had the upper hand, and Guelph partisans exiled from Arezzo encouraged them to take up arms against the rival city.
Battle of Campaldino, heralding : the start of a period of Florentine dominance in Tuscany.
The Eleanor Cross in Geddington, Northamptonshire, England, features an ee ogee arch, marking a milestone for the English Gothic style.
To limit the risk of disastrous fires, Venice moved its glassmaking industry to the island of Murano in 1291.
Venetian glassmakers were the only ones in Europe to master the art of producing clear glass.
Though unpopular with the English, she and Edward enjoyed a happy marriage, and he was devastated ay hemche diedino0ene following year he ordered the erection of 12 so-called Eleanor crosses to mark the passage of her funeral cortege to London.
The contest for mastery of the Mediterranean between Genoa and Venice continued, witha Genoese fleet defeating the Venetians off Laiazzo in 1294.
So NS il 4 William Wallace was outlawed for killing one of Edward's sheriffs in 1296.
The following year Edward launched a campaign to subdue the Scots, defeating them at Dunbar, and taking the Stone of Destiny—the Scottish coronation stone—back to London.
Venetians, destroying all but a few ' of their ships and killing up to warfare and overseas fundraising. : 7,000 men.
ALTHOUGH THE GHIBELLINES HAD BEEN EXPELLED FROM FLORENCE , factionalism still plagued the city, with a drawn-out power struggle between the old aristocratic nobility, the new mercantile nobles, and the powerful guilds.
In 1301, the Whites expelled the Blacks, only for them to return when Charles, count of Valois, entered the city.
Including representatives of the ' towns and clergy—and received ' their backing.
Boniface excommunicated Philip and ' Philip called for the Pope to face ' criminal charges.
Hereford Mappa Mundi Europe, able to direct a large fleet and maintain the primary Crusader army in Outremer.
Templar knights rose to prominence all over Europe, especially in England, where the Master of the Temple was the first baron of the realm.
In the early 13th century, then Master William Marshal ruled the country as regent for the young after the fall of Outremer, the Templars were struggling to stay afloat, and presented an easy lands and cooked up charges of heresy in which to indict them.
On October 13, 1307, Philip's officials simultaneously arrested every Templar in France.
They were accused of a variety of crimes, including sexual and occult outrages and worshipping an Idol.
Such maps encapsulated the : medieval world view on the eve | of the Age of Discovery.
DANTE ALIGHIERI Dante is the greatest Italian poet to have lived and one of the most important writers in European literature.
He Is best known for his epic poem the Divine Comedy, and for his tragic love for Beatrice, who married another and died young.
Exiled from his native Florence for political reasons, Dante spent much of his life traveling from one city to another.
Europeans probably picked it up from Spain and contact with the Mongols.
The first record of cannons forged from iron comes from Metz in 1324; later that year an English fortress in Gascony was bombarded for a month.
The Mali Empire of West Africa reached its height under Mansa Musa , extending from the Atlantic to Nigeria, and from the Sahara to the rain forest.
His great wealth was based on Mali’s gold, and when he traveled on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324-25, he dispensed so much gold on his THE PERCENTAGE _OF TIMBUKTU’S POPULATION AT -SANKORE UNIVERSITY ' passage through Cairo that he 2 destabilized the economy.
EUROPE ° & _ EMPIRE OF THE “~, GREAT KHAN Astrakhan Constantinople « Granada KEY The travels of Ibn Battuta aiiteete Route of Ibn Battuta to Mecca.
He made seven further journeys, visiting 1325-1345 almost every corner of the Muslim world.
Greatly influenced by Giotto, Pisano won a commission to craft a set of bronze doors for the Baptistry of Florence, finishing them in 1336.
The Tughluk dynasty of the Delhi sultanate had expanded the reach of the Muslim state, reducing neighboring Hindu kingdoms to vassal status, and repelling a series of Mongol incursions.
In 1325, Muhammad Tughluk murdered his father and took the throne, and established a reputation for cruelty.
In 1327, he transferred the capital from Delhi to Daulatabad for defensive reasons, forcing the population to relocate.
France, who was sent to France , in 1325 to arrange the marriage of : god, is shown carved ona rock : surface in Vijayanagar, the heart : of the last great Hindu empire. . their son.
Gascony to France ' and acknowledged : Robert the Bruce ' as king of an ' independent : Scotland.
Edward Ill (r.27' 77) had Mortimer ' hanged and began O S ge ' his own rule.
French territories forfeit, while : Edward claimed the French ' crown, triggering the start of ' the Hundred Years’ War.
The Garait of Gibraltar, where Marinid forces destroyed the Castilian fleet.
THE BATTLE OF RIO SALADO IS CONSIDERED, BY SOME, to be the defining battle of the Reconquista, ending forever the threat of Islamic incursion into the Iberian Peninsula from Africa.
The Marinid dynasty of Morocco, which had overthrown the Almohads in the mid-13th century, gathered a vast force and destroyed the Castilian fleet in the Strait of Gibraltar.
THE AMOUNT IN FLORINS OWED BY EDWARD III To finance his expensive war in France, Edward Ill of England (r.27-77] had taken out huge loans from Florentine bankers, especially the Peruzzi family.
With the king of Naples also defaulting on loans, the Peruzzi were bankrupted, throwing Florence into economic chaos.
HAVING GAINED MASTERY OF THE ENGLISH CHANNEL at the naval battle of Sluys in 1340, Edward Ill was free to invade France.
He landed in Normandy in 1346 and took Caen, but retreated in the face of a huge French army.
This was largely thanks to the indiscipline and arrogance of the French knights and the effectiveness of the Welsh and English longbowmen.
The English use of combined aristocratic and yeoman forces had produced a powerful new form of army.
In 1348, Clement VI bought Avignon from Joanne of Naples, and work continued on its papal palace.
Scholars and artists were attracted to the papal city, briefly among them the Florentine Francesco Petrarch (1304-74], who had been crowned poet laureate in Rome in 1341.
In 1354, the Nasrid king of Granada, Yusuf Il, was murdered by his son Mohammed V (133891) who took the throne.
Under Mohammed, the Alhambra—the fortress-palace of Granada—was further developed, becoming a treasure of Islamic architecture.
Led by Orhan, the Turkish dynasty soon seized the peninsula, securing themselves a foothold in Europe.
Architectural jewel The Court of the Lions is at the heart of the Alhambra palace, built by Mohammed V as the winter residence of the royal family.
BOHEMIA HAD EMERGED ASA POWERFUL STATE under the Premyslid dynasty in the 13th century.
Pedro |, thereby placing control ane ‘ institution and advance the Despite having a limp, and the of the Castilian navy in the + fortunes of Bohemia.
In 1356, Charles IV issued the Golden Bull, which regularized the election of the emperor toa majority vote of seven electoral princes, most of which were hereditary; the papacy would have no role.
China was reunited by conquest from the south, as a native rebellion drove out the Mongol Yuan dynasty.
In 1368, rebels under Zhu Yuanzhang (1328-98]—a former peasant established the Ming dynasty, setting up a strong, centralized government, in which the position of emperor was strengthened, but so was access to the bureaucracy.
Printing is the impression of marks on a medium— eastern Asia but perfected by German printer paper is pressed against form to produce imprint most commonly ink on paper.
His printing cuneiform, was a form of printing composed of press was so advanced that, except for refinements indentations made by a stylus in clay.
Printing inthe | suchas new typefaces and mechanization of the modern sense of the word first arose In 8th-century — presses and paper handling, the basic process China with the development of block printing. remained unchanged until the 19th century.
Blocks of wood carved into bas-relief were used as In the 1880s, the development of linotype allowed stamps to reproduce multiple copies of asingle text, a typesetter to compose lines of type using a complete with images, such as the Diamond Sutra, keyboard, rather than by hand.
Stereotyping made the earliest datable printed book . it possible to duplicate complete pages for multiple ea 7 printing.
In the 20th century, filmsetting enabled setting Gutenberg’s MECHANICAL PRINTING rapid photographic creation of printing plates.
By special type Block printing was laborious and slow, as each block the end of the century, computers allowed every was specific to one page.
Movable type was a major aspect of printing, from typesetting and graphics wooden coffin, advance (see panel, opposite], first achieved in to inking and drying, to be done on one machine.
JJ Thomas Carlyle, Scottish essayist and historian, 1759-1881 1377 Movable metal type The first metal movable type Is cast in bronze in Korea and is used to produce the Jikji Simche Yojeol, a Buddhist scripture.
Early Korean book “1% oy e 1790s-1820s Metal presses The all-metal Columbian printing press Is the first to replace the screw with levers and weights.
Japanese | c, 1275-1313 dharani Movable type scroll Invented in China in the 11th century, movable type is refined by Wang Shen, who uses over 60,000 wooden types in his treatise. 8th century Block printing Printing using carved wooden blocks and ink is known as xylography; the earliest surviving xylographic fragment is a Buddhist dharani scroll from Korea.
Linotype typesetter adapted from wine press square sleeve, or socket 1903 Offset printing In offset printing, the inked image is transferred from the printing plate to the paper viaa rubber sheet, achieving smooth, precise transfer and reducing wear on the plate. screw, or spindle, THE STORY OF PRINTING The key technology in the printing revolution was movable type, in which each character in a script had a corresponding single, small block, or type, allowing lines of type to be assembled, and then reordered for different texts.
The first book, printed by movable type cast in bronze, was published in Korea in the late 14th century.
Gutenberg improved upon this technology by developing a technique that enabled rapid, precision casting of metal type. ink impression raised movable type Letterpress printing with movable type sturdy construction Gutenberg’s press for industrial-scale Gutenberg created a screw production press for pressing inked type, set on a wooden frame, against a sheet of paper.
This was a dramatic improvement on the traditional method of taking impressions by means of rubbing.
Late 20th century-present Desktop printing The laser printer offers technology that would once have filled an Laser printer entire workshop.
Early photocopier A 16th-century painting captures the triumphant return of the Doge to Venice after victory over the Genoese.
VENICE AND GENOA, was triggered by the continuing contest for control of the trade routes through the Dardanelles, along which flowed the lucrative trade of the Byzantine Empire and the Silk Road beyond it.
In 1376, the Byzantine emperor John V Palaeologus granted to Venice the Aegean island of Tenedos, key to the Dardanelles.
In the ensuing war, the Genoans defeated the Venetians at Pola and, in 1379, seized Chioggia in Italy and blockaded Venice.
Under Vittorio Pisano, the Venetians counterblockaded the Genoese fleet, starving It into submission.
Genoese maritime power was broken and Venice now controlled the Levantine trade.
The anti-pope Clement Vil was : known as the “executioner of : Cesena’ for his brutal suppression : of arebellion in the Papal States : while acting as a papal legate. after.
Western, or Great Schism, which : saw rival popes installed in Rome : and Avignon until 1417.
Catherine of Siena, In 1376, Dominican mystic and miracle worker Catherine of Siena travelled to Avignon to convince Gregory XI to return the papacy to Rome.
THE BLACK DEATH AND SUBSEQUENT LABOUR SHORTAGES contributed to rising social tension in England.
Around 1362, for instance, the poor country priest William Langland had written Piers Plowman, a poem in English sympathizing with the plight of the poor peasant.
Motokiyo , who wrote Biblical egalitarian sect, knownas | the Lollards, partially inspired by Wycliffe, was winning widespread support.
In 1377, the so-called Bad ‘ Parliament, dominated by the king's son John of Gaunt, Earl of Lancaster and soon-to-be regent to his infant nephew Richard II (13671400), introduced a poll tax; subsequent parliaments extended it, causing widespread grievance.
In 1381, attempts to reintroduce serfdom triggered the Peasants’ Revolt, which saw peasants rising against landlords, burning manors, and destroying records.
Il cleverly appeased the rebels; Tyler was executed and the revolt was brutally suppressed.
Jodo was elected king by the Portuguese parliament and, with English help, defeated Castile at the Battle of Aljubarrota, in 1385.
In doing so, he freed Portugal from Castilian influence and, after marrying the daughter of John of Gaunt, founded the AngloPortuguese Avis dynasty.
In 1384, Philip the Bold of Burgundy inherited the county of Flanders, adding to his extensive territories.
France, ruled by the young and mentally ill if Charles VI, was now of ' dominated by rivalry ay between the houses of Burgundy and Orléans.
This unfinished poem by Geoffrey Chaucer, Mc 17,000 lines long, vividly illustrates the medieval world view on social, religious, and moral matters.
JAGIELLO OF LITHUANIA , THE LAST PAGAN RULER in Europe, was crowned king of Poland and converted to Christianity in 1386.
Timur Leng (see 1356-65] completed his conquest of Persia | in 1386 and raided deepintothe Caucasus, sacking Tbilisi in Georgia and capturing the Georgian king.
However, when the army of the Golden Horde attacked his Central Asian territories, in 1387, he was forced to turn back and meet them.
The spectacular success in converting Europe posed extreme challenges to the Church, as it struggled to reconcile temporal and spiritual power.
Canterbury Tales, partially modeled on Italian author Giovanni : Boccaccio’s Decameron, tells the story of pilgrims on the road to the : shrine of Thomas Becket (see ' 1170); it was begun in 1387.
THE START OF THE MING DYNASTY IN CHINA TRIGGERED CHANGE IN KOREA, which was considered a client state by the Ming.
The Koryo empire had supported the new Chinese dynasty, but this did not prevent the Ming from threatening to invade.
In 1388, Yi Songgye , a leading general who favored the Chinese, seized power in Korea.
In 1392, as King Taejo, he founded the Yi dynasty, also known as the Choson , aname taken from an ancient Korean kingdom.
Taejo restructured his government on the Chinese model, and instituted wideranging land reforms to redistribute estates from the hands of the oligarchy, replacing them with a new class of technocrats known as the yangban.
Anatolia to revolt, but Bayezid as the Period of eros *S, % : swiftly reduced most of them, Northern and Southern Ul pe ae Aswan @ & eiedine 2p, 4 Arabian bringing their territories under : F 25 Sea : direct Ottoman rule.
FOUNDED BY THE AZTECS IN 1325, the city of Tenochtitlan—existing on the apparently unpromising site of a marshy island ina partially brackish lake—reached its height at the beginning of the 15th century.
Tenochtitlan means “Place of the Fruit of the Cactus’ —a reference to the vision that supposedly informed the choice of location.
In this vision, the tossed heart of a conquered enemy landed on the island where an eagle wrestled with a snake on a cactus growing out of a rock— as depicted on the presentday Mexican flag.
Meanwhile, they expanded their © political territory through marriages, alliances, and ' conquest.
Tenochtitlan was laid out ona : grid pattern, with quarters arranged around acentral ' sacred district, regarded as ' the center of the world.
Hofoenyezjan jo ayAq Lake » Texcoco Mixiucan o * Zacatlalmanco *Mexicatzincgo ivory.
However, in the early Map of Tenochtitlan Causeways connected Tenochtitlan to other settlements on the lake and the mainland.
Songhay gold coin : This coin from the Songhay Empire : is from the Songhay city of Gao; rich : and powerful, the city provided the : basis for building the empire. 15th century, Mali declined and : Gao won its independence, ' beginning the growth of a Songhay Empire that would ' eclipse the other two largest : empires of the late Iron Age in : West Africa—Ghana and Mali.
Timur massacred the population of Baghdad and launched an ' invasion of Syria.
In 1405, he embarked on a campaign, but died en route to China and was buried at his capital, Samarkand.
Despite his possibly exaggerated reputation for cruelty, Timur was a devout Muslim and a patron of the arts and architecture.
His enormous empire did not long survive him, quickly breaking down into a Timurid state ruled by his son Shah Rukh , which soon fragmented further.
The Burgundians, who favored peace with the English, were popular in Paris and the north, while the Armagnacs, who were anti-English and pro-war, had the support of Queen Isabeau of Bavaria, the great nobles, and the south of the country.
In 1404, Zheng He (1371-1435] —a Muslim captured from Yunnan in China as a boy, castrated, and pressed into military service—was named grand, or high-ranking, eunuch at the imperial court.
The following year he led the first of seven epic voyages of discovery.
THE RELENTLESS ADVANCE OF THE ORDER OF TEUTONIC KNIGHTS had brought Prussia and much of the Baltic coast under their control, cutting Poland off from the sea.
The union of Poland and Lithuania under King Wladyslaw II Jagiello (c.62-1434] posed a new threat to the Order, and the Great Northern War ensued.
Jagiello was unable to keep the powerful Polish nobles in order ' and thus could not press home ' his advantage.
Thorn, concluded the following year, failed to secure Polish : access to the Baltic and enabled © the Teutonic Knights to regain : some of their advantage.
He worked during a period of : monastic revival in Russia, when the Eastern Orthodox Church offered comfort in the face of internecine war and the hated Mongol Yoke—the tribute and service exacted by the Golden Horde.
Though inspired by the great icon painter Theophanes the Greek, Rublev was celebrated for pioneering a new, more serene and symmetrical style.
The Holy Trinity This detail from Andrei Rublev's greatest icon, painted around 1410, shows the three angels who visited Abraham.
IN 1413, HENRY IV OF ENGLAND DIED and his son, Henry V (1386-1422], came to the throne.
He’s fourth and greatest expedition in 1413, he visited Calicut in India, and reached Hormuz on the Persian Gulf, sending ships to explore down the : African coast as far as Malindi in Kenya.
Fe THE COUNCIL OF CONSTANCE by trying and deposing the last antipope, Benedict XIII, and as the sole true pope.
There should have been little contest between France, the most powerful nation in Europe, and smaller, poorer England, but the English used new tactics and weapons, especially the longbow, to devastating effect.
The war drained resources on both sides, but also forged a new degree of national identity for both countries.
This illustration from the Chronicle of Ulrich von Richental shows the papal electors taking their leave from Emperor Sigismund at the Council of Constance.
SULTAN MEHMED | had successfully restored the Ottoman state after the Timurid invasion [see 1401-03), although his navy had come out worse in a conflict with the Venetians at the Battle of Gallipoli in 1416, forcing the Ottomans to recognize Venetian claims in Albania.
The siege was unsuccessful and Mehmed was distracted by an uprising led by the Sufi theologian and preacher Sheikh Bedreddin—it was suppressed, and the sheikh was executed.
The Visconti family had ruled Milan since Archbishop Otto Visconti rose to power in 1277; their domain had spread to encompass much of northern Italy, reaching its height under Gian Galeazzo , sole ruler from 1385.
He had made marriage alliances with the chief monarchs of Europe; was made hereditary duke In 1395; mastered Verona, Vicenza, Padua, Pisa, Siena, Assisi, and Perugia Sultan Murad Il Murad defended and extended the Ottoman Empire, and was also a patron of poetry and learning, making his court a cultural center. between 1386 and 1400; and threatened Florence until his death tn 1402.
Filippo Maria saw this empire : disintegrate, but when Filippo had : Gian assassinated in 1412, he set ' about restoring it, regaining Genoa in 1421.
The dauphin, based at 2 Bourges, refused to accept this, ' and the Hundred Years’ War (see © 1411-15) continued.
IN THE 1420S, THE CULTURAL MOVEMENT known later as the Italian or High Renaissance gathered pace, particularly in the field of painting and the visual arts.
Working at the same time as Ghiberti were a host of other artists, including Brunelleschi, Jacopo della Quercia, Masaccio, Donatello, Gentile da Fabriano, Jan van Eyck, and many more.
The Tribute Money Tommaso di Ser Giovanni di Simone created some of the most influential artworks of the Renaissance.
Doge’s Palace, which had been : evolving since its origins in the 9th century, embodied many of In 1424, Timur’s descendant, Ulugh Beg (1394-1449]— ' astronomer and future Mongol : leader—built a great observatory in Samarkand.
Bodkin point This type of arrowhead is an uncomplicated, squared, metal spike, extensively used during the wars of the Middle Ages.
Joan failed to take Paris, however, and the following year, she was captured by the Burgundians, who ransomed her to their i The Arnolfini Marriage by Jan van ‘ # “i Eyck is noted for its detailed interior.
FROM 1431 TO 1433, ZHENG HE made a seventh and final expedition, returning to the Persian Gulf.
Despite this last trip, China’s period of exploration had come to an end with the death of Emperor Yongle in 1424, after which the Ming dynasty returned to its former isolationist policy.
Surrendering the lead in exploration to Portugal and the Europeans would have profound consequences for the Chinese and for world history.
SHIP LENGTHS Cosimo de Medici SINCE THE 1380S, FLORENCE HAD BEEN DOMINATED by the Albizzi family, who extended the city’s control of Tuscany.
The attempts of Visconti Milan (see 1421-22] to gain control over all of Tuscany forced Florence into a ruinously expensive war, although alliance with Venice saw Milan defeated.
A leader of the peace party was wool merchant and banker Giovanni de Medici, possibly the richest man in Europe.
Compact, and civil war broke out between the factions, which ' represented different classes as well as religious ideals.
Sukhothai kingdom of Thailand ' had increasingly threatened the | Khmer Empire ' through the 14th century.
In 1428, Le Loi, leader of SHIP but new elections saw him : Vietnamese resistance to the ZHENG HE’S returned the following year, : Chinese occupation, expelled the SHIP marking the start of Medici : Chinese and founded the Le : dynasty of Dai Viet.
Not all the great Renaissance painters were Italian; Jan van Eyck (c.90-1441] was Flemish.
Celebrated for his mastery of realism and his perfection of oil painting, van Eyck produced some of his greatest masterpieces in the 1430s.
In 1432, he and his brother Hubert completed their largest surviving work, the altarpiece of St.
Later that year, in London, van Eyck painted the Portrait of an Unknown Man and the Man with the Red Turban; possibly a self-portrait.
In 1431, Joan of Arc was turned over by the English to the French ecclesiastical authorities for trial.
She was found guilty of heresy, and was burned at the stake in Rouen. domination of the city.
Cosimo combined business acumen with political shrewdness, winning popular support for his policies.
The superior organization and tactics of the Hussites, first under Jan Zizka Andrew Prokops, made them militarily powerful.
Negotiations with the ecumenical Council of Basel in 1413 led to the Compact of Prague, or Compactacta, under which moderate Hussites (the Utraquists] agreed to go back to the Catholic Church.
The windrose mosaic at Sagres in : Portugal—possibly a sundial—was : commissioned by Portuguese and, after his death in 1424, under : navigator Prince Henry. ' trigger the 1434 abandonment of Angkor and the : transfer of the Khmer capital to Phnom Penh, farther south, ' although it is also possible that ' the new location offered better ' connections for foreign trade.
Portuguese explorers pushing out : dangerous and terrifying : otherworld.
With the Treaty of Arras, the Burgundians and the French king, Charles VII, made peace but the English, unwilling to accept the terms, withdrew from negotiations.
The following year, the French alliance took Paris from English control.
The 1430s saw increasing tension between the papacy and the conciliar movement, which held that the Church ought to be governed by a Church council, rather than an individual pope.
Pope Eugenius IV summoned a General Council at Basel in 1431, but it was dominated by antipapal sentiment and, in 1437, he tried to transfer the Council to Ferrara, where it would be more amenable to his influence.
It began with invasion by the rival Chancas, who besieged Cuzco, and were completely defeated.
KEY : | Expansion by 1400 : Expansion in the reign of Pachacutec : to receive free education before ' going on to King’s College, : Cambridge.
With the Ottomans (see 1286-90) occupying territories on all sides of the tiny remnants of the Byzantine Empire, and threatening Constantinople itself, the embattled Byzantine emperor John VIII Palaeologus [see 1448-49] arrived in Europe to plead for help from the Council of Ferrara in 1438.
MACHU PICCHU (meaning “Old Peak” in Quechua, the language of the Incas) is a mountaintop citadel Cuzco.
Construction probably began in the 1440s, under the auspices of Pachacutec.
The maximum population of Machu Picchu was possibly only around 1,000, and it is thought that it served as a ceremonial center, as well as being an impregnable stronghold for the Inca elite in case of attack.
Resistance to Ottoman occupation of the Balkans increased, and in 1443, a crusading army defeated the Ottomans at Nis, in Bulgaria.
Machu Picchu : High above the Urubamba : Valley in the Peruvian : Andes, onan : inaccessible ridge, : lies Machu Picchu, : sacred citadel of : the Inca : kings. : attempted to entrust his crown. : At Adrianople, Murad made a . 10-year truce with Albanian about 43 miles northwest of: Skandebeg and other resistors of : Ottoman advance.
HENRY THE NAVIGATOR’S EXPENSIVE PROJECT to open up the coast of Africa (see 1434] was met with scepticism at home in Portugal, until in 1441, one of his ships returned with gold dust and slaves, prompting an acceleration of activity.
In 1445, sailing in one of Henry's new caravels, explorer Dinis Dias sighted the mouth of the Senegal River, which offered a trade route deep into the African interior, and rounded Cape Verde, the westernmost point of Africa.
Dias returned the following year as part of a fleet of caravels intending to plant the Portuguese flag and explore what Henry believed might be the western branch of the Nile, while another of Henry's captains, Nuno Tristao, sighted the Gambia River.
Golden age of Great Zimbabwe : In the mid-15th century, the : population of Great Zimbabwe was : just under half the size of the : population of London.
IN 1449, ASHIKAGA YOSHIMASA BECAME SHOGUN, or military dictator, of Japan.
Repeated famines triggered constant uprisings, while the Ashikaga practice of issuing tokuseirei or “acts of grace’ to cancel debts, damaged the economy.
Despite this, Yoshimasa presided over a cultural flowering at his Higashiyama estate.
The new pope, Nicholas V, elected in 1447, was intent on bringing an end to the schism caused by his predecessor's clash with the Council of Basel (see 1435-37), and on restoring peace to Italy and achieving harmonious relations with other rulers.
At the Concordat of Vienna in 1448, he made concessions to Emperor Frederick III and the other German princes, who in return abandoned the Council of Basel and recognized some papal powers.
The following year, the Council of Basel finally disbanded and the anti-pope, Felix V, abdicated in return for a cardinalship.
This marked the final victory of the papacy over the conciliar movement.
Palaeologus [see panel, right) acceded to the throne in Constantinople—he would be the last Byzantine emperor.
The arts flourished in PALAEOLOGUS Constantine XI Palaeologus succeeded to the remnants of a once-great empire, left without the resources to defend itself.
He was the last emperor of Byzantium, a state that had lasted throughout the medieval period, providing a unique bridge between east and west, ancient and modern.
He died on the walls of Constantinople, having done everything in his power to secure its defense. them from the Balkans at the ' second Battle of Kosovo in 1448, ' regaining control of Albania.
REFORMATION AND EXPLORATION 1450-1749 The 16th and 17th centuries were determined by new horizons, as new lands were explored and new Ideas formulated.
The This 16th-century fresco depicts the siege of Constantinople, which began on ts second pair of doors he completed, they show scenes from the Old Testament.
Sustained by Lorenzo Ghiberti completed his men; the French, scarcely 100.
Bordeaux itself fell again to the 80,000 men against only 7,000 French.
Milan, Venice, Florence, the Papal States, and Naples were 7 the signatories.
The treaty had been given additional impetus by the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans a year earlier, when it became clear there was a need to present a united Christian front.
His method of printing meant that thousands of copies of books could be made relatively easily.
Prussia (conquered by the : Teutonic Knights two centuries earlier) had become resentful of : its lowly status within the Baltic ' territories of the Teutonic Order. : In 1454 the Prussian Estates revolted, and asked for Polish military support, beginning what : was to become the Thirteen ' Years’ War against the Teutonic : Knights.
These were a series Ococenriima Bete Agu wit-\ gu meron armen of civil wars between the rival ee Ieateaiteeidudsen Plantagenet houses of York and Scemeaneansnteninetine reef ae Lancaster, both of which had tae gra pcaihey srudemman Seen ; 3 claims to the throne.
Ge oN ta A Turkish miniature painting showing Mehmed II's forces attacking Belgrade’ “which they tried unsuccessfully to take from Hungary in 1456.
OTTOMAN EXPANSION CONTINUED IN THE BALKANS AND GREECE as Mehmed II pressed ahead in his determination to conquer the world for Islam.
Simultaneously, the Ottomans conquered the Peloponnese in southern Greece, with Athens falling in 1456.
Louis Xl acceded the French throne in July 1461, marking a critical point in the evolution of the French state.
The medieval monarchs of France, whatever their nominal power, were heavily limited in their influence.
Artois, Picardy, and Burgundy 2 itself under his rule, but by a ' combination of inheritance and : clever diplomacy had added : Roussillon, Cerdagne, Maine, Provence, and Anjou.
Grand Duchy of Moscow—with the accession of Ivan III “the Great” : in March 1462.
It was Europe's largest medieval brick castle and is in what is now Poland.
THE THIRTEEN YEARS’ WAR between Poland-Lithuania and the Teutonic Knights—a military order founded in Palestine—ended with the Second Treaty of Torun In 1466.
Samurai sword This 15th-century katana, with its scabbard, is typical of those used in the Onin war.
Los Reyes Catolicos, the Catholic : Monarchs—were jointly ruling : Castile and Aragon, although the : kingdoms were not formally ' unified.
Spain's potential to emerge as the ' dominant force in Renaissance : Europe was unmistakable under | Ferdinand and Isabella.
It had been a hesitant process, limited by ship types, principally galleys and cogs, that were unsuited to long-range exploration.
Its goals were uncertain beyond a general hope to trace the trans-Saharan gold trade to its source and to exploit the West African slave trade.
The death in 1460 of Prince Henry, ‘the Navigator,” the early champion of Portuguese exploration , had made further progress unlikely.
However, in 1469 Portuguese king Afonso V agreed—in exchange for an annual fee—to allow a Lisbon merchant, Fernao Gomes, to continue to push Portuguese efforts south along the West African coast.
Fernao Gomes continued the : age of exploration begun by Henry the : Navigator as depicted in the : Monument to the Discoveries, Lisbon.
Christian powers, notably Venice, : Expansion of Burgundy North CONQUEST of Constantinople in ' in an attempt to enlist them in | This map shows the Sea 1453, its conqueror,MehmedIl, _°_ Christian struggles against | territories held by Charles at. set out not merely to extend : Ottoman expansion.
To this constellation of territories, Philip's grandson, Philip the Good, then added parts of northeast France and much of modern Holland.
These holdings, however imposing, were still far from Ottoman drums The Janissaries of the Ottoman army parade with the drums that were used to urge the soldiers into battle.
Charles the Bold, inherited this ' state within states in 1467 and : determined not just to make it a continuous territory—which by : 1472 he had succeeded in doing : through an audacious ' combination of purchase and : conquest—but to assert its : independence as a separate : kingdom.
They were comprehensively routed and the body of the duke was discovered face down in a frozen pond.
While Louis XI seized the Burgundians French territories, those in the Low Countries passed to the Habsburgs with the marriage of Charles's only child, Margaret, to the future Holy Roman Emperor, Maximilian I William Caxton was an English merchant whose continental travels introduced him to printing.
He established the first printing press in England in 1476, printing the first book a year later.
Caxton’s printing press The first printing press in England, established by William Caxton in Westminster, London, produced its first book in 1477. al a) lm, —_ aa \ WF ~sS ~~ nal thousands dead, including the Duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold.
Ottoman control of the Greek : island Negroponte and ' of Lemnos in the north Aegean.
Madeira—successively colonized » by Spain and Portugal since the 3 early 15th century.
Canaries and Portugal's claims to : the Azores and Madeira, and The accession of Isabella I to the | Portuguese rights in West Africa.
THE SPANISH INQUISITION Founded by Ferdinand and Isabella in 1478, the goal of the Inquisition was to impose an overarching Christian Catholic identity on all Spanish territories.
Tribunals were held in which heretics—which at this time meant Jews and those who had converted to Christianity from Judaism— were punished and expelled.
BY ABOUT 1440, THREE SEPARATE MOSSI KINGDOMS had become established in West Africa, roughly in present-day Burkina Faso.
Making use of formidable cavalry, from about 1480 they exploited the gradual decline of Mali in the face of Songhay expansion by raiding deep into Mali territories.
The year 1482 saw two crucial developments in the continuing Portuguese exploration and settlement of West Africa.
The first was the construction of Sao Jorge da Mina, now called Elmina Castle, on what was later known as the Gold Coast and is today Ghana.
West Africa to the Gulf of Guinea ' were generally benign, aided by : northeast trade winds and the : Guinea Current, to the south they were much more arduous.
By 1700, European explorers and colonizers had established themselves globally.
European explorers were motivated by glory, Christian zeal, and—above all—gold, spices, and slaves.
With overland routes blocked by Muslim states, maritime routes offered the prospect of outflanking them.
By the 1550s, they had conquered two empires—the Aztecs and the Incas—and created a huge New World empire.
Though futile, this paved the way for two further European empires there.
Ships sailed for months at a time to cross the vast oceans, often with crude systems for navigation.
Relations with native peoples also proved fraught and almost invariably ended violently.
Europeans generally Saw natives as a resource to be exploited and Christianized.
But the startling death tolls in the New World were more the result of the dislocation of settled ways of life and of imported European diseases than of deliberate policy.
The sudden intermingling of previously separate worlds had a dramatic impact in both directions, with crops and animal types introduced to new environments.
England and possessions possessions and possessions Most of what remains of the Great Wall of China was rebuilt during the Ming dynasty.
Fought between Lancastrians and Yorkists—rival Plantagenet claimants to the English throne— it had appeared to have been settled for good in 1471.
In 1470, the Yorkist Edward IV, who had seized the throne from the hapless Lancastrian Henry VI in 1461, had been forced from it by a group of vengeful magnates.
In 1471, with Burgundian support from Charles the Bold (see 1472-76), Edward retook the throne.
The problem was that the new king, Edward V, was only 12 years old and his mother’s family, the Woodvilles, saw the boy-king as an obvious opportunity to proclaim themselves regents—in effect, to seize the throne themselves, undoing Edward IV's legacy.
This at least was the view of the dead king's most consistent champion, his brother the Duke of Gloucester, who was competent, intelligent, and loyal.
Gloucester characteristically preempted the Woodvilles by seizing the throne himself, as Richard Ill, executing the leading Woodvilles, and imprisoning Edward V with his younger brother in the Tower of London where both were then murdered.
Tudors, England was significantly : strengthened, its magnates Richard Ills much larger force, which | tamed, and its government : comprehensively overhauled. in this destabilizing infighting.
The second The Renaissance (literally “rebirth”) grew out of the Italian Middle Ages and marked a reevaluation of European thought.
It gave rise, first in Florence , to an artistic and architectural revolution, and later, toa scientific one.
FOLLOWING ON FROM EARLIER PORTUGUESE VOYAGES [see 1470-71), two further expeditions were despatched in 1487 to investigate routes to and across was charged with investigating the East African coast as well as the Indian Ocean.
Mamluk helmet This 15th-century iron Mamluk helmet, as worn by Mamluk soldiers, is decorated with inlaid silver calligraphy.
THE OTTOMAN-MAMLUK peace treaty of May 1491 ended a war that had begun in 1485 for control of the Western Asia and Red Sea trade routes.
Neither side gained much but the war exhausted the Mamluks financially, making their subsequent conquest by the Ottomans in 1516-17 inevitable.
By 1490, Vladislas II (14561516) ruled over a vast kingdom, including Poland-Lithuania, Bohemia, and Hungary, whose crown he accepted in 1490.
Despite the size of these territories, they had little influence on Europe as a whole.
Poland-Lithuania—vast, desolate, and impoverished—was on the margins of Europe.
Hungary and Bohemia, although more sophisticated, remained not just separate kingdoms but uneasy rivals.
Isabella presided ' over the fall of the Kingdom of : Granada, marking the end of a 10-year campaign to claim the last Moorish territory in Iberia. : It was the end of a process begun : in the 8th century—the Christian reconquest or reconquista.
Spain was anxious to match the spoils ' flowing to Portugal from its West ' African ventures.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS Born in Genoa, Italy, Christopher Columbus made four transatlantic voyages believing that the riches of the East could be reached by sailing west from Spain.
His first journey (1492-93] was followed by others in 1493-96, 1498-1500, and 1502-04.
He was the first European to sight South America, in 1498, and charted most of the Caribbean.
This 20th-centilry paiating depicts King Manuel | of Portugal blessing Vasco da Gama and his expedition as they get ready to set sail from Lisbon.
The Italian Wars, nominally sparked by the desire of Charles VIII of France to asserta claim to the kingdom of Naples, saw an intermittent 65-year struggle between France and Spain for control of Italy.
Its opening salvo, which ended in 1499, was both destructive and inconclusive.
The first phase ended with the Battle of Fornovo, fought LEONARDO DA VINCI Born in Italy, Leonardo was a self-taught polymath—a painter, sculptor, inventor, and scientific enquirer— whose restless genius drove him to embrace a limitless range of projects, but to complete almost none.
Vill found his former Italian allies, : notably Milan, had joined forces THE APPROXIMATE NUMBER OF EUROPEANS WHO CONTRACTED SYPHILIS IN 50 YEARS FROM 1496: : with Venice, the papacy, and the * » Holy Roman Empire to oppose him +: inaHoly League, ending his | dreams of Italian conquest. : By about 1496, an outbreak of what was commonly called the : French pox [so-named as it was : first recorded among French troops there] occurred in Italy.
In May 1498, Vasco da Gama consolidated this achievement when he continued into the Indian Ocean and reached Battle of Zonchio This woodcut depicts ships in the first battle of the Ottoman-Venetian War.
Portuguese mariners had hugged : the African coast, da Gama made a : vast sweep westward into the : South Atlantic.
Of greater significance was ' the growing realization that this ' was indeed a New World.
With the Ottoman Empire to the west and the Mughal Empire to the east, it formed one of a bloc of sophisticated, centralized, highly cultured Muslim empires that dominated West Asia in the 16th and 17th centuries.
It began ina burst of conquest launched by Shah Ismail I, whose troops surged westward across Persia, putting an end to the political vacuum and infighting that had followed the death of Timur (see 1386-90) in 1405.
Proclaiming himself Shah of Persia, Ismail | was a Shi'ite Muslim and vigorously promoted his faith as the official state religion.
Checked Safavid Empire From modest beginnings on the Caspian Sea, by 1501 the Safavid Empire extended to occupy a swath of Western Asia.
The introduction The spread of Islam in East ' Africa was reinforced by the ee Michelangelo’s David Completed by Michelangelo in 1504, this giant marble statue of » biblical hero David stands at 17 ft tall. establishment in 1504 of the Funj Sultanate of Sennar in the north of Sudan, at the expense of the previous Christian rulers of Sennar.
The sultanate rapidly established itself as a major power in the region, threatening both Ethiopia and the Ottomans In Egypt.
Sistine ceiling Commissioned by Pope Julius II, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican Is one of the masterworks of Michelangelo.
Antonio de Montesinos, Dominican to Spanish colonists, Hispaniola, December 4, 1511 : Where the latter two were forced : to turn back in the Banda Sea, : Serrdo was able to continue to the : Moluccas using native craft.
Spice Islands exploration : Portuguese explorer Francisco : Serrao successfully reached the : Moluccas after : others had turned back.
Makassar @ Flores Sea mba Antonio de Montesinos, in which, ' to predictable outrage, he ' denounced the “cruelty and ' tyranny” of the settlers.
Moroccan dynasty after 1511—the : Sa’dis—who filled the political ' vacuum created by the crumbling ' of Marinid rule in the 1480s.
Venetian alliance. : Hemmed in on the west by the : Ottomans and threatened to the south by the Portuguese, : the Safavids were nonetheless : successful in confronting the : loose Uzbek confederation of peoples of Central Asia to their ' north.
Xe Peo” we ""a9 eS ae Wo NO LESS SIGNIFICANT than the Spanish exploration of the Caribbean in the immediate aftermath of Columbus's 1492 crossing was the discovery by Juan Ponce de Leon in April 1513 of the “island” of Florida.
It was the first Spanish contact with the mainland of North America and the basis for subsequent Spanish claims to the region.
In attempting to circumnavigate his island, Ponce de Leon made a further discovery almost as important in the age of sail as Columbus's discovery of the wind systems of the central Atlantic— the Gulf Stream.
Its central theme—that the exercise of political power requires violence and deceit—earned It lasting notoriety.
Philosopher and writer, Niccolo Machiavelli was a functionary in Florence, where he witnessed the power of aggressive rulers first hand, including, in 1502-03, that of the pope's illegitimate son, the ruthless Cesare Borgia.
He completed several diplomatic missions, but in 1513 was arrested and tortured.
Control of Egypt both consolidated the Ottoman presence in the eastern Mediterranean and, crucially, gave them access to the Red Sea.
In doing so, they found themselves in direct conflict with the Portuguese, who had been actively probing the Red Sea since 1513.
The stage was set for another round of conflict between the Muslim world and the Christian West.
In October 1517, the priest and professor of theology Martin Luther nailed his 95 Theses to the door of All Saints The Reformation—the religious revolt against the Catholic Church instigated by Martin Luther —tore the Western Church apart.
Church in Wittenberg, Saxony, ' as part of what was a growing : protest movement against : religious practices and corruption : in the Catholic Church.
THE ELECTION OF CHARLES V AS HOLY ROMAN EMPEROR in 1519 appeared pivotal.
For the earnest Charles, the imperatives were clear—to preside over a prosperous, pan-European Catholic entity which, properly mobilized, would then rout the Ottoman menace.
Few of his subjects were prepared to surrender traditional “liberties” to a distant, foreign ruler; almost none was prepared to finance him; and religious differences persistently intruded.
Simultaneously, the prospect of Habsburg domination alarmed every other major European power, above all France.
Emperor Charles V : Few rulers were more dutiful than : Charles V or as conscious of their : divine destiny.
THE BELIEF THAT THE LANDS IN THE WEST discovered by European explorers from Columbus onward than a new continent, proved tenacious.
It was likewise widely held that a navigable passage to the East through these landmasses must exist.
Yet Verrazzano persisted in the belief that the Pacific was within reach.
The German Peasants’ War of 1524-25 was a sharp reminder of the way that the language of Protestant reformation could be appropriated by groups who usually lacked a voice in politics.
The revolts were attempts by huge numbers of the politically disenfranchised in Germany and in Austria, by no means all of them peasants, to end what they Saw as abuses against them— chiefly taxes and labor services— by the Church and the nobility.
KEY ') Habsburg were unknown Asian coasts, rather ~ Border of Holy ENGLAND possessions 1525 Roman Empire Paris @ ATLANTIC OCEAN AFRICA Habsburg Empire under Charles V : The very size of Charles V's empire : made it effectively ungovernable. : Whatever its potential power, it was : riven by religious and political strife. ' gathered in a variety of loose : groupings and hastily assembled : armies.
Battle of Pavia a ‘al Babur’s Mughal empire could only be created—and sustained—by force.
The alliance also provided the Ottomans with further justification to renew their conflict with Hungary and, in August 1526, they obliterated a combined HungarianBohemian force at Mohacs.
Babur hailed from Ferghana in central Asia, from where he had been expelled.
In 1522, however, he captured Kandahar, an important staging point on the road to India and, in 1526, defeated the Afghan Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodi, and declared himself emperor.
At its height at the beginning of the 18th century, the Mughal empire (“Mughal” is Persian for Mongol] covered almost the entire subcontinent.
Early astronomy was closely linked to mythology, of the gravitational force controlling that movement Newton’s telescope religion, and prognostication.
In the 19th century, the distance to Uiront vier) observations were used to measure time, devise the Sun and nearby stars was accurately measured, calendars, set the dates of religious festivals, and Spectroscopy was introduced, and advances in for astrological prediction.
For millennia, it was theoretical physics provided explanations for believed that the Earth was the center of problems such as how Stars generate their energy the cosmos.
Prior to 1920, explain the observed movements of the many thought the Universe consisted of only our hydrogen beta line. sodium lines own Milky Way Galaxy.
However, Edwin Hubble measured the speed at which distant nebulae were receding, and it was realized that these nebulae were independent galaxies.
It was proposed that the other forms of electromagnetic energy, such as X-rays and radio waves.
Using spectroscopy, these electromagnetic emissions can be broken up into a spectrum of colors.
MODERN ASTRONOMY In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus published his heliocentric model, which put the Sun at the center of the cosmos and Is widely considered to mark the birth of modern astronomy.
Then, after 1609, the newly invented telescope revealed magnesium lines expansion had been caused by a massive explosion—the Big Bang.
Findings from a host of new astronomical modern space astronomy have supported by dark absorption lines, each corresponding to objects.
The 17th century also the Big Bang theory, but it has also been a different chemical element.
By investigating saw the establishment discovered that much of the Universe the intensity of these lines, a star’s chemical of the laws of planetary pote ieee ener ater aoe consists of dark matter and dark composition can be discovered.
Further study motion by Johannes De ire ee energy, the nature and origin of can also establish its temperature, relative velocity, ; ne ; and the pressure and density of its atmosphere.
Kepler, and an explanation century to estimate time and for navigation. which are still unknown. aS aie | 2000BCE Solar and lunar calendars The Babylonians produce the first calendar by integrating the 365.25 days of the solar year with the 29.53 days of the lunar month.
This demotes that prevailed until the Earth to being just one the 16th century.
TELESCOPES USED BY MODERN ASTRONOMERS HAVE MIRRORS UP TO 10,400MM IN DIAMETER. screw that holds main mirror in position supporting strut Newton's telescope Isaac Newton made his first reflecting telescope in 1668.
Shortly afterward, he made a second model , which stands about 8in high.
Newton's telescope was the first to use a primary mirror rather than a lens to collect light.
They fly past, orbit, and land on planets, moons, asteroids, and comets. when early radio telescopes detect radio waves from the Sun and distant galaxies. radio astronomy—begins ayy. . 1 ‘ie | kk. on galaxies, and expanding.
The Sack of Rome i deeply embarrassed Charles V, it meant his dominance in Italy was confirmed.
THE MOST SHOCKING EVENT OF THE ITALIAN WARS was the Sack of Rome in 1527 by Charles V's Imperial troops.
Roman Emperor, Charles V was the natural ally of the Catholic : Church just as he was the natural : enemy of Lutheranism . : Yet not only was Charles now at j — n 1527 shocked Europe and devastated the Church.
SULEIMAN I The 46-year rule of Suleiman was marked by a succession of victories in the Balkans, the Middle East, and North Africa that left the Ottomans as the most dynamic and dominant presence in the Western Hemisphere.
Hesse and Saxony in northern : Germany, under which each ' promised to aid the other if Charles V attempted, by force, to reimpose Catholicism.
SPANISH EXPLORATION AND CONQUEST IN THE NEW WORLD, so decisively reinforced by the subjection of Mexico in 1521, was continued on an even more spectacular scale with the takeover of the Peruvian Inca Empire by Francisco Pizarro in 1532.
Like Cortés’s invasion of Mexico, its success depended on internal divisions within the Inca Empire, and a combination of religious zeal, greed, and superior military means—steel, guns, and armor against the Incas weapons of sharpened stones and padded cotton armour—the whole driven by Pizarro, a man of huge ambition.
On the other side of the continent, further European penetration of South America was also taking place, albeit on a far smaller scale.
In 1532, Portugal established its first permanent settlement in Brazil, at Sao Vicente.
This was the nucleus of what by the end of the century would be a huge colonial enterprise based on slavery and sugar plantations.
In 1532, hostilities between Germany's Schmalkaldic League and Emperor Charles V ceased with the signing of a treaty at Nuremberg.
Henry would remain a devout Catholic to the end of his life, opposed to all attempts to reform Catholic practice.
Initially, Henry wanted a divorce from his aging Spanish wife, Catherine of Aragon, who after 24 years of marriage had yet to give birth to a son.
Henry had Anne Boleyn Henry VIII married Anne Boleyn in secret in January 1533, four months before he divorced Catherine of Aragon.
The initial Catholic response to the Reformation was hesitant and uncoordinated, and was led by a series of individuals rather than the Church itself.
The Jesuits, the Society of Jesus, were established In 1534 by a Basque nobleman, Ignatius of Loyola.
Loyola's goal was to produce a new generation of highly educated priests to spread a new militantly Catholic faith.
In pursuit of Henry's ' personal interests, Roman Catholicism was abolished.
The Pilgrimage of 3 Grace saw the largest uprisings HAVING BROKEN WITH ROME, it followed that all the structures of the Catholic Church in England should be taken over by the state.
This was not just a question of wanting to eradicate papal authority in England.
The Catholic wealthy, and this was money that Henry VIII, permanently strapped for cash, was determined to have.
In 1535, the king's secretary, Thomas Cromwell (c.851540), took charge of the two-part dissolution of the country’s monasteries.
Starting in 1536 and culminating with all the great monasteries in 1539, the dissolution involved systematic vandalism and saw the greatest transfer of land ownership in England since the Norman Conquest in 1066.
Spanish exploration of North America in the 16th century : proved discouraging.
Francisco Vazquez de Coronado ' headed a still larger force north : from Mexico, penetrating as far : as Kansas.
But none of these ventures would be followed up until the end of the century.
Jean-Francois de la Rocque de Roberval, with Cartier his deputy, : and was a dismal failure.
According to the Portuguese writer and explorer Fernao Mendes Pinto, it occurred on the island of Tanegashima, to the south of the main Japanese archipelago.
Not only did the Portuguese introduce firearms to Japan, but they became intermediaries between China and Japan, whose merchants had been forbidden to trade with the Chinese as a result of persistent raids by Japanese pirates.
In 1543, the Polish mathematician Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543] published On the Revolution of the Heavenly Bodies.
It was based not on Copernicus’s own observations of the heavens so much as on those of Greek and Arab astronomers.
Gold and silver shipped to Seville i The silver mountain at Potosi meant : it dominated the exports of precious : metals shipped to Spain from Chile : and Mexico from 1503 to1660. than the other way around.
Also published in 1543 was : Vesalius’s On the Fabric of the : Human Body.
In 1531, Charles V had been forced : to skirt its threat to his authority as Natives and llamas were pressed i into service to transport silver from Potosi, Bolivia.
The result, decided at the Battle | of Miihlberg in April 1547, was ' an overwhelming military success ' for Charles.
Spanish Empire, for it was New 2 World silver from Potosi that drove : Spanish trade with China just as : set out to challenge the Protestant of Trent aimed to eradicate : corruption, make the Church's : teachings more coherent, and to : competitive religious force.
Persistently Ottomans, he had had little option but to appease the league [see 1532) and only in 1546, with France temporarily sidelined after he feel able to confront it directly.
In 1545, Spanish colonists in northern Mexico, it would prove it financed Spain's attempts at European dominance.
In the same year, at Trent in the Italian Alps, the Catholic Church Reformation by reforming and remodeling itself.
The Council project itself as a dynamic and rise to a series of new Catholic 1951-52 and 1959-63.
Henry VIII's Church of England was Protestant only in its rejection of papal authority.
He was a consistent champion of the Indians in the face of routine brutality by the Portuguese colonizers.
Many of the outward forms of Catholic worship, including bell-ringing, were forbidden.
It saw France allied with the Ottomans in the Mediterranean, and with a series of German Protestant princes, notably Maurice of Saxony, in Germany.
England would make a late and disastrous contribution to the Spanish cause In 1557.
This came about because Henry VIII's daughter, Mary, became queen in 1593 and married Charles V's son, the future Philip II of Spain, in 1554.
That the ruler of an England that had been Protestant since 1534 should be married to the son of the most militantly Catholic ruler in Europe is easily explained.
Where her brother, Edward VI, had been aggressively Protestant (see 1549-51], Mary 1 was no less aggressively Catholic, determined on the full restoration of Catholic —and papal—supremacy.
Jesus, Son of with eternal salvation available : only to those who submit to God’s : will (largely as defined by Calvin]. : What was significant about the death of Servetus was that for the ' first time Protestantism was seen : to be as intolerant of heresy as Catholicism.
D oe Xe e SO” eS ee N < «om This copper engraving depicts the Peace of Augsburg of 1555. am THE FINAL PHASE OF THE ITALIAN WARS made plain that Charles V could never impose himself militarily on those of his nominal subjects within the Holy Roman Empire who had embraced Protestantism.
Charles accordingly, and reluctantly, allowed his brother Archduke Ferdinand, Holy Roman Emperor designate, to negotiate a compromise, the Peace of Augsburg, agreed in September 1555.
At its heart was a formula—cuius regio eius religio — that allowed each ruler to impose his own religion on his territory.
But the choice was between Catholicism and Lutheranism only—Calvinism was not included.
The accession of the 14-year-old Akbar to the Mughal throne in 1596 marked a decisive moment in the dynasty’s fortunes.
His father, Humayun, had seen a substantial erosion of Mughal power in the face of Afghan and Hindu advances.
Having fought off a determined Hindu attempt on his throne at the Second Battle of Panipat in November 1554, Akbar presided over an enormous expansion of Mughal power.
The claims of Russia’s czars to be the sole legitimate heirs of Rome and, therefore, the only guardians of Christianity led naturally to a belief that the expansion of Russia by conquest was not just desirable but inevitable.
THE TENSE RELATIONS BETWEEN the Portuguese, who had been attempting to establish trading posts in China since 1513, and the Chinese, always suspicious of Portuguese intentions, had thawed during the 1540s to the point that by 1552 China agreed to allow Portugal a trading post in Macau on the south coast of China.
It would, in turn, prove a crucial link in the Portuguese, later Spanish, global trading system.
In 1557, Mary | of England (see 1552-54) was persuaded by her husband Philip II to join Spain in its renewed war with France.
This proved disastrous, leading directly to the loss of Calais to the French in January 1558; Calais had been English since 1360 and was the country’s last foothold in continental Europe.
Mary had been unable to have children and when she died in November 1558, she was succeeded by her Protestant half-sister Elizabeth |, the daughter of Anne Boleyn.
By the terms of the treaty, Philip II _ was tacitly making plain m that the military and financial contributions of the Netherlands to the conflict had been principally to advance Spain's Italian goals.
Future conflict in the Spanish Netherlands was more or less guaranteed.
Czardom of Russia. sab owe ae Me : @Tsaritsyn sin tne 100s, he goo, el : began the expansion HUNGARY #Astrakhan : of its boundaries, ee : and its territory and Black Sea % : population doubled econdlitalc : predictable consequence was the : death of the French king, Henry : [I three months later ina tournament held to celebrate the : treaty.
This lacquer and gold example Is decorated with scenes around Kyoto. netsuke stops inro from slipping off belt human figure connecting cord Porcelain tea bowl 1700-1750 Wrestler’s netsuke 1800-1850 In the Edo period much ingenuity went into the designs of carved toggles called netsuke.
The merchant class grew wealthier and better educated, and began to enjoy arts that were previously the preserve of the landowning elites and the samurai warrior class.
Mount Fuji top piece emphasizes height Japanese craftsmen were inspired by the culture of ukiyo (Floating World}, itself inspired by the Buddhist idea that all is illusion.
In Edo Japan ukiyo became associated with fleeting pleasures—from dallying with courtesans to attending kabuki dance dramas.
Surrounded by beauty, their clients set about their pursuits, from writing to prayer, as though they too were part of the illusory Floating World. decorative straw hat lacquered surface finely carved detail Zen ink decoration separable Lotus component throne Brass lantern 18th century Intended for exterior use, probably at an entrance approach, this monumental brass lantern disassembles into five parts.
Wooden Buddha figure 18th century Buddhism lay at the heart of Tokugawa ideas of a coherent society.
Ivory figure 18th century This delicately carved ivory figure of an old woman carrying a bundle of faggots carries the inscription of Gyokusen. 190° typical floral decoration Imari charger Edo period Vast quantities of Imari porcelain, named after its principal port of distribution, have featured this charger’s palette, dominated by blue, pink, and orange shades. bamboo mount gives fan rigidity Ny ’ Printed fan 1858 This late Edo artifact is made of split bamboo and paper.
From 1561, the substantial Baltic territories of the Livonian Order , which had already lost East Prussia in 1525 when the Teutonic Grand Master, Albrecht von Hohenzollern, converted to Protestantism, were progressively dismembered by Russia, Sweden, Poland, and Denmark.
Originally a Crusading frontier entity, Livonia was a victim in part of the Reformation, but more of PolishRussian rivalries—neither willing to see the other strengthened In the region at its own expense.
The killing of 80 Huguenots at Vassy : in northeast France in March 1562 : was the spark that began the French : Wars of Religion. crown or the nobles, whether : Catholic or Huguenot.
Protestants were known as Huguenots, from the Swiss: German Eidgenossen or “oath companions.
It was intended to underline the piety as well as the majesty of Spain’s rulers.
The first modern naval war ensued —that Is, with sailing ships, rather than galleys [as was still common in the Mediterranean], heavily armed with cannon.
Both countries were competing for control of the maritime invasion routes, the Danes supported by the semi-independent German city of Luibeck.
As other countries would discover, custom-built men-of-war may have been the most formidably powerful weapons of the period but the ships were prodigiously expensive.
Florida on the banks of the St. : John’s River on the site of what today is Jacksonville.
Spanish force determined not to allow French settlers, especially : Protestant ones, to encroach on : a territory where they enjoyed superiority.
All the settlers and ' the relieving force, bar a number of women and children, were » killed.
P| \s or oS x o> X ow ‘0 ss 9 a Although Breugel’s Massacre of the Innocents has a Biblical subject, in reality it is acommentary on Spanish brutality during the Dutch Revolt.
IN ESTABLISHING HIS OWN BRAND of divinely sanctioned Orthodox absolutism, Ivan IV (see panel, right] never had to contend with the substantial vested interests— mercantile, aristocratic, or clerical—that frustrated his counterparts in Western Europe.
His principal opponents were the Cossacks—free-ranging frontiersmen—and the boyars, the ‘al Spanish settlement St.
Augustine in Florida, founded by Spain in August 1565, is the oldest continuously inhabited European settlement in North America. hereditary nobility.
The Cossacks were co-opted as allies by the obvious strategy of bribing them, while, from 1565, the boyars were dispossessed, and in most cases slaughtered.
Their former estates became lvan’s “private domain,” the oprichina—a vast area of central Russia—parceled out among a new nobility, the dvoriane, loyal to the czar.
The Netherlands, whether : Protestant or Catholic, had no | desire to submit to Philip’s rule ' given that this would mean ' surrendering its own “liberties” — IVAN THE TERRIBLE Though capable of bouts of remorse—as when, in 1581, he killed his eldest son and heir by staving in his head with a staff—lIvan IV applied a ruthless brutality to his rule.
IN 1568, OMURA SUMIDATA , a Japanese daimyo who in 1563 had converted to Christianity, gave permission for Portuguese traders and missionaries to establish a port at a fishing village at the southern tip of Japan— Nagasaki.
Until the suppression of Christianity in Japan in 1614, Nagasaki, a Jesuit colony, was not only almost entirely Catholic—or “kirishitan” —it was Portugal's most important trading center in East Asia.
The most urgent task facing Akbar in his consolidation of Mughal power in India (see 1555-564] was the defeat of the Hindu Rajputs of the northwest.
This was a decade-long campaign, which climaxed in 1569 with the fall of the fortresses of Mewar and Ranthambore.
Having secured the submission of the principal Rajput rulers, Akbar married a series of Hindu princesses (he had 36 wives in all), tying his defeated enemies to him in matrimonial alliances.
II, last of the Jagiellonian rulers of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and of Poland, to produce an heir led to a formal union between the two states.
This new PolishLithuanian Commonwealth became the largest territorial state in Europe.
The move was prompted by Sigismund's desire to ensure that his dynasty’s territories were preserved, and the need to protect Lithuania from the Ottomans and the Russians.
The Northern Rising of : November 1569 was the most : serious threat to Elizabeth I’s ' pragmatic Protestantism.
Mercator projection remains the most familiar map of the world. : Gerardus Mercator : Mercator was an engraver and a : mathematician as well as a skilled : cartographer.
From the 1570s, three galleons made an annual round-trip between Acapulco in Mexico and Manila in the Philippines.
In return for New World silver, Spain imported silks, spices, porcelain, lacquerware, and ivory.
Christians failed in the wider goal to retake Cyprus, the threat of : Ottoman expansion in the western Mediterranean was ended. : Battle of Lepanto : An estimated 20,000 Ottomans and : 7,500 Christians died at the Battle of : Lepanto.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre by — —_s the Huguenot Francois Dubois, Catherine de Medici inspects a pile of corpses.
DESPITE THE SPANISH CONQUEST Inca state was set up in the Upper Amazon in 1539 under a minor Inca noble, Manco Inca Yupanqui, ina small settlement, Vilcabamba.
Catherine de Medici (see panel, right) who, as fearful for her son’s throne as she was alarmed by : growing Huguenot power, had : nonetheless persistently sought ' to bring the warring factions ' to terms.
In waged an intermittent, generally ineffective campaign against the Spanish.
In 1572, Vilcabamba was overrun and the last Inca leader, Tupac Amaru, was executed.
In 1566, a delegation of Dutch nobles appeared before Margaret of Parma , half-sister of Philip Il and governor-general of the Netherlands, objecting to Philip's drive against heresy in the Netherlands.
The name was enthusiastically taken up by the protesting Dutch, particularly the Sea Beggars, privateers (or pirates] whose raids on Spanish shipping from 1568 significantly hampered Spain's military efforts.
The Sea Beggars depended toa considerable extent on support from England, discreetly doing what it could to disrupt the Spanish.
On his death in 1559, she became monarch in all but name as France fell into turmoil, with her first two sons, Francis Il and Charles IX, proving too young and inexperienced, and Henry III facing a deteriorating political situation.
Huguenot takeover was in the : offing and could be forestalled : only by killing all the principal : Huguenots in the city.
Yet, gradually, the handful of North African cities in Spanish hands were lost—Algiers In 1529, Tripoli in 1551, and Bugia In 1555.
The result was a near ' continuous fire against which the Takeda clan’s conventional cavalry and infantry were helpless.
Spain's efforts to suppress the ' Dutch Revolt (see 1572-73] foundered in 1575.
JUST AS PHILIP II’S ATTEMPTS TO REASSERT HIS AUTHORITY over the heretical Netherlands were derailed by his simultaneous need to confront the Ottomans in the Mediterranean, so the Ottomans’ attempts to confront the heretical Safavids in Persia were distracted by their conflicts with Spain.
The pause in the conflict after the fall of Tunis in 1574, confirmed by a peace treaty in 1580, freed both states to pursue their goals elsewhere.
The benefits for the Ottomans were immediate—a string of conquests in Georgia and Azerbaijan that, by the fall of Tabriz in 1585, saw both incorporated within their empire.
In August 1578, the king of Portugal, Sebastian, was killed at the Battle of Alcacer Quibir in northern Morocco.
One was to confirm Ahmad al-Mansur as the new sultan of an Ottoman-backed Morocco.
After the Pacification of Ghent (see 1576}, Philip II was forced to agree not just to pull out his troops but to restore traditional privileges across the provinces.
But on the question of religion, he remained adamant— Catholicism must be restored everywhere.
To the miseries ' of the Netherlands were added » the horrors of civil war.
The Ottoman rawhide : helmet with copper : gilt was so effective it : was widely imitated : In Europe in the : 17th century.
Songhayterritory ~~, beliefs today. commoners could not challenge in 1500 oe vee aes ; 2Ee7 Philip Il of Spain’s claim to his authority, while his Songhay territory yy Ze the Portuguese crown after the reorganization of the tax system in 1625 throne became vacant [see 1578-79] was made good in August 1580 by a combination of military force and bribery.
United Provinces—declared their : : avoid problems of inflation created ' by a paper currency and debased ' coinage.
With the Spanish king now technically deposed, a new throne, that of the Netherlands, was created and accepted by the Duke of Anjou , brother of Henry Ill of France.
Francis, Duke of Anjou : Foreign support—English or : French—was essential to defeat the : Spanish, so the Dutch Protestants : made the Duke of Anjou their ruler. : assertion that a legal king could 2 be legally overthrown would : have significant consequences.
It was introduced to simplify China's tax system and to entire Ming economy. and redistribution of land guaranteed the revenues needed to complete his conquests.
On February 24, 1582, Pope Gregory XIII (1502-85] decreed a revision to the Julian Calendar, introduced in 46BCE, which underestimated the length of every year by 11 minutes.
ENGLAND’S INTERVENTION IN THE DUTCH REVOLT (see 1572-73] was characterized by the Battle of Zutphen in September 1586—it was a comprehensive defeat of the combined Anglo-Dutch forces by the Spanish.
In a series of plundering voyages to the Caribbean, Drake had highlighted how Spain’s lucrative New World trade could be disrupted.
In April 1587, Elizabeth despatched him on a mission to Spain with a goal of further raiding and destruction.
Characteristically, she almost immediately changed her mind, but her message recalling Drake never reached him.
Catholic cousin, Mary, Queen of ' Scots, executed in 1587 as a : dangerous claimant to her throne. : Christianity in Japan thrived : when first introduced by the ' Portuguese in the mid-16th ' century.
By about 1580, there were an estimated 130,000 » Japanese Christians, most in and ' around Nagasaki.
It showed how outright military success was elusive, and that logistical difficulties confronted any long-range military operation.
Launched on May 30, 1588, the Armada was the victim of English seamanship, of lengthening lines of supply, and of the weather—the gale-wracked Spanish fleet was forced home in disarray.
Spanish hopes of exterminating Protestant heresies were decisively checked.
ELIZABETH | Elizabeth faced many problems on her accession to the English throne in 1558— religious division, economic hardship, and threats from Scotland, France, and Spain.
She overcame them with a combination of guile and intelligence and presided over a reinvention of England as a defiantly self-confident Protestant nation.
France, stabbed by a Dominican : monk, brought Henry of Navarre : to the throne and Spanish Armada ' plunged France into crisis.
N por 1 9 7 Metal turban helmet Spiked parrying shield Date unknown 18th century The warriors of early Mughal armies With its five spikes and central plate, this wore lightweight but effective turban Mughal device served as an elaborate and elbow helmets with nose and neck guards dangerously impressive weapon, as well Dastana forearm guard protector to deflect enemy arrows and blades. as vital protection for its bearer.
Date unknown Forearm guards (dastanas} were worn by Mughal warriors to shield limbs from glancing blows.
Solid weapons, like this mace, could crush enemy skulls, even through plate armor, and were used by Mughal foot soldiers. elaborate tip central plate ae THY, AND INTEGRATED SOCIETY For over two centuries , Mughal rulers See dominated most of India.
Through military might 2S carved in ivory and administrative prowess, they integrated Hindus ~~ ~~ and Muslims into a rich culture of imperial splendor. a With their roots in Mongol and Turkish cultures, seven generations of Mughal kings, beginning with Babur [r.26-30), blended Persian and Islamic Ivory priming powder horn military and artistic influences into India’s indigenous Hindu culture.
The Date unknown result was one of the most impressive medieval empires, which, at its height re sage ae an speeie eee 5 , commanded vast wealth, assimilated Hindus into its ruling elite, A aceon ee aca cca aa in Mughal courts.
This powder horn, expanded education, and provided patronage in the arts and literature. used on hunts, has an antelope shape.
Hunt painting 17th century Hunting and horsemanship were favorite pastimes of Mughal rulers, who created huge hunting parks.
Miniature painting, introduced as manuscript illustration, was most prized.
TESS NNN IES SS Sarpech Date unknown The extraordinary wealth of the Mughals was evident in their love of jeweled objects.
This sarpech, made of gold, emeralds, diamonds, rubies, and a pearl, adorned a royal turban. large ruby at center solid jade pestle spike can be used as weapon Mortar and pestle 17th century Jade could only be worked using diamond dust, so it was highly prized in Mughal society.
Se ee | Re a fea fica ~ ae ee a ae 5S EES Ae Mughal court painting 17th century The splendor of the Mughal court is clear from this painting of the emperor Jahan among his nobles, grouped in strict hierarchical order around the throne.
Jahan, fifth Mughal emperor MUGHAL EMPIRE Hansli necklace 18th century Cast in gold and heavily encrusted with precious stones, this rigid torque or necklace was known as a hansli, because it was designed to rest on the wearer's collarbone—or hansli in Urdu.
Talisman Date unknown Mughal craftsmen were famed for the intricacy of their work.
Though it was not the capital, from 1590 Hideyoshi based himself at Edo, where the feudal nobility, now entirely subservient to him, were required to spend every other year.
It proved a highly effective elaborate social structure was who had to pay heavy taxes. (see 1588-89] besieged Paris in May 1590.
The siege was broken in September by Spanish troops under the Duke of Parma.
The invasion involved a ' perilous four-month crossing of the Sahara by a fighting force of 4,000 men sustained by 8,000 ' camels.
Rit eel ‘Taek THE SEVEN YEAR WAR began in the spring of 1592 when Japanese forces mounted a sustained invasion of Korea.
Japanese land victories in Korea were matched by Korean naval victories—the heavily armed and protected Korean turtle ships proving decisive against Japan's progressively weakened fleets.
Chinese intervention late in the year tipped the balance against Japan.
In 1597, the aging Hideyoshi renewed the campaign, sending larger forces.
The result was a further defeat for Japan in 1598, but the savage fighting devastated Korea.
Rialto Bridge : The Rialto Bridge over the Grand : Canal in Venice was completed in : 1592.
In this Portuguese map of Mombasa, Fort Jesus is depicted bottom right.
THE OTTOMAN-HABSBURG FRONTIER, generally stable after the renewed Ottoman attempt on Vienna In 1529, was a key focus of Ottoman-Christian conflict.
A series of inconclusive campaigns followed In Hungary and the Balkans, with the nominal Ottoman vassals of Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia supporting the Habsburgs.
The net result of the eventual peace settlement—the Treaty of Zsitvatorok of 1606— was to leave the frontier in a state of simmering uncertainty.
Augustine, Florida, Father Diego Escobar de Zambrana baptized Maria, daughter of Juan Jimenez de la Cueva and Maria Melendez.
The event was recorded in the oldest public document in what would become the United States and Is the first authentic record of a child born to European settlers there.
Fort Jesus in Mombasa, East Africa was built at the command of Philip Il and completed in 1593.
It proved to be crucial to Portuguese endeavors in the Indian Ocean throughout the 17th century.
JJ Henry IV of France, 1593 Despite the perils of the venture, all four Dutch ships that set out for the East Indies in 1595 made it back safely to Amsterdam with their cargo in 1599.
THE FINAL CONVULSIONS OF THE FRENCH WARS OF RELIGION were played out after 1595.
Henry IV , by his conversion to Catholicism in 1593, succeeded in winning broad acceptance as king.
League, supported by Spain, while | demonstrating to the Huguenots : that, Catholic or not, he was no puppet of the Spanish monarchy.
Spanish-Catholic League force . in Burgundy was followed the following spring by a renewed Spanish offensive that saw the . capture of Calais and Amiens.
Anglo-Dutch ships Spanish ships ' The inevitable sieges by Henry © followed, and the capitulation of Amiens in September 1597 ' marked his final triumph.
ALTHOUGH THE BANNING OF CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN had been enforced only partially since 1587, in December 1596, certain that Spain and Portugal were using Christian penetration as a prelude to conquest, Toyotomi ordered the deaths of 26 Christians—six Franciscan missionaries and 20 Japanese.
On February 5, 1597, in Nagasaki, they were strapped to crosses and speared to death.
The uneasy compromise brokered by Henry IV in France after 1597 was symbolized by the Edict of Nantes of April 1598.
Under it, Protestants in France were granted the right to organize a quasi-independent state within France.
Not only could they practice their religion freely— other than in Paris—but the Crown guaranteed their security, paying them to garrison their towns.
Nothing if not pragmatic— and effective enough in the short term in ending the French Wars of Religion—inevitably it satisfied no one.
The Huguenots still felt themselves unequally treated compared to the Catholics, while the latter were horrified that the Huguenots should be tolerated at WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE William Shakespeare exerted more influence on English literature and European drama than any other writer.
Between April and August The Spanish lost 80 percent of the fleet anchored at Cadiz.
They set many of their ships on fire to deny Armada, the Dutch determined 2 to break into the spice trade.
Although theirs was still a Stone Age society—and would remain so until the arrival of Europeans and the introduction of metal—it was remarkably well adapted to the new environment.
Known as the Classic Maori phase, the culture was distinguished by elaborate wood s carving, precisely bil patterned bone tools and weapons, and substantial earthwork settlements.
The establishment, with royal mee ane tf) Se ih es yi \ J) Pa ; + n trading with Surat, a key center of Indian Ocean trade, in 1608.
Its navigators not only outflanked the Portuguese In the Indian Ocean—pioneering new routes deep into the Southern Ocean as a means of access to the East Indies—but, having reached their lucrative goals, they exploited them with a single-mindedness that left their predecessors floundering.
Although they remained two quite clearly separate countries, sharing only a common monarch, James did manage to drive through the repeal of mutually hostile laws.
Otherwise, the closest he came to the union he sought was an Anglo-Scots flag, the Union Jack, known for his preferred French already been King of Scotland, as | to which the medieval castle, with high, thin walls, was vulnerable.
So much so that many fortified towns were beyond the range of contemporary guns, and a blockade was the only practical means of taking them.
The death of Czar Boris Godunov in 1605 brought toa head a political crisis rapidly engulfing Russia, one heightened Ships of English goal.
Swedes, Russia came to terms : with Sweden in 1617 at the cost of ' giving up its access to the Baltic. In 1619, the Polish-Russian conflict was ended by Russia ' ceding substantial territories on : its western border.
Xe <O S st ~y < a A reconstruction of Jamestown, the first permanent English settlement in North America, established in 1607 on the James River in what is now Virginia.
After sailing through the Tuamotu Archipelago in February 1606, he reached the New Hebrides in May, but was swept out to sea by the trade winds and forced to return to New Spain.
The expedition had a second ship, under the command of Luis Vaez de Torres.
Continuing to the west, he discovered the strait that bears his name between New Guinea and Australia, sighting the continent in the process.
In the event, his discoveries, meticulously noted but never published, would not be followed up by Spain.
On May 4, 1607, the first permanent English settlement was established in North America.
Venetian gold ducat 16th century e ITALY This gold coin depicts the Doge of Venice receiving the city’s banner from a dominating St.
Lippershey’s device was crude, only magnifying by three times, and was soon exceeded by others.
But it was still a milestone in the development of scientific observation in 17thcentury Europe.
Since 1606, the Dutch had been trying to broker a truce with Spain to halt the ongoing wars of the Dutch Revolt.
River to present-day Albany, ' claiming the region for the Dutch. intended to do.
Both had been sparring for control of the duchy of JulichCleves in Germany, threatening a renewed pan-European religious conflict.
With Henry's death, both could now legitimately retire with no loss of face.
Less than a year after Hans Lippershey claimed to have invented a telescope, Galileo , working from no more than descriptions of ~ GALILEO Galileo Galilei, born in Pisa, was an Italian scientist who, despite obstruction from religious orthodoxy, revealed an entirely new, scientific understanding of the world.
The Church regarded his revelations as heresy but, reluctant to condemn the scientific pioneer outright, did its best to accommodate him.
IN 1604, KING JAMES I OF ENGLAND authorized a new English translation of the Bible.
However, it was felt that both contained minor inaccuracies and neither fully reflected the doctrinal authority and structure of the Church of England.
The new translation, published in 1611 as The Holy Bible, was the work of 47 scholars under the direction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft.
Though accepted relatively slowly by the Anglicans, by the 18th century it was widely regarded by all English-speaking Protestant churches as the definitive English-language Bible.
It was only when the revised edition was issued in the late 18th century that it became commonly referred 15 Lippershey’s device, had devised This explosive revelation was OXFORD his own.
It was with this basic instrument that, in January 1610, Galileo began to observe the ‘three fixed stars, invisible to the naked eye, that were next to the planet Jupiter.
King James Bible Several scholars from each institution translated the Bible from Greek, Hebrew, and Latin into English in 1604-08.
Denmark and Sweden at the : mouth of the Baltic—was a : central preoccupation in the : continuing Scandinavian ' struggle for supremacy in : the Baltic.
Dutch and England in particular ' supporting the Swedes once : a Danish victory threatened. : Future conflict was, in effect, ' merely postponed.
OVER THE WINTER OF 1609-10, : the fledging English colony at : Jamestown in Virginia endured : what was known as the Starving Time, a systematic attempt by the Powhatan Indians to starve the colony into submission.
Indians themselves cultivated tobacco but the native strain, Nicotiana rustica, was so harsh as : to be unsmokeable.
Its results were generally only to inflame religious passions and, by creating a Catholic underclass, to create tensions that still slumber today.
AS < Qo oo a oo oF ye > a The title page of Don Quixote, part one of w hich was published in 1605, and part two in 1615.
THE BRSTIMATED NUMBER OF EUNUCHS KMPLOYED BY THE MING DYNASTY IN CHINA IN STARK CONTRAST TO ENGLAND, where parliamentary authority would progressively increase throughout the 17th century, the influence of France's legislative assembly, the Estates-General withered almost entirely.
But it would not meet again until 1789, by which point France would be on the verge of revolution.
By 1615, China was grappling with financial crisis and social breakdown.
By 1624, Wei Zhongxian had ' ensured the execution of the leading Donglin academics.
In 1615, the Dutch cemented their 1609 claim to the region of present-day Albany by building Fort Nassau at the same site.
THE NUMBER OF BLUE CEILING TILES THAT GIVE THE BLUE MOSQUE rls NAME Since 1599, he had united other Manchu tribes in the Eight Banners military system.
Dutch expedition under Jakob le ' Maire and Willem Schouten found ' anew route through open water ' to the south, naming its southernmost island, Cape Horn.
Gorée Island, to the south of | Africa’s Cape Verde, was 2 purchased by the Dutch from its ' Portuguese owners in 1617.
The 1617 Treaty of Stolbovo 2 ended the war between Russia 2 and Sweden that had lasted seven ' years.
It was mostly confined to Germany, which by 1648 was a scene of wholesale destruction and slaughter.
Initially a religious conflict, Ferdinand’s quest to erase Protestantism from all his dominions became a Europe-wide fight for supremacy involving, at different points, every major European power.
On October 29, 1618, the English soldier and explorer Sir Walter Raleigh was executed by beheading at the Tower of London.
He had been one of the early English colonizers of Virginia, North America, but his failure to find the legendary South American city of El Dorado, as well as his attacking a Spanish settlement against the expressed wishes of King James |, had sealed his fate.
English privateers (stateAlthough it was in the 18th century that the Atlantic slave trade reached its peak, in the early 17th century it was developing rapidly.
Slaves were transported from a series of slave forts on the west coast of Africa to the burgeoning European colonial lands of the New World.
Male slaves were branded with irons on the Atlantic Ocean crossing, in which about 25 percent died.
The work of the English philosopher Francis Bacon was to have a lasting impact.
THE DUTCH, IN AGGRESSIVELY SEEKING to supplant the Portuguese in the East Indies, had first attempted to establish a trading post in Java in 1596.
From 1602, they also had to contend with English efforts to infiltrate themselves in the East Indies.
In 1619, the Dutch struck back decisively, ousting the English and their Javanese allies, and establishing themselves in Jayakarta, which they renamed Batavia.
Novum Organum, one of the : great books of philosophy, was : might have expected.
Thereafter, they scraped a desperate existence, dependent on uncertain reinforcement from England and their own meagre efforts.
The expiration in 1621 of the Twelve-Year Truce between Spain and the Dutch Republic in 1609 was, perhaps predictably, the signal for a further round of Spanish-Dutch conflict.
Both sides had increased their armies and navies in expectation of a resumption of the war.
Indies, were the only known : sources of nutmeg and mace, spices that commanded a huge ' premium in Europe.
Dutch, actively encouraged by the Governor-General of the East : Indies, Jan Pieterszoon Coen, set ' about the extermination ofthe | ' islanders.
Richelieu claimed that his goals were ‘to destroy the military power of the Habsburgs, to humble the great nobles [of France], and to raise the prestige of the House of Bourbon in Europe.
It was ambitious, and involved alliances with groups that 2 had little commitment to his program.
Eventually, the price of confronting enemies abroad and Protestants at home would be popular revolt in France against the financial and military burdens imposed by him.
Huguenot military power at home ' (see 1597-98] was a permanent 2 threat to France's stability, but that the persecution of Protestant worship would lead to last-ditch : resistance at home and imperil : France's alliances with foreign 2 Protestant powers, on which its : anti-Habsburg strategy rested. : In 1625, the already tangled ' conflicts of the unfolding Thirty Years’ War became even more » complex.
Dutch, taking Breda after an : 11-month siege, while France, : whose policy was now being directed by the hawkish Richelieu, ' became covertly involved in ' supporting an anti-Habsburg struggle in northern Italy. : This was an attempt by Richelieu to sever the Spanish Road, the : tenuous but vital link between Habsburg Italy and the : Netherlands.
ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS EVER TRANSACTIONS occurred on May 26, 1626 when Peter Minuit, director-general of the Dutch West India Company's New Netherlands settlement, bought Manhattan island—site of Fort Amsterdam since 1625—from its American Indian inhabitants.
Always strapped for money, , armies took funding into their own hands and imposed taxes directly on the peasants and the towns.
Gathering pace in the early 17th century, the Roman High Baroque was a strong Catholic response to the Protestant Reformation, and reasserted classical Renaissance architecture.
AFTER MORE THAN A YEAR, THE SIEGE OF LA ROCHELLE, the strongest Protestant enclave in France, ended in October 1628 with defeat for the Huguenots.
The siege was Richelieu’s response to lingering hopes of Huguenot opposition to the French Crown, and was designed to both crush Huguenot resistance and dismantle its still formidable military.
Although Richelieu acknowledged their right to religious toleration, he made sure they could mount no further threat to the Crown.
The publication in 1628 of On the Motion of the Heart and Blood, by royal physician William Harvey , marked one of the major discoveries of the 17th century.
It explained both the circulation of the blood and the functioning of the heart, by using observation and experimentation.
Chief minister of France, Cardinal ' Richelieu, inspects the formidable : sea wall defenses of La Rochelle, ' during the siege of 1628. emperor in 1628.
Were SF ts NW — A way Polofcd woodcut depicting the siege yr ERG by the Holy Romar Empire.
It was still essentially a religious war—one that the Catholic Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II was clearly winning.
Exploiting this, Sweden's Lutheran king, Gustavus Adolphus , presented himself as the savior of the Lutheran princes of north Germany.
Having spent the previous 19 years fighting the Russians, Poles, and Danes for control of the Baltic, he now hoped to dominate its German coast too.
Portrait of Marie de Medici, the : second wife of King Henry IV of : France, who attempted to displace : Cardinal Richelieu in 1630.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO DIED IN THE DECCAN FAMINE, 1630-32 ANXIOUS TO RECOVER ITS LOSSES TO POLAND-LITHUANIA under the Treaty of Deulino of 1619, and exploiting the death of the Polish king, Sigismund III Vasa, Russia besieged Smolensk in October 1632.
Polish forces were unable to attempt a lifting of the siege for almost a year.
Battle of Lutzen, near Leipzig, : might then have confirmed 2 Swedish territorial ambitions in : Germany had King Gustavus Adolphus not been killed in the : battle.
Galileo Galilei was 2 called before the Roman : Inquisition of the Catholic 6,000 6,800 : Church.
THE DEFEAT AT LUTZEN WAS one of the last times that Albrecht Wallenstein led an Imperial army.
Although generally successful, he was distrusted by almost everyone and was believed to be negotiating a separate peace.
He was charged with treason by Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II, but in February 1634 he was murdered by some of his own officers, with the tacit approval of Ferdinand.
Yet, with the Swedes having failed to follow up their victory at Lutzen, the initiative returned to the Imperial Battle of Nordlingen Fought in southern Germany, this battle resulted in a crushing victory for the Habsburgs—but it was not a conclusive end to the war. gh s Ty # ‘ ipa.
Swedes on the verge of pulling out : of Germany, the French now took : the field themselves.
Swedish armies progressively ravaged Germany, the Swedes : gradually reversing their previous losses, so Germany was ' devastated.
ETHIOPIAN EMPEROR since 1632, Fasilides founded a permanent imperial capital at Gondar in 1636.
The buildings he constructed there included the Fasil Ghebbi, a fortress complex that became home to Ethiopia’s emperors until the 18th century.
Descartes , an advocate of rationalism, produced : Discours de la Méthode in 1637.
THE RELATIVE PRICE OF TULIP BULBS COMPARED TO THE ANNUAL INCOME OF A SKILLED DUTCH CRAFTSMAN and then suddenly nose-dived, allegedly ruining many investors.
A luxury item, they were seen as a safe haven for investment in an uncertain time.
Although Tulip Mania prices are difficult to be certain about, and have been disputed, anecdotal evidence suggests significant highs.
It granted all of Mesopotamia (modern Iraq} to the Ottomans, while handing the city of Yerevan [in present-day Armenia) to the Safavid Persians.
The problems that would eventually lead to the execution of Charles I of England in 1649 stemmed from the king's high-handed conviction that he could always impose himself on his kingdoms.
This was not exclusively a matter of royal versus parliamentary authority.
For their part, Scotland's Kirk elders, much like their Puritan counterparts In England, considered any attempt to impose Anglican religious uniformity little better than papism.
Pedro Teixeira’s : Amazon expedition : Teixeira’s expedition was immense : and expensive.
Pedro Teixeira (d.41] achieved : a remarkable double first in : becoming the first person to make the return journey of the entire : length of the Amazon River, reaching Belém, at the river's mouth, more than two years after he had set out.
Xe of ; ww ox vor’ Ze wy ae An illustration of Malacca, which was taken from the Portuguese by the Dutch in 1641.
FOLLOWING A SCOTTISH INVASION OF ENGLAND IN 1639, in April 1640 Charles | recalled the parliament he had dismissed 11 years earlier.
Determined not to submit to its lists of grievances, he dismissed it, but a second Invasion in August forced a recall.
In December 1641, Parliament presented a Grand Remonstrance, an accusation of royal abuses of power.
The king responded, in January 1642, with an attempt to arrest his parliamentary opponents.
Life dancing to music Poussin’s A Dance to the Music of Time shows four dancing figures representing poverty, labor, wealth, and pleasure in a perpetual cycle.
By 1640, French painter Nicolas Poussin completed A ' Dance to the Music of Time, a key work of the era.
THE COURSE, NOT TO MENTION THE CAUSES, of the English Civil War that began in August 1642 was never Clear cut.
It pitted a king bent on absolutism against a Parliament determined not so much to overthrow the monarchy as to reassert its claim to shared sovereignty in the government of the kingdom.
As the opening battles were fought, Charles | proved himself a surprisingly obstinate and able war leader.
However, he was soon to become undone, not just by his compulsive deviousness but by the fact that he found himself confronting increasingly assertive and better organized Parliamentarian forces.
These would be largely dominated by the formidably imposing figure of Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658], a Puritan, East-Anglian country squire and Member of Parliament.
Eleven years after the village of Breitenfeld, in Saxony, had seen King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden defeat a Holy Roman Empire army , the Second Battle of Breitenfeld in October 1642 saw another decisive victory for Sweden in the Thirty Years’ War.
Rocroi marked the , | , end of its dreams of European imperial dominance.
Torricelli’s barometer : In this engraving, Torricelli : demonstrates the existence of : atmospheric pressure through the : use of mercury-filled tubes.
In May, the Manchus, allying with a remnant Ming force, crushed Li's army at the Battle of Shanhai Pass.
By the autumn, the first Manchu Qing emperor of China, the six-year-old Shunzhi Emperor , had been installed in Beijing.
Naseby in June 1645, ' ultimate victory was . virtually guaranteed » when the main army : of Charles | was ' annihilated by Parliament's newly ' formed New Model Army.
Only some areas of the vast empire were governed directly by the Manchu or settled by the Chinese.
Pr, ee wat, Carisbrooke Castle, on the Isle of Wight, England, was where Charles | was —_T imprisoned for 14 months, from 1647, after his defeat in the English Civil War.
The Potala Palace, seen atop the : Marpo Ri hillin this view from the : south, rises more than 1,000 ft : (300 m] above the valley floor. ' emphasized the ultimately ' superior resources of the Parliamentary cause. : From about 1645, the Northern , brought about by abnormally cold winters.
On May 26, 1647, the Massachusetts Bay Colony banned Jesuit priests from the colony.
Founded as a staunchly Puritan enclave, the colonists loathed the Jesuits as a sinister manifestation of popery.
Also, increasingly alarmed by the French Jesuit missionaries in Canada, who had converted many Huron and Algonquin American Indians, they were determined that a movement “subversive to society” should have no m place in the new colony.
As prehistoric humans skills advanced, clubs and stone hand-axes gave way to carefully crafted wooden spears used to hunt animals or impale fish.
Even more effective weapons married wooden shafts with razor-sharp flint blades to form axes, Like arms and body armor, shields—a type of “accessory armor’ —could be functional, decorative, or both.
During the medieval period in Europe, when knights held high status in society, shields were often embellished with elaborate scenes of courtly devotion or prowess in battle.
Wooden spear 5500-3300 BCE Flint arrowheads The wooden bow combined ‘ with arrowheads made from sharpened flint proves a deadly combination, allowing users to strike their victims from a safe distance.
Soft, easily worked metals such as copper replaced flint, followed by stronger, sharper, and longer Bronze Age and Iron Age swords, daggers, javelins, and battle-axes.
Until the advent of firearms, the history of handheld weapons Is one of variations on a theme, culminating in the sophisticated forging processes of Japan’s samurai swords, which at their height in the 14th-16th centuries wrapped Super-sharp steel around a flexible iron core.
Plated helmets, breastplates, and wooden shields were used by classical Greek and Roman armies, but elsewhere, ordinary soldiers relied on padding, leather, and luck—a situation that changed little in Europe until chain mail was perfected in 11th-century France.
Full suits of armor were costly, so they were also used as status symbols.
Early armies use plated helmets, but most soldiers rely on leather caps.
Attic helmet 1400 BCE Suit armor develops Plated body armor is an early invention, but it is expensive and not always practical for movement in battle.
Bronze ax Mycenaean armor 5 te i two sections of skull plate join at comb French 16th-century embossed helmet Armor reached its greatest decorative heights during the Renaissance.
Early Chinese crossbow 3rd-4th centuries Steel blades Adding carbon to iron produces steel, which allows bladed weapons to be mass-produced.
A FULL SUIT OF EUROPEAN 16THCENTURY TOURNAMENT ARMOR neck guard _ a 1939-1945 Wheel-lock : pistol Flak jackets Based on the 15th-17th centuries Same design as the cuirass, World War Il flak jackets Firearms developed With the invention of guns, body armor than armor plate, chain mail worn over a gambeson [padded jacket) saves lives. to protect the hand, and marks the first big change to sword design since Roman times.
Gloves now have jointed fingers, while shoulder plates bring freer movement and less exposure. rotating cylinder, meant that multiple shots could be fired before reloading.
Paris was ' taken, the royal family fled, and Mazarin was : twice forced into exile.
War in Germany was brought to a close with a series of treaties collectively known as the Treaty : of Westphalia.
France was still at war with Spain [as it would be withdraw its troops.
Among the This depiction of the execution of King Charles | of England outside the Banqueting House, in London, was painted by English artist John Weesop.
His conviction by the High Court of Justice as “tyrant, traitor, and murderer’ was carried by a vote of 68 to 67.
In reality, there Is little doubt that since the triumph of the parliamentary New Model Army, dominated by Oliver Cromwell, his death became a possible outcome to the crisis.
The awkward question was whether one form of tyranny was being swapped for another.
The royalists had an obvious figure to rally round, Charles's elder son, also called Charles.
One of the foundations of Western political philosophy appeared in 1651 when Thomas Hobbes published Leviathan. |t argued for the absolutism of a sovereign authority.
It was an early example of social contract theory [individuals in society are united by mutual consent} and was profoundly influential.
In 1648, the Khmelnytsky Uprising saw a Cossack revolt against the rule of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in the Ukraine, which had been awarded to Poland under the Treaty of Lublin of 1589.
The uprising climaxed in 1651 with the Battle of Berestechko, the largest single battle of the 17th century.
However, the ultimate effect of the struggle was a weakening of the Commonwealth, which was already wracked by numerous internal disputes among its querulous nobles.
The Coronation of Louis XIV, a tapestry fr oma painting by Charles Le Brun, court artist to Louis XIV, shows the young Louis about to receive his crown.
ONE OF THE WORLD'S ICONIC structures, the Taj Mahal, in Agra, India, was completed in 1653 after 19 years.
A mausoleum built by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his third wife, Mumtaz Mahal, it combined Indian, Persian, and Islamic styles of architecture.
Various types of government for the new republic had previously been tried, including military rule, while parliaments were formed and dissolved, generally by the irascible Cromwell, with great rapidity.
Inevitable that the vacuum could be filled only by the restoration of ' the actual king-in-waiting, the ' future Charles Il.
Khmelnytsky Uprising, the partial : dismemberment of the Polish' Lithuanian Commonwealth by ' neighbors eager for territorial ' gains became inevitable.
Years’ War, the following year Sweden, too, invaded the country. : The most enduring consequence ' of this calamitous period was not : merely Poland's loss of the Ukraine to Russia under the ' Treaty of Andrusovo in 1667; rather, that Orthodox Russia was immensely boosted, and its czars : claims to rule “all the Russias” : made tangible. : On June 7, 1654, the 15-year-old : Louis XIV was crowned king of : France.
In two days, fed by relentless winds, it destroyed almost 70 percent of the city, consuming the paper and wooden buildings and killing around 100,000 people.
Although an offshoot of the First Northern War, the SwedishDanish Wars of 1657-58 and 1658-60 developed into a largely separate conflict over control of the Baltic when, in June 1657, Denmark joined the coalition confronting Sweden in Poland.
Sweden had made consistent gains at Denmark’s expense since the mid-16th century; the prize, control of The Sound—the strategically and economically vital entrance to the Baltic—still under Danish control in 1657.
In the winter of 1657-58, Charles X of Sweden outflanked the Danes, marching his troops into Denmark and then, in February, across the frozen Baltic to Copenhagen itself.
The Treaty of Roskilde in 1658 confirmed Sweden's territorial dominance.
The second war, if less favorable to Sweden, still underlined Sweden’s Baltic superiority.
With the Ottoman Empire now reinvigorated by Grand Vizier Koprulu Mehmed, in late 1657 its fleet captured the Aegean islands of Lemnos and Tenedos from the Venetians.
The islands, which dominated the approaches to the Dardanelles, had been used by the Venetians to blockade Constantinople, the Ottoman capital.
It ended two years of infighting between him and his brothers for their father, Shah Jahan’s, throne—this despite Shah Jahan still being alive.
Yet the near continuous warfare of his 49-year reign, In which immense i \ Conqueror of the World This portrait of the Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb |, seen here with his courtiers, is attributed to the Indian artist Bhawani Das.
France, on June 14, 1658 a ' combined Anglo-French force : defeated the Spanish.
Franco-Spanish War that had : begun in 1635, and as such the : last battle of the Thirty Years’ War.
English, to steal whatever advantage, commercial or ' territorial, they could over Spain, : hence the pragmatic alliance between Oliver Cromwell's : Puritan England with Louis XIV’s : Catholic France.
Today, it 2 constitutes the oldest continuous 2 measurement of temperatures ' in the world.
With these words diarist John Evelyn recorded the overwhelming reception accorded Charles II in London in May 1660 on his restoration as king of England.
By any measure, Charles's restoration was a triumphant vindication of the principles of kingship, as well as of the contradictory limitations of Oliver Cromwell's republican experiment.
Worldly, Knowing, and, at heart, lazy, Charles was always ready to compromise with his parliamentary opponents.
That said, his weakness for pleasureseeking combined with his instinctive sympathy for Catholicism, especially when funded by Louis XIV in France, highlighted a still unresolved political crisis.
France was divided made him : aware of the need to develop a : style of personal assertiveness ' and grandeur.
FOR ALMOST FOUR DECADES the Dutch East India Company had controlled western Formosa , with its trading base Fort Zeelandia at its heart.
Hostile to this alien presence, the Chinese Ming dynasty besieged the fort, which was inadequately supplied by water, and captured it in February 1662.
The pace of scientific investigation in the 17th century led Europe's scientists to share ideas, and then to form bodies devoted to a better understanding of science.
In 1662, the Royal Society, the world’s oldest such scientific body, was founded in London.
That it had royal approval showed how both the practical application of science and the pursuit of pure knowledge had become of interest to the state.
I aa Ln | L rs The people of New Amsterdam plead with its director-general, Peter Stuyvesant, not to resist the English warships gathering in the harbor.
NUMEROUS ENGLISH RAIDS on Dutch shipping and trading posts in this year were the result of an English desire to win as much Dutch trade as possible.
The most successful of these took place on August 27, when a small English fleet arrived at New Amsterdam, the capital of the Dutch North American colony of New Netherland, and demanded its surrender.
Although the Ottomans gained favorable peace terms, ' their invasion was curtailed.
Adolf Ehrhardt, shows an attack by — : the Habsburg cavalry in the defeat of : the Ottomans at St.
Micrographia, by English natural philosopher and polymath Robert Hooke , was the first work under the patronage of the Royal Society.
It was not merely the first time that those other than a closed circle of specialists had been made aware of the remarkable world revealed by microscopes.
His drawings of an ant, louse, and flea, lovingly detailed and precisely executed, sparked particular astonishment at the complexity of this hitherto unsuspected microworld.
Robert Hooke’s : 1665 publication, : Micrographia, : shows a detailed : illustration of : anant.
THE BIGGEST ENGAGEMENT OF THE SECOND ANGLO-DUTCH WAR, which had begun in 1665, the Four Days’ Battle was an English attempt to destroy the Dutch fleet before it could grow to challenge them.
However, the English suffered such losses that it handed the initiative to the Dutch.
Disaster then followed for England in June 1667 after a daring Dutch raid on the Medway River, in the Thames estuary.
As the Great Plague ended, a new disaster overtook London, the Great Fire, which burned from September 2 to 5.
London was still a medieval city, filthy and unplanned, with no great Spaces and few public buildings of note.
The City, which was the commercial heart, was especially overcrowded and unsanitary.
As an arm of the state it was also : interested in discoveries that could enrich its country, such as : in agriculture and armaments.
THE TREATY OF ANDRUSOVO in January 1667 ended the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth's calamitous war with Russia that had begun In 1654.
It also climaxed The Deluge—its dramatic decline above allin the face of Russian expansion.
Russia, granted Smolensk and present-day Belarus, could for the first time claim to have unified the Slavic peoples of the region.
The completion in 1667 of the Piazza San Pietro, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini , saw Baroque Rome.
Many of Rome's public spaces were ambitiously rebuilt by a series of architects to make them deliberately imposing, and worthy to be at the center of the Catholic Church.
The War of Devolution began in continuing claims to the Spanish Netherlands.
It saw France take some Habsburg cities in Flanders, as well as Franche-Comté to its east.
England, Sweden, and the Dutch Republic forced the isolated Louis : to return most of his gains by the the high point of urban planning in | 1668 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.
Lost, by English poet John Milton : , gave the English ' language one of its greatest : literary achievements.
Siege of Lille : Louis XIV directs French forces at : Lille during the War of Devolution.
THE PORTUGUESE TRADING POST AT BOMBAY had passed to the English Crown in 1662 as part of the dowry of Catherine of Braganza, Charles Il’s Portuguese wife.
In 1668, the king leased it to the East India Company for an annual rent of £10, making it the Company's third trading post in India after those at Surat and Madras.
With Bombay Castle completed in 1675, from 1687 it became the focus of all the Company's trading in India, resisting attempts to storm it by the Mughals and the Dutch.
In 1668, the Welsh privateer (state-sponsored raider] Henry Morgan, famous for his attacks on Spanish settlements in the Caribbean, succeeded in one of the most daring assaults ever when his ships captured the well-protected Spanish trading city of Porto Bello, in Panama.
It won him both great wealth and further English support for his buccaneering endeavors.
Just as Philip Il’s seizure of the Portuguese crown in 1580 was a sign of Spanish power, so its recognition of Portuguese independence in 1668 under the Treaty of Lisbon, which confirmed the House of Braganza as rulers of Portugal, was evidence of its decline.
From 1640, Portugal had been in open revolt against Spain, and in June 1665 at the Battle of Montes Claros a combined Anglo-Portuguese force inflicted a crushing defeat on them.
JJ Attributed to Dom Perignon, while tasting champagne, 1670 Portuguese glazed tiles decorate the Sao Miguel Fortress in Luanda, a key military strongpoint in the colonization of Angola in the later 17th century.
ONE OF THE REASONS GIVEN FOR THE DISINTEGRATION of the Mughal Empire after the death of Aurangzeb in 1707 has been his supposed religious persecution of Hindus and other minorities.
Where his predessor Akbar | had pursued an active policy of religious toleration as the most effective means of controlling his Hindu vassals, Aurangzeb— himself a Sunni Muslim—was said to have systematically destroyed Hindu temples.
In addition, he banned the use of music, central to Hindu practice, issuing a decree, perhaps in 1669, to this effect.
He also had drawn up an exhaustive digest of Muslim law, the Fatawa-eAlamgri, said to have been rigorously imposed.
In fact, the number of Hindu temples said to have been destroyed varies improbably from 80 to 60,000.
That Aurangzeb was strongly anti-Christian, though, seems certain to have been true.
They had learned that the best furs came from the Cree territory to the north of Lake Superior.
Easier to reach via Hudson Bay rather south, they proposed a base there.
The Hudson's Bay Company would become one of the great commercial enterprises of England, the basis of its claim to Canada, and source of regional rivalry with France.
The claim that in 1670 Dom Pérignon , a monk at the Benedictine Abbey of Hautvillers, in Champagne in northeast France, invented the sparkling wine of that name, is largely discounted today.
Stepan Razin, the Cossack leader : who rose up against the nobility and : the czar’s bureaucracy, is seen here : on the Volga River, South Russia. : he was devoted to eliminating the : bubbles such wines produced, as : the pressure they built up in the ' bottles tended to explode them.
IN 1671, PORTUGAL ENDED THE INDEPENDENCE of the kingdom of Ndongo, in what is today Angola.
A Portuguese colony had largely dominated the Ndongo since the 16th century, but a rebellion by their king, Philip, in 1671, saw Portuguese troops capture the capital and take control of its entire territory.
Just as fears of Spanish dominance in Europe had allied France, England, and the Dutch Republic, so French dominance after 1659 saw anti-French alliances throw Spain and the Dutch Republic together.
While the French would accompany the American Indians on fur-trapping expeditions, the English, and the Dutch before them, usually took delivery of furs from the Indians at their trading posts.
THE EXTENSIVE WATERWAYS OF North America provided a ready-made means of exploring its interior.
They turned back for fear of arousing Spanish hostility but discovered the Missouri and Ohio rivers, as well as confirming that the river led to the Gulf and not the Pacific.
English exploration inland from their scattered coastal settlements was much more hesitant, rarely coordinated, and additionally blocked by the Appalachian mountain chain.
For example, It was after spending a year with a group of Tomahitan Indians in present-day Georgia that Gabriel Arthur traveled with them across the Cumberland Gap, unwittingly discovering what in the 18th century would be the principal route to Kentucky and the west.
FOLLOWING THEIR TAKEOVER OF CHINA WITH THE COLLAPSE of the Ming dynasty in 1644, the Qing coopted some of the more powerful Ming generals, making them regional governors and allowing them considerable latitude in their rule over what became almost independent territories.
It was felt that if they enriched themselves—as they did on a prodigious scale—the less likely it was that they would revolt.
The risk was that their progressively greater revenues would be matched by greater pretensions to rule China.
In 1674, the Revolt of the Three Feudatories broke out across southern China in those provinces controlled by the three most prominent rebels, Wu Sangul, Shang Kexi Gungdong, and Geng Jingzhong, joined by lesser Ming governors.
IN 1675, MUGHAL EMPEROR AURANGZEB ORDERED THE EXECUTION of Tegh Bahadur, ninth guru of the Sikhs, after he had refused to convert to Islam.
It would be several years later that, under Singh's leadership, the Sikhs would pose a growing military threat to Mughal rule, and contribute significantly to its collapse.
However, the pattern of religious opposition to the Mughals was already well established in many parts of India, most obviously in the Western Ghats, where Shivaji had declared the Maratha Empire.
On June 18, 1675, a combined Prussian and Brandenburg army, led by Frederick William |, Elector of Brandenburg ], met and defeated a Swedish army, led by Count von Wrangel, near Fehrbellin, in Brandenburg.
This relatively insignificant battle in the Scanian War, itself a by-product of the Franco—Dutch War, nonetheless marked a crucial moment in Sweden's long struggle to impose itself as the dominant Baltic power.
Defeat at the hands of an otherwise relatively minor German state dealt the Swedes a lasting blow.
A 19th-century image of the Asante, who dominated West Africa from the 1680s.
Henry's intent ‘| vast dome and spire, with details to realize the \ | pragmatic reasons rather than had been to lift the city from medieval slum to a capital worthy of the first power of Europe—a city to rival Rome for its Imposing public buildings and commanding spaces.
The Louvre Palace, predictably, was significantly enlarged and remodeled, notably the east wing, whose stately facade encapsulated the French taste for Classicism at its most austere and precise.
But the building that most memorably reflects Louis's contribution to Paris is Les Invalides, or more properly L’Hotel National des Invalides.
Designed by Liberal Bruant , Les Invalides was conceived on an grand scale, with vast formal gardens ' picked out in gold.
Racine, Pierre Corneille (1606: 84), and Moliére thrived : under royal patronage, captivating : court audiences in different ways.
There is doubt as to which European can claim to have ' seen the falls first.
French Franciscan missionary : Louis Hennepin , : exploring at the request of King Louis XIV, is generally credited : with their discovery, in 1677. gue eles” y aU NTA Religious work This is the frontispiece from the : third edition of John Bunyan’s The : Pilgrim’s Progress, a hugely : influential work in the 17th century. : One of literature’s most significant religious works was published in February 1678.
The underlying principle of the Act, which is incorporated into the American Constitution, remains fundamental to most Anglo-Saxon legal systems as an ultimate guarantee of individual liberty.
In August 1680, the Pueblo people of the colony of New Mexico rose against the Spanish occupiers and drove them from the area for 12 years.
The Asante kingdom, founded : in about 1680, was formed from : the Akan, who dominated West ' Africa.
France to extend itself than the : construction of the Canal du : Midi, a navigable inland waterway ' that stretched between the | Mediterranean Sea and the ' Atlantic Ocean.
The Pueblo of southwest North America, so called by the Spanish for their pueblos, or villages, were famed for their sophisticated and elaborate pottery.
It is characterized by a light background on which are painted stylized animals and repeated abstract patterns In ocher, black, and gray coloring.
THE 1682 CORONATION OF nine-year-old Peter the Great as czar of Russia brought to a close this vast nation’s vague, imperial influence as a semipower on the margins of Europe.
Peter's childhood was scarred by revolt, and it left him determined to punish his internal enemies and reshape Russia as a western European power.
His version of Versailles, recreated on the edge of the Baltic, did not amount to much more than a statement of intent, but by the end of his reign Russia was a massive power-inwaiting, looming over Europe.
York Facto P vast areas of North the Mississippi, confirming that : NORTH : L | America claimed by these territories contained neither | AM ERI CA Cre & ican France, as wellas the easily exploited wealthy natives ee RP pays pen Sere areas under Spanish nor obvious sources of gold, Fae and British control in Robert de La Salle a veteran of North American & 2é ATLANTIC exploration, determined to follow Ss Se P OCEAN the river to its mouth.
As with the previous Ottoman attempt on the city in 1529, this was a direct assault on the Christian West.
But whereas 1529 had been the climax of a series of conquests that had seen the Ottomans sweep across Hungary, the 1683 Ottoman assault was a frantic final attempt to regain former glories in the face of internal weakness.
Confronted with renewed resistance, the siege was broken in September at Kahlenberg by a combined Imperial-Polish force led by the Polish king, Jan III Sobieski.
League of the Holy Roman Empire, Poland, and Venice, formed in 1684 under papal : authority, driving them south ' across the Balkans.
Taiwan's Tunging kingdom, a supporter of China's ousted Ming, ' had supported military assaults ' against the Qing since 16461.
Maunder Minimum, which had : begun in 1645 as a result of reduced sunspot activity, had by Thames Frost Fair, 1683-84 Frost fairs were a regular feature on the Thames River, in London, during the winters of the Little Ice Age, with tents and coaches on the Ice. —— P ————— — Pd as.
THE EDICT OF NANTES, AGREED by Henry IV in 1598, was essential to ending the French Wars of Religion.
Of necessity, it was a compromise, and it saw France's substantial Protestant Huguenot minority granted religious toleration in return for accepting Henry as king.
In October 1685, with the Edict of Fontainebleau, Louis XIV revoked it.
There was practically no European state that permitted religious toleration.
In THE NUMBER OF HUGUENOTS 'T WAS CLAIMED FLED FRANCE AFTER LOUIS XIV ISSUED THE EDICT OF FONTAINEBLEAU religion, and that religion was Roman Catholicism.
The huge numbers of Huguenots who fled the country were among the most industrious In France, and they were eagerly embraced by those countries to which they emigrated, chiefly England, the Dutch Republic, and Prussia.
Charles | and younger brother of : Charles Il, brought a curious : incompetence to a brief : occupation of the English and ' Scottish thrones.
This Dutch painting shows William III's fleet departing the Netherlands for England at the start of the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
The next month, William III of Orange landed in England with an army of 15,000.
These two events provoked a kind of volcanic eruption in European political history.
Whereas Louis's invasion, almost immediately bogged down in winter mud, eventually led to an eclipse of French power in the face of a Europe united in opposition to him (see 1685-864], within three months William III had become not just the joint monarch of England [with his wife, Mary] but the leader of the pan-European, anti-French Protestant alliance.
ISAAC NEWTON In 1687, the English physicist Isaac Newton published the universal law of gravitation, one of the most remarkable of all scientific discoveries.
Glorious Revolution of 1688, was : a triumph of Parliamentary authority, and England would be : immeasurably strengthened.
WHEN CONFRONTED WITH THE INVASION OF WILLIAM III IN 1688, James II of England abandoned an army he sent to confront William and fled to Louis XIV’s France.
Charles II had been happy to be financed by Louis XIV, but he had disguised the fact.
In March 1689, he landed with a French-financed army in Ireland, and attracting substantial Catholic support briefly threatened the new Dutch Protestant settlement.
Henceforward, the Stuart Jacobite claim to its thrones in Britain (see | 1715 and 1745) would complicate French diplomacy, and seem unlikely to change political reality.
His son, Mehmed II , extended Ottoman rule across the Balkans and seized Constantinople in a blaze of conquest.
Under Selim | , the Safavids were contained at FORMIDABLE OPPONENTS Christian—Balkan force was defeated.
The most feared troops, the janissaries, from the conquered peoples of the Balkans, converted to Islam.
The Ottoman state began as a small frontier principality preying on Christian Byzantium.
Suleiman the Magnificent (r.20-66] expanded Ottoman territories deep into Hungary and almost as far as the Atlantic.
Enormously rich, technologically advanced, and buoyed by its leadership of the Muslim world, Ottoman power seemed irresistible.
The empire's decline after the failure of the siege of Vienna in 1683 was the result less of internal weakness than of the growing strength of its European opponents.
Size of the Ottoman Empire By the turn of the 20th century, the 2 MILLION SQ MILES 0.
MILLION SQ MILES shrunk to a third of | invading hly trained were recruited centuries earlier.
Mamluk Egypt, conquered in 1517, and Safavid Persia, an equally dynamic and sophisticated state.
Greece, Serbia, Romania, and Montenegro were now independent, and other European powers had taken over North Africa and the Black Sea.
TERROR OF THE Attributed to a European ambassador 1600 EUROPE Black Sea mS ie.
Turkey was reduced to its Anatolian heartlands, sparking nationalist conflict with Greece and Armenia.
THE ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY had been a presence in Bengal since the early 17th century.
Seeking greater security for their trade, a new base, Fort William, named after William III, was established in 1690 in what is now Calcutta.
The fort, continually enlarged and improved, would be critical to the later British dominance in India.
They made many ALTHOUGH THE NINE YEARS’ WAR had quickly settled in 1688 into a stalemate on land that would last to 1697, at sea the Grand Alliance enjoyed a clear superiority over France.
Trials for witchcraft were of the world came through experience of it, and that the basis of this understanding was reasoned, empirical (based on observation) thought.
James Il at the Battle of the 2 Boyne, in Ireland, was decisive in maintaining the Protestant ' supremacy that had been : established there by the Glorious : Revolution of 1688.
Of Salem remains hard to explain. | converts, and in 1692 the Kangxi : Emperor issued an edict of : toleration of Christianity.
At 11:43am on June 7, 1692, a catastrophic earthquake struck Port Royal, capital of the English colony of Jamaica, and one of the most important ports in the Caribbean, as well as a legendary base for pirates.
With the subsequent tsunami and outbreaks of disease, the death toll was about 5,000.
In Salem, Massachusetts, in late 1691, young girls started having fits and hallucinations, citing demonic possession.
The forces of the Grand Alliance, led by William III of England, gather outside Namur, where a French garrison is besieged.
IF SOUTHERN EUROPE had been spared the , worst of the Little Ice Age (see 1683-84], the eruption on January 11, 1693 of Mount Etna, in Sicily, proved a cruel reminder of the power of nature.
The eruption set off an earthquake that devastated Sicily and large areas of southern Italy and Malta.
About 60,000 were killed in Sicily alone, and thousands of square miles became uninhabitable due to lava flows and tsunamis.
For several years after the summer of 1693, a series of famines swept western Europe.
These were among the most calamitous consequences of the Little Ice Age, with bitter winters giving way to dismal, rain-soaked summers, and stunted crops rotting in sodden fields.
Even in years of relative plenty, the vast majority of Europe’s peasants, themselves the overwhelming majority of the continent's population, had a subsistence existence at best, with root vegetables, bread, and oatmeal as their staple diet.
In the face of these near Biblical visitations of mass misery, there seemed to be no answer.
Later ' Dutch settlers there called it a 2 “dodaars,” which was a reference ' to what they saw as the knot of tails at its rear.
By perhaps 1693, the ' dodo, a flightless bird that was ' related to the pigeon, had become ' extinct.
Sees 0” ye oe 0 NY) \e oo 3” e om IN JULY 1694, ENGLAND FOUND A NOVEL SOLUTION to the problem of a lack of funds that had plagued | the combatants of the Nine Years War.
The Bank of England served both Crown and government, and was closely modeled on the Bank of Amsterdam, founded in 1609.
A private venture , it immediately loaned the government £1. million—raised by its investors in 12 days—at an annual interest rate of 8 percent and for an annual service charge of £4,000, in return for the right to print bank notes.
It also created a National Debt, but at the same time allowed England not merely to finance its own part in the war but to finance its allies.
The bank was possibly the most significant factor in Britain's subsequent emergence on the world stage.
European colonialism in the 17th and 18th centuries had the simple goal of money.
In the New World, the Spanish had conquered two rich civilizations and found a vast silver mine.
The Portuguese in Brazil had found only native peoples and tropical jungles; sugarcane plantations worked by slave labor were the source of its marginal profits.
It transformed colonial Brazil, as did the later discovery of diamonds in the same region.
Khalkha (Outer Mongolia] by : the nomadic Zunghar people of Central Asia in 1690, who were anxious to forestall a possible Chinese takeover of the region. : a confused series of campaigns under the Zunghar ruler, Galdan, : as wellas a civil war.
Kangxi Emperor led a KhalkhaChinese army across the Gobi : Desert into Mongolia and crushed ' the Zunghar.
The invasion failed, sparking only : his disabled half-brother, Ivan, ' attacked Azov with a combined land and naval force, capturing : the city in July 1696.
The Ottoman defeat at the Siege of Vienna in 1683 marked not just the beginning of a protracted Ottoman decline, but the emergence of Habsburg Austria as a European power to challenge France, England, and the Dutch Republic.
After 1683, Austrian Imperial armies pursued the retreating Ottomans south across the Balkans, a process that climaxed at the Battle of Zenta, in Serbia in September 1697.
Under the Italo-French general Eugene of Savoy , who _ MUGHAL EMPIRE The crushing of a Sikh revolt in the Punjab in 1699 saw the Mughal Empire at its zenith.
From its Afghan heartlands, it had grown under Akbar, taking all but the tip of India’s subcontinent by the end of the 17th century.
The harsh rule of Aurangzeb saw many revolts, and the later rise of the Marathas left the Mughals as puppets.
Treaty of Ryswick : The treaty was : signed at the : palace of Huis ter : Nieuwburg, the : country house of : William of Orange, : in Ryswick, in the ' Dutch Republic. ' was rapidly emerging as one | of the foremost commanders : in Europe, an Imperial army ' surprised the Ottomans as they : attempted to cross the Tisa River. : The Ottomans were massacred: : about 10,000 drowned, anda further 20,000 were killed in | battle.
Newcomen , working : with Savery, produced his atmospheric engine, that a viable commercial use was found.
THE DEATH IN 1700 OF CHARLES Il, the childless king of Spain, caused a major crisis when he nominated Philip of Anjou , the grandson of Louis XIV of France, as his successor.
Charles hoped that French power would preserve the Spanish Empire if ruled bya Bourbon.
Louis accepted the vast increase in family prestige and French influence, but opposition to the succession and its increase in French power grew hugely.
The accession in 1697 of the 15-year-old Charles XII to the throne of Sweden was the signal for Sweden’s Baltic rivals, Denmark, Saxony, Poland, and, increasingly, Russia, to attempt to end Swedish pre-eminence.
In fact, in the conflict that followed, the Great Northern War of 1700-21, Charles, “the Swedish Meteor,” would prove himself a general of genius.
In the four months from August 1700, he successively defeated the Danes and then, over on the other side of the Baltic, at Narva, Stradivarius violin The Stradivarius violin, made by Italian Antonio Stradivari, entered a golden age in 1700.
It evolved from later Renaissance music, above all in Italy, but developed to reach a new level of polyphonic tonal and instrumental complexity.
It sowed seeds in rows, performing work that previously required several laborers.
A major timeand labor-saving device, it sowed great numbers of seeds in neat rows.
Although not taken up at once, it later proved popular with large landowners and would lay the basis of modern productive agriculture.
No sooner had the Nine Years’ War ended than Europe's powers found themselves In another lengthy and costly war.
The surprise choice of Philip, duke of Anjou, as King Philip V of Spain , greatly disturbed the European balance of power, and Louis XIV did nothing to discourage fears of a FrancoSpanish military alliance.
He took over military duties in Philip's lands, moving troops into the Spanish Netherlands to defend them from the English and the Dutch.
With renewed confidence then recognized James III, son of the exiled James II , as king of England.
With England and the Dutch Republic backing Austria’s claims to the Spanish throne—in the form of their candidate, Archduke Charles of Austria—armed opposition to France was now guaranteed.
The War of the Spanish Succession that began in 1701 sawa Grand Alliance oppose the unification of the French and Spanish thrones.
It would last until 1713-14 and redraw the map of the continent and the world.
Battle of Vigo Bay, October 1702 ' In an early encounter in the War of : the Spanish Succession, 25 ships of an Anglo-Dutch fleet defeated a 2 Franco-Spanish fleet at Vigo Bay.
Freelance Samurai warriors ' knownasronin emerged from | the Japanese civil wars of the 2 14th and 15th centuries.
In 1701, a ' respected lord, Asano Nugatory, ' was forced to commit suicide after | assaulting an official who had insulted him.
THE BATTLE OF BLENHEIM, fought in 1704 near the village of Blindheim on the Danube in Bavaria, Germany, ended in victory for the Duke of Marlborough and the Grand Alliance , and turned the War of the Spanish Succession in favor of the Grand Alliance.
The battle halted a Franco—Bavarian march on Vienna, and Bavaria played no further part in the war.
Meanwhile, the Gibraltar peninsula on the Spanish mainland was seized by a combined Dutch-English force in 1704; Gibraltar was ceded perpetually to Britain in 1713.
Victor of Blenheim The Duke of Marlborough sits astride his horse in this tapestry, now hanging in his eventual home, Blenheim Palace, England.
Husaynid dynasty was established ' in 1705 when Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ' was recognized by the Ottoman sultan as governor ' of the province.
News from home : Published weekly, The Boston : News-Letter provided English : colonists in America with news of : England's political events and wars. : of French-Canadians and : American Indians.
English mathematician and astronomer, published A Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets in 1705, in which he described the : parabolic orbits of 24 comets.
THE DEATH IN 1707 OF AURANGZEB, sixth Mughal emperor of India , marked the start of the decline of the Mughal Empire.
Aurangzeb’s successors squandered the dynasty’s fortunes while losing control of regional governors, who went on to built their own empires.
Aurangzeb, disturbed by the growing power of the Sikh Guru Gobind Singh, had GURU GOBIND SINGH The tenth and last guru of Sikhism, Gobind Singh was a powerful figure in Indian history.
In 1699 he transformed Sikhism by creating the Khalsa (Pure], a community of the faith that trained as warriors; now the Khalsa embraces all Sikhs.
Aurangzeb considered coming to terms with Gobind Singh, but the rajas of the Sivalik Hills remained hostile, and Gobind Singh was assassinated in 1708.
Aurangzeb’s reign : Emperor Aurangzeb reigned for 48 : years, from 1658 until his death in : 1707, but for 27 of those years he : was at war with the Marathas. summoned him, but died before ' they could meet.
Britain, still embroiled in the : War of the Spanish Succession, joined Dutch forces to seize : Minorca and Sicily from France in : 1708; both were used as military : bases.
Ny x os” a oon ae woe 4 mee yhoo po pet gt * 8h 3° oe oF go” se Qe oe >» x Ina detail of a painting by Ignace Micgucs cet Arince Eageiid of Savoy's troops are shown confronting the French at the Battle of Malplaquet.
THE BATTLE OF MALPLAQUET in 1709 was the bloodiest of the War of the Spanish Succession (see 1701) and, indeed, the entire 18th century.
Grand Alliance forces under the Duke of Marlborough attacked the French at Malplaquet, France, southwest of the French-held fortress of Mons, which lay over the present-day Belgian border.
In gaining possession of the battlefield, the Allies suffered more than 21,000 casualties, twice as many as the French, but the French retreated In good order and remained a future threat.
Meanwhile, in the Great Northern War between Russia and its western neighbors , Charles XII of Sweden had been leading forces ina march on Russia.
Ottoman Empire to go to war : with Russia in 1710, but Peter the : Great accepted terms : in 1711.
In that year, the Meissen factory, near Dresden, ' produced the first successful European porcelain.
In November, a large Danish : invasion force landed in Sweden virtually unopposed.
Se OSE on Zo) 1450-1749 | A NA Perhaps the most surprising fact in the history of navigation is that, until the REFORMATION AND EXPLORATION J {\ 18th century, it was impossible for explorers and mariners to determine their position accurately.
Today, thanks to developments in navigational technology, it is possible to pinpoint locations to within a few meters.
The earliest sailors had no means of accurate navigation other than by sight, relying on landmarks along coastlines, judging distances and directions from the positions of the Sun, Moon, and stars, and using simple sounding devices, such as weighted Lines, to keep ships from running aground.
The invention of instruments such as the magnetic compass, astrolabe, and sextant John Harrison English clockmaker John Harrison was the first to make accurate timepieces that enabled longitude to be calculated with precision. enabled direction and latitude to be gauged reasonably accurately (by measuring the angle of the Sun or a star above the horizon) but the problem remained of how to determine longitude.
Calculating longitude therefore relies on accurate timepieces, which did not exist until John Harrison developed his chronometer in the 18th century.
LONGITUDE Longitude lines run vertically on a map and are measured in degrees east or west of Greenwich, England.
They meet at the poles and are farthest apart at the equator. winding handle Portolan chart 1480 The astrolabe Sailors start to use astrolabes to estimate latitude by measuring the angle of the Sun or a particular star above the horizon.
However, the H1 was impractically large, a problem Harrison solved in 1759 with his H4 chronometer. if minute hand 1735-59 calendar hand, The chronometer indicating date John Harrison makes the first marine of the month chronometer in 1735.
He then makes improved versions, culminating in the H4 in 1759. 1907 1930s-40s Late 20th century Gyroscopic compass Radar Global positioning American Elmer Sperry The invention of radar systems The introduction of satellite-based GPS makes it possible makes it possible to determine an object's position even when it cannot be seen. invents the gyroscopic compass, a major advance for accurate navigation because It always points to pinpoint locations to true north and is not —and navigate to within . subject to deviation.
Portuguese-held Rio de Janeiro, incapacitated Portuguese ships in the harbor, and only spared the city’s defenses from destruction on payment of a ransom.
French morale, which had been at a low since their withdrawal from the Battle of Malplaquet , was raised by this proof that French long-range naval power had not been extinguished.
In North America, the Tuscarora War began in North Carolina between Tuscarora American Indians and settlers from Britain, Germany, and the Netherlands.
The settlers and northern Tuscarora American Indians began to kidnap the Tuscarora in the south, sell them into slavery, and appropriate their lands.
The southern Tuscarora retaliated in September with widespread attacks on settlements in which hundreds of settlers were killed.
Losses at Rio de Janeiro : Caught unawares by a French naval : attack in Rio de Janeiro harbor, : Portuguese ships tried to escape. : Three drifted aground, and one was : destroyed by its crew. : moved to counter the uprising : organized by Mirwais Khan Hotak ' , but the Safavid : army and its leader, Khosru Khan, : were annihilated, and Afghan _ independence was secured.
Cathedral, London's most iconic ' building, was completed. : Designed by Christopher Wren, it : was the fourth church to occupy 2 its site; its predecessor was badly | damaged in the Great Fire of » London in 1666.
William Penn was not : himself an opponent of slavery. : In South Africa’s Cape region, : Dutch sailors infected with smallpox inadvertently caused : a catastrophic decimation of the : native Khoisan people in 1713.
Netherlands, and Britain was ceded Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and Gibraltar.
The final conflict between the two powers, the war ended in 1718 : with an Ottoman victory and : Venice's loss of the Peloponnese, ' its major possession in Greece.
THE STATE OF WAR BETWEEN THE MAJOR EUROPEAN POWERS in the late 17th and early 18th centuries created a profound sense of lawlessness.
This was most marked in regions where desperate efforts were being made to seize colonial power.
One of the most notorious, Edward Teach, known as Blackbeard (c.80-1718], became a target for the authorities after he took charge of his own ship in November 1717.
In North America, the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht (see 1713] had failed to bring an end to the hostilities between the European colonizing powers, and, in turn, these were struggling to dominate competing American Indian tribes.
In Europe, King Louis XIV of | France diedin 1715, leavingthe | . infant Louis XV as his heir.
A style of European music that began around 1600 and lasted until about 1750, baroque developed from the masses and madrigals of the Renaissance.
It had a stronger emphasis on counterpoint and rhythm, greater expression of emotion, and gave greater importance to the solo voice and instrumental solos.
It also established opera, with Monteverdi and Cavalli being early practitioners.
W715 this erupted into the First enamel-work asi by their : Jacobite Rebellion.
THE TREATY OF UTRECHT [see 1713) had ceded Sardinia and Sicily to Savoy, but the treaty was ignored by King Philip V of Spain , who sailed to capture the islands in 1717.
Set against 1717) of Britain, France, and the Dutch Republic, which Austria joined on August 2, 1718, expanding it into the Quadruple Alliance.
This freed Charles's forces to turn their attention to Spain, and the War of the Quadruple Alliance was declared on December 17, 1718.
Previously, the Triple Alliance had set an ultimatum for the War casualties In the War of the Quadruple Alliance, 28,350 men were killed or wounded, including more than 2,000 from Sardinia, which was invaded by Spain.
George Byng, clashed with the : Spanish invasion fleet—which ' had not been informed of the ' ultimatum—in the Battle of Cape Philip was the Triple Alliance (see larger Spanish warships were > captured, while the smaller ships escaped.
Sicily, to oust the Spanish garrison, : but was defeated on October 15 in ' the first Battle of Milazzo. signed the Treaty of Passarowitz, : : attempts by the Quadruple : Alliance, now joined by Savoy, to : curb Spain.
Spanish Basque Country and : then Catalonia, but disease forced both forces to withdraw. : The Austrians attacked in Sicily and eventually the Spanish ' occupiers capitulated, their ' supplies having been blocked by : the British navy.
By the turn of the 18th century the colony had begun to exploit the region's logwood (Haematoxylum campechianum], which yielded an important dye used for textiles and paper.
In 1720, slaves—many from Jamaica and others directly from Africa—were first imported to this area of the so-called Mosquito Coast to expand logging operations on the Belize River.
The year 1720 saw the end of the War of the Quadruple Alliance [see 1718) with the signing of the Treaty of the Hague.
Philip agreed to abandon his claims to Sicily and Sardinia, which came under the control of Austria and the Duchy of Savoy respectively, with the duke being titled king of Sardinia.
In North America, the French returned Pensacola in Florida to King Philip V, along with places they had occupied In the north of Spain, receiving trade advantages In exchange.
Maratha expansion : The Maratha expanded : their empire to the north, : south, and east.
Recognizing the weakness of the grip that the Mughal Empire, based in Delhi, had on the states around him, Bajirao’s army struck out into Hindustan.
This helped him negotiate peace treaties with Mughal authorities in the Deccan.
THE GREAT NORTHERN WAR between Sweden and Russia was brought to an end by the conclusion of the Treaty of Nystad.
In 1719, Russia had successfully challenged Sweden's supremacy in the Baltic by attacking cities on the Swedish east coast.
An alliance of the British and Swedes in 1719 then gave Sweden British navy protection that discouraged further raids.
The Nystad Treaty restored Finland to Sweden, but former Swedish Baltic territories in Estonia and elsewhere went to Deified ancestors Moai were erected by clans on Easter Island to watch over their fields.
Pacific Ocean the following year, : the three ships chanced upon : Easter Island (now Rapa Nuil, so-named because It was ' discovered on Easter Sunday. : Roggeveen also discovered the : Society Islands and Samoa : before returning home.
JJ From the Louisiana Code Noir, 1724 EUROPEAN SUCCESS in procuring slaves in West Africa for transporting to the new colonies depended on the enthusiastic cooperation of certain tribes.
In Dahomey, in what is now the Republic of Benin, King Agadja presided over a culture of enslavement and human sacrifice.
His conquest of neighboring Allada in 1723 provided a ready source of captives for sale, and by 1724 Dahomey had become the Europeans principal source of slave labor.
Petersburg, founded in 1725, was rehoused in this building of 1783-85 on the Neva River.
THE TREATY OF THE HAGUE [see 1720) did not end rivalries between the major European powers.
In 1725, Austria signed the Treaty of Vienna with Spain, gaining trading advantages In the colonies for its Imperial Ostend Company; in exchange, Austria abandoned all claims to the Spanish throne and also promised to help Spain recapture Gibraltar.
In 1726, Britain embarked on an attempt to blockade Spanish treasure ships at Porto Bello, CATHERINE | The orphaned daughter of Lithuanian peasants, the future wife of Peter the Great was born Marta Skowronska.
She was secretly married to Peter in 1707, and she reigned as Russia's first female monarch from his death until her own.
In her reign, she was supported by the Supreme Privy Council, which wanted to deny power to the aristocracy.
By then, To the southeast, the Afghan Persian lands were being encroached upon by Ottoman forces, who were linked to the previous regime by an OttomanSafavid alliance.
However, Ashraf Khan defeated the Ottomans in a battle near Isfahan at Kermanshah, and peace was eventually declared at Hamadan, Persia, in 1727.
Satirical novel Clergyman and writer Jonathan Swift first published Gulliver's Travels in 1726.
Kyakhta was signed by Imperial : Russia and the Chinese Qing : Empire; it remained the basis of : relations between the two until : the mid-19th century.
THE RUSSIAN EMPEROR PETER THE GREAT was determined to discover the full extent of his lands to the east.
A Danish seaman, Vitus Bering (16811741), was commissioned to follow the Siberian coast northward from the Kamchatka Peninsula, and in 1728 Bering sailed into the narrow Strait, now named after him, that separates Siberia and Alaska.
By sailing farther north, Bering established that Siberia reaches its eastward limit at the strait.
Bering suspected that there must be land farther east, but it was only during a second voyage, in 1741, that he first saw the coast of Alaska across the strait.
On the Indian subcontinent, the Maratha people, after nearly a decade of consolidating their power under Bajirao , struck out Into the Deccan region surrounding their homeland.
In a strategic masterstroke, the Marathas cornered the nizam’s army in a waterless zone, where it refused to fight.
In consequence, the nizam abandoned his leadership claim and payment of chauth was resumed.
The first such state was Bondu, in Guinea, formed in the late 17th century.
Then came Futa Jallon (centered in Guinea but sprawling over neighboring territories), where the Islamic Fulbe took power from the existing leaders and nonIslamic Fulbe people.
A confederation of provinces was formally created in 1735 with its capital at Timbo, Guinea.
Other areas that were profoundly affected by the Fulbe Jinad—as the seizure of power was termed— included the formerly declining Bornu Empire (in present-day Nigeria), the fortunes of which underwent a significant revival.
The Yoruba had invaded and defeated them after a protracted and bitterly fought campaign in 1728, but resistance in Dahomey did not end until 1748.
Opium pipe and poppy This traditional Chinese opium pipe has a knobshaped bowl in which the drug (dried latex from the opium poppy] is vaporized when the bowl is heated.
In this way, the Prussian army became the fourth-largest in Europe, with 60,000 soldiers, despite having the twelfth-largest population. was founded in 1732, becoming the last of the Thirteen Colonies established by Britain on the Atlantic coast.
Named after Britain's King George Il, the new state was intended to strengthen the British presence in the south.
The first settlers began to arrive in 1733 and included many released from debtors prisons.
Heavy rains then destroyed winter crops of wheat and barley, and insects decimated the following year's rice crop.
VOLTAIRE Born Francois-Marie Arouet in Paris, Voltaire was a prolific writer, historian, and philosopher of the French Enlightenment (see 1763} who disseminated his radical humanist ideas In works that ranged from essays and historical works to poems, plays, and novels.
CHARLES MARIE DE LA CONDAMINE , French explorer, scientist, and mathematician, joined an expedition to Peru in 1735.
After falling out with his colleagues, he continued alone to Quito, Ecuador, from where he traveled down the Amazon to Cayenne, thereby making the first scientific exploration of the river.
Returning to Paris in 1744, he published the journal of his travels and discoveries in 1751.
When in Ecuador, La Condamine was the first European to encounter rubber—the Mayans had been making flexible rubber for centuries— and in 1736 he introduced the product to Europe when he sent sheets of processed rubber to Paris.
By the early 18th century, the Portuguese, Spanish, British, French, and Dutch had slave-worked sugar plantations in Brazil and throughout the Caribbean.
Soon to follow was the first sugar refinery on Mauritius, built at Ville Bague in the north.
Weapon of conquest This finely decorated battle-ax belonged to Nader, who was crowned shah of Persia in 1736.
In 1732, ' a trading fort had been erected at ' the site of present-day Vincennes, but in 1735 the traders were ' joined by a wave of agricultural ax head inlaid with 2 silver a calligraphy workers.
Vincennes quickly grew, becoming not only the foremost French trading post in Indiana but also the dominant center of French culture in the region.
In 1737, Nader moved against Persia’s former Afghan overlords by occupying southern Afghanistan.
When Tahmasp and Abbas were murdered in 1740, the Safavid dynasty was extinguished.
Russia, joined by Austria in 1737, ' intended to seize the Crimea and : gain access to the Black Sea, at : the same time ending raids by : Crimean Tartars.
In the Persian siege, Hussein Hotaki took refuge in the citadel but surrendered after it was bombarded by Nader Shah.
THE AFGHAN HOTAKI DYNASTY had been expelled from Persia in1729 by Nader Shah (16981747), and he was also determined to eliminate the remaining threat posed by the Afghan Ghilzai people.
Afghanistan was then part of the Mughal Empire, centered in Delhi, but the Mughal governor had been powerless to stop Nader Shah's Persian force, which swept through Kabul and crossed the Indus in December 1738.
In the Hostilities broke out once again between Britain and Spain in ' 1739.
WITH THE DEATH OF KING FREDERICK WILLIAM I OF PRUSSIA in 1740, his son, Frederick II , ascended to the throne.
In his youth, Frederick II had been fond of music, poetry, and philosophy.
He studied the works of Niccolo Machiavelli (see 1513] in preparation for kingship, and in 1739 wrote a refutation of the Renaissance Florentine’s ideas, Anti-Machiavel, which he published anonymously in 1740.
His rule was characterized by modernization, tolerance, and patronage of the arts.
Yet he became known as Frederick the Great for the political and military feats by which he first expanded the borders of Prussia (until 1701 known as Brandenburg-Prussia] far beyond their historical limits, then defended these acquisitions against massive coalitions of powerful enemies.
Frederick Ils first opportunity to expand Prussia‘s frontiers arrived quickly after his accession.
The Habsburg emperor, Charles VI, died in 1740 and was succeeded by his daughter, Maria Theresa (171780), who was to rule Austria’s hereditary domains with her husband, Francis Stephen, as Holy Roman Emperor.
Most of Europe took sides in what became the War of the Austrian Succession , with Britain, the Dutch Republic, Sardinia, and Saxony supporting the queen.
In the late 17th and 18th centuries, : successive leaders enhanced the power and territory of Brandenburg-Prussia : through military and political means.
The Ulster diaspora : Between 1680 and 1750, 70,000 : Scottish-Irish emigrants left Ulster : for North America, 4,000 moved to : Britain, and 16,500 left for Europe. : Church, most of whom were : descendents of families who had colonized the Irish north in the : 17th century.
THE OPPORTUNISTIC SEIZING OF SILESIA by Frederick II of Prussia (see 1740-41] proved a successful gambit.
The Austrian army had challenged the Prussians but had been defeated In the Battle of Mollwitz in 1741.
In 1742, Maria Theresa of Austria and the victorious Prussians signed the Treaty of Berlin, by which a large part of Silesia was ceded to Prussia.
The treaty brought an end to the First Silesian War , though the wider European conflict known as the War of the Austrian Succession continued until 1748.
In 1742, Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius developed the Celsius, or centigrade, thermometer.
In Spanish Peru, a new leader of the native people, Juan Santos Atahualpa, a Jesuit-educated man claiming to be a direct descendant of the murdered Inca king Atahualpa (1497-1533}, began a rebellion in Quisopango in 1742.
The Spanish mounted a military campaign against him in 1742, and again in 1743, 1746, and 1750, but never defeated him in his home territory in the Andes.
Celsius thermometer This 18th-century French instrument, intended for measuring outdoor temperatures, features Celsiusss scale, with a range of -15 to +45 degrees.
In India, the struggle for power continued between the Maratha people (see 1720) and the nizam of Hyderabad, the semiindependent representative of the Mughal Empire.
The Marathas seized Trichinopoly, leaving Murrarao Ghorpade as governor of the town, and refused to pay tribute to the nizam.
Petersburg, Russia had occupied ' Finland, and the treaty moved the Swedish border north.
Finland was returned to the : Swedes, who in exchange accepted ' Adolf-Frederick of HolsteinGotthorp , a client of Empress Elizabeth of Russia, as : heir to the Swedish throne.
Its discovery and use first allowed small, previously nomadic, hunter-gathering societies to settle in one place, transform the landscape, form communities, and establish civilizations.
Most archaeologists agree that the earliest plants TOOLS OF THE TRADE Middle Ages, when the heavy horse-drawn plow and a were domesticated in the Fertile Crescent region Neolithic farmers used digging sticks—long, flat three-field system of crop rotation revolutionized of the Middle East around 10,000 sce.
While the blades with rounded points—to scrape shallow agriculture and greatly increased food supplies. fig is thought to be the first truly cultivated food, depressions in the earth, into which they dropped Voyages to Asia and the discovery of the New World in ; emmer wheat, barley, lentils, chickpeas, and flax seeds.
They also cleared areas of woodland using the 15th century had a profound impact on agriculture ra were also common early crops.
The first animals axes as well as fire to make space for crops and worldwide, as crops and animals were exchanged fo to be domesticated were sheep and goats, followed animal enclosures.
The light scratch plow used by Mediterranean planting them together not only retained soil countries dominated farming in Europe until the nutrients but provided essential vitamin and minerals needed for human health. attachment point coulter cuts thin vertical strips of turf share cuts deep horizontal slices of earth 5000 BCE Sumerians develop core agriculture Large-scale cultivation, . monocropping, irrigation, | | Ist century and the use of a specialized ; agricultural labor force allows the Sumerian culture to flourish and expand.
In the mid-1700s, he significantly redesigned the single-furrow horse plow and remodelled the mouldboard, which was now made of iron, making it stronger and more efficient at turning soil. handle United States 20th-century tractor usage Tractors became more widespread as their design improved.
From the end of the 16th century in Europe, landowners began to take a more scientific approach to farming.
This entailed following such practices as crop rotation to ensure that soil fertility was not depleted, using more efficient machinery such as improved plows, and cross-breeding livestock to avoid genetic weaknesses.
The mechanical reaper Move to sustainability Urban farming Columbus's discovery Although still horse-drawn, In a countermovement As world populations of the New World the mechanical reaper to the high-impact and rise, the search for results in an is the first step in the environmentally damaging new ways to feed more unprecedented cultural mechanization of farming, chemical practices of the people increases.
Vertical exchange of animals harvesting crops in much mid-20th century, green hydroponic farms in and plants, including ' Tobacco less time than could be and sustainable practices urban spaces have tobacco and corn. leaves achieved by hand.
THE EAST AFRICAN PORT OF MOMBASA was used in the 18th century for trade in gold, ivory, and slaves.
The Arabs of Oman took over, and in 1744, with a new dynasty installed in Oman, the new governor of Mombasa seized power there from the Omanis.
He was killed by Omani assassins in 1745, but his brother, ‘Ali ibn Athman [r.46-55) stirred up a rebellion and the assassins were executed.
Ali ibn Athman proclaimed himself Sultan of Mombasa, thereby securing the port's independence from Oman.
In the Second Silesian War , the Austrians tried to regain Silesia, but the Prussians eventually defeated the forces of Empress Maria Theresa in 1745 in the battles of Hohenfriedberg, Soor, and Kesselsdorf.
Maria Theresa finally recognized 9,000 PRUSSIANS Losses at Hohenfriedberg In this battle the victorious Prussians had significantly fewer casualties than the Austrians and their allies from Saxony.
Scotland and rallied the Jacobite : chiefs of several Scottish : Highland clans to march on : England.
The battle ended the Second Jacobite Rebellion and ' wiped out Jacobite hopes of regaining power in Britain.
In 1745, an English farmer ' began experiments in selective ' animal breeding that were to ' revolutionize animal husbandry.
Qianlong Emperor , ' Christians were subjected to : renewed persecution from 1746 : to 1748 as a matter of imperial policy.
This 1842 engraving depicts a New Leicester ram, a breed : developed by Robert Bakewell’s new breeding methods at : his Leicestershire farm.
From this developed the idea of a battery, originally a group of Leyden jars combined to generate a more powerful electric charge.
In 1747, the powerful Persian overlord Nader Shah , who had become paranoid and mercilessly cruel, was murdered by his bodyguards.
A grand assembly in Kandahar, Afghanistan, recognizing the Map of Madras This 1750 engraving depicts the Indian port of Madras, together with its British Fort of St.
George, both captured by a French naval expedition in 1746. resulting weakness of the Persian Empire, elected Nader’s Afghan lieutenant, Ahmad Khan Abdali, (also known as Ahmad Shah Durrani, 1722-73) as head and founder of the modern state of Afghanistan.
Royal Navy, proved that scurvy, a ' sometimes fatal disease common : during long voyages, could be ' treated by eating citrus fruit. However, only in 1795 did the : Royal Navy begin to use lemon | juice to prevent and treat scurvy.
A fireworks display on the Thamés River on May 15, 1749, ofganized 7 the Duke of Richmond to celebrate the signing of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.
THE WAR OF THE AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION was concluded by the signing of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (present-day Aachen] in 1748.
Prussia’s conquest of Silesia was recognized, France regained some of its colonies in exchange for withdrawing from the Netherlands, and Britain's Asiento contract with Spain was renewed.
His army of 12,000 horsemen was met in the Battle of Manupur by a defensive Mughal force of 60,000.
Abdali’s Afghans held their own until 1,000 of them were killed by an exploding gunpowder store; devastated, they fled.
Under Hyder Ali, the Mysore Empire seized territory from the Marathas, Hyderabad, and neighboring kingdoms.
Unrefined platinum ore : Platinum was discovered in South America by Spanish conquerors.
Spain hoped that by allowing Portugal some concessions it would discourage any further Portuguese territorial expansion in the region.
MARQUIS OF POMBAL (1699-1782] The Marquis of Pombal was a controversial political figure, appointed prime minister of Portugal in 1750, the year José | took the throne.
His 27 years in power Saw economic and social reform, and the expulsion of the Jesuits.
A detail from engraver William Hogarth's 1751 work Gin Lane depicts the & ‘/ ‘yy “ public drunkenness and social problems caused by cheap gin.
THE NUMBER OF VOLUMES OFTHE ENCYCLOPEDIE PUBLISHED BETWEEN 1751 AND 1765 ENGLAND WAS EXPERIENCING AN ALCOHOL CRISIS, fuelled by the popularity of cheap gin, as illustrated by the darkly satirical engraving Gin Lane by William Hogarth , issued in 1751.
Public outcry over the social effects of gin led to the Gin Act of 1751, which attempted to limit the amount that could be bought.
Dzungaria and Tarim basin by fighting the Mongolian tribes : for control to this key part of the : steppes.
ROCOCO This 18th-century painting on the ceiling of a Bavarian church exemplifies the work of the Rococo movement that dominated European decorative arts, architecture, painting, and sculpture.
Rococo evolved out of Baroque , but its details and flourishes were even more ornate and often playful.
The period is often associated with French design during the reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI . a This Buddha statue is in the Sulamani Pahto temple in Bagan, Burma, which was built in 1181 but contains images and frescos from the Konbaung period.
BURMA HAD LONG BEEN DIVIDED among warring factions until a chief, Alaungpaya , began to unite the country through a series of military victories, and established the Konbaung dynasty.
Not only did he have to bring disparate groups together, he also faced the challenge of troops from Britain and France, who were eager to gain territory in Burma and who were willing to arm Alaungpaya’s enemies.
But for the next seven years, Alaungpaya resisted both threats, and British and French troops were driven out.
In Britain, the public went to bed on 2 September and woke up on 14 September.
American inventor, politician, and diplomat : had made the decision to change ' from the Julian calendar to the : Gregorian one, joining the other western European countries that : had made the change hundreds of years before.
XIII, who chose to make the : change when it became clear that the old Julian calendar put around : 11 extra days between vernal ' equinoxes, making the celebration ' of Easter arrive earlier each year.
BY THE TIME SIR HANS SLOANE , an Irish-born physician and collector, died, he had amassed 71,000 different objects, ranging from samples of flora and fauna from all over the world, to books and manuscripts about a wide range of subjects.
Like other intellectuals and scientists across Europe, he was | part of wider Enlightenment intellectual currents, and he had realized the scholarly value of his collection, which he bequeathed to Britain.
Sloane's contemporaries across ; Europe were engaged in collecting and other scientific pursuits.
The Treaty of Pondicherry temporarily halted tensions between France and Britain, whose troops were technically employed by corporations the East India companies.
The treaty recognized the British-backed Mohammad Ali as the new Nawab of Carnatic, which had been a key factor behind the dispute.
It was later estimated by scientists to be around an 8. magnitude event.
Estimates of the number of deaths range from 10,000 to The earthquake also triggered a tsunami that destroyed settlements further south in the Algarve region.
The disaster had a profound effect across Europe Voltaire was inspired to write his Poeme sur le désastre de Lisbonne about the event, and German philosopher Immanuel Kant wrote 3 ¥ a series of essays about it.
The Marquis of Pombal (see panel, left) immediately took action, making sure fires were put out and the dead were quickly buried.
He then began the rebuilding of the city, including the construction of buildings meant to withstand another earthquake.
Although it was not the first English dictionary, it quickly became the most ' celebrated and authoritative.
The interests in the region and became a target for the British when war was declared in 1756.
THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR was fought in theaters from India to North America to Europe, making it a truly global conflict.
The earlier War of Austrian Succession left many territorial issues unresolved.
The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle did not settle the dispute between Prussia and Austria over the province of Silesia, located in southeast Prussia and bordering Austria.
Because of complicated FREDERICK II Known as Frederick the Great,” the Prussian King Frederick II ruled for 46 years.
With his interest in culture and philosophy, Frederick's reign was marked by a liberal spirit.
But it was his military prowess that earned Frederick II his reputation, as he transformed the small kingdom of Prussia into a European power.
The ' French sent 15,000 troops to the island, where the British had only around 2,500.
Menatarms : The sizes of the armies : involved in the Seven : Years’ War are shown : here.
Bengal, Siraj-ud-Dawlah © (1733-57], who France supported, : attacked the British in Calcutta : and imprisoned many of them : inasmall cell in Fort William.
Robert Clive recovered Calcutta for the East India Company and Britain by defeating the Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey.
The Holy Roman Emperor Francis |—who was married to Austria's Maria Theresa—officially declared war on Prussia.
King Frederick II then attacked Bohemia, though he was defeated by Austrian troops.
Although Prussia defeated Austro-French forces in Rossbach in November, they lost to Austrian troops in Leuthan in December.
In Morocco, Muhammad III brought stability to the country as sultan after 30 years of unrest.
Muhammad was known for curbing the power of the Barbary pirates, who raided towns across the Mediterranean.
Robert Clive Calcutta was recaptured for the British by Major General Robert Clive at the Battle of Plassey.
AS THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR CONTINUED, the British won key victories over France by taking Fort Duquesne and Louisbourg in North America and Pondicherry in India [see map, opposite), and by claiming Senegal in West Africa.
In Europe, Britain and Prussia defeated the French near the banks of the Rhine at Krefeld in June and Russia at the battle of Zorndorf, on Prussian soll, in August.
Meanwhile, in India, warfare was breaking out on a different front— between Afghans and Marathas.
After the death of Nader Shah , his Persian empire began to disintegrate and Afghanistan emerged independent under the rule of Ahmad Shah Durrani (c. 1722-73} who wanted to gain control of the nearby territories of the Punjab and the Upper Ganges.
The neighboring Marathas, who felt they should rule over the territory, then went to war against the Afghans.
In the Arabian Peninsula, significant—though not violent— political change was taking place as the chieftains of the Utub confederation elected Sabah bin Jaber (c.52-1762] emir of an emerging territory that would soon become known as Kuwait.
Luis Paret y Alcazar a depicts palace life in his painting Charles /// Eating Before his Court.
JF Voltaire, French writer, from Candide, 1759 FOR THE BRITISH, THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR reached a turning point.
They took the French West Indian island of Guadeloupe in May, Canadian territory in July, and Quebec in September.
They also defeated French naval forces off Portugal at Lagos Bay in August and at Quiberon Bay, in the west of France, in November.
Germany, followed in November . by further defeat by the Austrians : in the Battle of Maxen in Saxony.
The seal was made by Josiah Wedgwood for the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade.
Abolitionist groups were also established in other countries involved in slavery, such as the French Société des Amis des Noirs.
Wedgwood pottery Born into a family of English potters, Josiah Wedgwood transformed his craft with his style and technique.
He set up his own business in 1759 and became potter to Queen Charlotte.
King George | — was born in Britain, which he ruled for nearly 60 years.
WHEN GEORGE III TOOK THE THRONE OF ENGLAND in 1760, he was the first king from the German royal dynasty, the Hanoverians, to be born tn Britain.
Before his death, he left instructions for the 12-year-old George to separate the Electorate of Hanover from England and reduce the national debt, when he took the throne.
After the death of his father, George fell under the influence of John Stuart, Third Earl of Bute , who was his tutor and adviser.
Fleet size in the Seven Years’ War Many important battles were at sea, ' and British naval strength became : even more superior to that of France.
These wishes were 2 made manifest when Bute ' became prime minster in 1762.
The conflict had ' begun after the Mongols refused to pay the annual tribute the Chinese government had + Hyder Ali, the ruler of the Indian kingdom of Mysore, who became an enemy of British East India Company troops.
AS THE SEVEN YEARS’ WAR INTENSIFIED within Europe, it also reached a climax in the colonial possessions.
The port had been settled by the French East India Company in 1674 and had become one of France’s main bases of operations for trade as well as ongoing fights against the British East India Company.
This victory followed another one against the French the previous year in Wandiwash, in southeast India.
At the same time In India, the fighting between Afghans and Marathas (see 1758] came to a head in the battle of Panipat, in the north of the territory, on January 14.
The battle was bloody, with high casualty rates—some 75,000 Marathas were killed and 30,000 captured.
However, Ahmad Shah Durrani, who led the Afghans, was forced by his troops to return to the throne in Afghanistan.
This outcome meant that the Marathas and British began to divide the former Mughal 2 territory among themselves.
The war contributed to the weakening of the Maratha Confederacy and the further decentralization of its power, leading to the breakup of its kingdoms and subsequent battles over territory with Britain.
Farther south, in Mysore, another future enemy of Britain, Hyder Ali , was building up his army and consolidating his power base In order to take control of the territory.
British and French troops were : fighting in the Caribbean. : The British used the island of : Guadeloupe, which they had : captured two years earlier (see map, 1756], as a base from : which to take Dominica from ' the French.
Spain had entered the conflict, : and Britain’s naval fleet was making preparations to attack : Spanish ships.
Conflicts in India : India was the site of important : battles in 1761, not only for Britain : and France, but also in the fight : between Marathas and Afghans.
When Peter III became emperor, he made clear his support of Prussia in the Seven Years’ War and then pulled Russia out of the conflict.
Catherine the Great's reign was marked by Russian aggression and territorial expansion.
She introduced wide-ranging reforms in agriculture, industry, and education.
She also relaxed Russia's censorship laws and was known for her love of literature and particular fondness for French philosophers and writers— including Voltaire, with whom she corresponded for 15 years.
As the Seven Years War continued, Spain became further drawn into events as the British occupied its key Caribbean port of Havana.
In addition to this, Britain was able to use troops in India to occupy Manila, in the Philippines, which was also a Spanish colony.
At the same time, Spain and France entered a secret agreement known as the Treaty of Fontainebleau.
Catherine the Great : The German-born empress of : Russia, who reigned from 1762 until : 1796, oversaw the territorial : expansion of her adopted country.
The cost had been enormous—the lives of hundreds of thousands of soldiers, and mountains of money.
Britain's national debt rose from £75 million to £133 million; Prussia raised taxes and debased the taler three times.
Pierre and Miquelon; their territories in present-day United States east of the Mississippi River; the Caribbean islands of Grenada, Dominica, St.
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tobago; Minorca in the Mediterranean; and Senegal in West Africa.
They also formalized their cessation of the Louisiana territory to Spain.
In exchange, Britain returned to France the valuable Caribbean sugar Islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe; Belle Island, off the coast of Brittany; and the slave-trading island of Gorée in West Africa.
France also regained its Indian factories, but they were not allowed to fortify them.
German territories. : Under the Treaty of : Hubertusburg, the borders of 1756 were reinstated, so Austria ' retreated from Silesia and Prussia left Saxony, and Europe reverted to : its former boundaries. : In the Ohio River valley territory, : Pontiac , a chief of the Ottawa people, was angered by the deal, which would put the land ' under British rule.
IN AN ATTEMPT TO FILL THE COFFERS DEPLETED BY WAR, the British government brought in the Sugar Act, which clamped down on tax avoidance on imported molasses in North America, a move that angered traders and colonists.
At this time, the musical prodigy Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was on a three-year tour of Europe with his family.
He visited Munich, Brussels, Paris, and London, where his father Leopold presented him to play at the royal courts.
While in London he met the German composer Johann Christian Bach , who became an important musical mentor.
The Enlightenment was a time of questioning many established beliefs in Europe—a change in ideas reflected in the writings and other cultural output from around the mid-18th century.
Fear of revolution led to a desire + ee Grand Duchy of Warsaw , and the among Europe's statesmen to maintain the status ; MBrising regions of Germany, Italy, and the Low Countries quo.
Although there were threats from liberal and Bay of that had been annexed to France.
Munich ©, Bete ok England France had a far larger eee OF ITALY iis, * ¥, ae > | t iy Marseille 7.
At encroach on Russia were met with a state 1812 its height, it comprised humiliating defeat in 1812. nearly 600,000 men.
The assassination of the Austrian archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalists in 1914 sparked World War I, a global conflict that would reshape Europe.
ATLANTIC OCEAN 1914 The Vienna system was swept away by the wave of nationalism that crossed Europe from the mid-19th century.
Countries such as Italy and Germany were unified by the time Europe sat on the brink of war in 1914.
Norway © Spain |_| Switzerland i Sweden Hi Belgium Rival 1 3 a 6 populations 7 The population of the Allied countries at the outset of World War | was more than double the population of the Central Powers.
H Montenegro ™ Portugal Romania Blely |) Greece HE Ottoman Empire BW Albania Mi Luxembourg ™ Denmark > Serbia M Bulgaria 5. million 3.
Russia, France, Britain, Belgium, and Serbia Germany and Austria-Hungary Troop numbers The Allied Powers had far greater forces to mobilize in 1914 than the armies of the Central Powers.
THIS YEAR WOULD BE ONE OF GROWING DISCONTENT with colonial rule within British and Spanish colonies in the Americas.
In May, the residents of the Andean city of Quito [in today’s Ecuador] protested against the imposition of a new system of tax administration aimed at increasing revenues for Spain's depleted treasury.
The rioters drove out the royal officials, installing in their place a government that controlled the city until troops arrived a year later to reestablish royal control.
Farther to the north, Britain’s American colonists were growing angry at similar revenue-raising exercises.
This piece of legislation stipulated that all American colonists would have to pay a tax on every piece of printed paper they used.
The device was an improvement on the spinning wheel because it could power ' multiple spindles.
Dawn of the machine age : A woman working at a spinning : jenny inan early 19th-century mill. : James Hargreaves’ invention : revolutionized cloth production.
JAMES FRANCIS EDWARD STUART DIED IN 1766 at the Palazzo Muti in Rome, having failed in his mission to be restored to the British thrones as James Ill.
His birth in 1688 had initiated the Glorious Revolution, forcing his father James II to take his family to France to live in exile.
After the royal family had fled, the English Parliament passed the Act of Settlement of 1689, barring any Roman Catholics from succession to the throne.
The Stuarts, however, had many supporters in England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Several attempts were made to return James Ill, or the “Old Pretender” as he became known, to the throne, the most notable being the risings of 1715 and 1745.
Over the course of the Old Pretender’s exile his son, Charles as “Bonnie Prince Charlie” or the “Young Pretender” —also took up his father’s fight, but to little avail.
Charles never recovered from his defeat at the Battle of Culloden (the last clash of the 1745 rising—see 1744-47], although he made later efforts to secure support from France and the Holy Roman Empire for further uprisings.
German doctor Johann Freidrich ' Struensee infiltrated the court and exercised much : influence over the weak king, eventually enacting policy and ' having an affair with the queen. : Struensee was finally arrested ' and executed.
Christian's reign were in name : only, and from 1784 his son, ' Frederick VI , acted vas regent: & 1A depiction of the Jesuits being expelled from the kingdom of Spain.
Jesuit settlements in the New World The Society of Jesus was instrumental in the settlement of territory in the Americas and by 1767 had extensive missions.
LIKE THE PORTUGUESE NEARLY A DECADE EARLIER, the Spanish Crown grew concerned about the Jesuits and the order's activities in the American colonies.
One of the underlying causes for concern had been Jesuit resistance to paying tithes to the Crown, and this reluctance was symptomatic of longer-running struggles between the order and the king.
At issue was the Jesuits’ growing influence and wealth in Spanish America through their schools, extensive landholding, and agricultural success.
Claiming he was ‘moved by weighty reasons, Charles III decided to expel the Jesuits from his realm.
This enabled the Crown to confiscate valuable Jesuit land and property.
These accomplishments paved the way for his next assignment—an expedition to the South Pacific.
The mission was organized by the Royal Society, with the Admiralty providing the a ship.
The Endeavour set off from Plymouth on August 25 and arrived in Tahiti—via Madeira, Rio de Janeiro, and Cape Horn—on April 13, 1769.
Cook then headed further south encountering the island later known as New Zealand.
He eventually sailed from there to the unknown eastern coast of Australia where he landed in what became known as Botany Bay.
The Endeavour returned to England in 1771 and Captain Cook's expedition was hailed a success.
THE NUMBER OF CREW AND CIVILIANS WHO SET OFF WITH CAPTAIN COOK Captain James Cook and his crew at the watering place in the Bay of Good Success, Tierra del Fuego.
Clowns to provide entertainment 2 during the interludes, and the : modern circus was born. | \ yy Endeavour Hemisphere.
Ottoman Empire had pushed the : two into the Russo-Turkish War ' of 1768-74.
THE SETTLEMENT OF NORTH AMERICA showed no sign of abating, though its inhabitants still knew very little about the vast western territory.
In 1769, an American named Daniel Boone set off for a hunting expedition in present-day Kentucky, an area virtually unknown to white settlers.
Along the way he worked out a better route along the Cumberland Gap, a plateau in the Appalachian mountains.
This became part of the Wilderness Road, a trail blazed by Boone and the Transylvania Company, and later used by settlers to cross the mountains and reach the Kentucky territory.
Boone and his family moved to Kentucky | in 1775 and established one of the first towns, Boonesborough.
The Spanish, too, were looking to expand their territory in North America.
They had claimed a region in present-day southern California that Charles IIl was eager to populate with Spanish settlers after rumors that Russia was planning to move into the area.
To this end he sent Franciscan friars to establish missions in the region.
Spanish Franciscan Junipero Serra began work on a series of missions throughout Spain's California territory.
The first one, established in 1769, was San Diego de Alcala, and over the course of the next 54 years a chain of 20 further missions was built along the California coast.
AFTER THE FAILURE OF THE STAMP ACT the British government was still left with the question of how to raise money in the colonies.
The legislation included duties on paint, paper, glass, lead, and tea imported to the American colonies, as well asa reorganization of customs to cut down on smuggling.
Marie Antoinette miniature : A cameo of Marie Antoinette, who : would become one of the most : infamous queens of France. ' harass some British soldiers on ' patrol near a customs house in : Boston, and a crowd formed.
THE BIRTH OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION came a step closer when Englishman Richard Arkwright worked with clockmaker John Kay to develop a spinning frame.
The venture was a success and the textile factories became profitable, leading Arkwright to open a series of factories in Engand and Scotland.
Arkwright’s inventions are considered an important part of the Industrial Revolution, which transformed Britain from an agricultural economy to a manufacturing one.
The mills saw the development of the mass-production factory system which would be adopted all over the world.
SWEDEN @ Vienna HABSBURG EMPIRE POLAND FACED the first of three partitions of its territory.
This resulted from Russia’s defeats of the Ottoman Turks in the RussoTurkish War , which had alarmed Austria and Prussia.
Frederick Il aimed to shift Russian expansion from Turkish territory to the Polish—-Lithuanian Union, which was weakened by civil war.
On August 5, Russia, Prussia, and Austria signed a treaty—ratified took place in Europe during the late 18th and early 19th centuries, changing rural, agrarian economies to ones based on manufactured goods, which were often made in cities.
This transformation began in England, and was facilitated by the arrival of inventions such as the spinning jenny and the use of steam power (see 1775], which led to the growth of industries such as textiles in cities like Manchester.
New technologies soon spread OTTOMAN EMPIRE throughout Europe, and other countries such as France, Germany, and Belgium were seeing similar economic shifts as agricultural workers left the countryside for jobs in growing urban centers, or to work in the coal mines that powered the urban factories.
In England, a legal case was mounted over a slave, James : Somersett, who had been brought © from Jamaica to England in 1771 ' and was due to be sent back.
BRITAIN’S AMERICAN COLONISTS were becoming Increasingly agitated by the number of restrictions being placed on them—even If some had unexpected benefits, such as a reduction in the price of tea.
He traveled around Russia, ' claiming to be the deposed emperor Peter Ill, and promising to abolish serfdom.
Russia also was experiencing unrest, led by a Cossack called 29,000 willing troops.
Palestine and Syria, but by 1773 he was defeated by Ottoman ' forces and died from his wounds : while in prison in Cairo.
IN THE AMERICAN COLONIES, representatives from each of the 13 colonies except Georgia met in Philadelphia to discuss what to do about a slew of legislation that became known as the Intolerable Acts.
These acts were issued In retaliation for the dumping of tea in Boston harbor and growing American rebellion.
They stipulated that Boston harbor must be closed to all but British ships; that the colonists must house British troops if necessary; that British officials would not be tried for crimes in the colonies but in Britain instead, allowing them to act with impunity; and selfgovernment in Boston was to be stopped.
Also included was the Quebec Act, which enlarged the boundaries of the Canadian province, permitted a degree of self-rule through a governor and appointed councillors, guaranteed religious freedom for the many Catholic settlers, and allowed the continuation of French civil law in conjunction with British criminal law.
They objected to the expansion of Quebec into territory they believed was theirs, and many were suspicious of the type of government that had been installed there.
Peninsula as independent, ' meaning Crimea was free from ' Ottoman rule.
THE ANGRY RECEPTION GIVEN TO LEGISLATION and discontent over the issue of “taxation without representation” in the 13 American colonies had begun to worry British officials and they feared an armed rebellion.
Concord, just outside of Boston. Aware that the British might : execute such a plan, the colonists : had set up a system of alerts : should any event come to pass. : Once news was received of the 2 planned raid on Concord, Boston ' silversmith and engraver Paul : Revere (1735-1818] set off from : the city that night to warn fellow four-way valve controls admission and release of steam : organizers that British troops : were on the march.
Continental soldier’s hat : This style of tricorne was worn by : American colonists fighting for : the Continental army. as territorial boundaries, stood a better chance of being protected : by Britain.
Many others simply wanted to avoid participation in either side : of the conflict.
War was the result of : the East India Company's intervention into the Maratha Confederacy, a union of five clans : that came to power after the : collapse of the kingdom of Maharashtra.
In partnership with Boulton, Watt ' began to manufacture these ' engines in 1775.
The document outlined reasons for the decision to separate from Britain while asserting certain natural rights.
The ideas put forth in this declaration—that all men were created equal and had the right to ‘life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness’ —would not, however, apply to everyone.
Enslaved Africans—some of whom had been fighting on the Americans side—were excluded.
The year 1776 also witnessed the publication of many influential works.
Scottish philosopher Adam : Smith published An : Enquiry into the the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, : which outlined the advantages : of asystem of free trade, : changing the way politicians : and the public thought about economic expansion.
Fall of the Roman Empire by : English historian Edward Gibbon : was published.
Elector Maximilian III Joseph , last of the Wittelsbach line, died, and Charles Theodore , Elector Palatine was crowned.
Charles had no legitimate heir but several bastards for whom he sought land.
He signed a treaty with Joseph II of Austria to cede Lower Bavaria to Austria In exchange for part of the Austrian Netherlands.
This angered Frederick Il of Prussia and in 1778, the War of the Bavarian Succession broke out, ending in 1779.
Spain and Portugal finally settled ongoing disputes in the Rio de la Plata region with the First Treaty of San Ildefonso.
Charles Theodor The Elector Palatine, Charles Theodore, had no legitimate heirs but he had several illegitimate ones.
Clubs used against Cook Traditional Hawaiian clubs like these may have been used in the attack that caused James Cook's death.
WITH TWO SUCCESSFUL VOYAGES TO HIS NAME, Captain James Cook set out for a third in 1776, this time to search for the Northwest Passage, a fabled Arctic shortcut that was supposed to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
By 1778 he had made the first European contact with the Hawaiian islands.
He later sailed back to Hawaii, where a dispute over a missing boat led to his being killed by Hawaiians in 1779.
It was founded under the patronage of Maria Theresa of Austria (the city was under Austrian rule] to replace a theater that had been destroyed in a fire.
The new theater was built on the site of the church of Santa Maria alla Scala and financed by wealthy patrons.
XG Ve < 22 A Xhosa family, from a painting by French naturalist Pierre Sonnerat.
THE RELOCATION OF THE BOERS to remote regions hundred of miles north of Cape Town was causing problems for the Xhosa people.
These tribes had settled in the territory long before the Boers arrival.
Both groups were cattle farmers and competed for rich pasture land for their herds.
Attempts were made to establish a border between the Fish and Sundays Rivers, although both groups violated any agreement.
Tension turned to violence, with the Xhosa raiding Boer cattle and murdering some herdsmen, possibly in retaliation for the death Boer house Dutch settlers in South Africa moved away from Cape Town, deep into rural areas where they raised livestock. of a tribesman.
These skirmishes, amounting to the first Xhosa War, did not resolve the root cause of the dispute— access to grazing lands and water.
AS BRITAIN’S EAST INDIA COMPANY attempted to extend its reach outside of Bengal, it often met resistance from Indian princely states.
The fighting did not completely settle the conflict between them, which continued until 1799.
Unrest in India was not the only military preoccupation for Britain, which was now fighting on many fronts.
In addition to the ongoing war in North America, dispute broke out with the Dutch.
The Dutch were supplying arms to the rebelling colonists, and a dispute erupted over Britain's seizure of Dutch ships.
The » Dutch maintained Britain should ' respect their neutrality, but the _ British did not agree.
Buganda, located on the northern : shore of Lake Ukerewe (Lake Victoria), emerged as a regional : power as it expanded its territory.
Born José Gabriel Condorcanqui in Cuzco, Peru, around 1742, Tupac Amaru II renamed himself after the last Inca leader, who ruled the Incan Empire from 1945-72.
United States Constitution . a decisive turn at the battle of Yorktown, Virginia, on October 19.
That, along with a French naval blockade, gave Cornwallis no option but to surrender.
Although this was the last major battle of the Revolutionary War, official recognition of American independence would not come until later.
American riflemen : This cartoon depicts an American :_rifleman as worn out and badly : equipped.
These laws had been designed to place Ireland under the rule of the English Parliament.
With many of the restrictions in these Acts lifted, lreland was able to establish some degree of legislative independence.
Despite the new freedoms, however, political participation was only open to Protestants, and the unrest this arrangement eventually prompted in the largely Catholic territory meant that self-rule had a short life span.
In Siam , a new ruling dynasty was established—the Chakri—after a power struggle following the demise of the previous ruler, King Taksin, who had left no heir.
It was established by Rama | (17371809], who had been the chief commander in the army and had won loyal support fighting against the Burmese.
Vee This bronze frieze depicts the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783, in which Britain recognized the independence of its former American colonies.
The document gave formal recognition to the United States and established the boundaries of the 13 states that it comprised.
Although the settlement saw the establishment of the United States, there was still a significant European presence, with Spain holding large territories to the west.
KEY Western Territory _ United States : States of the : Union : This map shows : the 13 original : United States as : recognized by the : Treaty of Paris. : United States borders were : extended to the : Mississippi River : under the treaty. _ retaining Minorca—which it had : regained the year before—and : its territories in Florida.
Montgolfier had the ' first public trial of a hot air ' balloon officially recorded.
Balloon ride This engraving shows a later Montgolfier balloon, named Le Flesselles, ascending over Lyon with seven passengers, on January 19, 1784.
One of those on board was Joseph Montgolfier. wd mY AN , er AC x) Ae ge oO yor o ama EN ar Myr a a o% & 9 x oe oe oes — ee ee ees pe aoe VF 9.
BECAUSE THE BRITISH PRESENCE IN INDIA had evolved through the East India Company [EIC), the 18th century saw a growing tension between the EIC and the British government.
The India Act 1773 had already brought the company under tighter control, but its demands for government money to cover the cost of its many battles had prompted further action.
The Act also stipulated that trade and territorial rule were to be two separate activities.
Cartwright’s loom became an integral part of the textile industry in Britain.
The design was later improved by the American businessman Francis Cabot Lowell, who had seen the looms In operation on a visit to Britain, and its use was widespread on both sides of the Atlantic after 1820.
In Burma, the Konbaung dynasty’s King Bodawpaya (1745-1819] had captured the coastal kingdom of Arakan the previous year.
Bolstered by this victory, he decided to move to the east and invade the kingdom of Siam , but was defeated.
Round-the-world expedition Jean-Francois de Galaup, the comte de Lapérouse, was sent by Louis XV/ on an expedition to map out the uncharted waters of the Pacific. for his military prowess. | { an | | WH Ln 7 Pind ill AN ae THE United States WAS EXPERIENCING AN ERA OF TECHNOLOGICAL innovation.
In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, inventor John Fitch (1743-1798] had set up the Steamboat Company with the aim of designing a steam-powered boat.
Fitch found success ahead of his rivals in August 1787 when the Perseverance successfully sailed on the Delaware River.
By 1790, a fledgling steamer service was running between Philadelphia and Trenton, New Jersey, but Fitch struggled as he had trouble attracting investors.
First steamboat : John Fitch managed to take : steam-engine technology and apply : it to boats.
July 23, the United States signed a treaty with Morocco which assured safe : passage for United States ships in exchange for trading on equal terms. : In Europe, Prussia mourned the : death of Frederick Il.
JJ Attributed to Frederick II, king of Prussia This 19th-century engraving depicts the coastal settlement of Sierra Leone, West Africa.
AFTER THE RULING IN THE SOMERSETT CASE , which established that slaves who arrived in Britain were free, many slaves were abandoned by their masters and the ‘black poor” of London were left with no means of support.
Abolitionist Granville Sharp arranged for a free settlement to be established in Sierra Leone, West Africa.
These initial settlers were later joined by slaves from Nova Scotia, Canada, who had fought for the British in the American Revolutionary War.
At the same time, West Africa was still rife with other European slavers.
The United States Constitution Is the oldest written constitution in the world still in use.
It was adopted on September 17, 1787 and has been amended 27 times to deal with issues such as freedom of speech.
George Washington led the Constitutional Convention and became the first United States president in 1789.
During his presidency, the first ten amendments, known as the Bill of Rights, were ratified.
AFTER ALMOST 30 YEARS ON THE SPANISH THRONE, the “enlightened despot” Charles Ill died, and his son, Charles IV , inherited the crown.
His wife, Maria Luisa of Parma (17511819], and her political protégé Manuel de Godoy , who eventually became prime minister, ran the country and the empire, leading it into disaster.
In France, as In Britain, there was growing public support for the abolition of slavery.
The Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade had been established in Britain in May 1787 with the aim of ending the slave trade.
Arrival in Port Jackson : Colonists arrive in the bay that would : later become Sydney, Australia. : Native women are shown watching : them on the shore. ' up the Société des Amis des : Noirs (Society of the Friends of : the Blacks}, which called not only | for the abolition of the slave trade ' and slavery, but also urged ' equality for people of mixed race, : the treatment of whom was a : growing issue in the French ' Caribbean sugar colonies.
Empire, the Magyar ' nobles were unhappy about ' Joseph Il's reforms (see 1765], in particular the introduction of German as the official language | of government and secondary : education.
James Watt's engine Scottish inventor James Watt makes improvements to the Newcomen engine by adding a condenser, and develops an engine that rotates a shaft instead of pumping.
Newcomen’s engine Thomas Savery joins forces with Thomas Newcomen and they create the much-improved atmospheric steam pumping engine.
The Hero engine Newcomen’s atmospheric engine AM POYV| Although the power of steam was not harnessed until the 17th century, scientists had understood its potential for hundreds of years.
As far back as the 1st century CE, the Greek scientist Hero of Alexandria had discussed a device—the aeolipile—that illustrated the possibilities of water vapor.
The aeolipile worked by heating water in a mounted sphere that had two bent nozzles.
Although it had no practical use at the time, this was the first indication of experiments with steam power.
More dramatic developments took place in the 17th century, when the first boiler was invented.
Although it was little more than a pressure cooker, from this point onward, a steady stream of innovations followed.
POWERING INDUSTRY By the 18th century, engineers had realized how steam-powered devices could be used to pump water out of mines—an important issue in light of the growing demand for coal in Europe during the Industrial Revolution.
Scientists soon realized that steam could also be used to power engines.
Thomas Newcomen had invented a steam engine in 1712, but it was the improvements made by James Watt that made the device more efficient.
Watt's key innovation consisted of condensing steam, so that the engine did not need to heat and cool the cylinder, making it far more efficient.
Soon, steam power was being used to fuel ships and locomotives, enabling them to travel farther and faster.
The United States vessel Savannah becomes the first ship to cross the Atlantic using steam power as well as sails.
The era of sails ends soon after. — —_—__ ———— Babcock and Wilcox steam boiler Geothermal power station 1829 Stephenson's “Rocket” English engineer George Stephenson applies steam power to locomotives, and his “Rocket” becomes a commercial success.
Stephenson's 1884-97 The steam turbine Sir Charles Algernon Parsons develops a steam turbine generator, which produces huge amounts of electricity.
It is used to power large ships, such as the Jitanic. 20th century Steam turbines and nuclear power Controlled nuclear chain reactions create heat in reactors, which boils water to produce steam and drive a steam turbine In order to produce electricity.
Rallying cry of the French Revolution, 1789 Representatives of France’s “Third Estate”—the people—swore the “Tennis Court Oath” a i not to separate until they had established a constitution in France.
The decision was made to summon the Estates-General, France's representative assembly.
It had not met since 1614, so between January and April elections were held to select deputies.
First Estate (the clergy]; the Second Estate ; and the Third Estate—the people.
The immediate issue was how much voting power to give the Third Estate; the First and Second Estates wanted voting to be by estate rather than a vote per head, so that they would not be outnumbered by the public's representatives.
French countryside, which was : already in a state of unrest due to : grain shortages.
As the National Assembly knew, slavery did not sit well with the ideas espoused in the Declaration of the Rights of Man.
Neither did the inequity that free people of color faced in France and its empire.
In 1790, two wealthy mixed-race planters from Saint-Domingue, Vincent Oge and Julien Raimond were in Paris, where they argued that because they were property owners, they ought to be given full rights.
Ogé was frustrated by the Assembly's failure to confront white planters on this issue and continued his protest back in Saint-Domingue.
It was quickly suppressed, Tm A Hes ¥ a x oe — Rearerst Yosiah Harmar met with defeat when he mounted a campaign against a coalition of American Indians in the Northwest Territory.
This illustration shows a version of : the French Revolutionary emblem : issuing the famous call for liberty, : equality, and fraternity or death.
IN JANUARY, VINCENT OGE and Jean-Baptiste Chavannes (c.48-1791], who had helped Ogé organize the 1790 revolt, were | in hiding in the Spanish colony, Santo Domingo.
They were, however, returned by the Spanish to Saint-Domingue, where their bones were broken on a wheel and their heads placed on stakes.
This was met with outrage | in France, and by May political rights were granted to free people of color, if born of two free parents.
Slaves in Saint-Domingue had also been hearing a mixture of news and rumors about events in Paris and begun to hope they would see abolition.
A week later, Boukman and his followers launched a massive revolt in the north of the island.
It draws ona range of African traditions, especially those of Benin, the former home of many slaves.
It also incorporates Catholicism, the religion and Oge fled to Santo Domingo.
The Catholic practices slaves adopted enabled them to disguise their true religion from their masters, with Catholic saints standing In for Loa worshiped in Voodoo.
This new system of belief allowed slaves to form their own identity and also provided a way of organizing resistance, as In Saint-Domingue.
C QP NS eK NX ~~ <2 es xO op 1S Q@ e) A detail from the painting Battle of Valmy, by French artist Emile-Jean-Horace Vernet, shows Prussia’s defeat by France.
EVENTS IN FRANCE TOOK A DRAMATIC TURN on April 20, 1792 when the National Assembly declared war on the Holy Roman Empire, perceiving it as a threat.
Emperor Leopold II had signed the Declaration of Pilnitz with Frederick William II of Prussia, swearing to defend Louis XVI and destroy Paris should anything befall him.
Provoked by the French call to war, Austrian and Prussian troops set off for France.
News of this enraged the French people, who thought they had been betrayed by their king and the aristocracy, and on August 10 a group of revolutionaries found Louis XVI when they stormed the Tuileries Palace.
The king and the rest of the royal family were jailed in the Temple prison.
MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT Mary Wollstonecraft was an English writer and early advocate for women’s rights.
Deeply influenced by events in France and subsequent debates in Britain, she published, A Vindication on the Rights of Woman, in 1792.
The work, calling for the education system to allow girls the same advantages as boys, was controversial.
It would be many years before any changes were enacted, but the book has endured as a work of early feminist philosophy.
British with Chinese tea—for which they were paying China in : opium produced in Bengal—was ' proving a profitable trade.
ON JANUARY 18, THE NATIONAL CONVENTION OF FRANCE condemned Louis XVI to death.
On January 21 he was taken to the Place de la Révolution, Paris, where he was guillotined.
His wife, Marie Antoinette, remained In prison until October, when she appeared before a Revolutionary tribunal.
Marie Antoinette’s death occurred during the Reign of Terror, which was the result of a decree on September 5 that made “terror” the means of governance.
Eli Whitney’s cotton gin : This machine separated cotton : seeds from the plant's fiber more : quickly than if done by hand, which : increased cotton production greatly.
Robespierre—the Jacobins— also become involved In the : surveillance of potential suspects. : In Saint-Domingue , fighting on the island was : complicated by the arrival of : British troops.
This 2 escalated into a battle of words ' over who had the right to settle | in that territory.
However, the committee felt the need to go further and suspended a suspect's right to public trial and legal assistance, with juries instructed to issue either acquittal or death.
This measure was passed in June, but little more than a month later a revolt in the National Convention ended the reign of Robespierre.
Known as the Thermidorian Reaction, it refers to 9 Thermidor Year II (July 27, 1794], the date in the French Revolutionary Calendar.
This change to the calendar system began in 1792 and lasted until 1806.
Convention asserted its strength, : but the Terror had exacted a high price—some 17,000 people were : officially executed and hundreds ' of thousands arrested. partition the previous year, and : patriots organized the Polish : Rebellion of 1794.
Toussaint Louverture, former slave and military leader 2 view of the island of Penang, Teh of the Dutch settlement of Malacca.
The Strait of Malacca remains a key trade route linking Europe and Africa to China.
Elsewhere in Europe, the War of the First Coalition was drawing to a close, negotiated partially with three treaties under the Peace of Basel.
These agreements gave German lands west of the Rhine River to France, and ended Franco-Spanish fighting around the Pyrenees mountains through Spain's cessation of Santo Domingo to France.
This meant the French now had control of Maroon colony, Jamaica This engraving shows a maroon settlement in Jamaica.
Maroons were former runaway slaves who had established their own autonomy.
DAY IN REVOLUTIONARY ' FRANCE -AROUND 1795 © the whole island of Hispaniola, : although the fighting that had ' begun in Saint-Domingue showed few signs of abating.
OVER A YEAR AFTER SETTING OUT to find the Niger River, Mungo Park , a Scottish surgeon and explorer, finally located it.
He embarked from the River Gambia in 1795, and on July 20, after prolonged illness and four months spent captive, he reached Ségou (in present-day Mali], which lies on the river.
The first documented inoculation was completed by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823] on May 14.
In an attempt to prevent the deadly smallpox virus, which had killed thousands across Europe, Jenner experimented by using cowpox, a similar but less lethal virus often contracted by milking infected animals.
His experiment entailed inoculating eight-year-old James Phipps with cowpox taken from Sarah Nelmes, a dairymaid.
The early success of this experiment led to the development of the modern vaccine.
In Europe, French army commander Napoleon Bonaparte took charge of the French army in northern Italy in March.
He was given orders to seize Lombardy, and went on to win many victories over the Austrian army, subsequently forcing Austria into peace negotiations.
Austria recognized the French puppet state, the Cisalpine Republic, and ceded the Austrian : Netherlands to France.
Lotus, a secret Buddhist sect, : sought to overthrow their Manchu ' rulers and restore the previous : ruling dynasty, the Ming.
White Lotus attracted much : support, but ultimately failed after ' eight years of fighting.
IAS A PERIOD OF AGGRESSIVE EXPANSION of Britain's territorial claims in Bengal began when Irish nobleman Richard Wellesley was appointed Governor-General of Bengal in 1797.
He left for Calcutta in November and set about increasing British territory through both military and diplomatic channels.
This period also saw efforts to professionalize the East India Company.
These included setting up a college in order to teach junior clerks subjects such as Indian languages, though some of these measures were considered controversial at the time.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE (1769-1821} Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Corsica and educated in France, where he became an army officer in 1785.
His successful campaign in Italy was followed by further military and political victories.
In 1804, he was declared emperor and led France on to more battles, though with diminishing success, draining the nation’s resources and ultimately leading to his downfall.
DESPITE THE TERMINATION OF the War of the First Coalition in 1795, France still considered Britain an enemy.
The French mooted the idea of a possible invasion, but it was ultimately rejected due to Britain's superior sea power and naval defenses.
Seeking a way to get around the Royal Navy—as well as disrupt valuable trade—Napoleon proposed to attack the British on the colonial front in India, via Egypt, which he also hoped to conquer.
Setting off from France, he took 35,000 troops, capturing the Mediterranean island of Malta along the way.
Upon reaching Alexandria in July, Napoleon quickly defeated Mameluke troops at the Battle of the Pyramids.
However, on August 1, Irish Revolt Protestant prisoners, suspected of being loyal to British rule, were executed by Irish nationalists in Wexford during the revolt.
Revolutionary France, ' but the British, » : learning of these plots, had forced the : rebels to change their : plans.
The kingdom of Kandy, whose subjects occupied the interior of the island, remained independent. : Their autonomy would become a cause for concern for British ' governors in Ceylon.
Theobald Wolfe Tone : and James : Napier Tandy (1740: 1803), the group had made numerous Wexford.
A French expeditionary force sent Napoleon Bonaparte, 1799 ONCE NAPOLEON BONAPARTE had returned to France from Egypt, he began to focus on his political future, and was soon plotting a coup d’état that involved dissolving the Directory, the body that had been governing the country since 1795.
The outcome of the 18 Brumaire Coup of November 9 was that the Directory was replaced with the Consulate, and Napoleon took charge of France as First Consul.
It fell into British possession by 1801, although it took years of study before ' anyone was able to translate it.
In India, soldiers for the East India Company emerged victorious from a violent battle with the fearsome Tipu Sultan , the ruler of Mysore.
Ancient practices, such as bloodletting to cure illness, were replaced with ones that were born of a more rigorous scientific approach.
People have attempted to treat disease since prehistoric times, but until the 18th century medicine was based largely on superstition, natural remedies, and unscientific practices and theories, such as the theory that the body had four fluids {humors} that needed to be in balance for health.
There had been progress in anatomy and surgery, but overall, medicine remained primitive.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MODERN MEDICINE In the 18th century, medicine started to become more scientifically rigorous, and significant advances were made, such as the development of a vaccine for smallpox in 1796.
The 19th century saw the establishment of the germ theory of disease, the introduction of antiseptic techniques and anesthetics, and the use of X-rays to image the body.
Around 1900, pharmacology began to make great progress, with the invention of aspirin in 1897 and the first synthetic antibacterial drug in 1908.
During the 20th century, more vaccines and drugs were developed, such as antibiotics and anticancer drugs.
Surgical techniques also became more sophisticated; successful organ transplants were performed, and keyhole surgery became routine.
In diagnosis, scanning techniques were invented, and screening became widely used.
From the late 20th century, genetics also began to have a significant impact on medicine as genetic causes of diseases were discovered and genetic testing was developed.
In 1851, British physician Arthur Leared invented the binaural stethoscope, with an earpiece for each ear, and, in the 1940s, Americans Maurice Rappaport and Howard Sprague developed the modern acoustic stethoscope, which has two “bells,” one for listening to the heart, the other for listening to the lungs.
The latest development is the electronic stethoscope, which uses an electronic sound sensor and amplifier.
Trepanned 1550-700 BCE Ancient Egyptian surgery Medical and especially surgical knowledge advances due to the practice of mummification, which gives doctors greater insight into anatomy.
Egyptian knives and curettes 1543 Andreas Vesalius The Brussels-born surgeon writes his influential anatomical work, with accurate diagrams of human anatomy based on many dissections and operations.
Arabic medical manuscript 1818 First blood transfusion British obstetrician James Blundell performs the first successful human-to-human blood transfusion, using a syringe to transfer blood between the patients. 1796 ff Vaccination / / British scientist Edward / Jenner develops a vaccine j for smallpox.
It is the ad first vaccine created for any disease, and J Jenner’s work saves countless lives. i Jenner's inoculation point THE STORY OF MEDICINE gears for clockwork motor powering fan roller crank for winding clockwork motor housing of fan outlet for antiseptic spray hammer to tap antiseptic powder container Antiseptic machine Patented by British surgeon Anthony Bell in 1879, this device was used to make the air in operating rooms free of disease-causing microorganisms.
Robotic suturing 1971 and 1977 CT and MRI scans British scientist Godfrey Hounsfield invents the first commercial CT scanner in 1971.
MRI scan Chloroform inhaler ee ee Wt ne . “ilk ty) . / omy 1 ju | , hic a ont A oi eT rt Tag aba An engraving — peace celebrations in Milan, Italy, after the Treaty of Jean-Jacques Dessalines who fought The Battle of Marengo was a victory | The mausoleum of emperor and for France over Austria.
Despite previous treaties, French military action increased In aggression.
Mistrust of France prompted the formation of the Second Coalition in 1798; by 1799, it comprised Austria, Britain, Russia, Portugal, Naples, and the Ottoman Empire.
On 14 June, Napoleon scored a significant victory against Austria in the Battle of Marengo, the result of which was French control of northern Italy.
Spain, meanwhile, had done little to develop its Louisiana territory in North America, lacking the resources to settle it.
So when Napoleon put pressure on Charles IV to return Louisiana, the Spanish monarch obliged.
Under the terms of the secret Treaty of San Ildefonso, Napoleon agreed not to give the land to c 7 a third power.
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE IRISH REBELLION , British prime minister William Pitt the _ Younger concluded that the solution to the “Irish question” was a political union.
The Act of Union, also approved by the British Government, came into effect on 1 January 1801.
Pitt had hoped the move would allow the granting of concessions to Catholics, but the bill maintained a ban on their holding public office.
In a 1783 treaty, the ruling Bagratid dynasty agreed to Russian b protection, in return for assurances that its territorial — Integrity would be fy preserved.
THOMAS JEFFERSON _ (1743-1826] Virginia-born planter and slave-owner Thomas Jefferson was a leading republican and one of the primary authors of the United State's Declaration of Independence.
Yet for all the influence of his writings on issues Like liberty, he did not free his own slaves during his lifetime.
AFTER 30 YEARS OF CIVIL WAR, Vietnam was united under the leadership of Nguyen Phuc Anh , a powerful general who, with the help of French mercenaries, was able to defeat the rival Trinh family.
Nguyen Anh declared himself emperor, taking the name Gia Long, and reestablished the Nguyen family as the ruling dynasty.
Ongoing warfare in Europe and further afield came to an end with the Treaty of Amiens.
Under the terms of the treaty, Britain kept the colonies of Trinidad, which had been taken from Spain, and Ceylon, which had been captured from the Dutch.
Egypt was restored to the Ottoman Empire, and France agreed to relinquish Malta.
France and Britain at the table A political cartoon of Britain's William Pitt and France's Napoleon Bonaparte carving up the globe around the Peace of Amiens. for Haitian independence.
IN SAINT-DOMINGUE , THE ONGOING WAR TOOK A DECISIVE turn with the capture and exile of General Toussaint Louverture in 1803.
He had joined the French Republican cause ten years earlier (see 1793] and drove out the remaining British forces on the island, before taking up the title of governor in 1801.
Napoleon was, however, displeased with Louverture’s successes and was infuriated when he defied orders, riding into Santo Domingo then under French control and freeing the slaves.
In 1802, Napoleon reinstated slavery and sent 29,000 troops to reclaim the island.
After months of fighting, Louverture was invited to negotiate a settlement.
The battle for abolition then fell to his deputy Jean-Jacques Dessalines.
With most of Napoleon's troops in Saint-Domingue killed on the battlefield or ravaged by yellow fever, Dessalines’ men drove out the remaining soldiers.
French reinforcements were held up by a British blockade of French ports as part of the ongoing war, and France abandoned the island.
The cost of fighting in Haiti had put further strain on France's troubled finances and it occurred to Napoleon that he could raise revenue by selling the large and mostly undeveloped land controlled by France in North America.
Territory gained by the United States : The massive Louisiana territory : almost doubled the size of the US. : The following year it was extended : south to include New Orleans. ' settling further west came to : depend on trade along the : Mississippi River.
St Louis . dr <m (fem ge Bk prom + seem | bh 4b A sketch of an evergreen sshrub leaf from William Clark’ Ss Bit He and Meriwether Lewis spent years exploring the vast Louisiana territory.
AFTER FINALLY OUT of SaintDomingue, Jean-Jacques Dessalines declared the independence of the new republic of Haiti on 1 January 1804.
It was the first— and only—former slave colony to throw off colonial rule and slavery.
Despite this, its birth was met with a wary reception—some In the slave-owning United States did not want Haiti setting an example to the southern states, a concern shared by Britain, whose slave colony of Jamaica was also in close proximity.
The defeat in the Caribbean did little to weaken Napoleon's stranglehold on power in Europe.
In 1804, he made France a hereditary empire, ostensibly to ward off any assassination attempts, but also to showcase his own might.
President Thomas Jefferson to : find the Missouri River, establish ' relations with the indigenous people of the region, and find the : fabled Northwest Passage.
CODE CIVIL pHase, Ais One of Napoleon Bonaparte's most far-reaching reforms was to codify French law.
Enacted in 1804, the Napoleonic Code was a civil code created with the intention of breaking from the institutions of the past.
FRANCE’S DEFEAT IN THE CARIBBEAN at Saint-Domingue was soon overshadowed by victory against Russia and Austria, which had been pulled back into war.
Napoleon had also declared himself the king of Italy, then comprising Venice and northern Italian kingdoms.
This act provoked the formation of a Third Coalition against France, with Britain, Austria, Russia, and Sweden as members.
Deciding against an invasion of Britain, Bonaparte sent forces to Ulm, Bavaria (September 25-October 20), where he was victorious.
However, the day after the Battle of Ulm ended, France suffered a humiliating naval defeat at the hands of the British in the Battle of Trafalgar, under the command influenced by Roman law, and declared all men equal, ending any hereditary nobility.
Napoleonic Code was disseminated throughout French-controlled territory in Europe and beyond, making it highly influential an adapted version is still in force in the Dominican Republic today.
It was also later adopted by some of the new Latin American republics, including Bolivia and Chile.
Europe, occupying Vienna and ' defeating Russia and Austria : at the Battle of Austerliz on : December 2.
PRUSSIA SUFFERED A DEVASTATING defeat against France at the Battle of Jena on October 14.
Fought in Jena and Auserstadt in Saxony (southeast Germany], 122,000 French troops and 114,000 Prussians met in combat.
As a result, Frederick William III decided that internal reform in Prussia was necessary in order to bolster the country’s flagging fortunes.
Although the transition later proved profitable for agriculture, it took years to implement the changes.
In addition to his other conquests, Napoleon wanted control of the Holy Roman Empire, which would expand his territory in Germany.
Emperor Francis II was in no position to challenge France and abdicated, officially ending the empire, of which France took possession.
In the Middle East, the Islamic holy pilgrimage site of Mecca was invaded by members of the Arabian Saudi dynasty who practiced a strict version of the religion known as Wahhabi.
In 1805, they had captured Medina, which, like Mecca, was under the control of the Ottoman Empire.
They also made incursions into the Arabian Peninsula, sacking the city of Karbala, in Iraq [also under Ottoman rule), and extending their influence south to Yemen, a cause for concern among Ottoman officials.
Russia, alongside Prussia, had reentered the hostilities against France with the Battle of Eylau (February 7-8] in eastern Prussia.
The battle was inconclusive and resulted in a stalemate, with both sides losing more than 20,000 troops.
Francisco Goya’s painting The Third of May depicts the French troops A executing Spanish insurgents involved in the Madrid uprising.
ALREADY IN CONTROL OF MOST of western and central Europe, Napoleon now turned toward the Iberian Peninsula.
Enraged by the Portuguese refusal to back a French boycott against Britain, he sent troops into Portugal via northern Spain.
Lured to Bayonne, France, by Napoleon's offer to mediate, Ferdinand VII was forced to abdicate.
As Charles VII had already abdicated, Napoleon was now able to declare his brother, Joseph Bonaparte , the new king of Spain, triggering the Peninsular War.
When news of these events reached Spain's colonies, there were furious outbursts.
In Santo Domingo, loyalists mounted the War of Reconquest , driving out the occupying French troops and declaring the island once more under Spanish control. hammer LONG-STANDING ENEMIES, Spain and Britain now fought alongside each other as they united against France.
British troops met early defeat at the Battle of La Coruna, northwest Spain, fighting French troops under Napoleon's direct command.
Britain was subsequently victorious at the Battle of Talavera , southwest of Madrid, under the leadership of Arthur Wellesley , later known as the Duke of Wellington.
The Spaniards, while fighting the French, had also been establishing provincial bodies, called juntas, in order to organize their resistance.
The central junta in Spain had also issued a decree declaring the American territories to be more than just colonies, but still a part of the monarchy.
While debates about this were underway, similar American juntas were set up, and it soon it became clear that not all the colonies would stay on the path of loyalty to the Crown.
Pistol from Peninsular War Flintlock pistols were widely used in this period.
KEY _ ©) Spanish territory Portuguese territory Latin America on the eve of independence Spain and Portugal still controlled the majority of Central and South _ USING THE EXISTING POLITICAL CHAOS as an opportunity for reform, Spanish politicians called a congress, known as a Cortes, on September 24 in the port of Cadiz.
Deputies numbered 104, with 30 representing the colonial territories, although more arrived later.
The Cortes declared itself the source of national sovereignty and began to draw up a constitution, although Spaniards were divided as to the extent they wished the government to be restructured.
The colonies represented a population far greater than Spain’s, meaning Cortes.
The peninsular politicians wished to avoid this, yet needed the colonies’ continued support.
Some members of the public in the colonies began taking matters into their own hands.
One of the rebels involved in the deliberations for independence, Simon Bolivar (see panel, below], had recently returned from England, where he had tried to elicit British support for their cause, but he was unsuccessful.
They feared the machines would eventually replace them, thereby forcing them into unemployment and poverty.
He was sent to Europe at 164, where he was inspired by the writings of Enlightenment thinkers on the issue of liberty.
Soon after returning to South America in 1807, he became involved in independence conspiracies.
Later known as El Libertador, he led much of northern South America to independence from Spain.
He also ruled Gran Colombia, but the political union ultimately failed.
RUSSIA, LIKE PORTUGAL, DECIDED to resist Napoleon's Continental System, measures intended to damage the economy of Britain.
Russia had withdrawn from it in 1810, and Napoleon resolved to mount an invasion in retaliation.
He sent more than 500,000 troops to Russia in June and won early victories at the battles of Smolensk on August 17 and Borodino on September 7, arriving with his forces in Moscow on September 14.
Russian troops held off any further advance, and as the brutal Russian winter set in, Napoleon's troops began to falter.
The Grand Armée was running short on food and many soldiers, unaccustomed to such extreme cold, died.
His troops took Medina in 1812 , and Jeddah and Mecca the following year.
France had nearly 185,000 troops, but the allies outnumbered them with more than 300,000 soldiers from Austria, Russia, Prussia, and Sweden.
Even after this loss, Napoleon still refused to sign a peace deal that would put France's boundary back to the Rhine River and the Alps.
While Russia was caught up in the Napoleonic conflict, it was also entangled with territorial deals further east; Russia and Persia signed the Treaty of Gulistan, in which Russia was given a large area of Persian Caucasus territory.
The territories, which had been a dominion of Persia, had appealed to Persia's shah for help in resisting Russia.
In Venezuela, Simon Bolivar had won an important victory against the Spanish and captured Caracas, though Spain's forces would later defeat him, forcing him into exile for two years.
During this period he went to Jamaica and Haiti to regroup and enlist further support before returning to Venezuela In 1816.
He abdicated on April 6 and was exiled to the island of Elba, off the Tuscan coast of Italy.
To replace him, Louis XVIII (1755-1824]—brother of the beheaded Louis XVI—was placed on the French throne.
A painting depicts the 17th-century Temple of Tooth, located in the kingdom of Kandy, where one of Buddha’s teeth is preserved.
ALTHOUGH HE WAS EXILED FROM FRANCE, Napoleon rallied enough supporters to help him mount his return, and he entered Paris on March 20—just 11 months after his forced departure.
Once he had an army assembled, Napoleon mounted attacks against his enemies, defeating Prussia at Ligny [in present-day Belgium) on June 16.
This clash was the definitive defeat : of Napoleon Bonaparte, after which he was forced to abdicate and go into exile.
AN O Ye & eS ee ws ae pe Ro WF OD > RN) os A native inhabitant in Alaska, territory which Russia had claimed.
A RUSSIAN ORTHODOX PRIEST, Father Sokoloff, was sent to Sitka, in the Alaska territory, to build a church in the town as part of Russia's bid to colonize the region.
Alaska had lingered as an outpost but settlements began to grow as 4 trade in sea otter furs flourished.
In southern Africa, Shaka (c.87-1828}, a fierce warrior, took over the rule of the Zulus.
THE FIGHT AGAINST SPANISH rule took a decisive turn when Argentine-born General José de San Martin led | around 3,000 troops from Argentina into Chile through treacherous passages in the Andes mountains, and launched a surprise attack on royalist forces on February 12— the Battle of Chacabuco.
Serbia had also been fighting once more for independence, after being invaded by the Turks in 1813.
The Second Serbian Uprising was successful, and most of their former rights were regained by 1817.
Egyptian forces led by Muhammad Ali recaptured the holy cities of Mecca and Medina.
Wahhabi power had spread quickly, and from their Arabian base they had secured control of Mecca, Medina, and Jedda.
Syria was under threat when Muhammad Ali received his orders to defeat the Wahhabi and return the cities to Ottoman rule.
A final siege of the capital Diriyah (in present-day Saudi Arabia] put a temporary end to Wahhabi ambitions.
In South America, the effort led by José de San Martin at the Battle of Maipu on April 5 secured independence for Chile when loyalist troops suffered a crushing defeat.
Cochrane, the rebels also managed to break the Spanish hold on the coastline.
In Paris, German inventor Baron Karl von Drais de Sauerbrun was impressing crowds with a display of his draisienne, a two-wheeled machine that was the precursor to the modern bicycle.
Mary Shelley : The English novelist Mary Shelley : published her first novel, : Frankenstein, in 1878, and it : remains a literary classic today. including Briton Denis Johnson © , a coachmaker by ' training, who designed a “pedestrian curricle,” later known as a dandy horse.
Peter’s Field in Manchester, England, turned from a protest about high food prices and lack of popular suffrage into the Peterloo Massacre.
Magistrates, concerned about the size of the crowd, ordered the Yeomanry [voluntary cavalry officers) to arrest the speakers, but they attacked the crowd when they refused to make way.
Stamford Raffles ' arrived in Singapore, which was then part of the Riau-Johor The East India Companies monopolized trade between Europe and Southeast Asia, India, and the Far East from the early 17th century.
The charter for the Dutch Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie was revoked in 1799 when the government took control of it.
Sweden's Svenska Ostindiska Companiet folded in 1813, while Britain's East India Company traded until 1874.
Trade beads were obtained from white traders. beading intricate beading beaded tails Blue-beaded arm band Late 19th century e SARCEE This arm band from the Sarcee people, a nation of Plains Indians, is beaded into a pattern using blue, pink, black, and yellow polka dots.
A\ |V For thousands of years, millions of aboriginal people lived in North America, but their world was shattered and their population declined drastically when the Europeans arrived, bringing new diseases and weapons.
Glenary hat 1860 e IROQUOIS Made of black velvet, this lroquois hat has intricate beadwork and a floral pattern woven around the bottom.
European explorers encountered diverse cultures in the North American continent, ranging from the Arctic world of the Aleut, Innu, and Inuit to the hot, dry home of the Hopi in the southwest.
Trade was one way Europeans exerted their influence on native populations, and tribes such as the Sioux, Blackfoot, Sarcee, and Arapaho in the Great Plains, and the Iroquois and Mohawk of the Great Lakes were soon in regular contact with the European settlers. pelt pouch to hold needles wooden handle Hide-working tool 1890 e ALEUT Skinning and butchering was uSually a woman's task.
This hide-working tool scrapes the hides of sea otters and whales hunted by the Aleut. carved wood used as hook metallic blade sewing implement Fish hook 19th century e ALEUT Wood, bone, and fiber were used to make this fishhook.
The wood Is carved into a U-shape, with points of bone at both the ends.
Sewing kit 1880 ¢ INNU AND INUIT This sewing kit consists of tools made by carving bones and a pouch made from seal skin and animal fur. decoration on fur velvet feather indicates success In hunting or war horsehair Chieftain’s headdress 1930 ¢ ARAPAHO This headdress of Yellow Calf, the last chief of the Arapaho, was made with feathers and decorated fur.
It was worn close to the head. double-edged stone head head made of iron War club Late 19th century e PLAINS INDIANS Apart from war clubs, Plains Indian raiding parties were often armed with bows and arrows, shields, lances, and scalping knives. detailed beadwork leather cover on handle wooden handle rawhide tassel rawhide — atlape Pipe bag Late 19th century e sioux American Indians smoked tobacco in pipes.
AS THE UNITED STATES began the settlement of western territories, the issue of slavery could not be ignored.
Most of the northern states had abolished the practice, but the southern states had become increasingly dependent on slave labor.
When the Missouri territory petitioned for statehood in 1817, it caused a political crisis over whether the federal government had the right to restrict slavery in this territory.
The solution was the Missouri Compromise, which allowed slavery in Missouri, but not in any new state north of 36°30’ latitude.
Much of Europe, meanwhile, was convulsed by political unrest, with revolts in the Italian states, Portugal, France, and the Low Countries.
In 1823, France’s Louis XVIII—who Egyptian Mameluke soldiers were former slaves.
By invading Sudan, Egypt hoped to add Sudanese captives to their ranks.
Slave population : Although the slave population was : small in Missouri, the question of ' permitting slavery in the state 2 caused a political crisis in the US. : had been restored to the throne —sent in troops to | “free” Ferdinand.
Resentful at years of living under oppression, people from across Greek society—including the Orthodox Church—began to plot their liberation.
These organizations involved people living on the islands, but also had significant support from the large Greek diaspora.
At the same time, rebels in the Americas were able to take advantage of Spain's internal crisis and weakness to make the final push for independence.
Mexico managed to secure its liberation after Mexican royalists, upon hearing the news of events in Spain [see 1820), decided that self-rule was the only way to avoid a liberal regime as had happened in Spain.
On August 24, a treaty was signed recognizing Mexican independence, and on May 19 the former royalist Agustin de Iturbide crowned himself emperor Agustin I Farther south, the Congress of Cucuta was formed and formally established Gran Colombia, consisting of present-day Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, and Ecuador.
In Peru, José de San Martin led his troops into Lima and declared Peru independent, though fighting to secure its freedom continued.
Pedro, the son of the king of Portugal, had declared the colony's independence.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PORTUGAL AND BRAZIL had been fundamentally affected when the Portuguese court, fleeing Napoleon, arrived in Brazil in 1808.
After John VI returned to Portugal in 1821, he left his son, Dom Pedro (17981834), in charge of the kingdom of Brazil, as Prince Regent.
Dom Pedro, frustrated by the attempt of the Portuguese Cortes to reduce Brazil to its pre-1808 colonial status, issued his Grito de Ipiranga (Cry of Ipiranga declaring Brazil's independence and crowning himself Emperor Pedro I Even the loyalist Santo Domingo, on the island of Hispaniola, was swept up in the revolutionary spirit of the time, declaring independence in 1821, though it failed to realize a plan to join Gran Colombia.
Santo Domingo’s neighbor, Haiti (previously Saint-Domingue], grew concerned that France or Britain might sneak through the AFRICA ~ ATLANTIC OCEAN Liberia Located on the West Coast of Africa, alongside slaving ports, a colony for freed slaves was established by the American Colonization Society.
Domingo and launch an attack to ' recolonize and re-enslave the : island.
Santo Domingo—Haiti’s president, | Jean-Pierre Boyer (in office : 1818-50), arrived in Santo : Domingo with his forces.
American Colonization Society, founded in 1816, advocated they ' be returned to Africa.
Gal The Alaungpaya dynasty’s invasion of northern India led to Britain declaring war and eventually capturing the coastal city of Rangoon, pictured.
Concerned about the possibility of European incursion into the new republics of Latin America, Monroe attempted to set boundaries between Europe and the Americas.
The doctrine stated that the United States would not interfere in the internal affairs or wars of European powers, nor in any colonies in the Americas, but likewise declared the western hemisphere now closed to any further European attempts at colonization.
His time in office was a period during which the United States began to emerge as a Serious global power.
This period was known as the ‘era of good feelings,’ and was marked by significant economic growth and general public optimism.
America, which was composed : of Guatemala, El Salvador, : Nicaragua, Honduras, and : Costa Rica.
The local leaders decided ' to break away and establish a 2 federal republic, with the capital ' in Guatemala City.
Burma (present-day Myanmar, see 1752), had been making ' incursions into the northern ' Indian state of Assam, bringing ' them into contact with the British, : who were occupying the region.
Lord Byron The Romantic poet Lord Byron was inspired by the Greek struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire, and went to Greece to fight.
AS THE FIGHT FOR GREEK INDEPENDENCE INTENSIFIED, it attracted the public's attention across Europe, especially among writers and artists.
One such person was the English Romantic poet Lord Byron , famed for his poem Don Juan.
Byron had arrived in Greece the previous year to help fight in the struggle.
However, while he was abroad, he contracted a serious illness and died on April 19 in Missolonghi.
In Peru, a decisive victory at the Battle of Ayacucho, December 9, meant the end of Spanish rule, though to the north, in the territory known as Upper Peru, loyalist forces were still holding out against rebel troops, in one of the last bastions of fighting.
THE TERRITORY OF UPPER PERU received a much-needed boost with the arrival of Simon Bolivar (see 1811] and Antonio José de Sucre , whose troops helped to defeat the Spanish.
Bolivar wanted this territory to unite with the rest of Peru, but Sucre had already agreed with the rebel leaders that it would become a separate republic.
In honor of Bolivar’s help, the rebels named the new nation Bolivia, and they invited Sucre to be its first president, which he accepted.
With the creation of Bolivia, all the former Spanish colonies—with the exception of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines—had become independent nations.
Technological innovations in the use of steam ' to power engines had led to the development of railroad ' locomotives, such as the one . designed by English inventor : John Blenkinsop in 1812. George Stephenson (1781-1848], : a colliery mechanic, improved ' on that design and caught the ' attention of a group of investors : wishing to link the towns of : Stockton and Darlington. Darlington was in the middle of a coal mining region and the » Pennine mountains made transportation difficult.
TENSIONS BETWEEN RUSSIA AND Persia restarted over the Caucasus region, with the Persians attempting to take back the territory of Georgia in 1825.
However, a crushing defeat at the Battle of Ganja on September 26, 1826 halted the Persian advance.
Russian troops then marched into Persia, eventually taking Tehran, leaving the Persians no option but to accept defeat.
They negotiated the Treaty of Turkmanchai, which put the Russian border at the Aras River, returning the Caucasus territory to Russia.
In Hawaii, United States missionaries had started to settle on the islands and America had become one of the kingdom's largest trading partners.
The United States was looking to protect its growing interests there by formalizing trade arrangements In the face of possible European competition, so It convinced the regency government of King Kamehameha III to sign the Hawaii-United States Treaty of 1826.
The treaty stipulated that there would be peaceful and friendly political and trading relations between the two.
In France, inventor JosephNicéphore Niépce took the world’s first photograph, known as View from the Window at Le Gras, which was of a barnyard in France.
GF Xe Por ak x ar oe Xe) 5 ae AS GREECE'S BATTLE AGAINST the Ottoman Empire continued, neighboring powers began to call for an end to the conflict.
Britain, France, and Russia joined together to sign the Treaty of London on July 6, which demanded the establishment of an independent Greek state.
The Ottomans refused, confident they had the land and sea power to defeat the Greeks.
By autumn, the Ottoman resources were put to the test as a Turkish-Egyptian fleet went up against a naval force comprising British, French, and Russian ships at the Battle of Navarino on October 20.
The Russo—European ships sunk three-quarters of the Ottoman fleet, and this humiliating defeat led to the eventual withdrawal of Turkish troops from Greece, which won independence in 1832.
A one-sided battle A Turkish warship burns fiercely at the Battle of Navarino, in which the Ottoman fleet was devastated but not a single allied ship was lost.
HOUR THE TOP SPEED OF THE FIRST 1 MILES PER 4 United States STEAM José Gervasio Artigas Artigas was the father of the Uruguayan independence movement, but had been in exile for several years when it was finally liberated.
THE TREATY OF MONTEVIDEO RECOGNIZED the independence of Uruguay in August 1828.
The area, then known as the Banda Oriental, was disputed between Brazil and Argentina.
It had been under Spanish control but during the wars of independence in South America, under the leadership of José Gervasio Artigas (17641850), the territory established its independence from Spain and Argentina in 1815.
Lavalleja, with Argentinian support, defeated Brazilian troops and founded an independent Uruguay.
Daniel O’Connell, a Catholic lawyer, called for England to repeal its anti-Catholic laws, arguing that it could not claim to be representing the people of lreland.
In 1828, O'Connell stood for parliament and won, though he was not allowed to sit in government because of his Catholicism.
His victory, however, attracted the attention of the British prime minister, Arthur Wellesley, the Duke of Wellington (see 1815}, who was Irish though not Catholic.
He oversaw the Catholic Relief Act 1829, which allowed Catholics in Ireland and England to take seats in Parliament and hold public office.
Elsewhere in England, inventor George Stephenson (see 1825] unveiled a new locomotive engine, known as the Rocket, which reached speeds of about 36 miles (58km] per hour.
He had entered the Liverpool and Manchester Railway competition for best new engine.
This year also saw progress of the railroad in the US, with the first American-built steam locomotive, Tom Thumb.
In 1830, a race was Staged against a horse-drawn cart to prove the superiority of steam power.
Although the horse won on this occasion due to a techinal fault with the train, the point was made and the owners of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad agreed to switch to steam trains.
The rebellion had been triggered by Charles's attempt to enforce repressive ordinances, such as suspending the freedom of the press and modifying electoral law so many people lost their right to vote.
Louis-Philippe’s succession to the throne signaled the arrival of power for the bourgeoisie, who were his chief support, rather than the aristocracy, and he remained in power until 1848.
Around the same time, revolts were taking place in the Italian and German kingdoms; in the Netherlands; and in Russia, as the Polish living under Russian rule rose up against the czar.
Husayn (r.18-38], had struck a : French consul with a fly whisk, giving the French a pretext for ' an unpaid debt between France and the dey.
The Congress of Vienna had forced the Belgian territories, which had been under French control, to unite with the Dutch, thereby creating a buffer between Russia and France.
This move proved unpopular and tensions grew over the intervening years.
By August 1830, inspired by events in France, the Belgian Revolution had begun.
On January 20, 1831, the new state of Belgium was officially recognized by Britain and France, though not the Netherlands.
The Belgians were forced to choose a monarch with no direct connection to other major European powers.
They finally elected Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld—the uncle of Britain's Queen Victoria—and he ruled as Leopold I until 1865.
The same year, Syria was annexed by Egypt until 1840, when the latter was finally forced to return the region to the Ottomans.
A bill was drafted, aimed at transferring votes and redistributing seats from small “rotten” boroughs controlled by the nobility to the more populous industrial towns.
This caused serious riots in many cities, as well as a political crisis with the prime minister, Charles Grey (1764-1845], who threatened to step down over the matter.
The size of the first cotton spinning machines meant they were best operated by children.
A Galapagos cactus finch, one of the species noted by Charles Darwin. for Texan independence.
AS SETTLERS IN THE United States MOVED WEST, many decided to live in the Texas territory, which was part of Mexico.
However, Mexican authorities wanted tighter control over this large territory and the settlers rebelled in October 1835, launching the Texas War of Independence.
Amendment Act of 1834 Galapagos in September 1835 General Antonio Lopez de Santa progressed rapidly.
Conditions in Factory Act appointed inspectors the workhouses were deliberately the rebels managed to hold them off during a battle at a San to monitor factories and limited ' harsh and the legislation America.
In China, British merchants work on the evolution of different | defeated but the Alamo proved a provided some relief for the elderly, : were granted permission to species (see 1859]. rallying point for Texans bent on ill, and impoverished.
Out of this engage in trade after legislation In Britain, the National revenge.
Soon after, General grew a system of workhouses, ended the East India Company's Colonisation Society had been set | Samuel Houston aiming to give employment to 3 monopoly.
Muhammad Ali, the pasha, was angered by a _ failed promise from the Ottoman sultan to give him the territory.
Founder Edward Gibbon Wakefield —who had served time in prison—came up with a scheme for populating colonies based on the sale of land and a tax on the price, which would pay for the transportation to the colony.
EXPERIMENTS had been taking place for decades over the question of how to transmit electric current through wires.
In 1837, two British inventors, William Fothergill Cooke and Charles Wheatstone, made a breakthrough and secured a patent for an electric telegraph device that allowed for communication through wires and Texans had needles that could point to specific letters and numbers.
France got involved, demanding Mexican forces in the battle fought Samuel Morse received a patent free young children, and compensated : 4 settlement, in which Egypt was Charles Darwin, from Journal of between 23 February and 6 March on an electromagnetic transmitter planters in most of the British Empire. : given Syria, and Russia withdrew.
Reforms, restricting migration : to urban areas and instigating price controls—but they failed.
Along with the expansion in rail transport, travel by sea was also being revolutionized by many innovations.
Kingdom Brunel , who : had also been involved in other engineering projects, including : the Great Western Railway.
WHILE BRITISH TRADE IN CHINA _ CONTINUED TO EXPAND, so too _ did the Chinese opium problem.
Decades earlier, the East India _ Company had started exporting _ the drug, produced from poppies _ grown in Bengal, to China in order to trade it for tea, which it then sent to Britain.
On _ March 30, 1839, one frustrated Chinese commissioner ordered British warehouses and ships in Canton to be destroyed.
Britain sent warships in retaliation, attacking China's coastline in the First Opium War.
Meanwhile, tensions between Egypt and the Ottoman sultan erupted again in the Second Turko-Egyptian War.
Callags at 7 ey j ania Worried about Russia’s Nees ato Grosso PACIFIC eb ; OCEAN es Rio de Janeiro DARWIN’S JOURNEY Copiapo # Feb 1832 eesiiiesitiesiitesiiet Sep 1835 f Valparaiso ar Buenos Aires Darwin's Beagle coc Montevideo voyages Charles Darwin's five-year ; aa) ATLANTIC sla de Chiloé OCEAN voyage on ee the Beagle, a warship Archipelago carrying ten cannons, led him to consider scientific evidence In new ways.
What Thales noticed was that if he rubbed a piece of amber against fur it would attract bits of dust and feathers lying nearby—although he did not know it, he had stumbled on what we know today as Static electricity.
POWER TO THE PEOPLE As the 1800s progressed, understanding about electricity rapidly increased, and new innovations were rolled out in quick succession.
By the dawn of the 20th century, many of the technologies were in place that are still with us today—such as batteries and light bulbs—though they have since been further adapted and refined.
Today, the scientific challenge Is to find ways of generating electricity that do not cause pollution.
Wimshurst machine The English inventor James Wimshurst developed a device that could generate static electricity and store it ina vessel called a Leyden jar.
For many years, scientists studying electricity used Wimshurst machines to produce electric charge.
Voltaic 1799-1800 The first voltaic pile The Italian inventor Alessandro Volta creates the first battery, known as the voltaic pile—the unit “volt” is later named after him. feathers. and wool threads. pile 1600 1745-46 1752 Gilbert’s De Magnete The Leyden jar Lightning conductor Pieter van Musschenbroe and Ewald Georg von Kleist independently invent a device that allows static electricity to be stored.
English physician William Gilbert publishes his famous work on magnetism.
Leyden Jar United States scientist Benjamin Franklin flies a kite during a storm, with a key tied to the string, and proves that lightning is a form of electricity.
He spent years working out a way—using incandescent bulbs—to make electric lighting practical and safe for public use. 1820s-30s Faraday experiments English scientist Michael Faraday further illustrates the relationship between electricity and magnetism with his induction ring.
The idea is improved by United States scientist Thomas Edison, and the light bulb is born.
JJ Thomas Edison, United States inventor, 1903 wires carry electricity to and from _ filament carbonized bamboo filament moves electrons This English inventor played an important role in furthering knowledge about the relationship between magnets and electricity.
His discovery of what he metal end screws Into lamp contact transmits electricity We called “electromagnetic rotation” was a vital step in the development of what would become the electric motor.
Faraday worked out that the interaction between electricity and a magnet would lead to the constant rotation of current, something he tested using a wire carrying electricity, a magnet, and a bowl of mercury.
Hoover Dam 1881 The world’s first public electric lighting The English town of Godalming, Surrey, brings to a close the era of the gas lamp when it wires its streets with electric lighting.
Steam turbine 1884 Electricity from steam Like liquid water, steam is also harnessed for electricity by devices like the turbine, created by Charles Patton.
Tesla coil Early 21st century Sustainable electricity Growing worries about pollution caused by the older ways of generating energy lead to the development of “green” technology, such as wind turbines. 1950s Nuclear power Scientists discover that atoms can be used—in controlled nuclear reactions—as a source of energy to heat water, which then generates electricity.
The development of stagecoaches meant post could be delivered all over Britain.
EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT OF New Zealand had gradually increased over the previous decade, and included the introduction of many missions.
Settlers traded with the Maori, who were already living on the island—exchanging European muskets for Maori crops and livestock.
In 1840, William Hobson (1792Zealand, approached Maori chiefs with the Treaty of Waitangi.
Nene was a warrior and chieftain of : the Maori Ngatihoa tribe in the early 1842], lieutenant-governor of New : 19th century.
AS CHINESE AND BRITISH TROOPS continued to fight in the Opium War, Britain's ships sailed up the Pearl River, capturing forts around Canton, followed by the ports of Amoy and Ningpo.
A preliminary agreement to end the war, drafted in January and known as the Convention of Chuenpee, ceded Hong Kong to the British, but the document was written amid continued hostilities and was never ratified.
Egypt and the Turks, meanwhile, ended their second war over Syria , with Egyptian troops withdrawing from Syria.
THE OPIUM WAR between Britain and China finally came to an end after British troops took further territory, reaching Nanking In August.
Chinese officials sued for peace, resulting in the Treaty of Nanking on August 29.
China was forced to pay an indemnity of $20 million to the British and officially Foochow, Ningpo, and Shanghai to British trade.
Industrialization and the mining industry resulted in many children being forced to work under dirty and dangerous conditions.
In Britain, social reformer Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury , became a peyAray eee An illustration depicting a caravan of African slaves.
In the US, the state of | Massachusetts passed legislation to limit a child’s work day to ten ' hours.
It was also made | to open the ports of Canton, Amoy, | plans were rejected.
The slave trade and the practice of slavery still persisted in many ' countries.
Portugal's 1818 treaty with Britain and subsequent treaties were not honored, nor was | slavery abolished in its bP @ colonies.
However, in 1842, a further treaty _ allowed British ships to attack Portuguese slave ships off East Africa.
The territory was annexed by the I , ' 1 , ) \ \ J | l , J | Roy THE NUMBER OF BOERS WHO MIGRATED FROM THE CAPE COLONY British in 1843.
Many Boers decided to move farther north to what later became the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, joining the emigration of Boers from the Cape Colony, in a move known as the Great Trek.
Despite the treaty between the Maori and the British in New Zealand (see 1840}, the issue of illegal land sales caused increased tensions, culminating in the Wairau Massacre on June 17, in which a chief's wife and 22 Europeans were killed.
Friedrich Engels The Prussian philosopher wrote about the condition of the working classes in England.
FRIEDERICH ENGELS was the son of a prosperous businessman who owned textile mills in Prussia and a cotton mill in England.
Duarte , launched their ' fight for the independence of the : Spanish-speaking side of the : island of Hispaniola (see 1822]. : With neighboring Haiti distracted ' by its own civil war, Duarte and his fellow rebels were able to eject the Haitians and declared the new : Dominican Republic independent from Haiti on February 27.
Meanwhile, Samuel Morse (see 1837) had managed to get funding Glass and iron The Palm House at the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, UK, was built in 1844, constructed with plate glass and iron.
SUCCESSIVE FAILURES OF THE potato crop in Ireland triggered a famine that lasted five years and left more than one million people dead.
The crop failure, due to late blight (see panel, right], was particularly devastating because for millions of the rural poor, the potato was their staple food.
Rather than intervene directly, it directed landlords to shoulder the burden.
However, as many small tenant farmers had no crops to sell, rents went unpaid , and landlords ran their tenants off the land.
The blight responsible for the failure of Ireland's potato crop was Phytophthora infestans, a mold that caused rot within two weeks.
Blight spreads quickly when humidity stays above 75 percent and temperatures above 50°F for two full days; both factors were present during the summer of 1845.
The to accept this annexation and refuted the United States claim that the new Rio Grande, stating it lay farther north, at the Nueces River.
A diplomatic mission was sent to Mexico City in 1845 to settle the matter, as well as to attempt the purchase of the New Mexico and California territories, but these efforts were met with a snub.
The following year, on April 25, Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande and attacked soldiers stationed there.
The United States President, James K Polk (1795-1849] declared war, and fighting lasted until Mexico surrendered in 1847.
Legislation to protect domestic ' agriculture by limiting the import ' of cheap grain and fix prices had state’s southern border was at the : : establishment of the Anti-Corn | Law League in 1839.
The control of exports also limited the external market for British goods.
He gained the support of Algerian tribes who aided him in his fight against the French.
In Germany, a telegraph line connecting Frankfurt to Berlin was installed by a firm owned by Werner Siemens (1816-92], who had developed a technique for seamless Insulation of copper wire.
Meanwhile, English author Emily Bronté (1818-48} published Wuthering Heights.
Although not met with much critical acclaim, it later became one of the most influential literary examples of the Romanticism movement.
FRIEDRICH ENGELS AND KARL MARX joined a revolutionary group of Germans known as the League of the Just who soon changed their name to the Communist League.
Engels and Marx were charged with developing a program of action for the group, and the result was a pamphlet that became known as the Communist Manifesto.
Marx believed the gulf between rich and poor in Europe meant conditions were ripe for a socialist revolution.
In February, only a couple of weeks after the manifesto’s publication, the streets of Paris ' erupted into revolution.
France had been suffering an economic depression and a ' minister named Francois Guizot had come to symbolize the ' government's inability to alleviate : the situation.
Company considered Singh's COMMUNISM laid the foundation of a political movement that sought to share —a vast area of land that included : force of 100,000 Khalsa the means of production, such as land or factories, equally among California.
Communists aimed to create a classless and stateless carpenter named James Wilson _:_ to confront.
Yemen, at the foot of the : struggles led to a workers’ : Empire, Germany, and the Italian other countries.
Bonaparte , who had ' Germany saw street fighting in mid-19th century. : Sea.
This unrest was not limited to : of Prussia promising to grant explorer and missionarynamed : PRE-RAPHAELITES ' France.
Vienna, and anew government interior that he had heard with the state of British of factors involved: high food ' was appointed, while many of its about—known today as Lake : painting at the Royal Academy, prices, economic depression, territories, such as Hungary, Ngami.
IN THE SAME WAY CHINA HAD TRIED TO KEEP European ships from its ports, it had also tried to drive out Christian missionaries, thereby limiting the influence of Christianity.
Despite this, by the mid-19th century some 200,000 Chinese had been converted, and thousands more were familiar with the religion.
In 1850, officials sent troops to disband a religious society whose beliefs were loosely based on Protestant ideas.
This sect was led by Hong Xiuquan who, believing himself to be the younger brother of Jesus Christ, launched a revolt that became the Taiping Rebellion.
Drawn by his call to share property, many starving peasants joined the ranks and fighting went on for 14 years, claiming millions of lives.
Some six m i} ry Z a | hand-colored lithograph shows the Crystal Palace at the Great Exhibition of zt illion people visited it in six months.
The Great Exhibition, as it became known, was housed in the Crystal Palace, an exhibition hall made of glass and iron built for the occasion.
Some six million people pored over the 100,000 exhibitions between May 1 and October 31.
Of the 14,000 participating exhibitioners, almost half were from overseas.
An enormous variety of agricultural and manufactured items were on display, ranging from the Koh-i-Noor diamond from India to tapestries from Persia, and British engineering equipment.
In the same year as this global event, a telegraph cable was laid across the English Channel, facilitating rapid international communication.
Wales the same year prompted a : gold rush that tripled the country’s : population over the next ten years.
HOSTILITIES HAD ONCE AGAIN flared up between British troops and the Burmese.
After making extensive territorial gains in the last war against Burma (see 1823), Britain was eager to control more of the area.
Wider control would create an overland coastal connection from Calcutta in Britain's Indian territory to the British port in Singapore.
The East India Company also wanted access to the teak forests in Burma.
In 1852, the British seized a ship belonging to Burma's king, and this was enough to start the Second Anglo-Burmese War.
Lasting only a few months, British troops were able to take southern territory, ousting the reigning king, Pagan Min , and installing his brother, Mindon Min , who was willing to accept British control of the southern portion of the kingdom.
In West Africa, in present-day Senegal, Muslim Tukulor chief Umar Tall capitalized on unrest between the Dinguiraye and Bambara people to wage a jihad (holy war] on part of upper Senegal, taking control of the territory.
This was followed two years later with a similar acceptance of the settlers’ new Orange Free State. — ee ee ee “A Commodore Matthew Perry brought Japan a railroad car asa gift.
United States COMMODORE MATTHEW PERRY had been charged with opening up trade between the United States and the secluded Japan.
Japan had been under international pressure to open up its ports to foreign merchants for years.
The Dutch, who were the only Europeans allowed very limited access to trade in Japan, sent a mission in 1844 urging the country’s rulers to allow in more ships.
However, the United States government was eager to secure trading rights in East Asia and so sent Perry to further negotiate.
He arrived on July 8 and refused to leave until he had delivered his letters.
The Japanese relented after a few days and took his papers, which requested a trade treaty.
They eventually consented to the terms, and the Treaty of Kanagawa was concluded the following year.
As China was contending with the Taiping Rebellion , another uprising broke out in the central and eastern provinces.
The rebels were composed of many outlaws, as well as peasants from famine-stricken areas.
With the government otherwise engaged, the rebels were able to form armies and begin the Nien Rebellion.
Over the course of the next 15 years they gained control of much of northern China, although they were eventually defeated.
The conflict was fueled by the decision of Czar Nicholas | to declare the right to protect Orthodox Christians living under Ottoman rule.
September they landed troops in 2 Russia's Crimea territory and ' began a siege of Sevastopol.
Had it not been for French intervention, ' the casualty rate would have been higher than 40 percent.
MISSIONARY DAVID LIVINGSTONE was exploring the interior of Africa (see 1849} on his second expedition.
He was convinced a trade route to the sea existed, and sailed up the Zambezi River in November 1853 to find it.
He was the first European to see the falls and renamed them Victoria Falls.
To the East, in Siam , King Mongkut , known for his interest in the West, signed commercial agreements with Britain and the United States in an effort to open up Siamese trade.
United States filibusterer William Walker surrenders to Costa Rican troops.
IN NICARAGUA, US-BORN WILLIAM WALKER , who had arrived in the country in 1855 with 58 men, declared himself president.
He was initially invited by Francisco Castellon , who had been trying to organize a liberal revolt.
Walker intended to establish Nicaragua as a Slave state; southern United States states wanted to enlarge slaveholding territory as abolitionism grew.
Walker was eventually captured by invading Costa Rican forces and later shot.
English painter Thomas Jones Barker 'S The Relief of Lucknow co mpleted in 1859, depicts British forces defending this colonial city after the end of a prolonged siege during the Sepoy Rebellion.
Their new rifle cartridges were reputed to be greased with pork and beef fat.
The cartridges were for a new type of rifle, the Enfield, and to load them the ends of the paper cartridges needed to be bitten off.
For Hindu and Muslim soldiers, allowing beef or pork fat in their mouths went against their respective religions beliefs.
Added to this rumor were various other grievances, together with a British Indian 311,000 British-Indian army in 1857 A much larger proportion of Indians than British served in the army, making an uprising involving the Indian troops a serious threat.
Enfield rifle and cartridges The paper cartridges contained powder and a bullet.
After removing the cartridge's end, the powder was poured out into the barrel.
British army was similarly brutal, ' and they recaptured Delhi in : September and Lucknow the : following March.
This conflict was the culmination : : of frustration with the East India Company's rule as well ' as creeping westernization as : Britain annexed more territories and sent out more officials.
Mutiny had shown the level of : Indian discontent and anger, : which would continue to grow : under British rule, while at the ' same time helping to fuel the : independence movement.
In additon to the conflict in India, British troops had returned to battle in China.
Supreme Court in 1857, where ' the justices voted against freeing : Scott on the grounds that he was ' not entitled to rights as a United States ' citizen, including the right to sue : ina court of law.
Q A contemporary oil painting illustrates the 1860 Battle of Guadalajara during the Mexican Reform War between liberals and conservatives.
Installed in the government as justice minister, Juarez and other liberals, including president Ignacio Comonfort , drafted a new constitution curbing military and ecclesiastical privileges, such as the allocation of special courts for civil trials, and some landholding rights.
The constitution, which also prohibited slavery and called for a democracy in Mexico, went into effect in 1857.
City on January 1, 1861 as : president, taking control of the : whole country, and he once again | put the constitution into effect.
France, meanwhile, was — p, — AS _— United States Marines under the command of Colonel Robert E Lee smash the armory door at Harper’s Ferry, behind which John Brown and his men were besieged.
Singapore Sumatra INDIAN OCEAN INDIES KEY Melv-lasiiclin MW Netherlands Ea Bares WW Spain _ EUROPE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA — OUTER MONGOLIA Port Arthur Peking } Canton _ Saigon_f_} Khabarovsk Vladivostok , JAPANESE EMPIRE ~ -AVZ0) a: FP Weihaiwei Shanghai Tientsin Kiaochow Nanking Amoy g i Formosa PACIFIC Hong Kong OCEAN baa \Y FeXere|e) FRENCH INDOCHINA Isami : yr Reval ee FP China # **“APHILIPPINES Sea « F ei im) al SARAWAK he.
Goods such as spices were imported to Europe from colonies in RISE OF THE RAJ With the end of the East India Company's administration in 1857, India was governed directly from London by the Viceroy.
This was brought about on November 1, 1858 by governor-general Charles John Canning who became the first Viceroy of India.
The period, known as the Raj, lasted until Indian independence in 1947. -} the French sought a foothold in ' trade.
In 1859, the coalition ' captured the key port of Saigon, | where a garrison of 1,000 troops | later faced a year-long siege from 1860 to 1861.
Vietnam’s king, Tu Duc (1829-83], : in 1863, in which three provinces ' were ceded to France.
The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 made trade between Europe and Asia quicker and cheaper.
CONSTRUCTION WORK HAD FINALLY BEGUN ON A CANAL that would link the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
It would cut voyages between Europe and Asia by thousands of miles by allowing ships to avoid sailing around the Cape of Good Hope.
In 1854, French official Ferdinand de Lesseps managed to obtain permission from the khedive of Egypt, Said Pasha , to construct a canal at Suez.
Canal Company (Compagnie : universelle du canal maritime de : Suez) was set up and given the ' right to run the canal for 99 years ' after its completion.
Aclear majority : The Democratic candidates, Douglas : and Breckinridge, combined had : more of the popular vote, but Lincoln : won the necessary electoral votes.
THE SPLIT IN THE United States DEMOCRATIC PARTY ahead of the 1860 election precipitated a much larger, more dangerous fracture that came in 1861—the secession of Southern states to a confederacy.
But a gradual approach was not possible, since abolitionism kept growing, with more of the public Supporting it over the 1850s.
The United States was economically divided, which intensified the debate over slavery.
The South was mostly rural, and slave labor was used to grow cotton, tobacco, and rice.
The more urban Northern states, in contrast, had a high population of immigrant workers.
Lincoln's presidential victory was the last straw for Southern slave owners, and by December 1860 South Carolina had seceded from the Union.
Forage cap, with regiment badge, : as worn by northern Union soldiers : during the Civil War.
Giuseppe Garibaldi , : an Italian military commander, ' attacked the Kingdom of Two — » SOUTHERN CONFEDERACY The Southern Confederacy equated to a new nation, and as such, needed a flag.
The national flag of the Confederacy, known as the ‘Stars and Bars,” closely resembed the northern states Union flag.
To avoid confusion on the battlefield, a new battle flag was adopted, first by the Army of Northern Virginia, and Later, by all Southern forces.
Czar Alexander II of Russia IN MEXICO, AN EXPEDITION OF British, French, and Spanish forces arrived to collect payment on the money they were owed.
After the War of the Reform (see 1858] President Benito Juarez had declared in 1861 that he was placing a moratorium on the payment of interest on foreign debt for two years.
The lending countries disputed his decision, and soon resorted to armed conflict.
Bismarck built up the army and also tried to develop a German national identity; he fought against the Catholic Church and tried to stem the growth of socialism.
Civil War, Union troops attempted, | but failed, to capture the : Confederate capital, Richmond, by : advancing up the peninsula east of Yorktown.
As a result, Austrian archduke Ferdinand Maximilian Joseph was invited to become emperor of Mexico.
He accepted, thinking that he had been voted in by the people, and became Maximilian I the following year.
In the US, Abraham Lincoln tried to persuade Confederate states to return to the Union by giving them Emancipation proclamation Abraham Lincoln reads the Emancipation Proclamation before his cabinet members.
The Union Navy, meanwhile, had captured the port of New Orleans, and occupation of the city followed.
Confederate defeat at the Battle : of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, : of what would eventually become : the London Underground, also known as the Tube.
On the battlefields, Union troops from July 1-3, had marked a turning point in the war.
In Britain, Londoners were thrilled by the opening of the Metropolitan Railway, which ran underground, from Farringdon Street to Paddington.
IN THE ONGOING AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, President Lincoln made General Grant commander-inchief of the Union forces.
Sherman pursued a “scorched earth” policy, destroying rail lines and setting towns on fire from Atlanta to Savannah, Georgia.
Relations between Denmark and Prussia, part of the German Confederation, had soured.
A brief war was the result of a revolt by the Germans in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, which were living under Danish rule.
ANEW COMPROMISE As the United States expanded, the issue of which states would be allowed to have slaves | pilladseetelat reese ca uel bara Hina became the central political focus between North and South.
By 1860, the | Bian MICHIGAN ee rene edee aac 18 free states of the North and the 15 slave states were on the brink of war.
Speers the United States began to settle its ILLINOIS aa eee western territories.
AViateval INDIANA ’ the Missouri territory VIRGINIA eee ee KENTUCKY petitioned to become a state — ee in 1817, its slavery status ARKANSAS » Seueueer EE NORTH CAROLINA ue ae TERRITORY ae Ones an prompted a political crisis.
Apr 6-7, 1862 —— a ee much of Georgia on “Xs p * Mange oS atch to the ced Rie clenee.
THE KANSASNEBRASKA ACT One of the compromise acts in 1850 was to allow the Utah and New Mexico territories to reach a decision on slavery when they became states.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act applied this principle for people in those states, allowing them to vote on the issue.
This act also controversially repealed the Missouri Compromise, causing further anger in the North.
S ———— Si cece Se wee The shells fired at Fort Sumter, South Carolina, in 1861 not only ripped id aT-mxeL OT aLem Valea comm oll ar-]c-roM ol-ter-lam-Me against each other, with brother fighting brother on the battlefield, as the Confederacy of Southern states took up arms in defense of slavery.
Wi Territories opened to slavery WH Area not subject to standard territorial laws The issue was not only Ideological, but also economic.
Southerners felt that their rural, agrarian livelihood was under direct threat from the policies of the federal government.
And for the industrial and urban North and President Abraham Lincoln, the question was about more than freedom for slaves.
The Union navy blockaded ports causing prices in the South to skyrocket; the price of a cup coffee in Populations The industrial North had a much larger population than the mostly agrarian Southern states.
By the time the South conceded defeat and surrendered in 1865, both sides had been heavily battered—but the country emerged united.
The war was also significant because It was the harbinger of modern warfare.
Sandford that slavery was legal in all the territories. iDatem ere le estome[-telk-[actomaareyt the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional.
They argued that it was up to states to decide to ban slavery, but that territories were not states.
The estimated cost to the Confederacy, including the emancipation of the slaves, was around $2. billion, inflicting serious damage to the Southern economy.
This painti wel ng by Candido Lopez depicts the arrival of the Allied Army at Itapiru, Paraguay.
The war had left the United States intact, but more than 600,000 men had been killed and half a million wounded.
The American Civil War was over, but the situation in Mexico remained complicated.
When news of this reached Britain there was a public outcry and Eyre was recalled to England.
The cause of the war dated back to the Talambo Affair in 1862, when Spanish immigrants were attacked by Peruvian workers on the Talambo estate in northern Peru.
Spain's demand for compensation was ignored, so it seized the Chincha Islands off the coast of Peru in 1864.
Peru's General Mariano Ignacio Prado declared war on Spain in January 1866.
Chile, fearful of a renewed Spanish presence in South America, joined Peru.
They tried to close their ports, but Spain managed to bombard Valparaiso in Chile on March 31 and Callao in Peru on May 2 before a ceasefire the following week.
This was the last attempt by Spain to recapture South American territory.
Battle of Callao A detail of a painting shows Peruvian troops defending the fortified port of Callao, Peru, while being bombarded by the Spanish navy.
France abandoned Mexico's emperor, Maximilian |, who had been installed at their behest as well as that of Mexican monarchists.
He was captured by liberal forces, court-martialed, and executed on June 19.
Farther north, the size of the United States received a huge boost with the purchase of the vast Alaska territory from Russia.
For the price of $7. million, the United States received 663,268 sq miles (1,717,856sq km] of territory.
In Europe, Karl Marx (see panel, right) had published the first of three volumes in what would become one of his most influential works, Das Kapital.
The book, through an examination of the capitalist system, tried to address larger economic and historical questions about the nature of class and social relations.
In Prussia, tensions with Austria had led to the Seven Weeks’ War the previous year.
This period, known as the Meiji Restoration, was a time of long-lasting fundamental social reforms, such as the ending of feudalism, formation of a national army, and implementation of tax systems, with a constitutional government being convened by 1890.
There was a boom in infrastructure modernization throughout this period, with the arrival of railroads and the telegraph.
When Queen Isabella II was deposed by a military rebellion in Spain, Cubans , seeking Independence took the opportunity to launch a war against the Spanish rulers on their island.
Led by Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, this uprising, known as El Grito de Yara , resulted in The Ten Years War , a campaign of guerilla warfare that ended in failure for the Cuban rebels.
This painting shows battleships in the Ten Years’ War , which was part of the long-running struggle for Cuba’s independence from Spain.
Yl In the same year, there was ' also an uprising against Spanish ' rule in Puerto Rico.
Moshoeshoe | (c.86-1870] ' asked Britain for help against ' further incursions into Sotho : territory, and the result was that : the kingdom was annexed to the British Crown in 1868, becoming a : protectorate.
Roe U 2 YO \ S < ° s QO Saar Os Lara neers ees caer nF YO™ Oo ae. oN & R s & x’ oo a 44.
Meanwhile, westward expansion in the United States continued to grow, aided _ by the arrival of railroads.
By 1869, the first transcontinental railroad had been completed by the Central Pacific Railroad.
This 19th-century painting d — Loe epicts Prussian hussars firing up at a French observation balloon during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870.
September 1, where an ill : Napoleon surrendered to German forces and was taken : prisoner.
The city was | forced to surrender in early 1871 ' after severe food shortages.
March, an armistice had been PERCENTAGE N Oo o186 1889 1909 W727 : Immigration in Argentina : This graphic shows the steady rise : in the percentage of Spanish and : Italian immigrants who arrived in : Argentina between 1869 and 1929. : agreed and Germany was given : the regions of Alsace and : Lorraine.
Likewise, In Argentina the 1870 population of 1. million would reach 8 million by 1914, with many immigrants from Italy and Spain—both places that had been seriously affected by years of warfare.
ITALIAN TROOPS HAD ENTERED ROME the previous September and in October a plebiscite, or referendum, made Rome the capital of the united Italy—which became official by 1871.
The pope, however, was not pleased with his settlement offer and excommunicated Italian king Victor Emmanuel Il, entrenching himself in the Vatican while Rome developed as the new capital.
The tension between the Vatican and the Italian government would not be resolved until the 20th century.
A council ' of citizens—including republicans, Jacobins, socialists, and ' anarchists—governed Paris for over two months.
He was considered a strong ruler, staving off the increasing incursions from neighbors.
By the end of the following decade, Ethiopia had defeated invasions by Egyptian forces, as well as Italian forces.
In the US, pressure was growing for women to be given the right to was Susan B Anthony (18201906), who, during the 1872 Carlists out of Spain.
A portrait of the United States women’s suffragist leader Susan B Anthony, who brought her campaign to public attention by illegally voting in 1872.
One of the leading advocates The 19th century in Spain was dominated by the Carlist Wars.
December 4, the crew of the Dei ' Gratia spotted the Mary Celeste : drifting around the coast of : Portugal completely deserted.
San Royal Canadian Mounted Police “Mounties,” as they became known, wearing their distinctive uniforms at an annual sports event at Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada. —e ra EAGER TO PROTECT GERMANY’S GROWING POWER, Bismarck proposed the Three Emperors’ League, an alliance between Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and Russia, with the purposeful exclusion of France.
Formed in 1873, the league lasted for three years, was later reestablished In secret in 1881 and renewed in 1884, and finally collapsed in 1887.
At issue were the continued conflicts of interest between Austria-Hungary and Russia in the Balkan territory.
Although the slave trade had been suppressed earlier, the practice had continued on the island and in neighboring Cuba.
The force was 3 charged with policing the largely ' rural provinces of the huge ' Canadian territory.
United States was uncomfortable with the idea of armed troops patrolling the border, so the force’s name ' was changed to the North West : Mounted Police—though later the : name would be altered again to : the Royal Canadian Mounted ' Police, which is still in use, along with the famous ' abbreviation of “Mounties.” | wn denielion of Garnet Wolseley’s | _ reception among the Asante people.
IN MARCH, BRITISH ARMY OFFICER CHARLES GEORGE GORDON arrived in the province of Equatoria, in the south of Egyptian-occupied Sudan.
He was to take control of the territory but under the auspices of the khedive of Egypt.
Gordon was tasked with establishing way stations up the White Nile and to attempt to suppress the ongoing slave trade.
He mapped parts of the Nile and set up outposts along the river as far as Uganda.
Meanwhile, in West Africa, a British expedition led by Sir Garnet Wolseley defeated the Asante Empire and asserted control over the southern part of their territory, known as the Gold Coast.
Charles George Gordon A British general and colonial administrator, Gordon was invited by Egypt's khedive to govern part of Egypt's Sudan territory.
S ee 1750-1913 | THE AGE OF REVOLUTION Soapstone Lohan 1600-1799 This statue shows a Lohan, a human who achieved enlightenment through meditation on the teaching of Buddha.
Buddhism flourished during the Qing period. decorative panel Jade brush holder 18th century The detail of this jade brush holder contains the figure of Taoist philosopher Lao Tzu.
The ancient Taoist practices were popular in the Ming period but fell out of favor with Qing rulers. painted doors Elm cabinet 1860 The doors of this black lacquered elm cabinet of rectangular outline are painted with a colorful decoration that includes birds and flowering trees.
Elm chair 1800 This Ming-style elmwood chair has a shaped crest rail and curved backsplat with openwork cartouches above a beaded apron.
FE QING DYNASTY The Qing dynasty was established after the last Ming “Ge fete aunt emperor was overthrown in 1644.
Rule was instituted } — Supported ona spreading , _ “ circular foot, this flask has a short, contracted neck and one right-angle handles.
Carved in relief is a Taotie a phoenix on one side, and a mask and sleeping silkworms. silkworm pattern on the reverse.
Its simple design is embellished with floral and calligraphic engravings.
Brass wedding bowl 18th century This brass wedding bowl Is part of a set of two.
This one is lined with silver— the other has a gilt silver interior—and the base has an engraved design.
Sancai teapot 1662-1772 This teapot is sancai porcelain and has a rectangular shape, with raised panels on each side illustrating the four seasons. subsidiary Pp string of beads P large bead called Buddha head separates smaller beads Ivory necklace for civil servant 1900s These beads are made of painted ceramic and gold leaf.
The larger beads, called Buddha heads, divide up the smaller beads into groups of 27.
The device was designed longevity to protect the nail of the little finger. rounded designs popular in 19th century Xian seal 19th century This oval Xian seal has an incised inscription on each of the long sides.
Pair of bowed shoes 1800-1900 These bowed shoes with pointed toes and high heels were worn for outdoor activities by a woman with bound feet.
The sides have an intricate embroidered decoration of birds and flowers.
Silk robe 19th century This woman's black silk robe has a pattern of flowers woven into the fabric.
The design also includes a springtime scene involving flowers and butterflies. ok r A painting entitled The Victor by Russian w ar artist Vasily Vereshchagin depicts Turks celebrating a victory id il during the Russo-Turkish War.
Hostilities between Russia and the Ottoman Empire were long-running and the two had gone to battle many times over the previous two centuries.
THE RIFT BETWEEN THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE AND ITS SUBJECTS IN Bosnia and Herzegovina grew wider as Christian inhabitants of the two territories rebelled against Ottoman rule, requesting aid from neighboring Serbia, which had a much higher degree of autonomy.
Buoyed by Russian promises of support and inspired by the nationalism sweeping through the region, Serbia too declared war on the Ottoman Empire on June 30, 1876; Montenegro followed suit the next day, leading the weakening empire into another destabilizing conflict.
Montenegro was initially successful, with a victory in Herzegovina, but Russian support in Serbia did not materialize and the Turks won the battle of Aleksinac on August 9, 1876.
In other parts of the Ottoman world, Egypt continued to make incursions into Ethiopia, leading its king, Yohannes IV (see 1872], to declare war on the Egyptians.
By 1875 Egypt had succeeding in occupying many coastal towns, as well as the inland city of Harar.
The fighting lasted until 1877, by which time Ethiopia had managed to defeat two Egyptian ANGER AND UNREST HAD BEEN growing among American Indians in the US, many of whom had been forced off their land.
In May 1877 he was elected president and ' controlled Mexico for decades.
XG PORFIRIO DIAZ Mexican general, politician, and president, Porfirio Diaz was of mixed European and indigenous descent.
A drought the previous year affecting the Yellow River —a vital source of water—was compounded by a lack of rain in 1877 and the arrival of locusts.
In South Africa, the discovery of gold (see 1871} had exacerbated tensions between the Boer settlers and the British, who by this point governed much of the country.
The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 included a five-month siege of the Ottoman Bulgarian town of Plevna, which eventually fell to Russian forces.
Russia also managed to take some key fortresses and a truce was Called.
A settlement was reached on March 3, 1878, known as the Treaty of San Stefano, which gave Serbia, Romania, and Montenegro their independence, while Bulgaria was granted some autonomy and put under Russian authority.
However, European powers were not satisfied with this settlement as there were many competing interests.
Britain to establish a presence 2 and a naval base in the eastern : part of the Mediterranean, with the aim of blocking further Russian ' incursions into the region.
Second Afghan War (to 1880] Afghan fighters : A photograph of Afghan soldiers : holding hand-crafted rifles, at : Jalalabad, Afghanistan, during the second Anglo-Afghan conflict. : was ignited when British agents : learned of negotiations between ' Afghan leader Sher Ali Khan : and Russia.
MEA This oil painting shows the defense of Rorke’s Drift on January 22, where t, handful of British soldiers faced an attack by of 4,000 Zulu soldiers.
IN SOUTH AMERICA, PERU, BOLIVIA, AND CHILE began a dispute over who had control over the Atacama Desert region, running along the Peru-Chile border.
In the previous decade the valuable mineral sodium nitrate had been discovered there.
Initially Chilean companies went into the desert to extract the mineral and issues over territorial control soon arose.
Chile and Bolivia at first agreed that the 24th parallel was their boundary.
But Bolivia, dissatisfied with the deal, entered into a secret agreement with Peru to defend its interests in the desert.
Bolivia later seized the property of Chilean companies, prompting Chile's president to send in troops.
The war of the Pacific took place on land and sea, and was not resolved until 1883, with Chile keeping control of the mineralrich Antofagasta region.
In South Africa, British forces came up against the Zulu nation in the Anglo—Zulu War.
The British wanted to expand into Zulu territory, but this was met with resistance by King Cetshwayo Sunken ship in War of the Pacific This scene from the Battle of Iquique, during the War of the Pacific, shows Chilean and Peruvian ships.
British Zulu casualties casualties Battle of Rorke’s Drift Although the Zulus had some rifles, : these were put to little effective use, : and superior British firepower won : out despite overwhelming numbers. © , who organized some : 60,000 warriors.
The British ' established a depot at Rorke’s ' Drift, which was later attacked by Zulus after their victory in Isandlwana.
SUEZ CANAL , Ferdinand | de Lesseps [see 1859) beganto draw up plans for a waterway connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans through the isthmus of Panama.
However, the project got off to a difficult start the following year in 1881.
There were disagreements over the canals plans, the machinery did not function well in the terrain, and many workers died of disease in the tropical heat.
Meanwhile, the development of commercial refrigeration began to alter the relationship between consumers and producers.
On February 2, the first shipment of frozen meat to survive the journey intact arrived in London from Australia.
Treaty of Bardo that same year, : going to instruct the public to take ' their revenge on Jews.
Cross, a part of the growing : International Red Cross relief ' organization that had been ' founded in 1863.
THE BOERS The Boers in South Africa were settlers of Dutch, French Huguenot, and German descent that left the Cape Province in search of autonomy farther north.
The earliest settlers arrived in the Cape of Good Hope after the Dutch East India Company established a port in 1652.
Refrigeration sparked a rise in food transport and the use of vast ships.
Boers had established the South African Republic in the Transvaal area and begun to use arms to support their claim, starting the First Anglo—Boer War in 1880.
British troops suffered a defeat at the hands of the Boer settlers in the battle at Majuba Hill on February 27, 1881, bringing the dispute to an end by March.
This led to increasing European interference in Egyptian affairs— considered legitimate because of the financial debt Egypt owed to Britain and France.
By 1882, Egypt was bankrupt and the khedive was scarcely able to hold on to his own authority.
Britain was fearful of what a nationalist uprising might mean for the Suez Canal, in which it had a substantial interest.
So British forces decided to mount an attack to stifle any further action; the Royal Navy bombarded the forts of Alexandria on July 11, 1882.
Egypt was then placed under military occupation, becoming a British protectorate.
Farther south, in Sudan, British troops were continuing to fight the Sudanese War against the followers of the powerful Muhammad Ahmad bin Abd Allah , who had declared a holy war after taking the title Mahdi.
In Europe, an anti-French union was being formed, known as the Triple Alliance.
Italy 2 joined after disputing France's territorial claims in North Africa.
At the beginning of the year on January 26, Anmad and the Mahdi troops captured the city of El Obeid, situated in the center of the territory.
Mahdi troops continued their march toward Khartoum, which had earlier been placed under British administration by the Egyptian khedive (see 1874], capturing the city after a siege of nine months.
A hand-colored woodcut showing the island of Krakatoa, Indonesia, before its destruction, when its volcano erupted in 1883.
Madagascar off the coast of East : Africa in a bid to protect French ' territory.
In 1885, they reached a settlement ' allowing the French occupation ' at Diégo-Suarez in the north.
Conference on Africa (see 1885] : Germany claimed territory | in southwest Africa , : Togoland , Cameroon, and ' part of the island of Zanzibar off ' the coast of Tanzania, East Africa.
TOROUEMADA, : conducted further research with 1833, Spain and other European | Z 2 this end, the Berlin Conference — : : the engine, placing it on bicycles colonial powers did not follow suit. : on Africa was held from : GENGHIs KHAN and carriages.
MEN ARE MERE ' came up with the idea for the and South American colonies, British | Burmese powers jostled for territory— : Benz car, and in 1885 assembled Spain turned to its remaining COUNTRIES although no African leaders were even consulted, much less invited.
The meeting was initiated by Portugal in the interests of protecting its claim to part of the Congo estuary.
This claim would, however, be rejected and the river basin was declared neutral in order to protect trade in the region.
A group of European investors were given part of the Congo region, which was put under the control of Belgium's King Leopold II , and named the Congo Free State.
Mark Twain, American author, on Leopold II's regime in the Congo : the first automobile in the world.
Early Benz A side view of a gasoline-driven, three-wheeled Benz Motorwagen.
To this end, slavery not only continued, but increased over the course of the 19th century, although British antislavery patrols tried to stop ships between the west coast of Africa and Havana.
Despite their efforts, the numbers continued to were brought to Cuba; by 1859 this number reached nearly 30,500.
By 1866, slave imports had fallen to just over 1,000 and the following year, the slave trade was finally outlawed by the Spanish legislature.
However, this act did not free the considerable number of slaves on the island.
Years of gradual abolition culminated ina royal decree that emancipated the slaves in 1886.
Third Burmese War : Although the war lasted a few weeks, : the Burmese insurgency that followed : lasted until 1899, claiming many more lives—as shown in this chart.
Thibaw's negotiations with ' France over a political alliance ' and the construction of a railway ' line to the Indian border.
O% 6 Ye Oa aN) e N A crest belonging to Czar Ferdinand |, who was elected ruler of Bulgaria.
Bulgaria's independence struggle—during which 15,000 Bulgarians were massacred by Turkish troops in 1876—had attracted Europe's attention.
A couple of years later a small Bulgarian principality was established and Britain and Austria-Hungary ensured Russia would not have influence there.
By 1885, Bulgaria had merged with Eastern Rumelia, and after a coup d'état, the two states were unified.
On July 1887, Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was elected ruler of Bulgaria.
Ke ee Ad o 6&8 of \ x +9) @ An engraving depicts slaves washing diamonds at a Brazilian mine.
BRAZILIAN CUBAN Slave population At the time of their respective abolitions, Brazil and Cuba had large slave populations.
BRAZIL, LIKE CUBA, CONTINUED TO MAKE USE OF SLAVES much later than other former colonies.
In South America, the republics that emerged from the Spanish Empire had abolished slavery by the middle of the century.
And like Spain, Brazil had been put under pressure by the British to end the trade, which eventually occurred in 1850.
Over the next thirty years, growing abolitionist sentiment reached the highest level, as the emperor Dom Pedro Il became sympathetic to these ideas.
He was interested in the gradual abolition of slavery but was aware of the dangers of a slaveholder backlash.
In 1871, a gradualist measure known as the Rio Branco Law, which freed children born to slave mothers, was enacted.
Eiffel won a design contest to build the tower as part of the International Exposition of 1889 in honor of the centenary of the French Revolution.
The tower attracted almost two million visitors in the first six months after it opened.
Brazil, meanwhile, faced political upheaval as a military coup overthrew leader Dom Pedro Il.
The military, clergy, and aristocracy had been angered by Eiffel Tower Initially criticized by the Parisian public who thought it unsightly, the tower has come to be an iconic Parisian landmark.
The late 19th century was a time of extensive colonial rule by European powers.
Universelle du Canal : Interocéanique and the French : public had lost faith in the enterprise as the death toll ' mounted and construction was plagued by endless problems.
Rhodes —who had already established his reputation : in the gold and diamond mines in : South Africa—received a charter : for his British South Africa : Company in 1889.
ST ss oo wo ae \ aaa oO a © x) Q yy XX S w of sor 1750-1913 | THE AGE OF REVOLUTION THE IMPERIAL WORLD Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries the world witnessed a relentless European drive to control territories all over the globe.
Colonies provided not only direct supplies of valuable natural resources, but also a theater of conflict in which Europe's antagonisms were played out.
The Imperial Age saw Spain, Britain, France, Germany, Holland, Portugal, Italy, and to a lesser extent, Denmark and Sweden, scramble for territories.
A country could lose colonies in one war, only to reclaim them later through trade ina wider political game.
In 1810, they made up just was 76 times larger than Belgium. under a fifth of the total population.
Colonial minority Native Spaniards were in the Making tracks United States PORTUGAL BELGIUM GERMANY ~ BRITAIN Imperial land Imperial population By 1910, Britain was well ahead in the imperial race, with an empire covering more than twice as much of the globe as its closest rival, France.
BRITISH AFRICAN TERRITORIES By 1914, the vast expanse of colonial British Africa was spanned by thousands of miles of railroad track, opening the region up to trade and aiding communication between territories.
Martin EMPIRE BUILDING In the 18th century, most colonial outposts were located along the world's coastlines, as settlements sprung up where ships stopped off.
Trading posts grew into cities, often with European-style architecture to reflect the political changes.
Over time, improvements in military power, transportation, and health— tropical diseases killed thousands of Europeans—saw the spread of colonial rule throughout the 19th century.
However, Spain, which had begun empire-building earlier and controlled large parts of Latin America at the beginning of the period, had lost almost all of its territories by the 1820s.
Britain governed subjects in Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Australasia.
The had been reconfigured with the independence of Latin was mostly confined to port cities.
Huge swaths of British had also made a Series of incursions into America.
British and French attention had turned to the world were under the control of the older Ottoman India, as the Mughal Empire broke down, while also the resource-rich lands of Africa, while the Dutch and Qing empires in the East. undertaking exploration into Africa. continued to expand into Southeast Asia.
By the 1880s, a new mysticism called the Ghost Dance had emerged among the Sioux people, based on the belief that an Indian messiah would come in 1891 and unite all the displaced native peoples.
This newfound belief manifested in trances, dances, and a mass frenzy, which worried the United States agents who oversaw the reservations.
They attempted to stop the dances, and the Sioux people rebelled, with United States army troops being called in by the end of the year.
United States soldiers were also left dead, ' many due to friendly fire from » United States machine guns.
This was the last major conflict between American Indians and the United States Army, although poor relations persisted ' between the two groups. , off the North Sea coast 2 of Germany, near the . territory of Schleswig1814, having been ' seized by the Royal ' Navy seven years 2 earlier.
This became known as the “British Central Africa Protectorate” in 1893 and was then officially designated as “Nyasaland” in 1907.
THE DISTANCE BETWEEN MOSCOW AND VLADIVOSTOK ON THE TRANSSIBERIAN RAILWAY IN RUSSIA, CONSTRUCTION HAD BEGUN ON AN EXTENSIVE RAILROAD SYSTEM across its vast territory.
The project was the idea of Alexander III , and it was known as the Trans-Siberian Railway.
It stretched from Moscow to the port of Vladivostok, 5 miles to the east.
Russia received permission from China to run tracks through parts of Manchuria, allowing the completion of a trans-Manchurian line by 1901.
The work began from west and east ends and eventually met in the center.
By 1904, the sections linking Moscow and Vladivostok were connected and running.
The railroad facilitated the quicker movement of people through Russia and allowed for the further settlement of sparsely populated Siberia. ee il at | ~ i —_— OCCIDENTALI French in Africa A postage stamp from French West Africa shows an illustration of a native mask.
Lagos provided a key point from which to seize control of surrounding Yorubaland, situated around the lower parts of the Niger River, corresponding with much of modern southwest Nigeria.
The British took advantage of existing internal divisions among Yoruba rulers, and in 1892, they overthrew the Ijebu government, part of the Yoruba political system.
Likewise, the French exploited divisions in the Muslim Tukulor Empire by signing treaties with its neighbors and building forts within Tukulor territory.
RACE, CLASS, CREED, OR SEX, IS INHUMAN, AND MUsT BE OVERCOME. gy Kate Sheppard, suffragist, in the pamphlet Is it Right?, 1892 ALTHOUGH FRANCE HAD MADE GAINS IN THE WEST AFRICAN INTERIOR, the coastal territories around the kingdom of Dahomey had proven difficult to subdue.
The result was the First Franco-Dahomean War , which concluded with a treaty that ceded Cotonou and Porto Novo to France in exchange for payments to the king of Dahomey.
However, tensions remained, and by 1892 another war had begun, this time over the issue of slavery.
The king, Behanzin , was still allowing slave raids, despite the abolition of slavery.
France retaliated, this time with an army of French and Senegalese troops, and they overpowered the kingdom, bringing it under French control in 1893.
Sugar production in tons : In 1893, Cuba, then the dominant : world sugar grower, produced : 1 million tons of sugar, four times : as much as Jamaica.
Halfway around the world, in the British colony of New Zealand, women won the right to vote.
However, a United States tariff the following |» year would cause profits to drop ' to $13 million by 1896.
Ruler of Dahomey A painting of Behanzin, king of Dahomey , shows him holding symbols of kingship while surrounded by attendants.
An engraving showing the coronation ceremony of Emperor Nicholas II and _ the Empress Alexandra, who would be Russia's last ruling monarchs.
He presided over an increasingly troubled country, and would not be able to withstand the social revolution that engulfed Russia in the early 20th century.
Russia’s neighbor, China, had become entangled in a local conflict in Korea that escalated into the Sino-Japanese War.
Japan was allied with the modernizing government in Korea, while China backed the royal family.
Christian Armenian people were : also caught up in the nationalist ' spirit of the time, and they tried : to assert their independence.
Sino-Japanese War : A painting of the Sino-Japanese War : shows the Japanese forces : conquering Jiuliancheng after : defeating the Chinese at Pyongyang.
Eo oF oo a Wee oP ego"" . <“ as .) 4 y os Ao 44 EVERY DAY SEES HUMANITY MORE VICTORIOUS IN THE Ny oT RUGGLE WITH SPACE AND TIME. 99 iy Guglielmo Marconi, Italian inventor TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS WERE PROLIFERATING RAPIDLY all over the world.
In Italy, physicist and inventor Guglielmo Marconi (18741937) invented a wireless telegraph.
In his initial experiments, using a telegraph key to operate a transmitter, he was able to send electromagnetic waves In bursts that corresponded to Morse code.
He then used a transmitter to ring a bell that had been placed 30ft away.
However, he found Little enthusiasm for his work, so he Early X-ray One of the first X-ray photographs made by German professor Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen captured a womans hand with rings.
Marconi paved the way for the : development of radio technology. : the device the following year, and : laid the foundation for radio ' technology.
This scene from the Italian invasion of pavestiia in 1896 shows the Abyssinian forces routing the Italian troops.
GREECE SAW THE MODERN REBIRTH OF THE ANCIENT OLYMPIC GAMES, which was organized by an enthusiastic Frenchman, Baron Pierre de Coubertin.
Coubertin and Brookes wanted to create an Cymer international festival of modern Games sport.
After years of campaigning, and their Coubertin was finally able to Revival organize the event in Athens from April 6-15.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Uccialli, Italy thought it had the right to establish a protectorate over Abyssinia, but this was contested.
Olympic revival : The cover illustration for the April edition of Scribner's Magazine : celebrated the revival of the Olympic Games, being held in Athens, : Greece.
ALTHOUGH THE TEN YEARS’ WAR HAD BEEN UNSUCCESSFUL , many Cubans were unwilling to accept continued control by Spain.
Soldiers managed , to reach Havana by the following year, although they were driven back.
Trouble was brewing between Greece and the Ottoman Empire over the situation in Crete.
There had been a brutal suppression of a Christian uprising on the island the year before, and Greece was determined to annex the territory.
When an armistice was agreed in August, it was forced to pay an indemnity and it lost part of the territory of Thessaly.
Rs ab <e& S gy” oo of \) JOSE MARTI (1853-95] A writer, philosopher, journalist, and political theorist, José Marti became a key figure in the Cuban revolutionary struggle.
He is considered a national hero for his planning and leadership during the Cuban War of Independence.
Britain was around 695,200, rising : from about 216,200 ini 1851: Coal mining in Britain By 1897, Britain was the world leader in coal production.
WITH THE DESTRUCTION OF THE USS Maine—blown up while docked in Havana's harbor— the United States made the decision to go to war against Spain.
Although Cuba and Spain had agreed an armistice on April 9, the United States began the Spanish-American War only a few weeks later, on April 25.
United States Navy ships sailed into Manila Bay, in the Spanish Philippines, while another fleet harbor of Cuba, Santiago, where troops then disembarked.
However, the United States continued to occupy Cuba, and the following year tried to exclude Cubans from governing, and disbanded the army.
Hawaii annexed : In acontemporary illustration, : Hawaiians in Honolulu receive : news of their annexation by the US. made incursions into the southern : : Guam and the Philippines.
Fashoda Incident, which involved : territorial disputes over their ' respective attempts at expansion | in Africa.
Although their troops ' met in Fashoda on September 18, the situation did not escalate into war, as all sides wanted to avoid | battle.
British, French, and Egyptian flags should fly over the fort that the ' French had occupied.
EO 77 QO” >*0n fe) mame We sg \) ao | | Cyclists of the Lancashire Fusiliers _ | took part in the South African War. civilians, who saw their farms burned and women and children put into camps where up to 25,000 died.
HOSTILITIES BETWEEN THE BOERS AND BRITISH were once again heading toward conflict.
This time Boers were demanding that British troops protecting mining interests should withdraw from _ the Transvaal, but this request was ignored.
So the South African Republic and the Orange Free State declared war on Britain in October.
The South African War would last less than three years but, for the British, it would become the largest since the Napoleonic Wars, as its forces reached some 500,000 men.
The war was fought across a hostile terrain, which the Boers—whose troops numbered less than 90,000—could use to their advantage.
THE GROWING PRESENCE OF WESTERNERS— especially Christian missionaries—in China was Starting to cause public anger.
This eventually erupted into the Boxer Rebellion, which was a peasant uprising that aimed to eject all foreigners from China.
Members of the group were also found among the Qing court, and so the movement's violent attacks on foreigners and Chinese converts to Christianity were officially sanctioned.
After the arrival of 2 reinforcements, the international | force made its way to Beijing, 2 which it captured.
This 2 put an end to the violence and ' provided for reparations to be ' made.
Katanga, a southern region of the ' present-day Democratic Republic ' of the Congo.
As mining companies proliferated, Katanga was soon one of the most highly Going underground A Metro sign built into a lamppost in Paris, France.
Growing nation : Thanks to decades of immigration, : the population of the United States had : soared, reaching more than : 75 million by 1900. : of the Congo, but the many : Africans employed performed © the dirty and dangerous work : in the mines for very little pay.
British troops faced a rebellion : by the Asante, which took eight : months to subdue.
Across the Atlantic, in the US, ' decades of immigration had ' caused the country's population ' to nearly double.
THE MANY COLONIES THAT HAD BEEN FOUNDED IN AUSTRALIA— Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania—ushered in a new era on January 1, after the drafting and approval of the constitution and official establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia.
A few weeks later, Great Britain and its colonies mourned the loss of Queen Victoria, who died on January 22.
She had ruled the nation and empire for 63 years, making her reign the longest by a British monarch.
Her son, Edward VII , took the throne, and the largely peaceful— though very socially stratified— period under his rule was known as the Edwardian era.
Commonwealth stamp This stamp showing Queen Victoria is from Australia, which brought its colonies into a federation the same year the monarch died.
Prince Saud Ibn Abdul-Aziz, the first monarch of the modern Saudi state.
THE SOUTH AFRICAN, OR ANGLOBOER, WAR between Boer settlers and the British ended on May 31.
The end of the war was hastened when the British adopted a “scorched earth” policy, which involved destroying crops and livestock to limit Boer supplies.
The dispossessed Boer women and children were rounded up into concentration camps.
Under the Treaty of Vereeniging, the Boers were forced to recognize British sovereignty in South Africa, ending the independence of the Orange Free State and the South African Republic.
In 1901, Saud, who was living in Kuwait, set out to take back the territory he had been forced to leave by the rival Rashids.
He and his men reached Riyadh in January 1902 and crept into town, waiting to ambush the Rashidi governor the following ~ morning.
Soon Saud had taken the city and the territory, with the help of a growing number of supporters.
This became the kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932, and it remains under the Saud family’s rule to the present day.
On the Caribbean island of Martinique, the violent eruption of Mount Pelée killed around 30,000 people and destroyed the port of Saint-Pierre on May 8.
TWO BROTHERS IN THE US, WILBUR AND ORVILLE (18711948) WRIGHT, became obsessed with the growing science of aviation and were determined to fly.
They pumped the profits from their bicycle shop into their experiments and built a biplane.
In the town of Kitty Hawk, on the coast of North Carolina, they began to conduct experiments.
Colombian government (which ' still controlled the isthmus] broke : down.
Soon after, in 1903, Panama, with the backing of the US, ' declared its independence.
Panama Canal Zone, in which the : United States would be permitted to exercise : : its jurisdiction until 1979, and work on the canal began.
Its roots, < S e Ay) or S ~ ws se’ “9 Lion in the path The United States publication Judge depicts the Panama Canal as the ‘lion in the path’ in this political cartoon. however, were intertwined with the infamous Dreyfus Affair.
This was a scandal involving Alfred Dreyfus (18591935], a French officer who was Evidence came to light that cleared Dreyfus, but it was suppressed.
Angry ' advertisers decided to set upa rival periodical, LAuto-Vélo, later called LAuto.
Desgrange was hired as editor. : However, L’Auto's sales were initially poor, and so a race ' was organized to promote it. : Desgrange devised a month-long : cycling contest (though it was later shortened) which followed the route of Paris—Lyon: Marseille-Toulouse-BordeauxNantes-Paris.
The event's first winner was Maurice Garin. accused of treason. pee Rte Nain ai /* avy * ke aes The French newspaper Petit Sauer shows how the Ruseiah sick and JAPAN AND RUSSIA HAD BEEN COMPETING to expand their influence in Manchuria and Korea.
During this time, Japan had begun to build up its army and navy, and approached Russia in 1903 to suggest they recognize each other's mutual interests in these regions.
The talks broke down on February 6, 1904, and three days later Japan attacked Russian warships, sinking two of them and triggering the Russo-Japanese War.
Although automobile ownership was at first only the preserve of the wealthy, the United States inventor Henry Ford was able to increase output and push down NL ON the automobile revolutionized the way speed.
Instead of spending days ona dreds of miles in a matter of hours. prices, so that by the 1920s many eager consumers could buy a car.
This had a profound effect on the landscape as highways sprang up, and by the 1950s, suburbs In the United States were planned around the Idea that residents would be driving.
THE AGE OF THE AUTOMOBILE Despite the subsequent problems—especially pollution and traffic jams—the love affair with the car has never ceased.
Indeed, as people in developing countries become richer, they too want to be car owners.
However, in spite of these issues, the automobile continues to be an integral part of transportation networks all over the world.
Ford Model T Automobile engineers have long been trying to find ways to run cars on other fuels than gasoline, including solar power and battery power.
Hybrid cars combine a fuel engine with a battery engine, giving the driver better fuel consumption and producing less pollution.
Se 46 ANY CUSTOMER CAN HAVE A CAR PAINTED Rolling off the assembly line Workers on the assembly line at the Ford Motor Company assemble a Model T Ford's innovative factories allowed the company to assemble millions of cars very quickly. 15th century Leonardo da Vinci's car The Renaissance Italian designs the world's first self-propelled wagon.
Lenoir gas engine ANY COLOR THAT HE WANTS SO LONG AS 1867-77 The four-stroke Otto engine The German inventor Nikolaus August Otto patents his fourstroke internalcombusion engine.
Benz three1885 wheeler Internal combustion improves The Germans Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler separately develop practical cars with internalcombustion engines.
THE STORY OF THE CAR | brass-framed 1913 Ford Model T | | windscreen with Henry Ford's design classic has many two panels of the features found in today’s cars.
IN RUSSIA, DISCONTENT WITH THE CZAR, NICHOLAS II, had been growing, and there were calls for a | constitutional monarchy.
In February, Nicholas promised to set up an elected assembly, but this did nothing to stop the unrest.
Finally, the military joined in, and June Saw a mutiny by the crew of the battleship Potemkin.
Although the protests continued, antirevolutionary forces finally suppressed what became known as the Russian Revolution of 1905.
In Switzerland, the German physicist Albert Einstein had received his doctorate and international acclaim for his publications.
By 1906, people in the growing city were used to the earth moving—there had been recorded quakes in 1836, 1865, 1868, and 1892—but nothing had been done to make the city of 400,000 people better prepared.
On April 18, San Francisco bore the brunt of what was later estimated to be a 7. magnitude earthquake, while people as far afield as Los Angeles and Nevada also felt shaking.
The quake lasted less than a minute, but it wreaked damage that would take years to repair, as buildings collapsed and many caught fire throughout the city.
In India, the All India Muslim League was established—initially with the support of the British government—with the aim of protecting the rights of Muslims.
PEASANT UNREST THAT HAD BEEN SPREADING throughout the countryside in Romania culminated in a revolt in 1907.
This was fueled by land issues, as the peasants were forced into exploitative contracts, meaning many farmers had to live in poverty.
As the rioting spread through villages, up to 10,000 people were killed before it was suppressed by the military.
In Southeast Asia, Cambodia had clawed back some of its western provinces from Thailand due to French pressure.
By 1863, France had established a strong presence in Cambodia, eventually restricting the Cambodian king's powers and installing a governor.
This paved the way for colonization by the French, but angered Cambodian nationalists.
He was murdered during a period of increased calls for a republican government.
PORTUGAL WAS CONVULSED BY REVOLUTION following the assassination of its king, Charles I , in February.
Already a highly unpopular monarch, he made matters worse by deciding to appoint his own prime minister —bypassing parliament in the process.
Events took a violent turn on February 1 when Charles and his eldest son, Luis Filipe, were shot while they were traveling ina carriage in Lisbon.
In Africa, the Congo Free State was abolished and Belgium's government established the Belgian Congo.
The Free State had been run bya private company with Belgian King Leopold II ruling over it personally.
Africans working in the Free State provided the company with valuable rubber and ivory.
Balkans might be undermined because, technically, Bosnia: Herzegovina was still under ne —_ : Ottoman suzerainty and one of the : Young Turks’ aims was to reclaim ' the territory.
Austria-Hungary and its allies. : During this period, Bulgaria’s ' Prince Ferdinand — whose role as leader was not yet 2 recognized by Russia and many : other European countries—took . advantage of the crisis to proclaim : Bulgarian independence from » the faltering Ottoman empire.
FOLLOWING THE SUCCESSFUL REBELLION BY THE YOUNG TURKS the previous year, in 1909 the Committee of Union and Progress—the groups political wing—had taken control of the levers of power within the Ottoman Empire—something they would maintain for the next couple of years, despite internal disputes.
Hamid II (r.76-1909] ruled as a constitutional monarch, although only briefly—he was deposed on April 27.
A The Austro Hungarian Empire ITALY bd SERBIA Many of the Young Turks had War of Independence.
A CENTURY AFTER ITS FIRST REVOLUTION , Mexico was once again caught up in the throes of political change.
Diaz eventually allowed the development of an opposition, and other groups emerged.
This invasion came after British : attempts to occupy Lhasa in 1904, which were fueled by fears : that Tibet could fall under the : influence of Russia.
China and Britain that recognized : China's sovereignty over Tibet. : Tibet did not consider it valid, ' and the Tibetans were able to : use the revolution that began : in China the following year (see 1911) as an opportunity to drive out the Chinese.
For nearby Korea, the consequences of the Russo-Japanese war [see 1904) had severe ramifications.
It had allowed Japan to use the peninsula for military operations and in the resulting Treaty of Portsmouth, in 1905, Korea was made a Japanese protectorate, and by 1910 had been officially annexed.
Casa Mila Designed by the Catalan architect Antoni Gaudi (1852-1956], Barcelona's iconic Casa Mila was constructed between 1905 and 1970. ¥ _ s ie | «| —— Imperial officials flee from Tientsin during the Chinese Revolution, which precipitated the end of the Qing dynasty, rulers of China since the 1600s.
Despite its longevity, many Chinese always considered the ruling Manchus as foreigners.
They were also resentful at the growing number of Westerners, who had been permitted to move inland from the port cities.
The 20th century had been full of unrest for China (see 1900) and this continued to grow as revolutionary groups began to form around the country.
In October, a revolutionary plot was uncovered and the members arrested and executed.
Soldiers in Wuchang who knew of the plot decided to push forward with a revolt; they led a mutiny on October 10, which soon spread throughout the country, and the rebels declared Chinaa republic.
Manchus days were numbered. : In the US, exiled revolutionary : leader Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925] : had heard about the events in : China and returned home.
However, such displays did little to quell the growing nationalist sentiment.
In Europe, Marie Curie , a Polish-born French scientist, won her second Nobel Prize, this time in chemistry for her work on radioactivity.
She and her husband, Pierre , had been the recipients of the 1903 Nobel Prize for Physics.
In 1911, the world price of rubber was beginning to soar, fueled by its use in new technologies, especially in the production of automobile tires.
Rubber came from the sap of trees that grew in the forests of Brazil, Southeast Asia, and West Africa.
In March 1912, Morocco was established as a French protectorate under the Treaty of Fez.
The year before the new sultan Abd al-Hafiz , besieged in his palace, had asked the French to help him suppress internal dissent.
THE TREATY OF LONDON OF 1913 OFFICIALLY SIGNALED THE END of the First Balkan War.
However, the Balkan League—Serhbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro, and Greece—that had challenged the Ottoman Empire soon began to disintegrate.
Bulgaria attacked Serbia in June because of a disagreement over the division of Macedonia, although the fighting ended a couple of months later with a SerbianGreek alliance.
In northern Europe, Finland had given women the right to vote in 1906, while Norway followed in 1913.
Davison ' threw herself in front of ' King George V's horse +: during the Epsom Derby in June.
Motor Company, which he set up in 1903, had sold nearly 250,000 | Model T cars.
Mexico’s civil war by sending a : port of Veracruz, which prevented : | President Victoriano Huerta from | 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 : receiving arms shipments from TROOPS : Germany.
PVEREIG CITT eG Aba Luin Huerta’s fall from power in July. : were prepared to make poorly equipped and badly organized. : Meanwhile, Europe began its : concessions, Austria-Hungary : Britain had a relatively small army, descent into war.
Brushing aside last-minute traditionally antimilitarist and during an official visit to Sarajevo peace initiatives by Germany's : Internationalist German Social . in Austrian-ruled Bosnia.
Its demands were © Germany did not want to fight the © vetoed any strike action.
Intended to be so humiliating that British, but in order to invade the UK, Ulster Protestant Serbia would reject them, giving France they needed to send an ' paramilitaries, who had been : the Austrians a pretext for military : army through Belgium, whose : on the verge of an armed : neutrality was guaranteed by : rebellion against the British on : Britain.
Most people ' expected a short war with high ' casualties, and at first this 7 expectation seemed justified.
Unable to resist the German onslaught, the British | and French were driven back _ toward Paris.
Meanwhile, the trYe * KEY -® German advance (Aug 2-Sept 5] ~The Allies (and allied states) Germany Neutral states GERMANY Paris ™ The German war plan, devised in 1906 by then chief of staff Count Alfred von Schlieffen, assumed that, if attacked on two fronts, France would concentrate its forces along its eastern border.
The bulk of the German army was to advance through Belgium and Luxembourg, encircling the French armies.
The aim was to defeat the French in six weeks, before the Russians could enter the fray.
Prussia the Russian First and Second Armies were crushed at ' the Battles of Tannenberg and : the Masurian Lakes.
They culminated in ' the encounters known collectively ' as the First Battle of Ypres.
Recruitment poster | British War Secretary Lord : Kitchener's face adorned ' recruitment posters that called : for volunteers to join up and fight. : British Empire.
German U-boats terrorized the seas, attacking both naval and merchant shipping at will.
A German airship taking off from its base for a bombing raid on London.
POWERS OF EUROPE remained locked in a war for which they had been unprepared.
The fighting had exhausted munition supplies, so to continue the war the Chemical warfare Before the advent of the gas mask, troops, such as these French soldiers, protected themselves from a gas attack in any way they could. combatants had to vastly expand their armaments industries.
Governments became aware that the war would be won, or lost, as much In the factories as on the front line.
Britain set up a new Ministry of Munitions, and in Russia the czarist government set up a special War Industries Committee.
The French, meanwhile, had to recall conscripts from the trenches to work in factories, their production problems accentuated by the German occupation of industrial areas of northeast France.
Generals » assumed that sufficient numbers of men and shells hurled against these defenses would achieve a breakthrough, but they were wrong.
The British attempted their first offensive of the trench war at Neuve Chapelle in March, with Indian troops leading the assault and the Canadian Expeditionary Force fighting for the first time.
Germans had a similar experience 2 attacking at Ypres in April, and : the French suffered in repeated ' offensives throughout the year. : Mass offensives led only to mass : casualties—over 300,000 British : and French losses in the autumn Champagne-Loos offensive. : On the Eastern Front, the : fighting was far more ' mobile, and the Russians : were forced to retreat from : Poland and Lithuania. : break the deadlock on In an attempt to the Western Front, the Germans : used poison gas for the first time at Ypres in April, releasing : lethal chlorine to drift across to : the Allied trenches.
Allied soldiers quickly discovered : means of protection, and the : Allies also adopted gas as a 3 weapon against the Germans.
A shortage of manpower meant that women were recruited into a range of jobs traditionally reserved for men.
By 1918, around a third of the 1. million workers in French munitions factories were women, and they constituted over half of the total German industrial workforce.
Women also replaced men as agricultural laborers, for example in the British Women’s Land Army.
Germany and Austria-Hungary, : so this was a diplomatic coup ' for the Western Allies.
Strasser believed that Britain : could be “overcome by means of Savage attacks Soldiers raiding enemy trenches often carried primitive weapons for close-quarters combat.
Fighting a just war : This British recruitment poster uses : the sinking of the Lusitania as : propaganda to prove the justice | of the Allied cause.
British troops on the Western Front are silhouetted against the sky, wearing the steel Brodie helmets that were first introduced in October 1915.
Seeking an alternative to the ' costly stalemate on the Western 2 Front, Britain and France devised ' a plan to crush Germany’s ally Turkey.
British and French ' warships were to sail through the Dardanelles Straits into the Sea of Marmara, bringing the Turkish capital, Constantinople, under their guns.
When the naval attack was made on March 18, however, three battleships it was decided that the Dardanelles Straits should be seized before the navy could pass through.
Faced with tough Turkish resistance on difficult terrain, they failed to break out of their landing zones.
Renewed landings at ' Suvla Bay in August achieved no | greater success.
Trench warfare, similar to that in France but with conditions exacerbated by heat 44.
The United States entered the war on the Anglo-French side in 1917. most of the largest and bloodiest battles of the war were fought.
From the outset, the decisive arena of conflict was by the Germans at Verdun and by the Western Germany's Western Front.
The Germans invaded Allies at the Somme—without breaking the neutral Belgium and Luxembourg, overcoming stalemate.
Up to 1918, only a voluntary withdrawal Belgian resistance at Liege and Antwerp.
At From March 1918 a series of large-scale the Marne, however, French commander General German offensives broke through Allied defenses Joseph Joffre rallied his forces for a counterand advanced the front line toward Paris.
But, Sh oa dee aE offensive and the Germans were pushed back. aided by the arrival of United States troops, the Allies halted HinMenERPe ine After a desperate struggle at Ypres in the fall of the Germans at the Marne.
A successful British Front limelMar 1016 1914, the rival armies dug into trenches that offensive at Amiens in August initiated the | Eirthect extentor Cermanadvencatole stretched from the North Sea to Switzerland.
An Anglowe _ French bid to attack the Turkish capital, ""i Belgrade Constantinople, failed dismally at Gallipoli.
Ge. ‘e Odessa . lonian * | ' . cme t GREECE Aegean Sea . id ROMANIA Black Sea . 4 4 ey / le and Romania the following year.
Charleroi War in the skies KEY eee x 3 Gas Military aviation expanded W914 Jul 1-Nov 18, 1916 Cambrai + massively through the war.
By the end of the war ug 8-11, LUXEMBOURG some 12,000 military aircraft ‘ were in action at the front.
P + Rifle fire Artillery a Chateau-Thierry x Sep 26te “s Jul 18, 1918 First Marne Nov 11, 1918 ; *.s.
Major battle MAJOR COUNTRIES INVOLVED IN THE WAR ain —— . de ‘ the Easter Rising to delay the advance of British troops fighting to retake the city.
Prussian In April, Britain faced a revolt : Russia’s most successful UNPRECEDENTED SCALE opened : Pancho Villa (1878-1923], the : Wappen, or against its rule in Ireland.
German commander-in-chief Erich von Falkenhayn aimed to ‘bleed the French army white” by drawing It into costly combat.
The French reacted as he had hoped by sending reinforcements, decimated by the German heavy guns.
Repeated German offensives continued until mid-July, after which French counteroffensives succeeded into December.
Little territory changed hands and both sides suffered around 400,000 casualties.
From December 1915, Anglo-Indian troops had been under siege by Turkish forces at Kut-al-Amara, between Basra and Baghdad.
Relief forces failed to fight their way through to Kut, so, facing starvation, they were forced to surrender.
Taken prisoner, the British and Indian soldiers endured terrible hardship, less than half surviving captivity.
German helmet : The German spiked Pickelhaube : helmet was replaced in the course of : 1916 by the metal Stahlhelm, which , provided better protection.
The Austrians were only ' rescued by the arrival of German troops to support them.
In June, General Aleksei ' Brusilov mounted DOUGLAS HAIG (1861-1928] i GENERAL Cavalry officer Douglas Haig performed well as a corps commander in the first year of World War I As British army commander-in-chief, his assaults on German defenses at the Somme in 1916 and Passchendaele in 1917 resulted in huge losses.
In 1918, Haig held firm in the face of the formidable German spring offensives, then presided over a string of British victories.
The Germans knew that this would mean sinking American merchant vessels and would probably bring the neutral United States into the war, but they believed they could sink enough ships to force Britain to sue for peace and make United States intervention ineffectual.
Housatonic, was sunk by a U-boat on February 3 off the Scilly Isles, the United States broke off diplomatic relations with Germany.
Returning to Russia in 1917, he was determined to radicalize the revolution through a Bolshevik seizure of power.
Once in control, he ruthlessly stamped out all opposition, and founded the world’s first communist state. s Provisional Government by the Bolsheviks in Petrograd.
The slow process of building and equipping a mass conscript army began.
Government survived a coup attempt, but on November 7 it : succumbed to an armed takeover organized by Lenin's associate, : Leon Trotsky . : Lenin set up a revolutionary government of People’s : Commissars and proclaimed ' aunilateral armistice.
Nivelle Offensive was launched : in mid-April, however, it proved no ' more successful than previous offensives.
The British army remained ' committed to an offensive bundles of wood to fill the trenches, so that they can drive across them.
Cambrai in November, massed : tanks helped British forces advance 4 miles (6km] in one : day—three times the distance ' achieved at Passchendaele in ' three months.
Any celebrations ' were premature, however, as a German counterattack soon » retook most of the lost ground.
The long stalemate between Italy and AustriaHungary ended when German troops were transferred to the Italian front in October.
At the Battle of Caporetto, an Austro-German offensive drove Italian forces into retreat.
Arab allies, fighting : alongside the British army against the Turks, had not been consulted.
Nor exe Le WO oe SS coe Ae 5 ee 9 Ke < RX 8 o 5 i WO C) battleship Aurora Revolutionary hero Red horsemen DATE UNKNOWN e, 1920 In this painting for a poster from the 1917 The 1917 revolution was followed by the Russian Civil So iedee ad Revolution period, Lenin appears in front War, between the Bolsheviks and the “White” armies oe a of the battleship Aurora, which was used led by czarist officers.
SOVIE | PROPAGAND ART FOR THE FURTHERANCE OF COMMUNIST POLITICAL IDEOLOGY AND REVOLUTIONARY IDEALS For the Communists who seized power in Russia in November 1917, art had to serve the socialist revolution and disseminate its ideology.
Propaganda mobilized the populace in support of the regime and pilloried its enemies.
During the early phase of Communist rule, many avant-garde artists believed their revolutionary ways of making art would accord with the political revolution.
However, under the dictatorship of Joseph Stalin, from the late 1920s Soviet artists were required to depict workers and peasants in a heroic-realist style, their images reflecting the supposed happiness and progress of Communist life.
Rapid industrialization 1928 The Communist leadership launched an industrialization drive in the late 1920s.
F é * a q IN 2 AWUUR represents the Communist poster urges Soviet citizens HEMESIEHH Mes en a Red Army beating the antito become members of ' O | 0 "" “Ee oe a AR, lv MY Communist White armies. workers cooperatives.
Military strength 1940s A poster of the World War II era depicts bomber aircraft and a Soviet airman displaying the obligatory optimism of any Communist citizen portrayed in Stalinist art.
ALTHOUGH THE United States ENTERED WORLD WAR I IN APRIL 1917, at the start of 1918 its Expeditionary Force in Europe was still not ready for combat.
Despite this, in anticipation of victory, United States President Woodrow Wilson announced a 14-point program for a just and durable peace.
His proposals included freedom of the seas and free trade, general disarmament, self-determination for European peoples who did not have their own nation-states, and an international organization to guarantee new borders against aggressors.
Germany would have to hand back the territory it had occupied during the war as well as Alsace-Lorraine, which was taken from France in 1871.
Litovsk, which marked Russia's exit from World War I With : Poland, Ukraine, Belarus, Finland, ' and the Baltic States nominally ' independent as client states of Germany, the treaty deprived : Russia of about a third of its : prewar population.
The German ' military authorities then set ' about ruthlessly exploiting resources in the eastern ' regions they now controlled.
The humiliating treaty did not ; bring peace to Russia, which was ' already slipping into civil war.
Lenin forcibly dispersed 2 a democratically elected : Constituent Assembly in : January—the Bolsheviks had won : only 25 percent of votes cast.
March 21, the Spring Offensive : or “Kaiserschlacht” struck the British line on the Somme front.
But in April 1918 the family was moved to Ekaterinburg in the Urals and placed under close guard by local Bolsheviks.
Allied armies, including United States troops. : Although the Allies made further : retreats and remained on the : defensive until July, the Germans ' failed to achieve the decisive : success they needed.
This was followed by a combined : American and French offensive in : the Argonne forest, the costliest single battle in American history, : with 117,000 United States casualties. : On September 29, with their : Hindenburg Line defenses ' breached and their ally Bulgaria : on the point of surrender, the Germans sought an armistice.
They approached President Wilson , hoping to : make a deal with the US, but Wilson aligned himself with the : British and French, who insisted : that Germany should surrender. : Although German troops were ' still putting up a stubborn 2 defense, and there were not yet : any Allied troops on German soil, _ the country was disintegrating | from within.
German navy at the end of 2 October was followed by strikes : and socialist uprisings in major ' cities, where food shortages had ' fueled political discontent.
Two days later, a German delegation signed an ' armistice in a railroad car in the Compiégne forest.
MASS-PRODUCED WEAPONRY ALLOWS THE SLAUGHTER OF MILLIONS World War | has been described as ‘industrial warfare” as manpower and economic resources of industrialized states were mobilized for fighting.
Modern firearms provided armies with firepower on an unprecedented scale.
Formidable defensive systems of trenches, barbed wire, and machine-gun posts made offensive operations costly and tended to lead to stalemate.
Weapons used in trench warfare ranged from grenades and flamethrowers to homemade clubs and knives.
Aircraft added a new dimension to warfare, carrying out reconnaissance and bombing, and strafing ground targets. brake Artillery shells FRANCE Artillery ammunition in World War | ranged from shrapnel to high-explosive and gas shells.
These shells were fired by the French 75-mm field gun. wheeled gun Howitzer carriage BRITAIN Howitzers such as this 6-inch British gun were effective in trench warfare because they launched a shell on a high trajectory, dropping onto the concealed enemy.
Without it, soldiers could lose their way in the no man’s land between the trenches, rendered featureless by shelling. mother-of-pearl face catches the light adjustable eye pieces Stereoscopic periscope GERMANY Soldiers in trenches used periscopes to keep watch on the enemy line.
Snipers quickly picked off men who exposed their heads above the parapet. screw-on metal filter canister Nail club BRITAIN Gas mask GERMANY Folding shovel ITALY For an infantryman, a shovel was essential equipment, needed to dig trenches or temporary shelters.
This folding shovel was used by Italian alpine troops. leather face Primitive wooden clubs, with mask nails or other metal objects at the striking end, were used by soldiers on both sides as a silent, deadly weapon in trench raids.
Effective masks were developed that protected the eyes and face from contact with poison gas and, through a filter respirator, neutralized the gas for breathing.
Each European leader had his own agenda, inevitably dominated by issues of national self-interest.
In January, communist revolutionaries, known as the Spartacists, tried to imitate the success of the Bolsheviks in Russia © by staging an ' uprising in Berlin.
Weimar, set about drawing up : also required to make reparations payments, : which were justified by the assertion that : Germany had been guilty : of starting the war.
Bolshevik People’s Commissar for : War, Leon Trotsky , ' created a mass Red Army by conscripting peasants at gunpoint : and subjecting them to harsh : discipline.
The vision of an ' imminent world ' revolution had some ' credibility at a time 2 when radical workers : and anti-colonial : movements were ' challenging the ' established authority | in many countries.
Red and White armies was vicious, and accompanied by : massacres and atrocities on : avast scale.
Horthy’s counter-revolutionary National Army marched into : Budapest to suppress the » communists with another reign | : of terror.
In Italy, people of all political ' persuasions were disgusted with ' their country’s limited share in : the spoils of victory.
September, Gabriele D’Annunzio : , a flamboyant : right-wing nationalist poet and : aviator, seized Fiume with a band of armed followers.
General Dyer, the Amritsar ' massacre caused widespread outrage in India and increased : pressure for independence.
British pilot Captain John Alcock © (1892-1919] and his navigator : Lieutenant Arthur Whitten Brown © took off from St.
Alcock’s triumph was short-lived, : as he was killed in an air crash : just six months Later.
September it was announced ' that the observations did indeed confirm Einstein's theory, fundamentally changing the : notions of time and space that had underpinned Isaac Newton's ' view of the universe. oe | ALBERT EINSTEIN Einstein was born to Jewish parents in southern Germany.
In 1905, he published his Special Theory of Relativity, which was followed by the General Theory of Relativity in 1915.
His theories revolutionized understanding of the relationship between time, Space, matter, and energy.
From the 1920s Einstein was féted worldwide, but chose exile in the US, away from Hitler's Germany.
In March, units of the nationalist paramilitary Freikorps occupied Berlin and declared the Weimar Republic overthrown.
Workers walked out, factories and transport shut down, and within days the Kapp regime had collapsed.
Army into conflict with the Poles. : After some early success against : Polish forces, the Red Army : invaded Poland.
The 18th Amendment to the Constitution banned the manufacture and sale of “intoxicating liquors,” a move that had little influence on alcohol consumption, but provided a massive boost to organized crime.
The more momentous 19th Victory for suffrage This magazine cover celebrates the passing of the 19th amendment to the United States Constitution, which gave women voting rights.
Polish Cross of Valor : This military decoration was : introduced by Poland during the war : with Bolshevik Russia in 1920 to : recognize Polish deeds of heroism.
Amendment, ratified in August, ' guaranteed American women the vote on equal terms with men.
League's first General Assembly in Geneva in November, but : neither Germany nor Russia : was among them. : Meanwhile, war had broken : outin Ireland, where Britain was resisting the declaration of an : Irish Republic.
November 21, in an operation ' planned by IRA intelligence chief : Michael Collins , the IRA killed 13 people in Dublin.
OP pn nO oN OPK FS Sy Os eo < MILLION THE ESTIMATED NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO DIED IN THE RUSSIAN FAMINE OF 1921 Russian famine victims receive food from a relief train.
The United States played a leading role in the international effort to feed the starving.
IN 1921, RUSSIA experienced one of the most destructive famines of the 20th century.
Years of warfare and revolution had laid waste to the Russian countryside, which was further devastated by drought in the Volga region.
As hundreds of thousands died of starvation and disease, Lenin's Bolshevik government reluctantly appealed for foreign relief.
Despite the distribution of food aid to around 10 million people, millions died by the time the famine abated the following year.
The Bolsheviks continued to impose the will of their party upon their devastated country.
Russian Bolshevik government, : its example continued to stimulate : the foundation of Communist ' parties across the world.
He developed the idea of basing a revolution on support from peasants, rather than industrial workers.
In the US, racism and anxieties about political subversion were ' rife.
Meeting in the United States in February, the world’s five major naval powers—Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the US—signed the Washington Treaty, limiting the size of their navies.
The same conference also called for an end to the military use of poison gas and banned submarine attacks on merchant shipping.
It was the first effective arms limitation agreement between major powers.
Britain sacrificed most, accepting naval parity with the United States after long domination of the world’s oceans, but the treaty was most controversial in Japan, where nationalists objected to naval inferiority to Britain and America.
Another hopeful sign of the flowering of peace was the development of international air travel in Europe.
In accordance with the Balfour Declaration (see 1917], Britain had agreed to allow Jewish settlement in Palestine, but had also given wartime promises to the Arabs.
In 1922, it divided its Palestinian mandate territory along the line of the Jordan River.
Jewish settlement was allowed to the west, and to the east Transjordan would remain purely Arab land. of which he served only two.
Republican Army occupied : Dublin's Four Courts building. : After a lengthy standoff, in June Collins used artillery loaned by ' Britain to bombard the Four : Courts, and retake the building.
State troops had crushed most ' Opposition by the time the treaty came into effect on December 6. : The Protestant northern province : of Ulster remained part of the ' United Kingdom.
Greek city of Smyrna was * occupied by pursuing Turkish surplus of trained pilots and : immigration of Jews to Palestine : Amore positive side effect 300.000 Jews aircraft manufacturing capacity ' (see panel, above], which Britain: of the British presence in Egypt @® Muslims left over from the war.
Kemalas its first president. : 1922 was the year when Benito : Mussolini achieved : power in Italy.
World War I, Italy's ruling class : had been intimidated by waves : of militant action, with socialist workers occupying factories ' and peasants taking over large ' estates.
In October, Mussolini threatened to lead his ' Fascist followers in a “March on » Rome” unless he was made head | of government.
Emmanuel Ill , ' eventually gave in and Mussolini ' assumed office as prime minister.
Murnau’s expressionist horror movie Nosferatu to American filmmaker Robert Flaherty’s groundbreaking documentary Nanook of the North.
Early radio sets were often : Impressive-looking pieces of : equipment.
The French, led by fiercely anti-German prime minister Raymond Poincaré , were determined to take action.
In January 1923, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr, Germany's industrial heartland.
The German government responded by encouraging passive resistance— strikes stopped production in mines and factories.
The occupation triggered hyperinflation, and a collapse in the value of the German Mark.
Stresemann , a ' respected German politician, : formed a coalition government, ' and the following month called off ' passive resistance in the Ruhr.
November, the Mark was replaced : by the Rentenmark, knocking 2 12 zeros off the old currency and restoring public confidence.
German hyperinflation : The value of the Mark against the US’ : : dollar reflects the acceleration of : German inflation.
He banned traditional dress, ' abolished the Muslim caliphate : system of government, and ' replaced Arabic script with the Roman alphabet.
In Japan, one of the worst natural disasters of the century struck on September 1.
Gropius in 1919, : rejecting the traditional artist’s ' hostility to modern technology ' and mass production.
VLADIMIR ILYICH LENIN (18701924), founder of the Soviet Union, died of a massive stroke on January 22.
Plan, named for American banker : and politician Charles G Dawes, arranged for the withdrawal of ' French and Belgian troops from » the Ruhr (see 1923], and for German payment of reparations : with the help of United States loans.
He was found guilty of high treason, ' but given a lenient five-year prison sentence, of which he served less ' than a year.
Landsberg prison, he dictated : the first volume of Mein Kampf | , a statement of ' his political beliefs.
Ascents in balloons sparked the first flying craze but had little practical effect.
In the 19th century, engineers calculated the forces involved in winged flight and experimented with gliders, but it was the arrival of gasoline engines that made powered flight practicable.
JJ Orville Wright , American aviation pioneer American brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright Wright brothers showed that winged aircraft had passengers in the comfort of pressurized cabins. made the first viable powered winged aircraft by astounding potential for increase in size, range, Jet engines carried aircraft performance to attaching an engine to a glider in 1903.
Rocket technology then propelled humans by 1905 had a machine that would stay airborne the development of flying instruments improved into space itself.
Long-distance flying feats made pilots turned flight into a worldwide mass transportation outperformed winged aircraft, but they were slow heroes in the 1920s and 1930s.
Successors to the the same flights were available to paying travel had bridged distances and shrunk the world. narrow wing made from ash ribs uniquely designed propeller blades Wright Flyer The Wright brothers’ home-built aircraft, which they used . forward elevators for trial flights in December 1903, had a complex control landing skids system with rudders and elevators.
Passenger Concorde enters service Focke-Wulf company in Germany, aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, air travel zooms into Concorde, the world’s first supersonic passenger and Igor Sikorski in the US. makes successful test flight. the jet age. aircraft, enters commercial service.
The exhibition gave a name—Art Deco—to the design trend toward angular shapes, abstract patterns, exuberant African, Aztec, and Egyptian motifs, and materials such as chromium and ivory.
Art Deco soon set the style for everything from scent bottles and skyscrapers to ocean liners and movie theaters.
Man Ray was one of a host 2 of American expatriates who | flocked to Paris in the mid' 1920s, lured by the vibrant cultural scene and the favorable ' exchange rate.
His aim — was to modernize his country along secular Western lines. revolving IN JANUARY 1926, SCOTTISH ENGINEER JOHN LOGIE BAIRD (1888-1946] made the first demonstration of a television transmission in a loft in London's Soho district.
Fifty members of the Royal Institution saw the indistinct, but recognizable moving image of a face.
This nationwide Industrial stoppage, in support of coal miners, paralyzed transportation networks and docks, and closed down factories and newspapers.
The government responded by mobilizing troops and recruiting volunteers to maintain essential services.
The Pahlavi dynasty he founded ruled ' in Iran until the 1970s. nine days the unions backed down and ordered a return to work.
In Poland, the nation’s military hero Marshal Jozef Pilsudski led a coup d’état In May, in reaction against the unstable parliamentary government.
Pilsudski declined the presidency, but effectively took dictatorial powers.
Grigori Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev. : expelled from the Soviet Union of a cash prize for the first Arkansa, 3° Memphis —~ : the disaster, many thousands of | : Once the favorite to succeed Lenin : in February 1929.
On May 8, famous French war aces Charles Nungesser and Francois Coli attempted the flight from Paris; they set off westward over the Atlantic and were never seen again.
Such dramas had wrought excitement to a high pitch when the unknown Lindbergh, an airmail pilot, took off from Roosevelt Field on May 20 aboard a custom-built monoplane.
Not only did he succeed In reaching Paris in 33 hours and 30 minutes, | but he did it alone.
America’s upbeat mood was ' ripe for the world’s first modern consumer boom, which was built around the purchase of cars and 2 electrical goods.
Lindbergh flight in media ' coverage in 1927 was the controversy surrounding the : execution of the anarchists : Ferdinando Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.
Singer, took $2. million at a | 1a : : : ‘ E : : : Fi . _ | roads tripled.
IN THE SOVIET UNION, JOSEPH STALIN began radical economic and social reform.
Abandoning the compromise of . suffered heavy losses when Chiang | killer, José de Leon Toral, wasa_ _—:_ penicillin.
Kai-shek turned against them in : member of the Catholic Cristero : Scottish scientist Policy , Stalinlaunched : 1927.
He cracked down on businessmen and successful peasants who had made money out of the revolution.
Hundreds of “bourgeois experts” —people, such as engineers, who had been valued for their skills rather than their involvement in the revolution—were arrested and convicted of sabotage.
The warlords who ruled different areas of China either became his allies or were defeated by his army.
His ' armed rebellion in response to © the Mexican government's ' anticlerical policies.
Republic’s rigorous proportional representation system, the : Nazis’ minimal support gained : them 12 seats in parliament.
Of more practical v JOSEPH STALIN (1878-1953] Born Josif Dzhugashvili, in Georgia, Stalin joined Lenin’s Bolsheviks in 1903.
After Lenin's death he cleverly outmaneuvered other leading Bolsheviks to achieve dictatorial power by 1929. into a major industrial power Prohibition era weapon A sawn-off, doublebarrelled shotgun hidden in a violin case was a typical weapon for an American gangster of the 1920s.
ON FEBRUARY 14, SEVEN PEOPLE WERE SHOT DEAD in a garage on Chicago's North Side.
Valentine’s Day Massacre were probably members of the gang headed by Al Capone , a prominent figure in organized crime.
The massacre focused public outrage on the crime and violence that was rife in American cities.
The authorities were forced to take action, which led to the arrest and imprisonment of Capone on charges of tax evasion in 1931.
On March 4, Republican Herbert Hoover was inaugurated as United States president.
Frank B Kellogg that murdered millions of its high point of complacency about Prisoners taken : and French Foreign Minister citizens, yet he presided over United States economic progress.
JJ President Herbert Hoover, in a speech after the stock market crash, November 15 1929 Herbert Hoover being sworn in as United States president.
Street in an apparently endless : upward curve—about 30 million : Americans had some form of ' stock market investment.
Winning movie : The first movie to win the Academy : Award for Best Picture was Wings, a : silent film about World War | fighter : pilots, staring actress Clara Bow. h : was going through a technological revolution, with the transition : from silent to sound movies.
Dawes Plan (see 1924] had fixed _: payments too high, the Young : Plan made proposals for Germany to pay a reduced annual : sum until 1988.
In the eyes of dictator Joseph Stalin , who wanted to transform the Soviet Union into a modern industrial state, smallscale peasant agriculture was an obstacle to be ruthlessly swept aside—both inefficient and tainted with antisocialist self-interest.
The peasants, however, were ferociously attached to their land and farm animals, and when communist officials were sent to villages to organize collective farms, they met widespread resistance.
The authorities ' responded with mass arrests of | “kulaks”—better-off peasants— and troublemakers.
Mohandas Gandhi (see panel, : right) was mounting a campaign : of civil disobedience against British rule.
British remained committed : to gradually extending India’s limited self-government.
Jean Mermoz , who : was employed by the French : Aéropostale airmail company, : made the first postal flight across : the South Atlantic, flying a float plane nonstop from Dakar in West Africa to Natal in Brazil.
This completed an unbroken airmail link that stretched from France to Chile.
Meanwhile, the British cheered flew solo from Croydon in England to Darwin, Soviet tractor By the 1930s the Soviet Union was manufacturing its own tractors.
His first campaigns of non-violent civil disobedience were in South Africa.
Returning to India in 1915 he led the opposition to British rule, although many nationalists rejected his non-violence.
Famous flight : British aviatrix Amy Johnson after : her solo flight from England to : Australia.
United States unwisely sought relief for its ' farmers and unemployed workers : through blocking imports.
Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, which ' became law in June, placed heavy ' duties on thousands of imported goods.
Many observers outside Germany ' were disturbed by the growing ' support for Hitler's aggressive ' nationalist extremism.
South American countries ' were especially vulnerable to the Depression because of their role as suppliers of food and raw : materials to the industrialized United States and Europe.
In Brazil, an army ' revolt brought Getulio Vargas to power in » November.
Vargas installed a British airship R107 lies ina field outside Beauvais in northern France.
In Japan, radical nationalists, including many army and navy officers, believed the answer to Japan’s economic problems lay in military conquest.
Japanese assassination : Japanese Prime Minister : Hamaguchi after being shot bya : nationalist extremist at Tokyo : station.
ON APRIL 14, 1931, KING ALFONSO : XIILOF SPAIN ' abdicated and fled into exile, after : his supporters were defeated in ' municipal elections.
But its ' } completion also came against a ' background of farm bankruptcies and rising unemployment.
Austria's largest bank, the ' Creditanstalt, failed, and by July many major German banks also : faced collapse.
Chancellor Heinrich Briining proposed a customs union : between Germany and Austria, ' and suggested Germany might ' renege on payment of war ' reparations.
Congress, the principal Indian : nationalist movement, was Occupation of Manchuria Korea became a Japanese colony in 1910.
In 1931, the Japanese extended into Manchuria, which became the puppet state of Manchukuo.
KEY < , Peki Scaling new heights . ene KOREA JAPAN Japanese Empire 1930 Photographer Lewis Hine Beebul Tory ) Japanese sphere of documented the casual risks taken r influence 1930 by workers during construction of tenn Yellow W Japanese conquests the Empire State Building.
At least 13 million Americans, around 3 million Britons, and more than 5 million Germans were unemployed.
In Europe, national unemployment benefit programs helped the jobless to survive, but in the US, where only piecemeal local welfare programs existed, unemployment led to abject poverty.
Thousands became homeless, living in shanty towns ironically called “Hoovervilles” after the United States president.
Hitler suffered frustration in his campaign to : win power through the democratic iY : process.
Westminster by the British . : Reichstag, Hindenburg installed veterans gathered in Washington, D.C., to demand payment of a : parliament in December.
They established a shanty town within sight of the ' Britain and the dominions— Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, the Irish Free State, and Newfoundland.
British Empire had truly become Industrial unemployment German industrial workers had the worst unemployment rate at the peak of the depression, closely ' news of the Depression when : American pilot Amelia Earhart : became the first woman to fly solo across the : Atlantic.
Their protest attracted widespread sympathy from Americans distressed at mass unemployment, but President Hoover refused to pay out.
It was the advent of electricity in the 19th century that transformed communications.
In the 18th century, the French navy developed a system for transmitting orders between ships using semaphore flags.
From the 1790s, semaphore was used on land, with lines of stations relaying coded messages using large signalling devices, each visible to the next station in the chain.
From the 1830s, the development of electric telegraph replaced this medium.
The Vindolanda tablets from Roman Britain include a birthday invitation.
Prehistory Smoke signals Fire allows smoke signals to be sent over considerable distances.
However, this method Is limited to a simple set of prearranged messages.
Sumerian tablet 2900-2350 BCE Carrier pigeons Pigeons are used to carry messages In ancient Egypt and Persia.
They will continue to be used by armies in World War | and World War Il. on-off key generating a code that was transmitted along a wire.
By the 1860s, telegraph wires spanned continents, and underwater cables enabled almost instant communication across oceans.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the invention of the telephone enabled electronic transmission of speech.
The discovery that radio waves could transmit sound opened the new possibility of broadcasting.
From the 1920s, “wireless sets,” providing entertainment and news, became a common feature of households.
The advent of transistors made electronic goods smaller and cheaper, and advances in rocket technology allowed satellites to be placed in space, enabling global access to communication networks.
The triumph of digital technology and microprocessors from the 1980s made computers almost universal.
Jy Rutherford B Hayes, United States President, to Alexander Graham Bell after a demonstration of the telephone, 1876 mouthpiece crank, which drives a dynamo to send a signal to the exchange Early table telephone Made of metal, the Ericsson table telephone dates from 1890.
The first telephone exchanges in North America and Europe date from 1878.
Hitler, however, celebrated ' his appointment as if it was a ' revolutionary seizure of power.
German election results : The Reichstag election of March : 1933 showed stubborn support for : the communists and the socialist : SDP despite intimidation. was partly achieved through ' ambitious public works ' programs, most prominently the : building of a network of autobahns : (highways], that provided employment.
He immediately applied this principle ' to the tottering United States banking ' system.
The measures were neither entirely coherent nor ' uniformly successful.
Farmers were paid to leave land fallow and slaughter animals, to ' raise farm prices.
Elected president four times, from his first presidential campaign in 1932 he transformed American politics by attracting the votes of labor unions, ethnic minorities, and AfricanAmericans.
IN A YEAR DOMINATED BY POLITICAL VIOLENCE and assassinations, the French Third Republic was rocked by the Stavisky affair.
A crooked financier, Alexandre Stavisky committed suicide on January 8, after the collapse of a dishonest investment scheme.
The rightwing press accused leading French politicians of profiting from Stavisky’s fraudulent deals.
Their shoot-outs with police and narrow escapes were reported with feverish excitement in the press.
Another “most wanted” criminal was the Bonnie and Clyde American outlaw Bonnie Parker partner-in-crime Clyde Barrow.
Kirov's death to pass a new ' antiterrorist law, which was : later used to justify the arrest : and execution of hundreds of thousands of people.
Britain was a relative haven of tranquility, but even there fascism was on the rise.
Although it enjoyed the backing of some national newspapers, the BUF Ethiopian tribal warriors gather to fight for their emperor, Haile Selassie.
THROUGH THE FIRST HALF OF THE 1930S, parts of the United States and Canada were swept by giant dust storms as topsoil blew off land ruined by a combination of persistent drought and intensive farming.
The worst of these ‘black blizzards” occurred in April 1935, affecting a vast area of the plains of Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado.
The Dust Bowl created by this THE ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF TOPSOIL BLOWN OFF THE SOUTHERN PLAINS OF THE United States BY DECEMBER 1935 ecological disaster could no longer support small farmers, who were forced to migrate in their thousands.
Many of them found their way to migrant camps in California, where they were exploited as seasonal labor.
Relations Act placed the ' government on the side of workers : who went on strike to gain union ' rights.
His Fascist state was widely admired, but dreams of conquest led to military adventures and an alliance with Nazi Germany.
Mao Zedong asserted himself as 2 the foremost communist leader. : In December 1935, Mao declared that the Long March had been “a ' manifesto, a propaganda force... : proclaiming to the world that the : Red Army is an army of heroes.” : But for the time being these : “heroes” remained hunted rebels.
Nuremberg Laws formally defined a Jew as a person with three or four Jewish grandparents.
This . policy was wrecked by Mussolini's imperialist ambitions in Africa.
October, troops from Italy's east § : African colonies, Eritrea and Sle) Italian Somaliland, invaded the independent African state of : Chinese communists of the First : Front Army arrive at Yanan in Shaanxi: ' province at the end of the strategic : retreat known as the Long March. v : Ethiopia.
Hoare and French ' prime minister ' Pierre Laval were ' forced to resign, economic sanctions ' against Italy went : ahead, and Mussolini : was pushed into the ' arms of Hitler. : Despite the continuing effects of the economic Depression and the world’s : grave political problems, ' there were many signs of technological progress.
The operation was perfectly stage-managed, the marching soldiers greeted by cheering crowds and women throwing flowers.
However, behind the scenes Hitler and his generals were racked by nervous tension.
German rearmament was still In its early stages and the German army could not have resisted if France had opted for a military response, but strong public opinion and domestic issues inhibited a stronger stand.
By doing nothing, the Western allies showed they would not act to uphold international agreements.
The British and French nonetheless embarked on expansion of their armed forces in response to developments In Germany.
Despite having a mandate for military expansion, Baldwin continued to proceed cautiously.
Nationalist army officers based in Spanish Morocco launched a : military uprising.
A Catholic monarchist, he joined the military uprising against the Republic in July 1936 and was recognized as sole leader of the Nationalist rebels in September.
After victory in the Civil War in 1939 he imposed a harsh dictatorship.
He kept Spain neutral in World War II and remained in power until his death in 1975.
Olympics were staged on an : unprecedentedly lavish scale with : impeccable efficiency.
In the fall, two events took place that would enter Britain's political mythology.
Marconiphone television receiver i Early televisions like this one made i by Marconi were luxury products— i the Marconiphone sold in Britain for : 60 guineas, equivalent to about OF DAYS EDWARD VIII REIGNED AS KING BEFORE HE ABDICATED : presidential elections in November, ' securing a second term and ' confirming the popularity of his | New Deal policies.
Edward VIII informed ' Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin ' that he intended to marry : American divorcee Mrs.
JJ Franklin D Roosevelt, American president, in his inauguration speech, January 20, 1937 THE YEAR BEGAN WITH FRANKLIN D ROOSEVELT starting his second term in office as United States president.
In his inauguration speech on January 20, Roosevelt drew attention to persistent poverty in America.
He pledged to end this injustice, denouncing “heedless self-interest” as bad morals and bad economics.
The president's radical policies brought him into conflict with the Supreme Court, while across the country a wave of sit-down strikes pitted workers against their employers.
NS Os ae < oo xé oe o ot eo Se oO on y® o® a oe cy do” NS oo. om ee ye.
The most famous response to the bombing of Guernica was : Pablo Picasso's painting, which : was first exhibited in the Spanish Republic's pavilion at the Paris ' International Exhibition in ' summer 1937.
The Paris Exhibition also featured grandiose Nazi German and Soviet Russian pavilions, both ' using monumental sculpture to ' trumpet the glories of their rival political systems.
Between \ i te The German Zeppelin airship Hindenburg exploding into a fireball while docking at Lakehurst in New Jersey.
Soviet regime had always been ' executed, imprisoned, or fired. : symbol marked by air disasters.
On May 6, the airship Hindenburg, : with 97 passengers and crew on : board, burst into flames as it docked at Lakehurst, New Jersey.
Germans forged ahead with : development of a jet aircraft— Ohain’s engine powering the first jet flight in August 1939.
WALT DISNEY’S REWORKING OF THE FAIRY TALE OF SNOW WHITE and the Seven Dwarfs marked the transition of animated movies from cartoon shorts aimed primarily at children to a major strand in film culture.
The ability of Hollywood to manufacture universally appealing, mass-market films, along with the influence of American big-band “swing” dance music, was laying the foundations for a US-dominated, International popular culture.
The annexation was Ps Economic growth The Soviet Union achieved high economic growth in the 1930s.
Germany and Austria was a major ' breech of the Versailles Treaty : (see 1919], Britain and France : made no attempt to intervene.
Hitler . stirred up unrest among the » Sudeten Germans, while ordering ' his generals to prepare for an ' invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Chamberlain embarked on an : unprecedented diplomatic initiative, flying twice to Germany | for face-to-face talks with Hitler. : Although Britain pressured the : Czech government into making ' major concessions, this only made : : Hitler raise his demands. : military preparations were under way in Britain and France when, : on September 28, Italian dictator ' Benito Mussolini proposed a : four-nation conference.
Kristallnacht (“the Night of THE APPROXIMATE ADDITION TO THE GERMAN POPULATION BY THE ANNEXATIONS OF AUSTRIA AND SUDETENLAND : struck that preserved peace at ' the expense of Czechoslovakia, : which had to hand over the : Sudetenland to Germany.
Post-Munich optimism only Broken Glass”) provided graphic evidence of the extremist nature of the Nazi regime.
Steam record holder Designed by Nigel Gresley, the steam locomotive function.
The assassination of a German : diplomat by a Jew in Paris served : attacks on Jewish homes and ' businesses across Germany and : Austria.
Britain agreed to 9 ‘d F / "" Arab prisoners are guarded bya British soldier in the Old City of Jerusalem, during the suppression of the revolt agai nst Britain’s rule in Palestine.
Night of broken glass A shopkeeper clears up shattered glass from a looted Jewish shop in the wake of attacks on German and Austrian Jews in November. children, without their parents, and the United States maintained its existing barriers to immigration.
Jews were trapped because, although the Nazis were ready to let them leave, they had nowhere to go.
Welles's radio version of the : alien-invasion classic The War of | the Worlds was broadcast by CBS at Halloween.
Only a handful of countries, chiefly Britain and France, maintained a liberal democratic system.
In the spring, General Francisco Franco's Nationalists triumphed in the Spanish Civil War, occupying the surviving Republican strongholds of Barcelona and Madrid.
More threatening for the peace of Europe was German Fuhrer Adolf Hitler’s occupation of Prague.
After Hungary annexed the east, ' Czechoslovakia ceased to exist ' aS acountry.
Expecting air attacks, the British evacuated 1. million children from large cities, along with mothers with babies and young children.
The French carried out mass evacuations from the border provinces of Alsace and Lorraine in eastern France.
Georgy Zhukov's hard-fought ' victory at the battle of Khalkhin : Gol decided the outcome.
POLAND % USSR from East Prussia, Germany, and Reis GERMANY ) Slovakia on September 1.
There were The destruction of Poland was achieved with breathtaking ' speed.
Warsaw surrendered on September | 28, and the fighting stopped aweek later.
Soviets and Nazis set about ' imprisoning and massacring : Poles in large numbers.
British and French rejected a : peace offer from Hitler, but the troops they assembled in France ' remained passive.
German Navy's U-boat U-47 penetrated the defenses of : Britain's main naval base at Scapa : Flow, in the Orkney Islands off : Scotland, and sank the battleship : Royal Oak.
German expansion Between September 1939 and August 1942 Nazi indi KEY German Mess Su kG iy Heals ee S$ ie og 9 SES ener ser seizing control of an area from orway to rete, an e & May 20-Jun 1, 1941 $ Major battle from France to the Black Sea.
Britain remained free of fie German domination, but was subjected to air attacks.
After the rapid defeat of Poland in April 1940, defeat, the German army swept south to Crete and the Germans invaded Denmark and Norway. intervened in North Africa.
Its allies — satellites included Italy, Hungary, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Croatia, and Vichy France.
Greater Germany expanded before and during the war Netherlands, Belgium, and France.
But the escaped from Europe through an evacuation from German drive eastward came to a catastrophic Dunkirk in France.
ALBANIA| fs | with the British victory at , “s El Alamein in North Africa Sicily ALGERIA —ait a and the Soviet triumph at , ry ES ty “ 3 Stalingrad.
In uae KEY Ml Axis satellite Army Air Force carried out a sustained, Yugoslavia, an independent a 1c aad ~~ Frontiers 1937 WH Italy and Italian large-scale bombing campaign on Sea mera oe » ; occupied territory mainland Europe.
The British and French governments, both strongly anticommunist, planned to send an expeditionary force to aid the Finns.
Troops were assembled, but Soviet military successes led Finland to seek peace in March.
In France, the failure to help the Finns led to the fall of the government of Edouard Daladier, who was replaced as WINSTON CHURCHILL [1874Churchill led an adventurous life as a soldier and war correspondent before entering politics.
As First Lord of the Admiralty in World War | he was blamed for the Gallipoli disaster.
In 1939, he returned to the Admiralty before becoming prime minister in May 1940.
United Commonwealth A British propaganda poster shows men from the dominions and colonies united in the war effort.
August, Trotsky was killed by Ramon Mercader, an agent of Stalin's secret police.
On April 4, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain announced that Hitler had “missed the bus” by failing to launch a major offensive as British rearmament accelerated.
Britain and France sent troops and warships to aid the Norwegians but could not prevent a German victory.
Norway's King Haakon VII was evacuated to Britain with his government to continue the fight from exile.
After the Dunkirk “» German — Allied front — Allied front confidence in the Chamberlain : evacuation of the Allied advance line May 21 line Jun 4 government.
On the same day, German forces invaded the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg.
After Rotterdam was heavily bombed, the Dutch forces surrendered to avoid further destruction.
Dutch Queen Wilhelmina defiantly set up a government-in-exile in London.
Allied troops in northern France advanced into Belgium to meet the , German offensive.
The Germans unexpectedly delivered a powerful thrust through the Ardennes region into France and broke through the French defenses at Sedan.
The French army was driven into retreat, allowing the Germans to ' occupy Paris on June 14.
THE NUMBER : RAF when the Luftwaffe switched | railroad car in which the 1918 | OF GERMAN , to bombing London from early : armistice had been signed. : September.
Underground stations to shelter to command centers that : social breakdown nor the collapse | Roosevelt had made his hostility NCTM ne Homviog: coordinated a response by : of morale.
British refused to : negotiate a peace deal, Hitler : began preparing a cross-Channel all-metal monocoque fuselage structure laminated wood propeller blade : Supermarine Spitfire i The Spitfire, the RAF’s most famous : fighter aircraft of World War II, could : match the performance of the : German Messerschmitt 109.
Le. x0 CNN PO oO 9k OF 2"" ooh no~ sh WOT Woe’ EES oe @ mY of CO tien \ Sete s _ 4.
THE ENTRY OF FASCIST ITALY INTO WORLD WAR IIL IN JUNE 1940 extended the war into the Mediterranean and North Africa, where Italy had colonies, including Libya.
Early in 1941, British Commonwealth forces, advancing from Egypt, captured the Libyan port of Tobruk and took 130,000 Italian prisoners.
The Italian army also attempted ' an invasion of Greece in 1940, but once again the Germans had ' to step in.
Yugoslavia in April, which was German German paratroopers, like airborne forces all over the world, were considered to be an elite, a status reflected in their stylish badge. : rapidly defeated and dismembered, ' creating an independent Croatia : under the rule of the fascist _: UstaSe movement.
He had ' already set in motion preparations | ' for an invasion of the Soviet ' Union, codenamed Operation | Barbarossa.
Launched on June 22, Operation Barbarossa was warfare ona ' vast scale.
Axis war casualties : The casualties suffered by Germany : and its Axis allies rose dramatically : between 1939 and 1941, as the war : widened its grip on Europe.
Operation Barbarossa KEY : The Axis invasion of the Soviet Union : made great progress in the second : half of 1941.
Scotland, convinced that he could ' persuade the British government : to ally itself with Germany.
Royal Navy battle cruiser HMS : Hood, Bismarck was tracked : down, halted by torpedoes dropped : from Swordfish biplane aircraft, and then sunk by British : battleships.
Roosevelt felt he lacked the : popular support needed for : a declaration of war.
The United States opposed Japan's : expansion into Asia, and ' after Japanese troops : entered French Indochina Canadian navies were less ' successful at protecting merchant ' convoys against German : submarines, however, and losses ' were soon mounting.
March, he introduced Lend-Lease : to supply Britain with military equipment paid for by the United States : government.
October a United States destroyer was ' sunk by a German torpedo, but Fighting in the snow A German soldier experiencing the Russian winter during the invasion of the Soviet Union.
Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, on ISOROKU YAMAMOTO (1884-1943] In the 1930s, Japanese Admiral lsoroku Yamamoto became a leading advocate of naval air power.
As naval commander-in-chief he was the architect of the raid on Pearl Harbor in 1941.
Pearl Harbor badge : The slogan “Remember Pearl : Harbor” was widely used in the : United States to inspire patriotic support for : the war against the Japanese.
Harbor ensured popular American support for war against Japan, but : not against Germany.
Hitler chose to declare war on the United States in support of his Japanese : allies.
B The British and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia Battle of the Coral Sea.
A new phase of the war The Japanese navy was routed at the battles of the proved easy prey for Japan—the British base at began with an ambitious thrust by the Japanese Philippine Sea and Leyte Gulf, while the seizure of Singapore fell with virtually no resistance.
Within navy against Midway Island, which led to heavy the Mariana Islands brought the Japanese within five months, the Japanese had reached the border losses.
From August 1942, the most intense fighting | range of United States bomber aircraft.
Australia seemed focused around Guadalcanal, which the United States defeated in Burma and Okinawa, facing a Soviet threatened, but Japan's southward push was eventually held.
It was not until 1944 that the United States had _ invasion of Manchuria, and the destruction of cities checked by a clash with United States aircraft carriers atthe built up sufficient strength for a sustained advance. by atom bombs, the Japanese surrendered.
A naval defeat at Midway in June 1942 ended the period of Japanese expansion. x <a.
City Number of raids Percentage of city destroyed 50% 31% 56% 26% 44% 33% Tokyo Nagoya Kobe Osaka Yokohama Kawasaki Burma campaign 3 2 Sixty percent of the » Japanese troops who fought in the Burma campaign in 1942-45 lost their lives.
Total Japanese casualties numbered around 200,000, compared with the 71,000 British and British Indian men who were killed and wounded.
Sea of Japan (East Sea] Tokyo Kawasaki 7 PACIFIC OCEAN “Big Six” fire bomb target 2 x Attacks on Japan Taking off from bases in the Mariana Islands, United States B-29 Superfortress bombers devastated Japanese cities with incendiary devices from March 1945.
The dropping of atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki [August 6 and 9, 1945] was followed by Japanese surrender.
In the Central Pacific, the United States navy and marines spearheaded a thrust from the Gilbert Islands to the Marianas.
The loss of Okinawa in June 1945 placed Japan under imminent threat of an Allied invasion.
ON JANUARY 20, 1942, SS GENERAL REINHARD HEYDRICH chaired a conference at Wannsee, a suburb of Berlin.
The purpose of the meeting was to brief German civil servants and foreign ministry officials on plans to systematically deport Jews en masse from every country in Europe.
The Jews were to be transported to camps—chiefly in Poland—from which, it was made clear, none would return.
In February after token resistance, was a blow to the prestige of the 2 British Empire.
American and Filipino soldiers on the Bataan peninsula in the 2 Philippines ended tn April.
British-ruled Burma, Australians : worried that their country might : be next.
Roosevelt signed Executive : Order 9066, which allowed : Japanese Americans living in the : western United States to be : deported to internment camps. : About 120,000 ethnic Japanese : were interned during the war.
General Douglas MacArthur, United States commanding officer, after his ' battles in which both sides suffered heavy losses.
Chandra Bose’s Indian National : Army, which fought alongside the : Japanese, but far more fought for ' for total war, the fight back : National Congress leaders : Britain: around 2. million Indians : against Japan began.
The Nazis murdered people from many groups, including Slavs, | The American victory at Midway Viennag * Bratislava ROMANIA homosexuals, and gypsies, but their treatment of the Jews was : was a turning point, but far from SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA HUNGARY without parallel.
NUMBER Naval power United States Navy dive-bombers fly over Midway Island in the Pacific.
This was the location of a decisive duel between American and Japanese aircraft carriers in June 1942.
Africa, after suffering repeated : defeats at the hands of Field : Marshal Erwin Rommel (18911944), the British Eighth Army, : commanded by General Bernard : Montgomery , won a : great offensive victory at Alamein : in October-November.
Germans responded : by extending their military occupation of : France to the Vichy-ruled area.
Soviet Union came : to its climactic turning point at : the Battle of Stalingrad.
Montgomery as an observation post. | the city of Stalingrad—of ' symbolic importance because . of its name.
In November, Soviet General Giorgi Zhukov masterminded a ' counterattack.
The output of United States factories and shipyards soared during World War II. : The number of workers employed in shipbuilding alone rose from : around 100,000 in 1940 to 1. million late in the war.
IN JANUARY 1943, Franklin D Roosevelt met British prime minister Winston Churchill for a conference in Casablanca, Morocco, which set the future course of World War II in Europe.
At the end of the conference, Roosevelt announced that the Allies would accept nothing less than the “unconditional surrender” of their enemies.
The surrender of Axis forces at Stalingrad in February was a massive setback for Germany, but the Germans remained in occupation of most of Europe.
After the German occupation of Yugoslavia in 1941, Tito led a guerrilla movement that took control of the country in 1945.
He made Yugoslavia a communist state, but resisted | the dominance of the Soviet Union.
U-boat losses were so high that : submarine commander Admiral Karl Donitz had to withdraw his : forces from the Atlantic.
U-boat offensive never regained : its momentum. : By far the heaviest land fighting : of 1943 was on Germany’s ' eastern front.
The Resistance carried out acts of sabotage, gathered intelligence, and mounted guerrilla warfare operations.
Franklin D Roosevelt, United States President, 1944 | disaster at Stalingrad, Axis forces ' were able to mount a successful 2 counteroffensive at Kharkov in : the spring.
Grand Council, Mussolini was ' dismissed by King Victor © Emmanuel Ill and : arrested.
Naples toward Rome, the Badoglio government joined the : Allies, declaring war on Germany.
Aside from the casualties, 2 hundreds of thousands were » made homeless and there were ' severe food shortages.
Women at war A United States poster suggests that working in munitions factories can be as glamorous as joining the various uniformed women’s services.
Command, equipped with the new: : Lancaster bomber, achieved a ' spectacular success in the : “Dambusters” raid in May.
In July, bombers saturated ' the port city of Hamburg with ' incendiary devices.
US, women workers were employed in heavy industrial jobs traditionally reserved for men.
This led to racial ' tensions that erupted into ' rioting in Detroit in June.
Prime Minister Churchill refused : to allow shipping space, which Flying fortress The crew of an American Eighth Air Force B-17 Flying Fortress at a base in England prepares for a bombing mission over Germany.
The Eighth Air Force lost 26,000 men between 1942 and 1945. prevented food from reaching the starving.
In Asia, 60,000 Allied prisoners of war and almost 200,000 Asian laborers were forced to build a railroad from Thailand to supply Japanese troops in Burma.
Around 16,000 POWs and 90,000 Asian workers died while they were building it.
Building the Burma Railroad : Alongside Asian forced laborers, : chiefly British, Australian, and Dutch | prisoners of war were used by the ' Japanese to build the railroad.
IN EARLY 1944 THERE WAS HEAVY FIGHTING IN ITALY as German troops blocked the Allied advance on Rome.
In January, Allied seaborne landings at Anzio, behind the Germans defensive Gustav Line, failed to break the deadlock.
In February, Allied commanders decided to bomb the medieval abbey at Monte Cassino, a key point in the Gustav Line, but this much-criticized act of desecration was also ineffectual.
Monte Cassino eventually fell to the Polish infantry in May, allowing Rome to be liberated the following month.
In the spring, British Indian troops withstood a Japanese attempt to invade northeast India from Burma.
The Japanese offensive was so successfully repulsed that Allied forces were able to mount their own offensive to retake much of Burma later in the year.
During the night, 18,000 airborne troops landed by parachute or | glider behind the German coastal defenses.
KEY — Allied landing/advance © Allied parachute landing — Allied front line June 7, 1944 Burma Star This military medal was awarded to British and Commonwealth soldiers for service in the Burma campaign between 1947 and 1945. soldiers arrived offshore.
Colonel Claus Schenk von : Stauffenberg carried : a bomb in his briefcase to a : meeting at Hitler's headquarters at Rastenburg, East Prussia.
French Resistance fighters began an uprising in the city on : August 19, General Charles de Gaulle’s Free French forces, ' fighting as part of Eisenhower's Allied armies, raced for Paris.
AG aS we Qe oe Soldiers of United States 7th Armored Division patrol the snowy Belgian town of St.
As the Germans withdrew, the : celebrations in Paris began, and ' so too did reprisals against : alleged collaborators.
Red Army had almost reached ' the city, after pushing westward : through the summer, but Stalin : had no desire to help the Poles, who were mostly anti-Russian and anticommunist.
Montgomery devised : a plan to end the war quickly by northern Germany.
Japanese Imperial Navy was 2 almost wiped out in two great ' battles—the Philippine Sea in June, and Leyte Gulf in October.
JJ General Alfred Jodl, Chief of Operations on Hitler’s counteroffensive Flying bomb The German unmanned V-1 flying bomb was propelled by a primitive jet engine and packed with explosives.
German tanks broke through the : United States front line and headed for Antwerp.
Each agent carried a suicide They used a standard-issue Mosin-Nagant pill to swallow if captured. infantry rifle with a telescopic sight.
Improvised boots GERMANY German troops invading the USSR in 1941 were not equipped to face the Russian winter.
Some made straw boots to protect against frostbite. wt fii | ' Ub bhi | Ha ti il Ae ee ie . hail am we * 9 Bin viewing window shows code letters Civilian ration card GERMANY Shortages of food, fuel, and other essentials led most combatant countries to introduce rationing.
Red Cross parcel BRITAIN Prisoners of war received Red Cross food parcels.
GERMANY This Teller mine had a fuse activated by the pressure of tank tracks.
Enigma cipher machine GERMANY The Germans believed messages encrypted by Enigma were secure, but with the help of an early electromechanical computer, Allied codebreakers cracked the code. were better fed than their captors. telescopic sight Blackout poster GERMANY scorpion A dramatic poster calls on German badge of citizens to observe blackout regulations Long Range during air raids.
Desert headgear NEW ZEALAND The Long Range Desert Group, set up by the British, was initially formed of New Zealanders.
President Roosevelt did not the last time at a conference at _ Marines are : live to see the defeat of Germany Yalta in the Crimea.
Japanese fire on to hold democratic elections in hear ertne : on April 12 came as a shock Poland—a promise he did not intend to keep.
There was little pity for the Germans, as the liberation of the death camps exposed Nazi crimes.
The major extermination centers, including Auschwitz, were liberated by the Soviet Red Army.
L ‘, f A formally dressed Japanese delegation prepares to sign the surrender papers on the American battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay on September 2.
On July 16, the New Mexican desert was lit up by the world’s first atomic explosion.
This was the culmination of the top-secret Manhattan Project, a feat of science and engineering that had cost America $2 billion, spent on presidential authority without Congressional approval.
The explosion produced temperatures higher than those at the core of the sun.
Preparations for dropping atom ' bombs on Japanese cities were well advanced even before the ' first atomic test.
Soviet invasion of Manchuria was a further shock to Japan. killing at least 35,000 people.
The Japanese agreed to Time of death A pocket watch retrieved from the body of a citizen of Hiroshima records the exact The American B-29 bomber, Enola Gay, piloted by Colonel Paul Tibbets, took off from Tinian Island in the Marianas at 2:45 on the morning of August 6 carrying an atom bomb.
Although Truman refused to offer : any such assurance, on August 15 : Hirohito told his people the war ' had developed “not necessarily to ' Japan's advantage,” and that he : was making peace.
OS ow oo ae’ ee ge ee oe oN <o 3 oN on 9 on oo o> & As See “ s& ‘ «“ 8 fe) ° ce 2 WO ow y a e Sat. 7 rit 2 a Jewish refugees make their way to Palestine.
Thousands attempted this journey before Britain stopped allowing illegal entry into Palestine.
Its aims were to provide a forum for the nations of the world and to uphold peace and security.
Winston Churchill, British politician, March 5 1946 : India would gain independence ' after the war.
Jinnah , demanded a 2 separate Muslim state, while : Hindus opposed this idea.
August 16, Jinnah declared a : Direct Action Day, a mass protest : against British proposals for an © all-India government.
Kwame Nkrumah, from Ghana, : as president of Argentina on & M GREECE : and Jomo Kenyatta, from Kenya.
Into Palestine, but no agreement | : first practical electronic digital <a : was reached.
Juan Peron cf ‘lit i After the war, Britain, France, and the United States occupied 2 charg : Fiercely nationalistic, anti-US, and pee oY See pe ees: West Germany, while the Soviet Union controlled East boats ca ue refugees Nee : anti-communist, Peron pledged a _ occupied 1,800sqft (167sqm], Germany.
The General Assembly is the only part of the UN where all members have equal representation.
LORD LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN WAS APPOINTED THE LAST VICEROY of India to oversee the end of British imperial rule.
He believed that the only way forward for the country was to partition it, dividing it in two parts based on the religion of those areas.
In July, the British passed the Indian Independence Act, dividing the Raj into India (Hindu and Sikh] and Pakistan (Muslim], leaving Kashmir to determine its own fate.
Pakistan was split into East and West Pakistan, with India separating the two areas.
On August 14, Pakistan gained independence, and Muhammad Ali Jinnah became its first governor-general.
The rulers of Kashmir were left : with a momentous decision: to ' become independent, or to join India or Pakistan.
A plan was devised to partition the area into separate | Jewish and Arab states.
UN General Assembly agreed to : this resolution on November 29, ' but it was unpopular with Arabs.
Mohandas Gandhi lies in state after his assassination bya Hindu fanatic i who blamed him for the partition of India.
He based his policy on a system : UN PARTITION : the independent states of : the National Health Service OF MOHANDAS GANDHI on July 5. was realized when India won : and enforced a racial hierarchy proposed : pledged to fight communism, : With World War II over, the : é a Ga ee : : Arab State a : : : : independence in 1947.
The news of Gandhi's assassination had a profound effect throughout the world, and a state of mourning was declared in India.
Olympics saw the first defection : from the communist East to : the West when the head of the ' Czechoslovakian gymnastics team, Marie Provaznikova, ' refused to return home.
On October 12, the Soviet Union declared Kim's ' regime the only lawful government ' on the peninsula.
Plan for Palestine : The UN General Assembly proposed : to split Palestine into Jewish and : Arab states, with Jerusalem under : international administration.
Jordan, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq immediately invaded the ' new Jewish state but were repulsed.
Labour's election victory in 1945, : Aneurin Bevan presented a plan to provide free : healthcare to all for the first : time.
Bevan formally launched DAVID BEN-GURION The founder of the state of Israel, Ben-Gurion was born in Poland and immigrated to Palestine in 1906.
He became an active supporter of the struggle for an independent Jewish state and was expelled from Palestine in 1915 due to his nationalist activities.
KINGDOM ___ NETHERLANDS an Sean ie Bo eee Fae HUNGARY LUXEMBOURG —— FRANCE meal > ~__ ROMANIA PORTUGAL _ TURKEY tebe STATES | SPAIN og SLOVENIA CROATIA ALBANIA GREECE KEY BULGARIA i Original FRENCH signatories GUIANA _ Joined after 1949 NATO alliance A TRUCE WAS REACHED IN THE ARAB-ISRAELI WAR , bringing an end to eight months of hostilities.
Egypt was the first to sign on February 24, followed by Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria.
The agreement established a line between Israel and the Jordanian-held West Bank, which became known as the Green Line.
This map illustrates the 12 nations : that originally signed up to NATO in 1949.
West by exploding its first atomic ' bomb, on August 29, at a remote ' test site in Kazakhstan.
Ireland had officially broken free : of allegiance to the British crown. : In May, the British Parliament approved a bill continuing the : status of Northern Ireland as a part ' of Great Britain; six northern Irish counties had shown a majority in : favour of remaining British in : the Northern Ireland General : Election held on February 19. : The Fourth Geneva Convention : was adopted in August.
With its format of one song per side, the “single” was perfect for rock ‘n’ roll, and it went on to revolutionize the pop music business.
People’s Republic Following the proclamation of the People’s Republic of China, propaganda posters showed a smiling Chairman Mao Zedong encouraging his people to build a new, prosperous country.
BRITISH RULE, emblem, taken In June, a new crisis divided India became a republic on January 26.
USSR—invaded the south. the official cutting of The US, determined not to appease all ties.
In a formal the Russians, provided the main — ceremony, president to witness contingent for a United Nations Rajendra Prasad (1884-1963] took the oath of office anda new constitution came into force.
Since it was first created as Transjordan after World War I, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan faced problems arising from its disputed status, weak economy, and artificial frontiers.
On April 24, King Abdullah of Jordan annexed Arab Palestine to create an expanded kingdom, to the fury of his Arab neighbors.
Police ' opened fire in the Alexandra ' Township, killing 18 people and wounding 30.
Korean population and army : Despite having less than half the : population of South Korea in 1950, : North Korea's army was superior : in size and much better equipped.
Fears of a worldwide communist conspiracy resulted in a campaign against people suspected of communist leanings.
The first human organ : transplant took place on June : 17 at the Little Company of Mary Hospital in Illinois.
Alan Shepard had become the first American in space in the previous year.
Sputnik 1 1957 e USSR The first artificial satellite, launched ahead of the United States version, contained a radio transmitter.
What had begun as a ices search for long-range missiles became a battle for international prestige, which neither wanted to lose.
In 1957, the Soviet Union stunned the United States when it launched Sputnik 1 into insulated gloves with orbit.
Then, in 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human lane as to orbit the Earth.
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin stepped onto the lunar surface on July 21, 1969, marking the beginning of a new era in space exploration. | _ ee eC | | FE THE VIEW ene Be Hoon rock ft FROM THE 1969 MOON Collected by Apollo 11 astronauts, Moon en cern ee eee eevee ae eee rock resembled volcanic lava found on Earth, | suggesting that the Moon was once molten.
Brush Sample testing kit 1969 e us The crew of Apollo 11 took special tools and containers with them to collect rocks, soil, and dust from the lunar surface to return to Earth.
Life magazine January 20, 1969 e us Images from the Apollo 8 mission appeared on the front cover of Life magazine, such was the interest in space exploration.
Apollo patch 1969 e United States An eagle carrying an olive branch perches on the lunar surface in the Apollo 11 patch, which was designed by the crew.
Mir patch DATE UNKNOWN @ USSR This is the official mission patch for the Russian Space Station Mir program.
Seal Space tools DATE AND PROGRAM UNKNOWN Special tools were designed to help astronauts collect specimens.
Cuban newspaper 1980 © CUBA During the space race, astronauts from many communist countries, such as Cuba, went into Space as crew members on Soviet spacecraft.
JJ Julius Rosenberg, convicted spy, on his death sentence, 1951 EGYPT RENOUNCED ITS 1936 TREATY THAT GRANTED BRITAIN a lease on the Suez base, In October.
Britain refused to withdraw and a guerilla war began in the Suez Canal Zone.
In March, the Iranian government nationalized its oil industry, which had been dominated by the AngloIranian Oil Company.
Fears about the spread of communism deepened as Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were accused of stealing information from the United States for the Soviets.
British Foreign Office officials Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean disappeared on 28 May—it was later found out that they had defected to the Soviet Union.
In April, the French launched a big push to smash the Viet Minh resistance northwest of Saigon.
A peace treaty that Japan had signed in San Fransisco, US, in 1951 went into effect on April 28, making the country an independent state again.
His daughter, Elizabeth, was officially proclaimed queen two days later.
They began raiding white-settler farms, and by the end of the year the British had declared a state of emergency.
Comprised of six nations, it created a ‘common market” for coal and steel, and laid down the THE NUMBER OF AFRICANS WHO DIED IN THE MAU MAU UPRISING ce ao 0” .a% Vv ae ALS Qe cet ROS N\\ » o* e Ne C Av) §o-—a6, <> ae ar x ae oe WS To w yr’ oe mms ° oe x5» a HOP oO” We oe Xe NG 3° Thousands of suspected Mau Mau activists in Kenya were arrested following | EVA PERON Maria Eva Duarte de Peron, or Evita,” played a crucial role in helping her husband, Juan Peron, become Argentinian president.
She was idolized by the poor, and began many programs of social welfare and reform.
At the end of 1952, he told his Politburo that all Jews were sympathetic to America.
On January 13, nine doctors were arrested for conspiring to murder prominent figures in the Soviet armed forces.
Beria was charged with treason and was then shot in the back of a truck, in what seems to have been a summary assassination.
A scientific breakthrough was made In 1953, when the blueprint of life, DNA , was mapped out by James Watson and Frances Crick.
DNA is the hereditary material that contains the coded information needed to build and maintain all living organisms.
It explained heredity and led to the development of an entire biotechnology industry. — i he The Indochinese conflict lasted eight years, ending in 1954.
Laos and Cambodia became independent, while Vietnam was divided into North Vietnam, with a communist government, and South Vietnam.
In all three noncommunist states, communist guerrilla movements sprang up.
He set his sights on the United States army and made unsubstantiated allegations against them.
A vaccine for polio was tested in a huge field trial in the US, in April.
The African National Congress , an antiapartheid organization, responded with a day of prayer.
The Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance Treaty, known as the Warsaw Pact, was signed on May 14.
The treaty set up a military alliance of communist states to counter NATO in the West.
POLAND EAST GERMANY CZECHOSLOVAKIA HUNGARY ALBANIA SS BULGARIA ~ a shows ROSA PARKS Rosa Parks made history when she refused to give up her seat ona bus for a white man.
Her arrest mobilized a boycott of the bus system, which ended segregation on Montgomery's buses.
The boycott also brought international attention to the civil rights cause.
Parks remained committed to her cause, and was a symbol of the struggle for civil rights until her death in 2005, aged 92.
The ' Austrian State Treaty was signed ' on May 15, reestablishing Austria ' as an independent sovereign state.
JJ Nikita Krushchev, on Stalin, February 25, 1956 The Soviets began the “Race for Space” with the launch of the world’s first satellites, Sputnik | and II—an achievement celebrated by this poster.
Khrushchev’s “de-Stalinization” of the USSR prompted a thaw in the Cold War.
White community members attacked AfricanAmericans, and the activities of the Ku Klux Klan, an organization of white supremacists, increased.
March 2, although Spain retained : control of Ceuta and Melilla on : the coast.
Chevrolet Bel Air Convertible : The 1256 Chewy was just what the : American public wanted—it was : fast, big, and affordable.
Ghana became the first black African country to gain its independence from colonial rule on March 6.
Britain realized that this situation could not be resolved by military : means, and made constitutional advances that culminated in the independence of the Malayan ' Federation on August 31.
Indonesia had struggled to : maintain a parliamentary democracy since independence in 1945.
On March 14, he decided to dispense with parliament and imposed martial law.
It was followed a month later by © Sputnik 2, which carried a dog : called Laika.
October, led to the formation ofa (European Economic Community] ease —_ United States pressured Israel to withdraw, liberal government and Imre and provided for the countries Sarina KEY Areas affected by the Suez Crisis The Suez Crisis The Suez Canal was a vital trading route from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea.
It was especially important 2 and UN forces were stationed ' along the Egyptian-Israeli ' border.
It also gave former colonies free trade with the EEC, and made them eligible for aid.
European Economic Community : This map shows the composition : of the EEC at its inception in 1957, : when six countries signed the for the shipment of oil.
MAO ZEDONG, FOUNDER OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, initiated a program of reform In 1958 that would ultimately kill millions.
The “Great Leap Forward’ was intended to rapidly industrialize China’s rural economy.
However, Mao's scheme plunged the country into one of the worst famines in history.
At least 35 million people were worked, starved, or beaten to death in the following four years.
Free Officers led by Brigadier ' Abdul Karim Qasim captured ' power in Baghdad in a savage : military coup.
Elected president in 1945, he resigned in 1946, returning to power in 1958 to solve the crisis brought about by the Algerian War.
He resigned again In 1969 after being defeated in a referendum on constitutional reform.
JJ Fidel Castro, prime minister of Cuba from 1959-76 THE RACE BETWEEN THE United States AND USSR TO SEND A MAN INTO SPACE accelerated in 1959.
On January 2, the Soviets launched the first spacecraft to escape Earth's orbit and reach the Moon, Luna 1.
The United States also had its first successful mission this year, when the Juno 2 rocket sent the Pioneer 4 probe toward the Moon.
Luna 2 was launched on September 12, and on October 7, pictures taken by Luna 3 gave mankind its first look at the far side of the Moon.
A group of revolutionaries led by law student Fidel Castro took up arms and set up a base in the Sierra Maestra mountains, provoking Batista to indiscriminate repression.
Batista’s regime collapsed, and Castro took over—he was sworn in as prime minister on February 16.
A “honeymoon” period with the United States soon ended as Cuba became a totally socialist state.
In Vietnam, northern guerrillas under Ho Chi Minh attacked the southern army in March.
Thousands FIDEL CASTRO (1926-] Fidel Castro was jailed for his revolutionary activities in Cuba in 1953.
He was Cuban prime minister from 1959-76 and the first communist head of state in the Americas.
His relations with the United States were originally good, but speedily deteriorated.
Harold Macmillan visited the : South African parliament in February 1960, he made a speech : highlighting the “wind of change” : which he believed would bring ' independence for black Africans.
VW Beetle Produced by the German company Volkswagen, the Beetle survived the war and decorated Beetles became a symbol of peace around the world.
The Soviets were alarmed with China's “Great Leap Forward” , while the Soviets reneged on their earlier commitment to help China develop nuclear weapons, and were seen as too conciliatory to the West.
At a meeting In November, the Chinese delegation clashed with the Soviets again, but eventually a compromise was reached, preventing a formal split.
The Belgian Congo became independent on June 30, ushering in a period of turmoil.
It was renamed the Federal Republic of Congo, with Joseph Kasavubu as president, and Patrice Lumumba —a socialist—as prime minister.
In September, Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba as prime minister, and in December he was arrested.
He narrowly defeated the ' Republican candidate Richard ' Nixon after some fiercely contested television debates.
Nixon Kennedy Race for the White House The presidential race between Nixon and Kennedy was incredibly tight.
THE PORTUGUESE LUXURY PASSENGER LINER SANTA MARIA was hijacked in January while sailing in West Indian waters.
The hijackers were Iberian leftists who opposed the Portuguese government and the fascist regime in Spain.
One of John F Kennedy’s first proposals as United States president was the establishment of a Peace Corps to help in developing nations.
The aim was for young people to take one or two years working abroad as teachers, healthcare workers, or advisors in Africa, Asia, and South America.
Nelson Mandela [b.18) headed : the ANC’s new military wing, and ' launched a sabotage campaign.
August 13, as troops in East : Germany closed the border ' between East and West Berlin. : Barbed wire fences up to 6ft : high were erected.
Dividing wall The Berlin Wall enclosed the three sectors of West Berlin, separating it from East Berlin and East A Germany.
The United States came close to confrontation with the Soviet Union over the establishment of Soviet nuclear installations on Cuba.
It ' brought an end to eight years of civil unrest and guerrilla warfare.
Telstar, the world’s first communication satellite, was launched on July 10 from Cape Canaveral.
In the early hours of July 11, live transatlantic television pictures in the United States to Goonhilly In Cornwall, England.
The United States was back in the news when screen idol Marilyn Monroe, was found dead in her Los Marilyn Monroe _ At the time of her _ death Marilyn Monroe was a huge star who had appeared in 29 movies.
Fechter, an 18-year-old German bricklayer, became one of the first In Britain, Liverpool-based : rock band The Beatles finally signed with the record company : EMI on June 4.
Their aims were to promote African solidarity, end colonialism, and to coordinate the economic, political, health, scientific, defence, and cultural policies of the members.
The conference, hosted by Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, also planned to support African freedom fighters by supplying arms, training, and military bases.
Kenya, an early member of the OAU, became the 34th African nation to achieve independence.
Jomo Kenyatta (1894-1978] was elected leader of the Kenya African National Union after nine years in prison, and won the national election in May.
Kenyatta became prime minister and led Kenya from self-government to full independence on December 12.
In Europe, United States president John F Kennedy made a morale-boosting speech in Berlin on June 26.
In it he offered solidarity to the citizens of West Germany, who were alarmed at the construction of the Bertin Wall.
Thousands gathered in The ‘first wave” of feminism addressed legal obstacles, such as votes for women, while the second focused on sexuality and family.
Simone de Beauvoir’s Le Deuxieme Sexe defined the woman's movement and exploded the myth that women were second class citizens.
Soviets, Kennedy described West : Berlin as a symbol of freedom. : His speech dashed any hopes + held by Moscow that the allies 2 would abandon West Berlin.
It ' was ratified by the United States Senate on | September 24 and came into force on October 11.
Lincoln Memorial for a mass “March on Washington” for jobs ' and freedom.
DC on board the presidential : plane, Air Force |, Vice President : Lyndon B Johnson was sworn ' inas the 36th United States president. Kennedy's funeral took place on November 25.
Oswald, a former marine, was ' being transferred from police headquarters to jail.
The largest foreign-held territories were in Africa, a product of KEY the “Scramble for Africa” in the 19th “|-) United Kingdom and possessions century.
France and Britain were the Pane endineaseceire leading colonial powers. eading colonial powers ' Denmark and possessions V x COLONIAL DOMINATION CRUMBLES AS INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS GROW MODERN OVERSEAS TERRITORIES Overseas territories are countries that often Up until World War II, empires belonging to Britain, France, Belgium, have a degree of autonomy, but do not possess Portugal, and the Netherlands stretched back centuries.
Many colonies fought for self-rule after war, the political landscape had changed significantly, and there was Wvorild (ilar (I lout severel on then va oeied nakelerana tare me) oy eLey-Jiarelam-lalemedar-1ac-vare(-m com inal ol-Vat-l Mm eic-Mmtemaat-manlele(emule] ane independence.
Some overseas territories, for all that is left of the European empires is a sprinkling of islands. example, are too small and lack the resources to survive as viable independent countries.
By 1945 the empires of Italy, Germany, and Japan The last throw of the imperial dice for France Others, such as French Guiana in the had collapsed.
The British Empire emerged from and Britain came with the Suez crisis in 1956.
However, _ while Britain was trying to put down rebellions in economic importance to the states that change was slow.
American Samoa Baker Island Guam Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway islands Navassa Island Northern Mariana Islands Palmyra Atoll Puerto Rico Virgin islands Wake Island Antarctica G West Bank Nelson Mandela was among eight men sentenced to life imprisonment during the Rivonia Trial—they left the court with their fists raised in defiance.
THE YEAR BEGAN WITH INCREASING TENSION between Greek and Turkish Cypriots.
In March, the UN sent 7,000 troops into Cyprus to try to keep the peace.
On May 27, Jawaharlal Nehru— the first prime minister of an independent India, and regarded by many as the founder of modern India—died, aged 74.
Gathering in mile-long lines, 250,000 men, women, and children filed past his body to pay their respects.
In South Africa, Nelson Mandela, a prominent figure of the antiapartheid struggle, was jailed for life on June 12.
During the trial, Mandela and other members of the African National Congress (ANC, see 1994] admitted trying to bring down the government.
Beatlemania begins The Beatles took the United States by storm in 1964.
Their faces were splashed across newspapers and magazines as their tour of 23 cities sold out.
Meanwhile, race equality in the United States tooka positive turn when the ' Civil Rights Bill became law on 2 July 2.
Martin Luther King, Jr., who had 2 emerged as the symbolic leader ' of the worldwide struggle for civil ' rights.
Nobel Peace Prize for his work. : In Vietnam, the United States was adamant ' that South Vietnam should ' not fall to the communists.
August 7, United States president Johnson ' received approval from Congress ' to “take all necessary action” : against the communist regime in ' North Vietnam.
It asserted that 2 there had been no conspiracy, and ' concluded that gunman Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone.
Ho Chi Minh, president of North Vietnam, on a propaganda poster during Vietnamese war wy Hostile terrain The United States army was technologically superior in Vietnam, but struggled with unfamiliar territory such as the swamp that these marines are wading through.
Some blamed the heat wave, while others pointed the finger at police brutality.
Dawda Kairaba Jawara became the first prime minister, and was knighted the following year.
By contrast, Southern Rhodesia, led by prime minister lan Smith, announced a Unilateral Declaration of Independence on November 11.
Commander of the army’s strategic reserve, emerged the ' victor in the power struggle.
WITH INCREASED FIGHTING IN VIETNAM, 1966 SAW THE United States launch Its largest offensive against the Viet Cong In Operation Crimp, to capture the Viet Cong’s Saigon area headquarters.
By the end of 1966, the number of United States troops in Vietnam had reached 385,000, amid increased public protests about the war.
Pakistani and Indian leaders CHINA Gulf of i Tongking LAOS ® Vientiane 4. | a ie . sh THAILAND met more peacefully in January at Tashkent in Uzbekistan to signa declaration agreeing to resolve their dispute [see 1965) by a anin peaceful means.
Shortly , Heer afterward, Lal Bahadur Ahastri, a une Full of Mao's quotations, this book prime minister of India, died of a heart attack.
In August, Chinese communist anniversaries of the Battle of the : KEY : leader Mao Zedong launched the Somme and the Easter Rising— symbolic dates for Protestants and Catholics respectively.
The murder of two Catholics by a “loyalist” terror group called the Ulster Volunteer Force sparked more riots in May and June.
The UVF was banned, but the cycle of sectarian killings, known as the Troubles, had begun.
The shock assassination of Hendrik Verwoerd, prime minister of South Africa and the architect of apartheid, raised queries about the future of South Africa.
Cultural Revolution, aiming to : purge the country of “impure” : elements.
THE YEAR BEGAN WITH THE TRAGIC DEATH OF DONALD CAMPBELL, who was killed on January 4 at Coniston Water in the Lake District, England, while attempting to break his own water speed record.
Tensions were running high in the Middle East after Egypt asked for UN forces in the Sinai to be removed.
The Israelis responded with a pre-emptive attack, which ended after six days with Israel in control of Sinai, Gaza, the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and Jerusalem.
Meanwhile, in Bolivia, Ernesto “Che” Guevara (see panel, right] was captured and shot dead, on the Bolivian president's orders, on 9 , June.
Arab losses, in contrast, were high. a . CHE GUEVARA Ernesto Che” Guevara was born in Argentina in 1928, and became Involved in the opposition to Juan Peron.
He traveled extensively through Latin America, where he saw poverty and social injustice that helped forge his radical political views.
Che became an associate of Fidel Castro, and played a role in the fight for Cuba.
He left Cuba to help revolutionaries abroad, and was executed in Bolivia.
OX During the first manned mission to the Moon, the three astronauts on board Apollo 8 beamed back images of Earth as a planet in space.
THE MY LAI MASSACRE IN VIETNAM SENT SHOCK WAVES through the United States political establishment.
My Lai lies in the South Vietnamese district of Son My, an area where the Viet Cong were deeply entrenched.
The massacre helped to turn public opinion against the Vietnam War, although the story was not made public until the following year.
By 1968, the Vietnam War was costing the United States $66 million a day.
Protests against the war escalated as people questioned the US's role in the conflict.
On August 28, during the Democratic national convention in Chicago, 10,000 antiwar protesters gathered and were confronted by 26,000 police and national guardsmen.
A Chinese compass, a map case, and: : a map with enemy bases marked on, : formed the basic kit for Vietcong : militia during the Vietnam War.
King’s death sparked widespread race riots across the United States that cost dozens of lives and led to damage worth millions of dollars.
Earl Ray, a petty criminal, was : convicted of King’s murder and | On4April, the African-American | civil rights leader Martin Luther ' King, Jr. (see panel, right] was : assassinated in the southern United States ' city of Memphis, Tennessee.
King, Jr., made 1968 one of the : most volatile and traumatic, : years in United States history.
On November 6, Republican ' Richard Nixon ' emerged victorious in the United States ' presidential election.
A leading African-American civil rights campaigner in the US, Martin Luther King, Jr. rose to prominence in 1955, when he led a boycott of buses in Montgomery, Alabama, in protest against the state's transport segregation laws.
Dwight D Eisenhower's vice' president and lost the presidential ' race to John F Kennedy in 1960.
British right-wing politician, : made a hugely controversial ' speech on April 20, in which he ' warned the government against ' opening the “floodgates” to : black immigrants.
When French strikers took to the : streets in May, the country was on : the verge of revolution.
Gaulle won the election, the Paris : riots were regarded as a cultural and social revolution.
Troops from five Warsaw Pact ' countries stormed into Czechoslovakia on August 20 ' to seize control and restore / communism to the country.
Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders, returned on : December 27 as national heroes.
Beauty and backlash The glamorous contestants ' appearing in the Miss America : Pageant, in Atlanta, were : outnumbered three to one by ' the protestors.
Now, the knowledge that DNA carries genetic information has provided insight into the basis of life itself.
One of the earliest theories of heredity was that of the ancient Greek Hippocrates, who proposed that elements from all of the body became concentrated in semen, which then made a human in the womb containing the characteristics of both parents.
It was not until the 19th century that the basic rules of heredity were discovered, by the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel.
In the early 20th century, American biologist Thomas Hunt Morgan's experiments with fruit flies confirmed that genes reside on chromosomes.
However, it was still thought that protein, not DNA, was the substance that transmits inherited traits.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF DNA In the 1940s, Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty discovered that DNA is the hereditary molecule in most organisms and Is the chemical basis of genetic information.
These are arranged into “words” of three letters; each codon corresponds to a particular amino acid.
In a cell, a gene's codon sequence Is translated into a sequence of specific amino acids, making the specific protein coded for by that gene.
Hypocrates 1663-65 Cells first described English scientist Robert Hooke coins the term “cell” to describe the microscopic units he observed while examining a section of cork with an early compound microscope. microscope 1859 Theory of natural selection Charles Darwin publishes Jhe Origin of Species, in which he — puts forward his theory that the fittest organisms survive and pass on their traits.
Round and wrinkled peas 1868-69 Nuclein discovered Swiss scientist Friedrich Miescher discovers a substance he calls “nuclein” in the nuclei of white blood cells.
Later ae called nucleic acid, nuclein is now known as DNA. 1880s Meiosis discovered Meiosis, the process of cell division that produces gametes (sex cells}, is described in the early 1880s.
Its significance for inheritance Is elucidated in the 1890s by German biologist August Weismann.
White blood cell 1888 Chromosomes discovered German anatomist Heinrich Waldeyer notices that the central part of the cell (the nucleus] sometimes contains threadlike bodies, for which he coins the term “chromosomes.” aluminum plates represent four chemical bases in DNA model plate representing the base cytosine plate representing the base guanine plate representing the base thymine Watson and Crick’s DNA model James Watson and Francis Crick made a model of the DNA molecule using metal plates and rods in their laboratory in Cambridge, England.
They proposed that DNA was a double-helix | polymer, shaped like a twisted ladder, and noted that this structure allows for replication of genetic material.
Streptococcus pneumoniae 1989-present Human Genome Project The Human Genome Organization maps the human DNA sequence and discovers it contains only about 20,000 to 25,000 genes.
West Germany on October 21, : becoming the first Socialist : politician to lead a German ' government since 1930.
Eagle returns Apollo 11's lunar module Eagle, holding astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, makes its way back to the command module.
A child suffers the effects of hunger : and malnutrition during the Biafran : blockade.
Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal, : where the song Give Peace a : Chance was recorded, in May.
Millions marched across the United States on October 15 to protest against | © the Vietnam War.
IN CAMBODIA, THE HEAD OF STATE, PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUK ( was overthrown by General Lon Nol in a coup, on March 18.
In April, President Richard Nixon ordered United States troops and B-52 bombers into Cambodia to destroy North Vietnamese and Vietcong sanctuaries and supplies.
In early September, Palestinian militants forced two planes to fly to the Jordanian desert, where the hijackers blew up the aircraft after releasing most of the hostages.
After 24 days of talks, the remaining hostages were freed in exchange for seven Palestinian prisoners.
On September 16, fighting broke out between Jordanian troops and PLO guerrillas.
Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser (b.18] brokered a settlement on September 27.
He had become the most powerful figure in the Middle East while attempting to unify Arab nations.
The Beatles, the most famous music band in the world, split when Paul McCartney (b.42] ' announced his decision to leave ' in April.
Sierra Leone, in West Africa, and Qatar, in the Middle East, formally achieved independence from Britain in this year.
In December, Indian troops entered East Pakistan, following a surprise attack on Indian airfields.
In a campaign lasting only 13 days, Indian troops crushed Pakistani forces in the east.
In August, the Northern Ireland government introduced internment without trial to stop the growing violence.
On September 15, a small team of activists set sail from Vancouver, Canada, on the ship Phyllis Cormack to protest against United States nuclear tests in Alaska.
The Walt Disney World resort officially opened near Orlando in Florida on October 1.
After seizing power in 1971, he ruled by terror—an estimated 300,000 people died during his reign.
Idi Amin’s rule ended in 1979 after he was ousted by troops from neighboring Tanzania then forced to flee the country.
The United States president, Richard Nixon © , sent his national : security adviser, Henry Kissinger | (b.23], to China for secret talks.
BRITISH MINERS WALKED OUT ON NATIONAL STRIKE on January 9 after refusing a government pay offer.
On February 19, they agreed to a new pay deal and returned to work on February 25.
On January 30, British troops opened fire on demonstrators in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, killing 13 people and injuring 14.
The marchers were protesting against the policy of internment without trial.
In the largest attack on mainland Britain since “The Troubles” (see 1966), the IRA bombed the 16th Parachute Brigade headquarters at Aldershot, Hampshire, on February 22, killing seven civilians.
President Nixon flew to China in February and met Mao Zedong , marking a new cordiality in US-China relations.
In May, Nixon paid a state visit to Moscow to sign 10 agreements, the most important of which were the nuclear arms limitation treaties known as SALT I On June 8, South Vietnamese planes dropped a napalm bomb on Trang Bang, which was under North Vietnamese occupation.
Images of burned civilians were shown around the world and increased pressure on the United States to withdraw from Vietnam.
New horizons : For the Munich Olympics, leading : artists made 35 posters, including : the one shown below.
President Nixon, who had just been reelected, continually denied any connection between Watergate and the White House.
Their work on the “Watergate scandal,” helped by crucial information from the mysterious informant, Deep Throat,” led to the Washington Post being awarded the Pulitzer Prize.
Allende’s reforms The Chilean president's sweeping nationalization and reforms resulted in costly welfare schemes and economic chaos in the country.
JJ Richard Nixon, United States president, in a TV speech The White House, the official residence of the United States President, was rocked by the Watergate scandal and the subsequent resignation of President Nixon.
It was the first ' enlargement of the organization . since its inception in 1957.
September 8, there were bombs in : Manchester city center and at : Victoria station, London.
Salvador Allende was + killed in a coup led by his trusted | : ally General Augusto Pinochet : , and backed by the US. : Pinochet killed 3,000 supporters ' of the Allende regime, shut the : Chilean Parliament, and banned : all political activity.
When OPEC shut off oil supplies to the western nations : that had supported Israel, it sent prices shooting up {| a Heavy fighting broke out between : Arab and Israeli forces in what : came to be known as the Yom : Kippur War, in October.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries switched off supply at a time when the market was already starting to suffer shortages.
Arab oil-producing countries ' imposed an oil embargo on all : the countries that had supported | Israel.
THE OIL EMBARGO OF 1973 HAD A DRASTIC EFFECT on the developed world, leading to a long-term recession.
In Portugal, General Antonio de Spinola led a bloodless military coup, ending 90 years of dictatorship.
Known as the Carnation Revolution, this event ushered in a new era of democracy in the country.
In Britain, the IRA attacked the Houses of Parliament on June 17, the Tower of London in July, and a Guildford pub in October.
In July, Turkish troops invaded northern Cyprus following a coup in which President Archbishop Makarios, a Greek Cypriot, was deposed.
The island was split in two parts, with Greek-Cypriots fleeing to the south and the Turkish community, to the north.
After years of war and famine in Ethiopia, Emperor Haile Selassie (1892-1975] was overthrown in a coup, on September 12.
In the US, the Watergate breakin [see 1973) was traced toa Nixon support group.
Punk rock emerged during the mid-70's as an angry expression of contempt for politics and society.
In the Middle East, Saudi Arabia's King Faisal was asSassinated by his nephew, Prince Faisal Ibu Musaed.
Prince Juan Carlos was sworn in as King of Spain, two days after dictator General Francisco Franco died on November 20.
In April, the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, fell to the radical communist movement, the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot.
All inhabitants of cities were expelled to work in agricultural communes.
Paris; a German left-wing group : seized the German Embassy in : Stockholm, Sweden; and South : Moluccan terrorists took over : the Indonesian Embassy in : Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
THE MARXIST PEOPLE’S MOVEMENT FOR THE LIBERATION OF ANGOLA took nominal control of the whole country by February, and the new Angola People’s Republic was recognized.
Antiapartheid protests in Soweto, South Africa turned violent on June 16.
MILLION THE NUMBER OF DEATHS CAUSED BY MAO’S REGIME Mao Zedong (b.93], the founder of the People’s Republic of China, died of a heart attack on September 9.
In December, after more than 50 ceasefires had been violated, uneasy peace prevailed.
The Seychelles gained independence from Britain on June 29, with James Mancham as president and France Rene as prime minister of the coalition.
Steven Biko , a prominent black rights leader in South Africa, died in prison on September 12.
His death caused international outrage but an inquest cleared the police of any wrongdoing.
This prompted Army Chief General Mohammed Zia ul-Hag to depose Bhutto in a military coup on July 4.
The right-wing Menachem Begin had a surprise win at the Israeli elections in May, ending 29 years of Labor rule.
The distinctive logo—a rainbow-colored apple with a bite taken out—symbolized knowledge.
The government banned him in 1973, but he continued to spread his word.
On August 18, 1977, the police seized Biko, held him for 24 days, and tortured him to death.
ISRAELI SOLDIERS CROSSED THE LEBANESE BORDER on March 14, in Operation Litani.
Israel claimed Palestinian fighters were using southern Lebanon to mount attacks against civilian and military targets In Israel.
The challenge stunned the Shah and his generals, and rioters were attacked.
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat arrived in Washington, Carter , in February.
His visit represented a change in Egyptian foreign policy which had previously sought favor from the Soviet Union.
Shortly after, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin met President Carter.
These initial talks paved the way for historic joint meetings at Camp David, Maryland, in September 5-17.
Here, both sides signed the Camp David Peace Accord for peace in the Middle East.
Breton beaches were polluted. : Devastating scenes of marine animals covered in oil and dying were broadcast around the world. its steering mechanism failed.
Edwards (see 1969]. : Khmer Rouge fighter : Under Pol Pot, Khmer Rouge : soldiers, often teenagers, controlled : Cambodia.
JF Ayatollah Khomeini, from his lectures on Islamic Government RARRARAA RR AARAKT RAR 20:1 pores the Soviet invasion—for every Soviet who was killed or wounded, 20 Afghan soldiers lost their lives.
On January 7, 1979, they seized the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh and the Khmer Rouge were of the Khmer Rouge, fled to the jungle in Thailand and began a guerrilla war against a succession of Cambodian governments.
On April 2, Vietnamese forces discovered a mass grave in the northeast—this was the first of many mass graves from the Pol Pot era to be discovered.
It became apparent that between 1975 and 1979 Pol Pot was responsible for the slaughter of more than 1 million people.
Rings of Jupiter An image taken by NASA's Voyager 2 spacecraft shows Jupiter's ring system, never seen before, being bombarded by tiny meteorites.
OE owt \S \ Sm ge a oe China viewed the Vietnamese attack on Cambodia as a serious provocation, and, on February 17, Chinese forces invaded Vietnam.
Casualties on both sides were high, and each side claimed to have won the upper hand.
In the countryside, revolt grew ' against repressive government initiatives, and the Afghan army faced total collapse.
Ruhollah Khomeini , : a Shiite Muslim cleric, returned © from 15 years of exile to jubilant : crowds, and the Islamic Republic ' of Iran was proclaimed on : April 1.
Young supporters of Iranian women holding posters of Ayatollah Khomeini show support for the Islamic Revolution.
Afghanistan on December 24. : In doing so, they were confident : of military superiority.
America’s long support of the : Shah, took control of the United States : embassy in Tehran.
Sandinistas established a ' revolutionary government on : July 20, led by Daniel and : Humberto Ortega.
Liberation Army were active barrel ' AK-47 Kalashnikov assault rifle : The AK-47 became an iconic weapon : during the Soviet war in Afghanistan. : Used by both sides, Kalashnikovs : were cheap and readily available. this year.
Northern Ireland secretary Airey : Neave was killed by an INLA car : bomb.
Mountbatten (a member of the British royal family] was killed by an IRA bomb blast.
Amin escaped to Libya, leaving behind a country with its economy in tatters.
The first Walkman featured a cassette player and the world’s ' first lightweight headphones.
ROBERT MUGABE WON A SWEEPING VICTORY on March 4, becoming prime minister of Rhodesia.
The famine in Uganda is regarded as one of the worst in history—21 percent of the population died.
Smallpox was declared extinct on May 8 by the World Health Organization, 21 years after the global eradication program had begun.
London became involved in a dramatic siege on April 30, when 70% / SURVIVED — : Smallpox eradication i A global vaccination campaign led to : WHO declaring smallpox eradicated : in 1980.
Nineteen hostages were set free, but one died and two were injured in the cross-fire.
On September 22, Iraq invaded | Iran sparking a bitter eight-year ' war, which destabilized the whole ' region.
By the end of October, Khorramshahr, the largest port in Iran, fell to Iraqi forces.
Under President Tito’s grip (see ' 1943), Yugoslavia had achieved ' internal peace.
May 4, combined with the decline : of communist ideology, led to : the weakening of Yugoslavia’s : unifying factors.
United States presidential election on November 4, beating Jimmy Carter in a landslide victory.
Two months later he survived an assassination attempt by John Hinckley, who was obsessed with actress Jodie Foster, and believed an assassination of the president would impress her.
Pope John Paul Il survived being shot four times on May 13 as he travlled through crowds In his “popemobile” in St.
Police arrested Mehmet Ali Hagca, a Turkish citizen, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in July.
A state of emergency was declared in Egypt after President Anwar Sadat was assassinated at a military parade.
A group calling itself the Independent Organization for the Liberation of Egypt said it carried out the attack.
Vice-President Hosni Mubarak succeeded President Sadat as head of state.
The Mujahidin, ' a group of muslim fighters, mounted waves of bombings and ' assassinations.
In October, Ali Khamenei was elected president ina landslide victory. after an attempted right wing coup, led by Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Tejero Molina Spanish coup Colonel Antonio Tejero stormed the Spanish into the air as he announced a military coup.
The HIV virus was discovered in May 1983 by doctors at the Pasteur Institute in France.
The isolation of the HIV virus made it possible to develop drugs that could dramatically extend the life expectancy of those with AIDS, athough no vaccine has yet been found.
At least 28 million people worldwide have died from the disease; Africa has been the worst affected area.
WE 9 y A peo come 0? . a 2 ye OO Qe ~> 22 ‘) RS The frigate HMS Antelope exploded on May 23, during the Falklands War.
ARGENTINA INVADED THE BRITISH TERRITORY of the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic on April 2.
British prime minister Margaret Thatcher sent a naval task force to liberate the islands.
The subsequent conflict cost the lives of hundreds of Argentine and British servicemen, many of them through missile attacks on navy warships.
This marked a major turning point, and Iran forced the Iraqis to retreat.
Ariel Sharon resigned after an : Israeli inquiry stated he had failed : to act to prevent the massacre.
King of pop The dominant pop star of the 80s, Michael Jackson released the album Thriller in 7982.
Solidarity (see 1981], the Polish Trade Union Movement, was banned by the Polish government on October 8.
Brezhnev had pushed for better relations with the West, and : increased Soviet military and : industrial strength, but living standards remained poor.
The world's first test tube twins were born in Manchester, England, on April 28.
The United States embassy in Beirut was hit by a suicide bomber on April 19.
The United States government believed the attack was carried out by Hezbollah, a militant Islamic group.
Later in the year, terrorists peacekeeping headquarters in Beirut, with extensive loss of life.
In the Iraq-Iran War, Irag had begun using chemical weapons —the blister agent mustard gas was deployed as Iraq fought back against attacks from the “human waves of Iranian troops.
Secret hunger : A mother holds her child during the : Ethiopian famine.
These followed a deadly ' ambush by Tamil Tigers, which killed 13 Sri Lankan soldiers.
The Soviets were accused of shooting down a Korean airliner on September 1.
They claimed the ' airliner flew into their airspace and | did not respond to communication.
BRITISH COAL MINERS WENT ON STRIKE from March 12 over pay : and mine closures.
On December 19, China and Britain “ oS get British colony, to Chinese rule in 1997.
Bhopal gas victims : The Bhopal tragedy injured many : thousands and killed 3,000 people : within weeks.
Free in space United States astronaut Bruce McCandless floats free in space.
Indira Gandhi (b.17], the prime minister of India, was ' assassinated on October 31.
Bhopal, India, became one of the worst industrial accidents in history.
Reagan declared the withdrawal of peacekeeping troops from the Lebanese capital of Beirut, on February 7, following : increased terrorist attacks.
TANCREDO NEVES WAS ELECTED PRESIDENT OF BRAZIL on 15 January, after 21 years of military rule.
Prime minister Shimon Peres withdrew Israeli troops from Lebanon, but Israel held a 12 mile(19km-] wide security zone in the south.
Major General Mohammed militants hijacked an Italian cruise liner, the Achille Lauro, demanding the release of 50 Palestinian prisoners held in Israel.
The crisis ended after they 30 20 SIZE T7385 1990 lg 75 Hole in the ozone layer This graph shows the average size of the hole in the ozone layer in each year from 1985-95.
The Siege of Gibraltar ended after 16 years, when the Spanish ' government opened the border, on February 4.
Their findings, published in the May issue of Nature, rallied environmentalists.
Madrid ® WITH THE IRAN-IRAQ WAR IN ITS SIXTH YEAR, Iran launched a surprise assault and captured the abandoned Iraqi oil port of Faw in February.
Iraq was accused of using mustard gas In its efforts to hold off the attack.
The Reagan administration _ The Russian space station Mir provides a home for visiting astronauts.
Reagan survived, but his chief of staff, Donald Regan, and national security adviser, John Poindexter, resigned.
United States planes bombed military targets in Tripoli, Libya, on April 15.
Days earlier, United States soldiers had died in a bomb attack at the La Belle disco in West Berlin, believed to have been ordered by Libya.
Challenger badge : On January 28, the American space : shuttle Challenger broke apart 72 : seconds after take off, causing the : death of all seven crew members.
It released a high ; ' level of radioactive contamination, | which spread to Europe.
Mir, the Soviet space station, was launched on February 20, as part of a space city to house ' cosmonauts.
Nearly 50,000 students , gathered in Shanghai's People’s Square on 21 December, urging for more social freedom.
As prime minister he initiated major reforms and was an avid supporter of women’s rights, healthcare, and welfare standards.
Students all across China held demonstrations in major cities, : demanding democratic reforms.
BEFORE Communist regimes could be found across the world at the high point of communist influence.
After Soviet triumph in World War II, communism was embraced by one-third of the world’s population.
Fear that it would spread further dominated the conduct of the Cold War.
China remains one of the most prominent, while Laos, Vietnam, North Korea, and Cuba also have communist regimes.
COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION In March 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev became leader of a stagnating Soviet Union.
He realized that the Soviet Bloc needed radical reforms, and tried to +¥ Mikhail Gorbachev was a popular choice for leader.
It was supposed to offer ordinary people freedom from want and oppression, and it united Western critics of the capitalist system.
The great experiment, which began with the seizure of the Winter Palace In Petrograd in 1917, ended in 1989-91, as the Berlin Wall was torn down and the empire of the USSR came apart.
In July 1989, Gorbachev announced that countries within the Warsaw Pact could determine their own futures in openly contested elections.
The result was the total disintegration of the USSR, al Keda dar Tal-jael mantle Mm aal-Mant-] Me) m 10 lee) el-m-lalemelaoletelalar-leleolenar-mal-\wam elm nome) mel-) a To outsiders, Gorbachev was a hero.
But at home, living standards fell and he wrestled with deep economic problems.
In July 1991, Boris Yeltsin was elected president of Russia and emerged as a champion of reform when he saved Gorbachev from a coup by hard-line opponents in August.
The Soviet Union faced oblivion when Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus secretly planned to form a new union.
His position untenable, on Christmas Day 1991, Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president.
Soviet dissolution Territory that once belonged to the Soviet Union now forms a number of new states.
This was double what it was in 1950, and a billion higher than in 1974.
The population of the world was growing at a rate of 220,000 people a day.
Much of the growth was seen in parts of the world least able to sustain it.
New Zealand as compensation ' and for returning its agents to : French jurisdiction.
French compensation : France paid New Zealand $6. million: : to return its agents.
IRA was planning to detonate a bomb during a change of guard” ceremony in the British territory.
The event was to be attended by the 1st Battalion Royal Anglian Regiment, following a tour of Northern Ireland.
This year saw the first documented use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, when lraq dropped bombs containing mustard gas and nerve agents on the Kurdish city of Halabja in lrag, in March.
Between 3,000 and 9,000 civilians died, and many more suffered long-term health problems.
Lasting eight years, the war resulted in more than 1 million casualties.
Throughout 1988, Palestinian Arabs of the Gaza Strip and West Bank continued a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories.
Known as ‘intifada’, it took the form of general strikes, boycott of Israeli products, demonstrations, and use of petrol bombs.
On 14 November, the Palestine Horsehead nebula The resumption of shuttle flights, in 1988, meant that NASA's Hubble Space Telescope programme was back on track.
In a dramatic speech to ' the UN, on 7 December, Gorbachev ' announced unilateral arms and ' troop reductions, and withdrawal of forces from Eastern Europe.
She returned to Pakistan in 1986 and served as prime minister from 1988-90 and 1993-96.
Benazir was exiled in 1999 on corruption charges, but returned in 2007 for fresh elections.
South Africa’s border war with , Namibia and Angola had been ongoing since 1966.
They agreed to do this, but only if : Cuba removed its troops from : Angola.
The most ' popular science book ever, it was ' translated into 40 languages and sold more than 10 million copies.
However, De Klerk was more willing than his predecessors to modernize the political system.
On February 14, Ayatollah Khomeini (1902-89], the spiritual leader of Iran, issued a fatwa, or decree, calling for the death of author Salman Rushdie (b.47] and the publishers of his book, The Satanic Verses.
Eight people were killed in the stampede and hundreds more Injured while approaching the body to pay obeisance.
Tiananmen Square massacre : The Chinese Army shot dead nearly ; 3,000 of the 100,000 demonstrators : who protested in Tiananmen _ } Square in Beijing.
Intelligence gathered by electronic devices, satellites, and spies was used for military information and technology.
November 28, the Czechoslovak communist regime surrendered : to the people.
A month later, Vaclav Havel became President ' of the Czechoslovak Republic in ' the nonviolent Velvet Revolution.
Following the election of Solidarity : in Poland, Hungary's rulers : published a plan for independence.
On Erich Honecker, leader of the between the countries of the Eastern Bloc and the rest of Europe.
Named after astronomer Galilei i : bringing the wall down. : probe j : On December 3, the United States and the : , USSR met in Malta and declared : the end of the Cold War.
NATIONAL CONGRESS in South Africa was lifted by President De Klerk on February 2.
Nine days later, Nelson Mandela | (b.18], the leader of the ANC, walked free after spending 27 years in jail.
Neighboring Namibia became the 47th African country to gain independence after 25 years of struggle against South African rule.
In Central America, free elections were held in Nicaragua on February 25.
National Opposition Union, a coalition of political parties backed by United States funding, defeated the left-wing Sandinistas.
Violeta Chamorro E * Li q A | Nelson Mandela and his wife Winnie punch the air in a victory salute after his release from Victor Verster prison.
The LECH WALESA (1943-] One of the founding members of Poland’s Solidarity trade union movement, Lech Walesa was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983.
Gulf Vario el : as the first chancellor of the ae Becowait Cit oil-rich Arab nation, — : reunified nation.
ON JANUARY 13, SOVIET TROOPS STORMED INTO LITHUANIA to suppress dissident nationalists.
After four days, Mikhail Gorbachev announced he ' was resigning as Soviet president; a TV station after a broadcast called for people to defend government buildings from the Soviet troops.
It was the first time in over ' 40 years that Israel had sat down ' with all its Arab neighbours to | discuss peace.
Terry Waite, and Americans Terry : Anderson and Tom Sutherland ' were also freed.
Sf WO & Ye [ ; | Residents of Sarajevo, Bosnia, ducks the Bosnian War as radical Serbs ope THE IDEA OF A UNITED EUROPE CAME CLOSER TO REALIZATION when leaders of 12 European countries signed the treaty on European Union and the Maastricht Final Act on February 7.
It heralded common citizenship, and common economic and defence policies.
The break up of Yugoslavia continued as Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence on March 3.
War broke out and the Se United Nations Peacekeeping emerged out of World War II as a way to place military personnel between warring countries or communities to stop fighting.
UN forces were first used as an observer to monitor the armistice between Israel and the Arab states in 1948.
Salvation Front, a fundamentalist : party, whom many believed was ‘THE NUMBER OF BOSNIANS AND CROATS HELD IN OMARSKA ‘DEATH CAMP ' Yugoslav army under Slobodan ' Milosevic attacked the Muslim population of Bosnia.
Somalia was stricken by famine, ' but extortion and looting prevented : foreign aid from getting through. The US-led operation aimed to ' hold Mogadishu’s airport to : enable supplies to be airlifted to starving locals.
THE SINGLE MARKET CAME INTO FORCE across European Union countries in January.
It gave greater freedom to citizens of member states to live and work in other EU countries and paved the way for a single currency, the Euro.
On January 1, Czechoslovakia was Split into Slovakia and the Czech Republic, dissolving the 74-year-old federation.
Accords in Washington, DC in : the presence of the United States president Bill Clinton in September.
IN SOUTH AFRICA, ZULUS AND AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS supporters clashed on March 28—more than 18 people were killed.
The Zulus were responding to calls by their leaders to boycott the forthcoming national elections.
The elections went ahead, and on May 10, Nelson Mandela became South Africa’s first black president after more than three centuries of white rule.
Elsewhere In Africa, the president of Rwanda, Juvenal Habyarimana (b.37], a Hutu, was killed when his plane was shot down above Kigali airport on April 6.
Between April and June, about 800,000 Rwandans were killed, most of them Tutsis killed by Hutus.
On July 1, PLO chairman Yasser Arafat returned to the Gaza Strip after 27 years in exile.
Israel and Jordan signed a historic peace deal on October 26, ending 46 years of war.
United States president Bill Clinton witnessed the treaty between Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein at a ceremony in Wadi Araba, on the IsraelJordan border.
Albert Reynolds, asked loyalist ' paramilitaries to toe the : same line.
Eurostar’s maiden run : The high-speed rail service, Eurostar, : which travels through the Channel : Tunnel, linking England and France, : made its maiden voyage in 1994. : was believed to have been carried out by Serbians.
Brazil's Samba Boys : Marcio Santos of Brazil holds the : FIFA World Cup trophy to celebrate : victory.
Boys, beat Italy in the final. ‘ bring the military junta to an end : and restore democracy under ' President Aristide, exiled three | ' years earlier.
Ayrton Senna, plowed off the ' track at the San Marino Grand Prix on May 1, in a fatal crash. : A state funeral was held in his home city of Sao Paulo.
Founded in 1912 with the aim of increasing the rights of black South Africans, the African National Congress came to power in 1994, when Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa.
THE GREATEST Richard Holbrooke, United States Assistant Secretary of State, on the Bosnian crisis THE CITY OF KOBE IN JAPAN WAS DEVASTATED BY AN EARTHQUAKE on January 17.
Measuring 7. on the Richter scale, it resulted in hundreds of deaths and over 13,000 injuries.
Barings, a British investment bank, was declared bankrupt after an employee, Nick Leeson, risked huge amounts of money on the Nikkei, the Japanese stock market index.
On March 20, Turkey launched a major military offensive, involving 35,000 troops, against the Kurds in northern Iraq.
This was an attempt to pursue rebel Turkish Kurds who had fled into the region and prevent them from setting up permanent bases there.
Croatia signed the Dayton Peace : Accord in Paris, bringing three : years of war in Bosnia to an end.
It had applied to join in 1975, after the restoration of its democracy.
The Single European Act is signed in 1987, aiming to create a single market.
Born of a desire for peace and unity that would make another European war unthinkable, in 1957 six European countries joined in economic union.
The modern age of the European Union began in work, travel, and do business with other member THE NUMBER 1987 with the Single European Act, an attempt to unify states, and the EU has become the largest economy in OF COUNTRIES Europe further and create a ‘single market” for trade. the world.
European citizenship and the introduction burden of supporting poorer countries, and the huge OFFICIAL of the euro, acommon currency, have made it easier to bureaucracy needed to run the organization.
People of Europe The EU has over half a billion people, which is 7. percent of the world's population.
By contrast, only around 45 percent of Africa's population lives in cities.
Bulgaria and Romania join the EU, bringing the total membership up to 27.
A ceasefire was signed between Russia and Chechnya (see 1994] on August 31.
Romanian elections were won by the Romanian Democratic Convention, bringing 48 years of communist rule to an end.
Civil war began in Afghanistan, when Taliban rebels seized Kabul on September 27, forcing hundreds to flee the war-torn city.
The Kurdish civil war continued, and Irag seized a city inside the Kurdish “safe haven” protected by 1/7 THE NUMBER OF MONTHS THE IRA CEASEFIRE LASTED US-led troops on August 31.
In response, America launched Operation Desert Strike, firing missiles at Iraqi military targets.
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, : or ‘mad-cow disease”, caused a : major health scare in Europe.
United States president Bill Clinton won another term in office on » November 6.
December 12, Madeleine 2 Albright became the first female American Secretary of State.
In April, rebel soldiers, mainly Tutsis, sealed off camps in eastern Zaire, where refugees were trapped in appalling conditions.
Albania was consumed by anarchy during March and April, as law and order collapsed.
Academy Awards . r ld Moet / YAN o a | AN & ° “ Xe ie) ]@ a es Aw » ¢ RNG n\ NS oF oof ge oro"" ge e910 wae Cen 2 * 0” 13 PP 02 Vo.
IN JANUARY, United States PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON became the center of a scandal involving his relationship with a former White House intern, Monica Lewinsky.
Clinton was already implicated in a sexual harassment case and was being investigated by independent counsel Kenneth Starr.
In December, he became only the second president in United States history to 6.
Rouge had deposed him as : leader and sentenced him to life : imprisonment in 1997.
Q ~~ ee ie C Oo a x 1 y y 5 oe KO ne O 0 ° Xe"" A eo N go & PF oe ao™ one WF od soe yw x & AF oO eee Oo WY og a eo.
On May 1, Saddam Hussein ' wrote an open letter to the UN ' Security Council threatening “grave ' consequences” if sanctions against ' Iraq were not lifted.
The international community accused President Slobodan Milosevic of “ethnic cleansing” when 45 ethnic Albanians were found dead, apparently executed by Serbs.
Kosovo peace talks ended without agreement on February 23 and a week later NATO forces announced they would escalate their bombardment of Yugoslavia.
The purging of Albanians by Serbian troops increased, and half a million Albanians fled Kosovo.
Milosevic agreed to withdraw his troops on June 9, in response to unrelenting NATO bombing.
Thabo Mbeki won the South African presidential elections on June 2, succeeding Nelson Mandela.
East Timor, in Southeast Asia, asked for intervention from international troops after a complete breakdown in law and order in September.
This followed a referendum, which voted for independence from Indonesia.
Anti-independence Timorese rebels, supported by the Indonesian military, killed an estimated 1,400 Timorese, and 300,000 people fled to neighboring West Timor.
The Nasdaq never fully recovered. ‘45% i Wiis | , a George W Bush was elected president of the United States in 2001.
Opposition supporters from Serbia stormed the Yugoslav parliament building in Belgrade on October 5 using a bulldozer, proclaiming Vojislav Kostunica as the new Yugoslav president after discrepancies in September elections caused outrage.
September during meetings between the World Bank and the : International Monetary Fund.
Israel announced its withdrawal : from South Lebanon in May, 22 years after occupying it.
Ugandan cult known as the : Restoration of the Ten ; } Commandments of God died in : their churches in March.
First crew of ISS THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA WAS ON THE BRINK OF WAR in March, as ethnic Albanian rebels demanding equal rights clashed with government forces.
In August, NATO announced It would send a peacekeeping force to this former Yugoslavian republic.
The United States experienced an unprecedented day of terror on September 11, when 19 al-Qaeda terrorists hijacked four passenger | airlines.
Two flew into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, another into the Pentagon.
These events left America, and the world, in a profound state of shock.
NATO met the day after the attacks, offering full support and Invoking a Cold War-era treaty clause that stated when one member Is attacked; all members are attacked.
Only a week after 9/11, letters containing anthrax spores were mailed to several news offices and two Democratic United States Senators.
In October, the United States and Britain ' launched attacks on targets in ' Afghanistan, where Osama Bin Laden , head of the : militant Islamic organization al-Qaeda, was believed to be : hiding.
Freedom’ aimed to remove the Taliban regime and replace it with ' a democratic government.
Another attempted terrorist ' attack occurred toward the end of ' the year.
By the end of the ' year, it held more than 20,000 ' articles in 18 languages.
Qe 0% 00 JKCHNUSHE BS — une § , in Moscow, during a standoff with Russian troops.
Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, went on trial on February 12, charged with crimes against humanity.
He chose to defend himself, and the trial faced many delays due to his ill-health.
President George W Bush of America and President Vladimir Putin of Russia agreed to cut numbers of nuclear warheads by two-thirds each in the Treaty of Moscow, signed on May 24.
Russian special forces ' pumped gas into the building ' before engaging the rebels ina ' gun battle—118 people were killed.
Members of a violent Islamist group, Jemaah Istamiyah, were convicted | of the attack.
Zimbabwe, December 2002 Robert Mugabe, president United States millionaire Steve Fossett became the first person to fly a : balloon solo nonstop around the : world.
THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR was marred by tragedy when the United States space shuttle Columbia disintegrated as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere.
An investigation confirmed that a heat shield had malfunctioned on takeoff, causing it to break up upon reentry.
The last commercial flight of Concorde, the supersonic aircraft, was made in October.
Concorde was given an emotional farewell at Heathrow airport in London, England.
It had flown for 27 years but spiraling costs and dwindling ticket sales led to its demise.
Yugoslavia voted to end its existence in February, becoming Serbia and Montenegro.
The Yugoslavian Federation had existed for 74 years, but had lost its other four republics in Speedy exit The supersonic airliner Concorde retired in 2002.
Arnold Schwarzenegger, former ; : movie star, greets supporters during: : his election campaign for governor | of California in the United States in 2003. ' a series of bloody conflicts : throughout the 1990s.
European Union treaties with a : simplified single text, and would » : create an EU president and : foreign minister.
March 20 when US-led troops : invaded and toppled Saddam Hussein's government.
UNESCO list of World Heritage : Sites, the city was more than : 2,000 years old.
The United States offer of aid helped improve : Civil war erupted in the western region of Darfur, Sudan, as rebels ' rose up against the government, : claiming the region was being : neglected by the authorities in the capital, Khartoum.
A statue of Saddam Hussein in : Baghdad, Iraq is toppled from : its plinth by Iraqi civilians, aided : by United States marines.
THE NEW AFGHAN CONSTITUTION was signed in the capital Kabul on January 26.
Hamid Karzai, leader 2 of the transitional government, was Officially declared the winner of Afghanistan's presidential election on November 3.
The result of the election had been delayed due to an investigation Into voting irregularities.
Bush was reelected for a second term as United States president on November 2.
United States and Iraqi forces stormed into 2 western areas of Fallujah, Iraq, ' arebel stronghold, early on November 8.
Trouble continued in Chechnya when separatists stormed a school in Beslan, North Ossetia, » on September 1.
An earthquake under the Indian Ocean near the Indonesian island : of Sumatra on December 26 unleashed a series of killer waves, : tsunami, that sped across the sea.
Wave of destruction Tsunami waves traveled 1,000 miles (1,600 km] across the Indian Ocean in only 90 minutes.
Ss OF .e2 No) Sorin erees Oy \S %§ YO Comme aes Rem Cree & “ o 2 aa CS \ Pp AN ©) & Q x 2 e \y S \ Se 9a 6 Reo ON DEI eH FEM aT F™ gel GH Rich “ O <o eS & \ S% @ 2 4.
YASSIR ARAFAT DIED IN 2004, and the leader of the Palestine Liberation Army, Rawhi Fattouh, became interim president of the Palestinian Authority.
Under Palestinian law he held the post for 60 days until elections were held.
Abbas and the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, announced a ceasefire on February 8.
The former Lebanese prime minister Rafik Hariri was killed by a suicide bomb in west Beirut on February 14.
He had called on Syria to cease its involvement in Lebanese affairs—Syria denied any involvement in his death.
The assassination put further EXTREME WEATHER Weather became increasingly wild in the 2000s.
Former leader of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, went on trial in October, nearly two years after his capture, for atrocities he ' carried out during his rule.
He ' refused to acknowledge the authority of the court trying him, and claimed that he was not guilty.
Other weather gf) phenomena included record levels of rainfall, melting icecaps, and severe drought, all contributing to increased concerns about the prospect of global warming.
The forecast is for more extreme weather, disrupting lifestyles, making animal species extinct, and threatening human lives.
Coordinated terrorist attacks struck three underground trains anda double-decker bus, killing 02 people, and injuring several hundred more.
Weeks after the al-Qaeda attack on the London transport system, the provisional IRA— the paramilitary wing of the Irish Republican Army—announced it was ceasing its armed campaign on July 28.
Two months later there was a verification statement from the independent arms decommissioning body that the IRA had put all its weapons beyond use.
The US, the world’s top polluter, did not sign up, as the protocol was not thought to be in the best interest of the American economy.
Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in the US, on August 29 causing unprecedented damage.
The hurricane also battered large swathes of the Louisiana and Mississippi coastlines, leaving two oil rigs adrift in the Gulf of Mexico and causing destruction estimated at $26 billion.
JJ Al Gore, United States politician, An Inconvenient Truth, 2006 Former prime minister of Pakistan, Benazir Bhutto, campaigning THE BASQUE SEPARATIST GROUP ETA declared a permanent ceasefire on March 22.
They aimed to pursue independence for the Basque region through a democratic process.
They took the membership of the group from 29 to 27 member iPhone A new type of multimedia phone, the ' iPhone connects to the ' internet via a touch » screen.
Seven bombs exploded on the over Northern of President Musharraf. end of the former Union of Serbia suburban railway of Mumbai, Ireland by Within weeks he was and Montenegro, created only : India, on July 11.
It insisted this was for generating nuclear power, but the West was concerned that Iran was making a nuclear bomb.
The sailors were accused of entering lranian waters and were held prisoner for 11 days.
It was / grown from human bone marrow samples ina laboratory in » Newcastle, England.
On Monday, January 21, the London Stock Exchange experienced a dramatic fall in overall value.
On Monday, September 15, the United States investment firm Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy, and on the United States stock market the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 4. percent of its value.
Born in Hawaii, he is the first African-American to hold the office, and gained admirers for his relaxed charm and stirring oratory.
However, his first year met with fierce opposition as he attempted to change the American healthcare system, tackle climate change, and reach new agreements on nuclear disarmament.
Kevin Rudd made an : official apology for years of mistreatment inflicted on the country’s Aboriginal people on : February 13.
Musharraf bowed to intense : pressure and resigned on : August 18 ahead of impeachment proceedings.
Israel claimed it was in an attempt to stop Hamas, the main Islamic resistance movement, from firing rockets into Israel.
A ceasefire was declared and Israeli troops withdrew from Gaza by the end of January.
American car giants General Motors and Chrysler both filed for bankruptcy in 2009, as the ongoing financial crisis took its toll on industries around the world.
Zimbabwe's opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai was sworn in as prime minister ina unity government with President Robert Mugabe on February 11.
This power-sharing deal was designed to put an end to the ongoing political violence in Zimbabwe.
Five nations, including China and the US, agreed to attempt to limit global temperature rises.
Some critics were disappointed, as they thought that the agreement did not go far enough.
Sia i ‘i i ‘ll ae r Pla a Oe ee ee ; Sw rilhso-se ieee eS Xt, BP workers lay an oil absorbent boom near a wildlife refuge off the Gulf of Mexico to stop the spread of oil from the Deepwater Horizon platform disaster.
Reykjavik ® 6 Eyiafiallajékull Madrid @ Spread of volcanic ash in Europe The constantly shifting high-altitude cloud of volcanic ash from Eyjafjallajokull, Iceland, caused is Moscow P Istanbul # Pn Fes Athens @ KEY 19th April 0000 GMT 19th April 0600 GMT travel chaos as European airspace was Closed.
An Icelandic volcano, dormant for two hundred years, erupted near the Eyjafjallajokull glacier on April 14.
It sent clouds of ash soaring as high as 36,000 ft , disrupting air traffic in Europe, and delaying millions of air passengers across the world.
The United States experienced an environmental disaster in April when the BP-owned Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded and sank.
Around four million barrels of oil were pumped into the Gulf of Mexico and 11 men were killed.
European Union for a rescue : finance package on November 21, : ~ : after seven days of denying it ' needed a bailout for its banking : system.
Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi spent most of the previous 20 years under house arrest, due to her efforts to bring democracy to Burma.
Her tireless determination to stand for nonviolent resistance in the face of a brutal military regime inspired the world.
It began when a man in Tunisia burned himself to death in December 2010 in protest at his treatment by police.
This led to pro-democracy rebellions, which erupted across the Middle East.
After days of protests, Tunisian president Zine el Abidine Ben Ali promised more jobs while vowing to punish rioters.
A man burned himself to death in an apparent echo of events in Tunisia that sent new shockwaves across North Africa.
Antigovernment activists announced a “day of anger’ in Egypt, and there were calls for President Mubarak to resign.
In response, Mubarak shut down cellphone and internet networks and then appointed his first-ever vice president in an attempt to calm things down.
Eventually, after 18 solid days of mass protest, Mubarak surrendered power to the army on February 11 and flew out of Cairo.
The uprising in Egypt led to an upsurge of violent protests against repressive regimes in Yemen, Jordan, Morocco, Oman, and Iran.
On February 16, protests erupted in Libya's second largest city, Benghazi, following the arrest of a human rights campaigner.
Colonel Muammar Gaddafi : (b.42] developed into an armed ' conflict pitting rebels against ' government forces.
Sudanese voted ina referendum : to split the country between north : and south and form a new state.
Australia, resembled a muddy : lake in January following : catastrophic flooding, with : debris from houses and : Broken city : A family walks past cars upturned by : the tsunami in Japan.
One of the Hollywood greats, : British-born American actress : The future of the single currency looked uncertain.
Silvio Berlusconi , who : had shown a knack for surviving charges of corruption, faced : new charges in February of ' having sex with an underage girl.
The earthquake in Japan was the fifth : largest since records began—this : graph shows the magnitude of the 10 : biggest earthquakes in history.
Great War passed from living : memory into the history books. 9 : plant in Fukushima, where | Elizabeth Taylor died on March 23. ~—:: greater cuts.
Wars continue to be fought, and even developed nations can be devastated by natural disasters.
There are currently almost 7 billion people living on the planet, .. . three times the population of 1900.
Many high-income countries are in the northern hemisphere, with the world’s poorest in sub-Saharan Africa.
The six wealthiest countries account for more than half the world’s Gross Domestic Product —the value of all the goods and services a country produces— while over half the world’s population live on less than $2.50 a day.
The countries of Western Europe and North America have well-established business sectors, with multinational corporations selling products globally.
GDP PER CAPITA IN United States DOLLARS 40,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 140,000 Qatar Liechtenstein Luxembourg Bermuda Norway Singapore Jersey Kuwait Brunei United States In the money When a country’s wealth is divided by the number of people who live in it, Qatar emerges as the richest nation in the world.
Out of pocket The poorest countries in the world are all in sub-Saharan Africa.
On the up The fastestgrowing economies are mainly in developing countries.
Well-established agriculture, mining, and service sectors have helped create a healthy economy, and Brazil is also rich in natural resources.
ATLANTIC OCEAN Female Male 40 30 20 10 0 0 10 20 30 40 POPULATION THE GLOBAL ECONOMY / GERMANY RUSSIA Female Germany reacted to the Male Female The world's largest Male union of East and West ) country, Russia, has seen Germany by becoming huge changes since the the largest economy on fall of the Soviet Union. the European continent, It has vast natural and the fifth wealthiest resources, such as oll in the world by GDP. and gas, and is the Germany Is the world's world’s largest oil second-largest trader in producer, but many imports and exports.
Factories and mines produce ' most of China's wealth, but in the future this EUROPE | may be slowed by an aging population.
Male /Xej5 Female Arabian SY-F-) 6050 40 30 20 10 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 POPULATION INDIA It is estimated that b coro ; ee ere India's economy will | we, grow faster than any other country's over the next two decades.
It has a young and growing workforce, has opened up foreign trade, and hosts millions of entrepreneurs running small, but successful, businesses.
AFRICA Male Female 4 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 10 2030405060 o SOUTH AFRICA POPULATION ae £4 South Africa has Male Xe} 3 Female one ofthelargest — economies on the yVigleclameeyalelalcyale /Xej5 Female but poverty is AUSTRALIA widespread.
One in seven people Australia's economy stands out because is infected with HIV/AIDS, high crime and land it survived the global downturn without going into recession.
Natural gas and unemployment deposits are evenly spread throughout Is high.
Great leaders have been the salvation of their people, while weak leaders have been responsible for bringing mighty empires to their knees.
Within these time periods, a large number of dynasties ruled Egypt, from the 1st Dynasty even before the Old Period, reaching the 26th Dynasty (672-525 BCE], which ended with Egypt’s conquest by the Persian ruler Cambyses.
From then on, emperors took the honorific title Augustus for the duration of their reign.
Until 286, this was normally a title unique to one person, but there were periods of joint rule, usually when the succession was disputed or the nominated heir was too young to rule alone.
This persisted (with some variations] until 395, when the eastern and western portions of the empire split from each other.
The Franks, led by the Merovingian ruler Childeric, emerged victorious, uniting France under Childeric’s son Clovis.
On Clovis’s death, his kingdom was partitioned between his four sons and their descendants until Pepin, the first of the Carolingians, was anointed king of all the Franks by Pope Zachary in 751.
In 1469, Isabella of Castile married Ferdinand of Aragon, and when both succeeded to their respective thrones, they united their domains to form the kingdom of Spain.
However, the collapse of the Han Dynasty in 220CE was followed by three centuries of disunity during which the country was sometimes split into as many as 17 kingdoms.
The Song reunited China in 960, but they lost control of the north of the country in 1126.
The Mauryan Empire encompassed almost all of South Asia; the Gupta Empire formed a wide band across northern India; and the Chola Empire stretched across Southeast Asia.
At their heights, the Muslim Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire controlled virtually all of modern India and Pakistan.
Awul Abdul Kalam Pratibha Patil NAME Vishvant Pratap Singh Sadanand Singh Shekhar Pamulaparpi Narasimha Rao Atal Bihari Vajpayee Haradanhalli Dewe Gowda Inder Kumar Gujral Atal Bihari Vajpayee Dr.
Baghdad 7 Xian 400,000 The greatest cities of the ancient 50,000 200,000 700,000 world still had comparatively small populations.
Disputes over territory, religion, and governance have escalated into war throughout history, and while the stories of great battles and great commanders make compelling reading, the tragic consequences of war should never be forgotten.
Yet we can still admire the imagination and tenacity of those who risked their lives journeying into territory completely unknown to them.
Lawrence River Reached the Grand Canyon in 1540 Voyaged to Russia via the North Cape Reached the Frobisher Strait while searching for the Northwest Passage Circumnavigated the globe Explored Greenland, discovered the Davis Strait while searching for the Northwest Passage Searched for the Northeast Passage Undertook numerous voyages to America; attempted, unsuccessfully, to found a colony in Virginia Led first Dutch expedition to the East Indies; sailed the south coast of Java Explored the St.
Over the course of human existence, basic human needs—from the need to survive to the urge to obtain knowledge—have produced tens of thousands of inventions and discoveries.
These have transformed both the way we function and the way we think, and have made us distinct from the rest of the animal kingdom.
Since their time, Western philosophers have journeyed to the outer limits of thought and understanding, posing questions that challenge our most fundamental beliefs.
Originating from almost every corner of the globe, the world’s great faiths are as diverse as its cultures.
Some have their origin in prehistoric times, yet the 20th century saw the emergence of several new religions that have attracted followers in their millions.
Polymath interested in esoteric knowledge (that he made available to only a few initiates) and the mystical power of numbers.
A pupil of Socrates; argued that everything we perceive is a mere shadow of its abstract, ideal Form.
Wide-ranging philosopher with a special interest In logical classification.
F Hegel Karl Marx Arthur Schopenhauer Sgren Kierkegaard Friedrich Nietzsche Bertrand Russell Ludwig Wittgenstein Jean-Paul Sartre LIVED 1225-74 1469-1527 1561-1626 1588-1679 1596-1650 1632-77 1632-1704 1646-1716 1685-1753 1711-76 1712-78 1724-1804 1737-1809 1770-1831 1818-83 1788-1860 1813-55 1844-1900 1872-1970 1889-1951 1905-80 ORIGIN Italy Italy England England France Netherlands England Germany England Britain Switzerland Germany Britain Germany Germany Germany Denmark Germany Britain Austria France IDEAS/KEY WORK Greatest Medieval religious philosopher.
Argued that the state should promote the common good, irrespective of any moral evaluation of its acts.
Father of English political philosophy, the study of how societies are organized.
One of the most important 17th-century Rationalists, arguing that knowledge of the world can be gained through reason.
Proponent of empiricism, the view that all knowledge of anything that actually exists must be derived from experience.
Great empiricist who developed an idealist metaphysical system, maintaining that reality ultimately consists of something nonmaterial.
Leading sceptic of metaphysics, the philosophy concerned with the ultimate nature of what exists.
Espoused transcendental idealism, the belief that human experience of things consists of how they appear to us.
A forerunner of Existentialism, stressing the individual's unique position as a self-determining agent.
Leader of the Existentialist movement, which focused on the totality of human freedom.
In Europe, from the 11th century, and in the succeeding centuries on other continents, the talents of many of these people were nurtured in the universities that sprang up as conduits for the transmission of learning.
J POETS, PLAYRIGHTS, AND NOVELISTS Literature gives us a Special insight into the past.
Though the plots of novels and plays may be invented, the characters speak and behave in ways that reflect the preoccupations, social mores, and artistic conventions of their time, and in many works, a fictional chain of events plays out against a rich background of verifiable historical happenings.
It Is only later, around the 9th century CE, that we begin to know the names of some of these artists.
In almost all societies, religious scenes were an important part of the output, as well as portraits that flattered the rulers and the aristocracy.
Landscapes and rural scenes have also delighted artistic patrons through the ages.
In the modern era, artists, free from patronage, have pursued their own, often shocking, agendas.
Disasters such as the eruption of Pompeii, the Antioch earthquake of 526ce, and the Black Death caused huge losses of life, but modern societies are no less vulnerable, as evidenced by the loss of life in the 2004 Indian Ocean and 2011 Japanese tsunamis.
The term agrarianism relates to political movements aimed at promoting the interests of agriculture and rural life. allies/Allied People or countries working together.
In World War | and World War Il, the Allies or Allied forces were the countries fighting against Germany. anarchy In its original meaning, absence of government; also used for a condition of public disorder.
Politically, anarchism is a movement or ideology that believes in the abolition of government as an ideal for society. anticlericalism Opposition to the influence of churches and other religious organizations In society.
Unlike the similar term dictator, the word autocrat is often applied to a powerful king or emperor.
Axis The alliance between Germany and Italy before and during World War II; also these countries considered collectively (Axis forces or Axis domination). bilateral Involving two governments [or other organizations), especially with reference to treaties and agreements.
Compare multilateral. bloc A group of countries that act together in matters of international relations. bourgeois Originally a member of the French middle classes, now often used disparagingly for a supporter of the capitalist system [see capitalism), or simply for a person with conventional views.
In Marxist theory, the bourgeoisie are the class of capitalists. buffer state A smaller country lying between two more powerful rival countries.
The presence of a buffer state is considered useful in decreasing tension between the rival countries.
Byzantine Empire The mainly Greek-speaking Christian Empire that was a continuation of the eastern Roman Empire and lasted for around 1,000 years, until its conquest by the Ottoman Turks in 1453.
Caliphate In Islamic culture this is a political/religious institution in which a chosen individual, the caliph, is regarded as a successor to the Prophet Muhammad, and thus able to confer political legitimacy on individual rulers across the Islamic world.
Once powerful rulers themselves, caliphs later became mainly figureheads, although the Ottoman rulers of Turkey continued to claim the title until the 20th century.
Calvinism A strict form of Protestantism named after the 16th-century religious reformer John Calvin.
These businesses generate employment, while also providing profits for the capitalists.
Catholic A term that originally meant inclusive or all-embracing, so that the Catholic Church originally meant the whole of the Christian Church.
After various splits over the centuries, the Catholic Church ts now the organization of churches that owes its allegiance to the pope in Rome, thus it is also called the Roman Catholic Church. charter A written grant of rights or similar legal document. city-state A self-governing, independent city. classical/Classical Relating to the civilizations of ancient Greece and Rome and their achievements [the Classical Period) or to later artistic and cultural movements that emulated the values of this period.
The term classical can also be applied to the high point of any civilization or culture, and can be used with other shades of meaning, such as possessing timeless value.” client state A country that is dependent on another larger country for trade, protection, etc. coalition A formal arrangement in which two or more different groups agree to act together, such as when different political parties come together to form a government.
With an initial capital, Commonwealth refers either to the government of Britain in the years following the execution of Charles I, or to the Commonwealth of Nations, the association set up to maintain links between countries of the former British Empire.
The word also occurs in the full official names of several countries and United States states. commune A community of people who aim at sharing everything in common. communism Any society based on the principles of mutual help, in which property is not owned by individuals, but is held in common.
Counter-Reformation The period of revival in the Catholic Church following the Protestant Reformation, involving both internal reforms and active opposition to Protestantism. coup Short for coup detat, the sudden illegal seizing of power by a small group.
Crusades Military expeditions organized by the papacy in the Medieval period, initially with the goal of gaining control of the “Holy Land” (Palestine] from Islamic powers (see /slam]. czar The title of the former emperors of Russia.
Danegeld A tax raised in Anglo-Saxon England to pay off and defend against Danish invaders.
It later became a general land tax. decimal system The principle of organization of Genghis Khan's Mongol army, with a hierarchy of military units that contained between 10 and 10,000 men. demagogue A politician whose power base relies on stirring up the emotions of the people of a country through charismatic and emotional speeches, often in opposition to established authority. democracy A political system in which the people of a country control their government.
Direct democracy, which operated in ancient Athens, allowed citizens to decide policy by direct votes.
Most democracy is representative democracy, with the people electing politicians to represent them.
Democracy has often been popular with groups that are excluded from voting, such as women and non-property owners. denomination A body of religious believers sharing a common faith and organization and having a recognized name; most commonly applied to sections within the Christian Church—for example, Baptists and Methodists. dependency A subordinate territory that does not form an integral part of the country which has overall control of it. despotism An autocracy, especially one that is headed by a king or emperor.
An enlightened despot is one who Is seen as ruling for the benefit of the people rather than for him/herself.
Also refers to the exercise of power itself by the ruler. detente The lessening of tension between two countries; used especially for the time when tension was decreasing between the United States and the former USSR. devaluation The lowering in value of one country’s currency compared with other currencies. diaspora The members of a particular ethnic group who are living away from their land of origin.
It was originally used with reference to the Jews. dictator Originally an official in ancient Rome who was given sweeping powers for a short period during a time of national emergency.
Now used for any person who rules a country alone and with no effective restrictions on their individual power.
The word is not normally applied to hereditary kings or emperors, unlike the similar terms autocrat and despot . dissolution In general, this means the process of dissolving or separating into constituent parts.
The Dissolution of Parliament is the official end of a parliament before a general election is held to elect new representatives.
The Dissolution of the Monasteries was the disbanding of monasteries and other religious institutions in 16th-century England during the reign of Henry VIII. dominion/Dominions The right to govern or control.
A term formerly used, especially the plural , for the larger self-governing territories within the British Empire, especially Canada and Australia. dynasty A royal family that rules over a country for several generations.
Fascist doctrines were authoritarian, antidemocratic (see democracy), and anticommunist (see communism); they emphasized subjection of the individual to the state and tended to glorify war and nationalism.
Each level of society was entitled to claim rights from, but also obliged to undertake duties to, those “above” and “below” in the hierarchy. fiefs Lands held on condition of service offered to a superior lord under the feudal system . free trade Trading of goods and services between countries without restrictions, suchas quota limits or taxes on imported goods.
See also protectionism. fundamentalism A strict belief in all the traditional teachings of a given religion. genocide The systematic extermination of a racial or ethnic group . globalization The process by which improved communications and international links have resulted in ideas, cultures, labor markets, and ways of life becoming increasingly widespread and/or interconnected globally. gnosticism Any of various religious ideologies and movements that emphasize the acquiring of secret or mystical knowledge as a way to salvation.
Gnosticism was widespread in early Christianity, but came to be regarded as heretical by the Church.
Gothic Relating to the Goths, a Germanic tribe that invaded the Roman Empire in the 3rd and 4th centuries ce; A style of European architecture that flourished from the 13th to 16th centuries, and was characterized by distinctive pointed windows and other features.
Greek Church The branch of the Christian Church associated with the Byzantine Empire, in which church services were conducted in Greek.
See also Orthodox Church. guerrilla warfare Warfare where the fighters operate In small irregular units, often without uniforms or an official army structure. guild A Medieval mutual-aid association.
Craftsmen and merchants in towns were often organized into guilds, and individuals were often only allowed to practise their trade if they belonged to the guild of that particular trade. hegemony A situation in which a powerful country exerts a significant influence over its less powerful neighbors. heresy Usually a minority belief or tendency within a given religion that is regarded as unacceptable or even evil by other adherents to the religion.
Holy Roman Empire An empire set up in Western Europe in Medieval times, whose territory was centred on modern-day Germany.
Both connected to and forming a rival to the papacy, it increasingly took the form of a loose collection of states.
The emperor of the Holy Roman Empire held little power by the time it was formally abolished by Napoleon in 1806. hominin A member of the biological group that includes humans and their extinct ancestors and relatives, back to the point at which they split from the line leading to chimpanzees.
Huguenots Historical term for French Protestants [see Protestantism), whose history of persecution led many to emigrate and settle in other countries. humanist A Latin or Greek scholar, especially of the Renaissance period.
The work of Renaissance humanists involved the rediscovery of classical texts and their human-centered values, as opposed to the emphasis on God and theology of the Medieval period.
A person who advocates an ethical approach to human life that does not involve belief in a god or gods. imperialism Originally the system of government or rule inan empire.
Now, more particularly, the attitudes of mind that supported the acquisition of distant territories by 19th-century Western powers.
Iron Curtain Term for the barrier between the USSRdominated communist countries (see communism] of Eastern Europe and the capitalist West during the Cold War.
Islam A monotheistic (single-god] religion established in the 7th century ce in Arabia by the Prophet Muhammad.
The two main branches of Islam, Sunni and Shi'ite, differ in the authority and legitimacy they ascribe to different members of the Prophet's family after his death.
Islamism A tendency within /slam that aims to establish Islamic law and values in societies worldwide. isolationism A policy of isolating a country from international disputes, especially by not taking part in alliances.
The term is particularly associated with certain periods of Chinese, Japanese, and United States history.
Jacobin A member of the extreme revolutionary group during the French Revolution.
Jacobite In British history, a supporter of the claims of the Stuart monarchs to regain the throne, after James II (Jacobus in Latin) was forced to flee and abdicate the British throne in 1689.
In the US, liberal often implies a left-wing stance that supports increased governmental intervention and Spending on social welfare. mandate A legal command or commission, especially a commission in which a country was authorized by the former League of Nations to govern a particular territory in the interests of its inhabitants.
See also trusteeship. manifesto A written declaration of policy and goals, especially one issued by a political party or movement.
Marxist Term applied to a variety of doctrines that trace their origin to the German-born philosopher and social thinker Karl Marx.
Marx himself believed that he had discovered laws of history that proved that eventually capitalism would collapse and be replaced by communism.
Monophysitism The belief that Jesus Christ has only one nature (with his divine nature absorbing his human nature], rather than having two separate natures.
A minority view in the Christian Church, it is upheld mainly by the Coptic Church and other churches with their roots in the ancient Near East. multilateral Involving three or more governments , especially with reference to treaties and agreements.
A people defined by shared historical, cultural, and linguistic ties, whether constituting a single independent country or not. nationalism A political attitude of strong support for the interests and future of one’s nation. nationalization The taking of private property into public ownership by the state, especially ona large scale, such as an entire industry.
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization, an international military alliance of Western powers established in 1949.
Nazism The doctrines of the National Socialist party, in power in Germany under Adolf Hitler 1933-45.
Nazism was similar to fascism, but in addition was racist, believing in the supremacy of a supposed “Aryan” race of which the German people were allegedly the purest” representatives.
See also totalitarianism. neoclassicism Any cultural movement in which styles or ideals of aclassical period are revived.
More specifically, an 18th-century movement in European art and literature that was inspired by renewed interest in the values of ancient Greek and Roman art. neocolonialism The situation in which a powerful, developed country has influence over a less developed country [especially a former colony] in ways that are seen as similar to aspects of actual colonialism. oligarchy A political system where a few powerful, and often rich, individuals combine to rule a country.
Many former communist countries [see communism) were also effectively oligarchies, with communist party officials monopolizing power. order In the Christian Church, a body of people adhering to a particular rule or way of life that is often set down by an individual founder—orders of monks, for example.
The phrase in orders” means occupying a clerical position, such as priest or bishop.
Orthodox Church A major group of Christian Churches that descend from a split with the Western Church that occurred in 1054 ce.
Prominent in Eastern and southeastern Europe, it includes several different traditions and national Churches.
It is often implied that a populist simply tells people what they want to hear.
Praetorian prefect A high administrative office in the Roman Republic and Empire, deriving originally from the headship of the state bodyguards—the Praetorian Guard. pre-Colombian Relating to the cultures of the Americas before their contact with European explorers and conquerors.
Protestantism Any of the forms of Christianity resulting from the Reformation of the 16th century and afterward, in which allegiance Is no longer offered to the pope in Rome. puppet state A country that, though nominally independent, is actually under the control of another country. purge A term, usually associated with totalitarian systems (see totalitarianism], for the expulsion of people from an organization who are regarded as undesirable by the organization's leadership.
The term was later applied to religious groups with similar views outside the Church of England, and then eventually to any way of thinking that was seen as disapproving of pleasure and indulgence. putsch A violent attempt to overthrow a government. recession A reduction in the economic activity of a country, though less serious than a depression.
Arecession Is often defined as having occurred when economic output has declined for two successive three-month periods.
Reformation The Christian reform movement of the 16th century, in which many churches and individuals broke from the Western Church headed by the pope in Rome.
Renaissance A cultural phase of European history, centered on Italy in the 15th and early 16th centuries, that involved the rediscovery of the cultural achievements of ancient Greece and Rome.
This in turn became the inspiration for new ideas in literature and the creation of new artworks. reparations A term that came into use after World War | for payments made by the defeated countries to the victors, regarded as being in recompense for their aggression.
An older term for the same thing is indemnity. republic Any country not headed by a hereditary king, prince, or emperor.
Modern republics are usually headed by presidents and range from democratic regimes to dictatorships. republicanism Support for a republic as the preferred form of government.
In British history, the Restoration refers to the return of the British monarchy in 1660, after the English Civil War and Commonwealth, and the years following this.
Roman Church The Western branch of the Christian Church, which developed under the leadership of the pope in Rome, and in which church services are, or were, conducted in Latin.
Romantic Movement A many-sided cultural and artistic movement in Europe that reached its peak in the early 19th century.
It included an increased appreciation of nature and an emphasis on feelings and emotions in contrast to reason. royal minority The period when the monarch of a country is still a child . satrap A provincial governor in the ancient Persian Empire; also, a subordinate ruler generally. scholasticism The approach to reasoning and knowledge that is characteristic of centres of higher education during the Christian Medieval period. sect A religious group or organization that holds distinctive or nonstandard beliefs.
The term is often used to imply that the views held are doubtful, or even heretical. sectarian Displaying hostile attitudes to people from a different social grouping, especially those adhering to a different denomination of the same religion. secular Nonreligious. segregation Separation, in particular separation of one race from another within a racist or apartheid social system. self-determination Situation in which a people or nation are able to choose their own government, or to govern themselves.
The upper legislative house of the United States Congress, or of other legislatures that are similarly organized. serf A peasant living in a condition of semislavery, with no right to leave the land of the landowner for whom he or she works. shogun A hereditary commander-in-chief in Japan.
For various periods in Japanese history, shoguns, rather than the emperor, held the real power. social democracy Formerly another term for socialism or communism.
In modern usage it refers to a moderate form of socialism that is compatible with democracy and liberalism. socialism Term used for a variety of left-wing ideologies and movements that all involve some government intervention in society and the economy, with the goal of redistributing wealth for the common good.
Soviet Bloc Another name for the Eastern Bloc. speculation An economic term for the buying and selling of shares, or other tradeable assets, for the purpose of making a profit if the price rises or falls in the way that the speculator predicts. state An independent country.
The governmental apparatus of a country. stock exchange An organization that allows trading in shares of companies, government bonds, and other financial assets. suffrage The right to vote, especially in a public election.
Also, the supremacy of one state over a less powerful one. synod A church council or assembly. technocrat A member of a technical elite.
A tribune of the people was one of two officials appointed to protect the rights of the common people against the nobility.
A military tribune was an officer attached to a legion. triumph An official victory procession in ancient Rome. trusteeship Situation in which a territory Is administered by a particular country on behalf of the United Nations, for the benefit of the territory's inhabitants.
See also mandate. usurp To seize power from another in a manner regarded as wrongful.
The name, meaning nowhere,” comes from the title of a book by Sir Thomas More, published in 1516.
The word Utopian has come to be applied to any impracticably idealistic plan. vassal In the feudal system [see feudalism), a person holding land from a superior, in return for offering them allegiance; also used more generally for aservant or subordinate. viceroy A person who governs as the deputy of a monarch in acolony, region, or province.
Viet Cong The political and military organization that carried out guerrilla warfare and other activities during the Vietnam War.
Zionist A supporter of the creation of an independent state for the Jewish people.
Also, following the creation of Israel in 1948, a strong supporter of Israel’s continued existence as a Jewish state.
INDEX Page numbers in bold indicate main treatments of a topic; numbers in /talic refer to illustrations.
DK India would like to thank Dharini, Sreshtha Bhattacharya, Archana Ramachandran, Anita Kakar, and Vineetha Mokkil for editorial assistance; Pooja Verma, Ira Sharma, Priyabrata Roy Chowdhury, and Niyati Gosain for design assistance.
Victoria & Albert Museum, London 198bl; Wallace Collection, London 214bl; Courtesy of the Warden and Scholars of New College, Oxford 131b; © Trustees of the Watts Gallery, Compton, Surrey 301tr.
Take steel as the key link for a leap forward in all fields, Tianjin People’s Fine Arts Publishing House, 1958; offset, 53 x 77 cms, inv. nr.
Martin Bond 275crb; Jean-Loup Charmet 282bc; Eye of Science 429bc; John Greim 283bl; NASA 436clb; Science Source 208tr.
Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, Imperial Japanese ~SPOrMRG~ Navy, Official portrait, by Shugaku Homma, 1943 [inv NH 79462-KN) 393cb.
