When they nearly blew us up Share this:Click to share on Twitter Click to share on Facebook Click to print By Dr.
July 30, 2018 at 7:34m.If you were born around 1950 or earlier, you probably remember where you were in October of 1962.
Coincidentally, the last presidential debate for 2012 just happens to be on foreign policy, and is scheduled for Oct.nd — 50 years to the day since President Kennedy’s dramatic television address to the nation, which led to a week of heightened anxiety, to put it mildly, among the people of the world.
It is to be hoped that candidates Obama and Romney will be asked to weigh in on the lessons learned from 1962.
The crisis developed out of the conflict over the Cuban revolution of 1959.
The Kennedy administration pulled out all the stops in an effort to bring down the new Castro regime.
Trade sanctions, sabotage, assassinations and finally the Bay of Pigs invasion were launched in an effort to roll back Castro’s revolutionary government which then took a sharp turn to the left and turned to the Soviet Union for support.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, acutely aware of United States nuclear Jupiter missiles based close to Soviet territory in Turkey, approved sending military aid, troops and nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Khrushchev’s goals were to protect his new Cuban allies and to achieve nuclear deterrence vis a vis the United States on the cheap.
When a United States spy plane discovered missile sites under construction on Oct., the crisis rapidly escalated.
When Kennedy spoke to the nation, he demanded that the missiles be removed, and imposed a naval blockade of the island.
We know now that the crisis was a classic example of misperception and misunderstanding — the fog of war in action.
Both sides thought, incorrectly, that they understood the situation as well as the motives of the other side.
It seems clear in retrospect that the president was poorly served by his top military advisers.
Secret White House tapes made during the crisis reveal that the Joint Chiefs of Staff were unanimous in pressing for war, and hurled charges of “appeasement” in an effort to intimidate President Kennedy into launching an attack on Cuba.
At one point, after the president left the room, the chiefs can be heard mocking him.
It later emerged that both sides had grossly misunderstood the situation, and nuclear war had been averted more by accident than competent statesmanship.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy’s secretary of defense, later became one of many former nuclear warriors who worked to abolish those weapons worldwide.
What is perhaps most alarming about the crisis is that both United States and Soviet leaders behaved as if the addition of nuclear weapons to the mix had little impact on their handling of the crisis.
In a mind-boggling display of hubris, they allowed a dispute over a transient tactical advantage to put at risk the fate of the entire planet, both the natural world and human generations yet unborn.
So on this, our 50th anniversary of being more lucky than good, let us make a commitment to rid the earth of nuclear weapons.
He is now in Eureka helping Veterans for Peace restore the Golden Rule, the very first anti-nuclear sailing vessel.
Arnold Oliver The Times-Standard Join the ConversationWe invite you to use our commenting platform to engage in insightful conversations about issues in our community.
