Cover Story Missu cnsis CUBAN Many factors led to the confrontation—and more was involved than simple Soviet belligerence.
None of us knew if the world was going to come to a fiery nuclear end—and certainly enough weapons existed to make that feasible—or whether cooler heads would somehow prevail.
In any case, we were told it was all the fault of a belligerent Soviet Union intent on planting nuclear bases close enough to annihilate the United States population.
During those harrowing days the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than it has ever since.
The genesis of the crisis was the introduction of Soviet ICBMs into Fidei Castro's Cuba, missiles capable of striking all the major cities in the United States except on the West Coast.
Lost in the media noise and public fear was the fact that the 30 MILITARV HISTORY NOVEMBER 2006 Cover Story Soviets had never before transferred any power after overthrowing dictator Fulof their small missile force from their own gencio Batista in 1959, he turned the territory to any of the Warsaw Pact allies, let alone Cuba. sunny island into a totalitarian Communist bastion.
An alarmed Decades later, many historians believe that the Cuban Missile President Eisenhower began taking steps to topple Castro.
To Crisis is at least as rooted in United States election politics as in any nuEisenhower, an invasion seemed in order.
The pointman for the clear ambitions of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. invasion was Vice President Richard Nixon, then running for First, though, a short recap of the 13-day crisis, October 15president against Senator John F Kennedy. 28, 1962, is in order.
The United States took forceful military steps for a potential invasion of Cuba, mobilizing thousands of ORIGINALLY NDCON PLANNED a covert operation headed by troops as well as naval vessels, staging them off the Florida the CIA, to coincide with the closing days of the 1960 campaign. coast.
The United States Navy put a quarantine into effect that would This proved impractical at the time, however, and the exilestop further Soviet ships heading to Cuba from delivering their backed invasion had to be pushed back until after the Novemmilitary cargos.
Overhead, American U-2 photoreconnaissance ber election. aircraft kept a close watch as the Soviets went ahead with the By the time Kennedy became president, Cuban exiles had construction of their missile bases.
The crisis simmered, then begun training at a secret base in Guatemala called Camp Trax. came to a dangerous head when a Soviet anti-aircraft battery An airstrip at Retalhuleu was built for the invasions air force, shot down a U-2 taking pictures of the missile and a secret radio station called Radio Swan was buildup.
Despite heavy pressure from his military established to broadcast propaganda into Cuba. advisers.
President John F Kennedy did not order The operation was scheduled for late March 1961 a retaliatory strike against the offending Soviet batAfter the Bay ef at the town of Trinidad along Cuba's southern tery.
Instead, Kennedy resorted to behind-thescenes dealing with certain trusted Russian interPigs, settling the coast.
However, the site was canceled, and a new and now infamous landing point called the Bay of mediaries while threatening an imminent American invasion if the missiles were not rescore became Pigs was chosen instead.
It was thought that when the exiles landed in Cuba, a spontaneous revolt moved.
Premier Khrushchev decided to end the Bohby Kennedy's among the mass of the population would take crisis and took the missiles out of Cuba.
As part of place, resulting in Castro's downfall. the unwritten deal with the Soviets, the United personal baby.
The invasion force left its base at Puerto Cabezas, States removed from Turkey its Jupiter missiles, Nicaragua, on April 17, 1961.
Shortly before the which had been targeted against the Soviet heartlanding took place, a numberof bombers, based in land.
Under American naval and aerial supervision, the missiles Nicaragua and llown by exiles, attacked the small Cuban air were crated aboard Soviet cargo ships and taken back to Russia. force.
But the raid failed to take out all of Castro's planes, and So we were told. the remaining aircraft created havoc at the landing site, killing Unknown to the American public at the time of the crisis hundreds of exiles and sinking their supply ships offshore.
The however, the Kennedy administration was conducting a secret CIA asked Kennedy to call in an airstrike from American ships war to take down Fidel Castro by any means possible.
More than 1,000 men were Operation Mongoose, this secret war ran from 1961-1963 and captured and imprisoned for almost a year before being ranwas a full-court press by all branches of the American military, somed for medical supplies and other essentials.
A secondary part of Operation Mongoose 1962, speaking before the now freed members of the Bay of Pigs was the CIA-Mafia plot to kill Castro that began during the last invaders at Miami's Orange Bowi, President Kennedy promised days of President Dwight D Eisenhower's administration.
Still, that their flag would someday fly in a free Havana. it was not even these plans The Bay of Pigs defeat to kill Castro that led the was the first major drubCuban leader to ask the bing for the young Kennedy Soviet Union for protecadministration, and the tion from what Castro and Kennedy brothers did not the Soviets believed was an take it lightly.
Kennedy set imminent invasion of Cuba in motion operations to by the United States.
The oust Castro, including the story of how the Cuban use of the mob and the Missile Crisis began had its CIA's covert/overt plans in roots in Operation MonOperation Mongoose.
In goose—part theater, part the fallout from the bundeadly business. gled Bay of Pigs invasion, By far the most importhe president ordered an tant event leading Presiinternal investigation into dent Kennedy to go ahead what went wrong.
Declaswith Operation Mongoose sified a number of years was the ill-fated Bay of Pigs Cuban leader Fidel Castro, lower right, observes counter-invasion ago, this report offers a invasion of Cuba in April operations from a tank near Playa Giron, Cuba, during the Bay of Pigs complete internal critique 1961.
When Castro came to invasion by some 1,500 Cuban exiles on April 17,1961. of the operation, from be32 MILITARV HISTORY NOVEMBER 2006 ginning to end.
Another recently declassified memo, written by large amounts of guns and ammunition, they were blocked by CIA officer George McManus, makes it stiikingly clear that poUnited States Customs Service agents from sailing their small ship, Sally, litical motivations drove the attempts to take out Castro.
The to Cuba for hit-and-run raids. political stigma of the Bay of Pigs folly drove Attorney General Attorney General Robert Kennedy made it clear that OperaRobert Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara tion Mongoose carried top priority in the United States government.
McManus' memo lays out in stark detail why operation had many different components and units—an air the Kennedy administration wanted to get back at Castro—lo arm, fast-moving boats owned or leased by the CIA, storefront seek revenge for the Bay of Pigs fiasco and to ensure Kennedy's dummy corporations where the only things that worked on site reelection in 1964. were the phones, as well as separate units for intelligence, logistics and mail.
One of the main dummy coiporations was THE OFFICIAL CIA PLAN for the removal of Castro was run Gibraltar Steam Ship Corporation, which was actually the entirely out of the White House.
As a clandestine CIA project, agency's parent for all its seagoing operations.
The ""kinsman"" it was to be a plausibly deniable concept, one that could be of the agency's fast fleet of ships was called Ace Cartography discarded and denied in case something went wrong.
There was also next two years, from the spring of 1961 to the late summer and an underwater component, in which Cubans and Americans eaiiy fall of 1963, Operation Mongoose—closely supervised by were trained as frogmen to infiltrate Cuban harbors and attack Robert Kennedy—blossomed into a full-scale United States government boats in port.
These UDT operation. squads went by the fictitious name of Marine Engineering and A special group , or SGA, was created to oversee Training. the project and met on an almost daily basis.
Among the memWhile all these secret machinations were going on, the Cuban bers of the SGA were Robert Kennedy; McNamara; General intelligence service was buzzing with activity.
Castro had itifilMaxweU Taylor; presidential advisers McGeoi^e Bundy, Roswell trated hundreds of agents-in-place among the hundreds of thouGilpatrick, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Richard Goodwin; and sands of Cuban exiles who had fled Havana after he took power.
The man Very little got by the ears and wallets of Castro's agents, who put in overall charge of Operation Mongoose was Brig.
Gen. mingled at the bars, restaurants and shopping centers in Miami Edward Lansdale, a veteran of antiguerrilla campaigns in and the Keys, picking up all sorts of vital information concemthe Philippines and Vietnam in the ing anti-Castro activities.
His flamboyant style attracted Castro's intelligence people may not the attention of journalists, among have known the full scope of Operathem Graham Greene, a British writer tion Mongoose, they surely knew that who modeled the main character in the American government was up to his novel The Quiet American after something.
At the same time, on mainLansdale. land Cuba, thousands of Castro oppoLansdale teamed up with Bill nents were systematically rounded up Harvey, a tough James Bond-type CIA for questioning, and arrests were comofficer, to get all phases of Operation monplace.
Harvey tration was laying down the law on wanted to use traditional CIA methods Mongoose.
Hundreds of agents set up shop cess will require decisive, United States military intervention."" there, including dozens of dummy or fi ont organizations.
The By the latter part of 1962, de.spite the buildup, there was no CIAs headquarters was dubbed Zenith Technical Services Inc. military success in toppling Castro.
Small-scale raids had been in realit>' it was the jumping-off point for raids into Cuba. carded out, including attacks on oil installations, maritime cenA fleet of high-powered boats operated out of the Florida tere and even run-ins with Russian ships at dockside in Cuban Keys, smuggling raiders into Cuba, where they would attack harboi-s.
That spring the United States Navy and Marine Corps had gone Cuban military installations.
For example, a stoty in the December force landed off the beaches at Vieques Island, using the same 5, 1962, edition of the Miami Herald reported the arrest of 10 tactics they would need in a real assault on Cuba.
By this time, American mercenaries operating out of Sombrero and Castro knew that the United States, by means of these covert Marathon keys.
Dressed in battle fatigues and supplied with and oven military actions, was bent on his removal by force— NOVEMBER 2006 MILITARV HISTORY 33 '^ %''.\v\ PAD w i l H ERECTOR LAUNCH PAD WITH ERECTOiv MISSILE READY BIDGS OXtDIZEK VEMiCltS While high-altitude Lockheed U-2s provided photographic evidence of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, it was photographs such as this, taken by tow-level reconnaissance aircraft operating out of Key West, that delivered the most detail. thus his frantic calls for Soviet military assistance. killing two sailors near the town of Santa Clara de Norte.
Wilh American military pressure slowly building around Internal CIA reports said that Castro expected an AmericanCuba, Khmshchev met with his top military advisers in April led invasion of Cuba during the summer of 1962.
Ameriinvasion after September; it said any danger of an American can Jupiter missiles were operational just across the border in attack on Cuba would be over by then.
By the end of the month, Khrushchev had talked his top military and political advisers AS SEPTEMBER WORE ON, the United States prepared miliinto taking the unprecedented step of sending their most powtary options for an attack while Cuban exiles were raiding harerful intermediate missiles to Cuba in response to Kennedy's bors and other military and economic installations on the island secret war against Castro. nation.
Meanwhile the CIA was monitoring the arrival of a large While the war games were visibly underway, CIA-backed exile number of Russian freighters arriving in Cuba, including Omsk, raids into Cuba grew in scope and intensity.
On August 24, 1962, which docked at the port of Casilda on September 8.
Cuban exiles aboard two small boats slipped into Havana A lew weeks before, French intelligence officer Philippe de Harbor and moved close to the Hotel Icar in Miramar province.
Voskjoli told CIA Director John McCone that his agency had reIntelligence reports said that Castro had often frequented the ceived credible reports of the anival of ceitain types of Soviet hotel.
He also reported the deployment of thousands rounds hit the hotel, but Castro, who was inside, managed to of Russian soldiers to man those missiles. survive the attack.
Two days later, another exile attack took place Kennedy decided to make a full-court press.
Three months before, members of far of Operation Mongoose took center stage in an October 16, the exile group Alpha 66 attacked a Cuban Coast Guard cutter.62, meeting chaired by Robert Kennedy and attended by GenMILITARY HISTORY NOVEMBER 2006 Cover Story eral Lansdale and other SGA members.
One action pj-essing the general dissatisfaction of the President with Operenvisioned as a part of Northwoods was to destroy an Ameriation Mongoose.
He pointed out that the operation had been can warship in Guantanamo Bay and blame it on the Cubans.
A under way for a year, that the results were discouraging, tbat Washington-initiated wave of ten or was then supposed to sweep there had been no acts of sabotage, and that even the one which over innocent Americans in the Miami and Washington areas, had been attempted had failed twice.
These crimes would be blamed on had been noticeable improvement during the year in the colCuba.
Other despicable actions allegedly considered included lection of intelligence but that other actions had failed to influthe deliberate sinking of boatloads of Cuban refugees seeking ence significantly the course of events in Cuba.
The CIA wanted to Cuban MiGs had destroyed a numberof American What both Robert Kennedy and his brother did aircraft operating in international waters.
When not know was that in reaction to the Cuba project, hijack an American President Kennedy was shown the blueprints for the Soviet Union began secretly to send thou.sands Operation Northwoods, he turned it down. of militai-y ""ad\isers,"" Mikoyan-Gurevich MiGs and airliner and ciaim From the summer and through the fall of 1962, ICBMs to Cuba in defense of that country.
It now can clearly be stated that the 1962 missile crisis was Castro shot it United States intelligence had been keeping a close watch on the steady stream of those heavily loaded Soviet a direct result of the Kennedy's secret war against down.
Reports from the CIAs Castro. agents inside Cuba came back of large-scale Soviet At the height of Operation Mongoose, the CIA said no. missile deployments, as well as the presence of and the military devised numerous clandestine opthousands of Russian technicians to man the miserations aimed at destroying and creating havoc siles.
Even prior to the Soviets erecting their misthroughout the Cuban population and economy.
That all changed when, on October 16, Operation Bingo, an audacious plan prepared by the CIA that 1962, a U-2 returned with proof that the Soviets had covertly had little chance of succeeding.
The concept was to cause an insent long-range missiles to Cuba capable of hitting the United cident—prepared by the United States—that looked like a States.
Such an During the 13-day crisis that followed, the United States attack, if genuine, would give the United States reason to retalplaced a naval quarantine around Cuba, threatened to sink iate against Cuba.
The blueprint for this operation would be a Soviet ships that crossed the quarantine line, and brought thoulive firefight right outside the base during which, upon hearing sands of troops streaming into Florida for a possible invasion. the noise, the troops inside Guantanamo would think a real Unknown to the United States at the time was that the Soviets attack by Cuban forces had begun.
The United States would had in place a number of tactical nuclear weapons which could then make a counterattack upon the phony Cuban forces, thus creating a pretext for going to war against the Castro government.
The plan was to convince the Castro government that American naval forces, then in the Caribbean for the landing of the Mercuiy space capsule canying an American astronaut, were only a cover—that the real purpose was an invasion of Cuba.
Operation Free-Ride, which was meant to create unrest and dissension among the Cuban people.
One of the ways this program was to be implemented was to diop valid Pan American Airways tickets to destinations such as Mexico, Venezuela and other parts of South America to the Cuban people.
During a certain period, any Cuban who wanted to leave the counThe United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adiai Stevenson (seated at curved table at try would supposedly be able to do so, far right], challenges Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin [seated at curved table at far paid for by Uncle Sam. left] to admit to the United Nations Security Council that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba.
NOVEMBER 2006 MILITARY HISTORY 35 Cover Story Removal of the Soviet missiles vi/as monitored every step of the way, from the leveling of the sites to the shipboard loading onto freighters such as Bonronec, photographed sailing out of Havana on November 9,1962, loaded with shrouded mobile missile launchers. be used in the event of an American invasion.
When JFK was killed in were employed, thousands of Americans soldiers would be Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, the United States presidents perwiped out as they landed on Cuban shores. sonal emissary was meeting with Castro in Havana.
That same During the height of the crisis, the CIA landed an unauthoday a Cuban agent working for the CIA, Rolando Cubela, was rized team of agents in Cuba h^om a two-man sub to reconnoimeeting with his CIA contact officer in Paris, planning another ter with the underground and report on the Soviet buildup. assassination attempt on Castro.
The inspector general's report When it was learned that CIA men were in Cuba, frantic comon the CIA-Mafia links describes that final meeting. munications were issued from Washington to the team inside Given what we now know, the placement of Russian missiles Cuba.
Unfortunately, the CIA men could nol be easily retrieved. in Cuba was never the simple act of belligerence it was touted No harm was done, however, and the team members eventuaUy as by the news media and official United States government sources.
Kennedy brothers' secret war against Castro to preserve John The crisis ended when Premier Khrushchev decided to Kennedy's reelection viability, with its goal of removing him remove the missiles in exchange for a secret pledge by the from office by whatever means possible, surely helped push United States to remove its outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
While smallYet the popular myth persists of evil Russians armed and at the scale hit-and-run raids continued into the fall of 1963, no apdoorstep in 1962, bent on attacking America with nuclear preciable damage to the Cuban state took plaee.
After the erisis, JFK decided to reduce tensions with the Peter Kross is the author of The Encyclopedia of World War II Soviet Union.
The The following fall, the administration received tentative feelDeclassified Story of John F Kennedy and the Cuban Missile ers from Castro wanting to know if Kennedy would be willing Crisis, by Warren Hinckle, William Turner and Robert Smith.
