The Center is specialized in historical research in the Cold War era, focusing on the former Soviet Bloc.
From the outset the Center has been contributing to the flourishing of the ""new Cold War history"" aimed at transforming the previous one-sided approach based primarily on Western sources, finally into a really international discipline through the systematic exploration of the once top secret documents found in the archives in the former Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc countries.
All this was made possible by the internship project of the Center which was started in 2009.
Since 2010, the Center has also organized an annual two-day English language international student conference on the history of the Cold War, with the participation of BA, MA and PhD students.
Our Center proudly presents these excellent research results by motivated students and young would be scholars.
The Institute of World Economy and Politics and the Soviet foreign policy Andrea BORELLI Introduction The literature available on the Institute of World Economy and Politics has reconstructed its role within the Soviet State.
During my studies, I have recreated relations between Stalin’s power system and the Institute through the analysis of its members especially in times of cooperation between the Soviet Union and Western democracies in which pro-Western positions emerged in Soviet Union.
Furthermore, this paper is of significance because these documents are not yet available to the international scientific community.
The research is based on the methodological guidelines suggested by Anna Di Biagio.
Moreover, the works of Silvio Pons regarding the relationship between ideology 1 G Duda, Jenö Varga und die Geschichte des Instituts für Weltwirtschaft und Weltpolitik in Moskau 19211970.
Zu den Möglichkeiten und Grenzen wissenschaftlicher Auslandsanalyse in der Sowjetunion, Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1994; O Eran, Mezhdunarodniki an assessment of professional expertise in the making of Soviet foreign policy, Turtle Dove Press, Tel Aviv, 1979.
L’Istituto di economia e politica mondiale e la politica estera sovietica, Aracne, Roma. 2 and Realpolitik during the Stalin era have been central for my research.
In regards to the years of 1928 to 1948, I have shared the thesis on the ""specificity"" of Stalinism4 and the idea that Stalin's regime represented a driving force for the modernization of Russia.
In the last three years, I looked in greater depth at those cultural norms and values, a contradictory but effective mix of nationalism and socialist internationalism, which characterized the Stalinist leadership.
Furthermore, during my work, the study of the Soviet political culture and the relationship between the intellectual world and the leadership in the Soviet Union has been useful.
My hypothesis is that this relationship has determined, in the past as well as today, the Kremlin’s choice between a policy of cooperation or isolation toward the Western countries.
For those reasons, the history of the Institute of World Economy and Politics helps to show that the Soviet political culture combined with the perception of external threats played a decisive role in the elaboration and legitimization of the foreign policy of the Kremlin.
The miroviki7 and Eugene Varga The Institute of World Economy and Politics was born as a center for studies of international relations to help the Kremlin in 1924.
Rothstein was a member of the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, Narkomindel, and was the head of a bureau that studied international relations.
Originally it’s written in Russian as мировики 8 Institut Mirovogo Chozjaistva i Mirovoj Politiki”, in ‘Izvestija’, 19 December 1924 3 in 1924.
For example, Trotsky wrote the first article published by the Institute’s journal.
During the Stalinist power consolidation, after the defeat of the opposition in the party, the function and role of the Institute changed.
At the end of 1927, Eugene Varga was named Director of the Institute and members close to Trotsky were expelled.
In the 1930s, the Institute played a crucial role in the ideological justification of foreign policy and in collecting information about the capitalist world.
For example, during the Great Terror, his personal relationship with Stalin allowed the survival of the Institute.
Stalin intervened directly to protect Varga and his colleagues and allowed the spread of the miroviki’s non-dogmatic interpretation of the world political and economic system with the goal of justifying his choices in foreign policy.
Most of the works on Varga tend to describe him either as a loyal advisor of Stalin or as a non-dogmatic thinker.
Regarding to the first interpretation, Varga was never accused of treason, but between 1947 and 1948 he was persecuted because he was Jewish.
Regarding the second trend, Varga was considered as a non-dogmatic thinker because he showed also, his opposition to the Stalin's foreign policy.
This article will aim to go beyond these two views, framing Varga's contributions in the wider debate about the formation of the Soviet foreign policy during Stalin's regime.
Eugene Varga grew up and studied in Budapest, where he was born in 1879 in a Jewish family.
During the shortlived Hungarian Soviet Republic, the political regime established in 1919, he became 9 Aran, Fond 354, Opis 1, Delo 22.
Varga”, in A Masoero e A Venturi (a cura di), Il pensiero sociale russo.
The Information Bureau was renamed as “Bureau Varga”, demonstrating the prestige achieved by the economist during the 1920s.
However, the most important achievement for Varga’s career came with the Institute of World Economy and Politics.
Here, Varga found a proper environment to discuss his thesis with a team of highly specialized colleagues.
In 1931, Rothstein and many of his colleagues were expelled and the Institute, led by Varga, lost its connection with the Narkomindel.
The Institute’s members became the miroviki , a group of scholars highly specialized in the study of capitalist economy, politics and ideological propaganda.
In 1936, the Institute entered the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union, which was established that same year.
The miroviki and Varga shared a multicultural background, the knowledge of various foreign languages, and an open-minded attitude towards capitalist dynamics.
During Stalin's regime, they represented an important part of the Russian intellectual world quite different from the nineteenth-century intelligentsia.
The miroviki were not just strongly influenced by the political regime, as occurred in the past, but also they played an organic role in the new state.
This status as both scholars and members of the Soviet bureaucratic pyramid made them less independent than most Western intellectuals.
For this reasons, they cannot be considered an independent political group in the traditional sense, and they could not criticize or directly influence the foreign policy of the regime.
In several ways, they contributed to a deeper and nondogmatic understanding of the development of capitalism and over the international relations.
During the 1930s, the Institute organized a three-year course about these topics.
Many graduates worked at the Institute or at other Soviet academies and state institutions.
The miroviki were the first official think tank on international relations in the Soviet Union.
In contrast to most of the Soviet political elite, Varga and the miroviki maintained a more positive attitude towards Western Europe during the Stalin era, shared by the prerevolutionary intelligentsia, and consequently, with the rise of the Cold War, they faced the consequences of these sympathies.
When Stalin consolidated his dictatorship in 1927 and 1928, the catastrophic interpretation became the official one.
Consequently, during the first half of the 1930s, scholars of the capitalist world, under the pressure of Stalin's regime, adopted a more dogmatic view of international relations.
However, in 1934, with the rise of ""collective security"" campaign and Popular Fronts against Fascism, Varga and his colleagues could again advocate pro-Western positions.
In these ways, they legitimatized collaboration between the Soviet Union and ""bourgeois democracies"" against Hitler’s Germany.
After the agreement with Nazi Germany, the Institute reworked the previous analysis and played a propagandist role against the Western democracies, but this situation changed with the outbreak of the Great Patriotic War, when Varga and his colleagues proposed again a pro-Western position.
These pro-Western opinions were not only a response to the new international situation, but also the natural development of the positions that the miroviki had already proposed during their career.
They were convinced that the integration of the USSR into the PostWar international system would be the natural and better choice for the Kremlin.
From the Second World War to Cold War 6 In 1946, Varga published his most famous work, Changes in the Economy of Capitalism as a result of the Second World War, a collection of essays from the journal of the Institute.
The analysis was based on the concrete observation of the ongoing economic changes that occurred during the War in the global scenario.
According to Varga, the analogies between Soviet and Western models were progressively growing.
In particular, the emerging role of the state in the capitalist economies looked like the crucial element shared between the two systems.
First, it would facilitate the transformation of the capitalist economic model into a socialist one.
Second, the USSR would be integrated into the new world system, contributing, for example, to the creation of a new international organization for global security.
This transition would reflect also the national peculiarities and respect political pluralism without being forced into the Soviet model.
Varga and his colleague’s analysis implied a peaceful evolution of capitalism, which contradicted Lenin's notion of the ""inevitability of the war” under capitalism.
The miroviki suggested that not just peaceful coexistence would be possible, but also the cooperation and integration between socialist and capitalist states.
In 1946, it was remarkable that those ideas were not censored, and it suggests the persistence of some cultural openness and pluralism in the post-war Soviet intelligentsia and establishment about the future of international relations.46 was a chaotic year for the Soviet relationship with Western countries which was marked by ""insecurity"" across the entire decision-making process in foreign policy.
Varga, Izmeniia v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroy mirovoy voyny, Gosudartvennoe izdatel'stvo politicheskoj literatury, Moskva, 1946 7 dogmatic project oriented Stalin's foreign policy and even a possible collaboration with the Western countries was seriously considered by the regime.
It is in this context that the non-dogmatic positions of miroviki can be framed.
Those theories could circulate because in 1946, they could still provide an ideological basis for possible cooperation between West and Soviet Union.
This kind of relationship between the Institute and Stalin implied that miroviki analysis began to be inconvenient as soon as the international and domestic situation changed at the beginning of the Cold War.
A public discussion of Varga’s book was organized for 7, 14 and 21 May 1947.14 Konstantin Ostrovitianov, a dogmatic soviet economist, criticized Varga and his colleagues for asserting that the struggle between socialist and capitalist countries had been halted during the Second World War.
In other words, the Institute was an anti-Soviet centre of capitalist propaganda.
In his reply, Varga defended himself and the miroviki from the accusation of being reformist, declaring, “I regret very much if the comrades who have expressed criticism here are of the opinion that I have insufficiently recognised my mistakes.
This meeting reflected the confusion and confrontation within the Soviet Union in the first months of 1947.
In 1947, the Marshall Plan and the foundation of Cominform changed the international situation.
Varga asked in vain for Stalin's help, but this did not change the destiny of the institute.
Nevertheless, Stalin may have reserved preferential treatment to Varga due to his reputation.
While most of the miroviki were deported to the Siberian Gulag, Varga was not arrested and he was allowed to work and live in Moscow.
Varga ‘Izmenenija v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroj mirovoj vojny’, in Mirovaja Chozjajstva i Mirovoe Politiki, Nº 11, 1947. 8 dismissed and some were arrested.
The Institute of World Economy and Politics was closed and re-organized under the umbrella of the new Institute of Economy.
There were no reasons to justify the work of the miroviki and to tolerate further ideological pluralism.
As shown by the statements from meetings held in Octorber of 1948 in the new institute, the works of Varga and his colleagues continued to be debated and harshly criticized by central authorities.
This point of view was incompatible with the Cold War and the participants of the meeting, including his former colleagues, attacked Varga.
Furthermore, during the discussion, the miroviki rejected their own analysis and admitted to being “reformist” and anti-Marxist.
At last, Varga repented publicly on 15 March 1949, when he published a letter to the editor in Pravda17.
The introduction of the Marshall Plan changed the state of international affairs.
Stalin re-adopted a more dogmatic interpretation of relations between the USSR and the Western countries, based on the idea that no collaboration could persist to justify the 15 “Ob Institute ekonomiki i Institute mirovogo chozjajstva i mirovoj politiki”, in Akademija Nauk v rešenijach Politbjuro CK RKP-VKP-KPSS 1922-1991, Sost.
Esakov, Moskva, Rosspen, 2000, p.1 16 «Voprosy Ekonomičeskie», Nº 8, 1948.
It must also be added that during the Second World War, the propaganda of the regime promoted feelings of patriotism, the need for national unity and Soviet superiority.
The Soviet identity became more and more flattered by Russian nationalism.
For example, let’s think about Zhdanov’s propaganda, approved by the dictator and orchestrated in 1946 against some segments of the intelligentsia accused of admiring Western countries during the Second World War.
As known, Zhdanov combined anti-cosmopolitan and anti-Semitic feelings.
Finally, in the second half of the 1940s, Stalin began to manage his power in even more paranoid and authoritarian ways than in the past.
He eliminated most of his closest allies such as Molotov, Mikojan and Vorošilov.
In this context, Varga's point of view was naturally no longer necessary to the regime.
Conclusion To sum up, the experience of Varga and the Institute of World Economy and Politics provides fresh insights to the debate about the role of ideology in Soviet political strategies and the origin of the Cold War.
The ideology played a crucial role at the beginning of the Cold War, but it was not monolithic.
The experience of Institute clearly shows that intellectual efforts to facilitate the cooperation with the Western countries existed in the 1940s, though the repression against Varga and his colleagues showed why pro-Western position remained marginal and couldn’t halt the advent of Cold War.
While in the 1930s and 1940s Stalin was interested in the miroviki’s nondogmatic analysis, he later condemned them when his strategic goals changed.
In these years, the regime began a propaganda campaign against the Jewish people accused of being pro-Western and of having anti-patriotic feelings.
The end of the Institute shows the transformation of the USSR and mentality of the establishment during Stalinism.
At the end of the war, after twenty years of Stalin's regime, the nation was dominated by nationalistic feelings.
However, part of Soviet intelligentsia rejected those feelings and proposed a collaborative foreign policy with the European countries.
At this time, Stalin condemned every interpretation of international relations that could weaken the balance of the bipolar order and the superiority of the Soviet system.
In other words, part of the Soviet political culture justified the collaboration with Western countries, but Stalin was unfit to oversee that dialogue.
Bettanin, F., Stalin e l’Europa la formazione dell’impero esterno sovietico , Carocci, Roma, 2010.
Bucharin e la rivoluzione bolscevica Biografia politica 1888\1938, Feltrinelli, Milano, 1975.
Di Biagio, A Sozdanie Kominforma, in Svesshaniia Kominforma, 1947.1948.1949.
Duda, G Jenö Varga und die Geschichte des Instituts für Weltwirtschaft und Weltpolitik in Moskau 1921-1970.
Zu den Möglichkeiten und Grenzen wissenschaftlicher Auslandsanalyse in der Sowjetunion, Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
Eran, O Mezhdunarodniki an assessment of professional expertise in the making of Soviet foreign policy, Turtle Dove Press, Tel Aviv, 1979.
The fall of Zhdanov and the Defeat of Moderation, 1946-1953, Ithaca, Cornell UP, 1982.
Kyung Deok Roh, Rethinking the Varga Controversy, 1941-1953 in Europe-Asia Studies, Vol., Nº 5, July 2011.
Mezhdunarodnyj fond demokratiia Rossiia XX Vek , Stalin i kosmopolitizm 19451953 dokumenty, ROOSPEN, Moskva, 2005.
Pons, S La rivoluzione globale storia del comunismo internazionale 1917-1991, Einaudi, Torino, 2012.
Litvinov lost peace 1941-1946, in “Journal of Cold War Studies”, 2, 2002.
Varga, E Izmeniia v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroy mirovoy voyny, Gosudartvennoe izdatel'stvo politicheskoj literatury, Moskva, 1946.
Metternich, Castlereagh and the Problems of Peace 1812-1822.21 There is a gossip that tells that when Kissinger chose this topic, his colleagues from the Department of Government were quite surprised and suggested him moving to the History Department.
I would like to note that history was at that time considered out of fashion.
In the post-war era, students and professors at most of the American Universities were mainly concerned with international relations, particularly between the Soviet Union and the United States.
That is why historical work focused on 19th century European policy seemed out-of-date.
In this essay all the quotations will be taken from the London edittion.
For his theory, Kissinger chose historical background but I think that the general rules illustrated by the 19th century examples could be applied to many other political situations.
Due to his German roots, he understood the mentality and the European way of conducting foreign policy.
Since Wilson’s political philosophy expressed by the League of Nations did not work on the European political stage, the Americans did not tolerate anything connected with the European way of foreign policy that minimized the development of nations and is based on the disagreement between countries.
The way Kissinger wrote his text indicated that his purpose was not to provide the reader with specific events taking place in Europe in the period 1812-1822.
Strictly historical data was marginalized in favor of philosophical arguments about the nature of international relations and historical events as examples.
Kissinger was also not overly interested in the biographies of Lord Castlereagh and Metternich.
He presented a fairly detailed picture of these politicians due to his individualistic view of the history, but more important for him were the problems these politicians confronted.
Furthermore, he chose after the post-Napoleonic period because he believed it reflected his own times.
At first glance, it seems that contrary to A World Restored, the topic of Nuclear Weapons was more fitting to modern trends.
Stephen Graubard 31 wrote in the biography of Henry Kissinger that “few who read Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy were at all aware of Kissinger’s other interests; not many who read that book thought it necessary to look also at A World Restored.
Had they done so, they would have noticed at once the extent to which Kissinger made use in the nuclear weapons volume of insights drawn from his early-nineteen-century researches.
Also, they conducted together the Harvard International Seminar in its inaugural year.
First sign of the direction was provided by Stalin in his speech, made on February 9, 1946.
He announced the policy based on the concept of permanent and inevitable conflict of interests between capitalism and communism.
Stalin’s speech explicitly determines the path of Soviet post-war policy.
Kennan was asked to write an interpretive analysis of Soviet Union policy, its motives and expectations of the Soviet behavior after implementation of their policy34.
His text was not only an indepth analysis of Soviet policy, but also a presentation on the historical background and motives of Soviet government actions, information about Russian society and communist ideology.
Moreover, it contained suggestions for the United States on how they should respond to inflexible and aggressive Stalin’s policy.
A Critical Appraisal of American National Security Policy during the Cold War], trans.
First of all, I will focus on his theory on the world powers and rivalry among them as shown in Napoleonic France.
Finally, I will compare these two texts and propose that Kissinger took certain basic ideas for his book from Kennan’s telegram.
I believe that actually he was writing about the features of Soviet Union through the example of France ruled by Napoleon.
A world restored The period of the French Revolution and Napoleonic era changed the European continent so drastically that a return to the old order was impossible.
They knew also that Europe was tired of wars and revolutions, which was why a return to a peaceful existence was the only way of conducting international policy.
At this moment Europe was ready for the first time in history to create an international order based on a balance of power.
Therefore, the main role of the Congress was the pursuit of the Iustum Equilibrum and legitimacy, as well as the fight against any manifestation of power.
Iustum Equilibrum means to stabilize the international arena with the balance of power, and its main proponent was the United Kingdom.
Legitimacy means regarding the internal order and lawful validation of the monarch’s power.
These two concepts are key for understanding the Congress of Vienna and Kissinger’s analysis in A World Restored.
He presented a bipolar vision of the international relations between European powers.
The theory states a group gives up its freedom for universal sovereignty resulting in a single ‘social body’ with each member as an integral part.
This “social body” creates a certain framework which becomes the general law.
Kissinger generalized this theory, replacing the unit with the state and society with the international community.
The rules that define international order became general framework accepted by the individual states.
If power undermines this international order, it was defined by Kissinger as revolutionary.
According to Kissinger, France in the Napoleonic era was a revolutionary power.
There have been others, such as France over a century, where all issues have been basically revolutionary”.43 In the book A World Restored, Kissinger built the opposition of Napoleonic France and two kinds of legitimate powers, conservative and continental Austria and isolationist, insular Great Britain.
I will not write about these powers because they need separate analysis.
However, it’s very interesting that even between two legitimate powers, Kissinger saw them in opposition, for different reasons, but still contrasting with each other.
I emphasize further that Kissinger based all his concepts on duality and contrasts.
Power Revolutionary Power Legitimate Power France Conservative, Continental Isolationist, Insular Austria Great Britain Back to my main topic, Napoleon’s problem was not fighting, but stabilizing the external and internal field.
After 1807, he already defeated Austria and Prussia and entered the alliance with Russia.
Now he had to create stability and maintain his power, which is when his problems started.
Stable order builds its internal structure on duty, which is followed by a notion of responsibility.
It is not connected with the individual, current ruler but with the individual sense of responsibility for the state.
On the contrary, loyalty is typical 44 Ibid., 16. 21 with revolutionary power.
In the structure based on loyalty, it is not important that power is right or wrong or its rules are good or bad for the state, but its power.
In this system, transferring power from one individual to another is a mortal danger to the stability of the state.
Internal order built on a sense of duty leads citizens to accept principles for the good of society.
In this case, transfer of power from one person to another, within the same model, does not threaten the stability of the state.
Napoleon established his power based on loyalty, and thus with the first defeat, he could lose everything.
Therefore, in order to maintain his power, he always referred to the possibility of force.
If he admitted this, it would mean that somebody was stronger in some aspect.
For revolutionary power, showing the limits is the beginning of its collapse.
Negotiations are part of the process of “finding own place”, which is why the art of diplomacy and negotiations are necessary for every state.
For revolutionary power, this again results in the sense of insecurity, and in consequence, the use of force.
Acceptance of this selflimitation does not fit into the revolutionary rulers vision of the world as he knows that it would lead to the recognition of other powers in a certain area.
Hence, a situation in which there is a natural threat to the revolutionary power would arise, which creates a sense of insecurity and again of the necessity of using force.
Revolutionary power Legitimate power Does not accept the framework of the Accepts the framework of the international order. international order.
Looking for a way to legitimize itself It becomes legitimate by social acceptance, or at least the major powers.
It creates a situation in which one It creates a situation where no country country feels absolutely safe and others feels completely safe, but there is not one fully insecure.
None of continuous revolution in the of the members of the international dissatisfied countries. structure is unhappy enough to lead to a social explosion.
Nothing can satisfy it besides complete It achieves relative satisfaction through elimination of the enemy. balance.
It considers itself to be all-powerful and Conflicts are possible, but they have their not limited.
War is conducted in the name of communication. preserving existing structures.
The only form of communication with The main form of communication with other countries are power, war or arms other countries is diplomacy. race.
In both cases, Napoleon came to the same point, a sense of insecurity, to a revolutionary state is resolved force.
Kissinger explains that the basic motive of using force is almost in any case insecurity.
To be sure, the motivation of the revolutionary power may well be defensive; it may well be sincere in its protestations of feeling threatened.
But the distinguishing feature of a revolutionary power is not that it feels threatened, such feeling is inherent in the nature of international relations based on sovereign states, but that nothing can reassure it.
Only absolute security, the neutralization of the opponent, is considered a sufficient guarantee, and thus the desire of one power for absolute security means absolute insecurity for all the others.
That is why revolutionary power will always use force as a remedy of all problems and at the same time every problem will be based on and cause the sense of insecurity.
The only satisfaction for the revolutionary power would be total security, which is excluded in the international order based on balance of the forces.
According to this philosophy, revolutionary government seeks to completely eliminate the enemy, because only this can ensure its security.
Kissinger stated that legitimate powers cannot apply the tools of diplomacy as methods of contacting the revolutionary power.
In this situation, diplomacy is replaced by war or an armaments race51 and some tools of diplomacy merely have supporting positions.
Before the final part of my essay, I would like to summarize this section by a diagram, presented below.
The sources of soviet conduct Kennan points out in his telegram a few main features of the Soviet Union.
The Soviets were building an internal order based on this antagonism by demonstrating to society an enemy could justify the need for a dictatorship.
The Soviet Union was also opposed to the logic of reason, which was replaced by the logic of force.
They did not want to help create the international order but instead wanted to defeat the enemies as the only method of defense, which therefore generates a constant feeling of insecurity.
The author of the telegram also raised the issue of the stability of power in the USSR, which was not yet validated.
This issue is connected with the transfer of power from 52 X , The Sources of Soviet Conduct, 570.
If there was a change in the object of the loyalty, than it was not sure that this new person would be accepted.
This loyalty of the Soviet society was based on the fact that nobody tried to officially undermine the authority of the government.
If anybody tried to undermine the authority, he would be defeated by force.
In any case, the United States should have supposed that the Soviets would use force.
It was best for anyone who had contact with the revolutionary power to assume that the force would be used.
Similarly, it was best to assume that the Soviet Union was able to use the force in any case.
We get a picture of a bipolar world, in which one force is trying to eliminate the other, creating a constant struggle.
Moreover, his vision of the nineteenth-century France is quite often compared to the Soviet Union in the early Cold War period.
We can suppose that the aim of Kissinger was to present that resemblance.
However, while reading A World Restored, it seemed that the author made a comparison of the two superpowers in the reverse order.
In my essay, I wanted to demonstrate similarities between Kissinger’s concept and Kennan’s analysis.
He just presented it in a historical background and developed his ideas.
Aside from obvious similarities such as the sense of insecurity, logic of force, loyalty in internal structure, central position of the authority, there is also one more argument for my thesis.
In his bibliography, we can find many books about Metternich and Castlereagh, but none about Napoleon.
The author of A World Restored declined reading the literature on the Vienna Congress, opting to read Metternich’s memoirs instead.
Finally, as he began to write his work, he read some basic literature about the Congress, but these books did not make a good impression on him.
While reading A World Restored, it appears that Kissinger had a theoretical thesis and tried to prove it on the historical example, using this data that fit the concept, without developing superfluous details.
For Kissinger, A World Restored is a form of dialogue with himself conducted in order to understand contemporary politics through the lens of history.
However, he did not mention in the article his approach during his studies at university.
Therefore, the question remains open whether Kissinger's vision stemmed only from the study of the Congress of Vienna or the study of the nineteenth-century combined with the knowledge of the concepts of Kennan.
Kissinger’s world was in almost every aspect bipolar, and thus it was intimately linked to the post-war period.
It is characteristic of revolutionary power and thus makes international relations unstable.
The only remedy is stabilization achieved by the balance of powers and coexistence of legitimated powers.
The Soviet Union in early post-war times exactly suited the theoretical concept created by Kissinger.
In both diagrams presented in this essay, we could classify the Soviet Union as a revolutionary power since from an American point of view, it was a revolutionary power.
In a world that has become a global village, there cannot exist a state that plays the role of a lonely island, and in this global village, a revolutionary power is even more dangerous.
Bibliography Bógdał-Brzezińska A., Ewolucja doktryny i koncepcji polityki zagranicznej Stanów Zjednoczonych u progu zimnej wojny, Historia.
Kaplan R D., Kissinger, Metternich, and Realism, The Atlantic Monthly, Vol.
Metternich, Castlereagh, and the Problems of Peace 1812-1822, London, 1957.
Museums Julia DANYLOW The Cold War was a basic condition of life for nations all around the globe from 1946 until 1990.
Scarcely anyone ever thought it possible to overcome the ideological rift between East and West, originating from the different political positions on post-war reconstruction in Europe.
When looking at historical museums, there seem to be different approaches to the topic of Cold War History; contrasting views from American, European and Asian nations exist, depending on their respective historical involvement and their coming to terms with the past.
In this article I will analyze four different United States American institutions – some being government funded, others products of public-private partnerships or completely privately funded.
Each institution represents one of the four characteristic aspects of historical culture – the academic, the aesthetical, the political and the economic dimensions.
The German historian Jörn Rüsen developed the prototype of this classification in 1994.
In concluding this paper, I will discuss some challenges of Cold War representation in museums in general.
Representing Identiy and diversity in a changing world 2. 33 illustrating social relations, identity and difference, knowledge and power, theory and representation of national and international culture.
The task of historical museums is to provide orientation for their visitors in time and space.
Historical narratives are constructed and deconstructed to vividly picture times long gone.
That is to say that exhibitions themselves create certain narratives of the past.
In my analysis the exhibitions are evaluated as sources, regarding their way of dealing with Cold War history and of their date of origin.
Museums and exhibitions representing Cold War history have different purposes.
Some are intended for the improvement of historical knowledge, others engage their visitors emotionally.
At the same time, public history projects depend on economic preconditions as well as political decisions.
These four aspects, the academic, the aesthetic, the political and the economic dimension are to be found in every exhibition – but their weighting differs.
In the mid-1990s the exhibition team developed a narrative called ""From Competition to Cooperation"", comparing the American space program to the Soviet one.
In the end, it did not prove possible to consolidate the perceptions and beliefs of war participants with the post-war research evidence gathered by professional historians.
The Space Race exhibition delivers a well-balanced display of American and Soviet space artifacts to illustrate the race to the moon and the effects of this technological competition on the military confrontation.
Bulky cabinets, poor lighting and uniformity of explanatory texts refer to the early 1980s.
In particular, the chapter on the Military origins of the Space Race and the former Nazi-German V-2 weapon, in addition to the NASM internal discussion about its presentation, serve as an example of successful transgression of historical-political boundaries.
At first the rocket was entitled “captured German V-2 missile as a prominent and persistent symbol of Space Age”.73 But the retaliatory weapon was intended by the Third Reich's leaders to demoralize the civilian population of the enemy.
Repainting the originally camouflaged V-2 in black and white, to present it as a space artifact, was thereby erasing its Nazi past.
Moreover, it was supplemented with further large objects (a Viking, a large liquid-fueled rocket and a WAC Corporal, the first American sounding record), which strengthened the purely technological nature of the presentation.
A new director and a little luck concerning the budget made an update of the V-2 representation in the Space Race gallery possible.
Using new research results, visitors are now informed as to how the weapon fell into the hands of the United States and about its role as the technological 72 Richard H Kohn, “History at Risk.
In addition to this, American businessman Ross Perot 76 donated some objects reflecting the Russian perspective.
The V-2 presentation, in its new form, features a great starting point for the topic of the Space Race.
That is why Space Race is a good example for a scientific-based understanding of historical culture.
The aesthetical dimension of historical culture – The Price of Freedom.
Americans at War at the National Museum of American History The National Museum of American History 77 in Washington D.C. sees its task to survey the major themes of American history and culture to the public.
It was built within three years, thanks to an $80 million donation by real-estate developer Kenneth E Behring.
The Cold War has its own section in POF covering the period from 1945 to 1989, but focuses mainly on the Korean and Vietnam Wars.
These parts are presented with dramaturgical and scenographic elements.
Illuminated images of war printed on canvas, enhanced by music and sounds of war, show up in a seven-minute loop to catch the visitors emotionally right from the beginning of the exhibition.
As a continuous subtheme, POF operates with “War in media” – an important topic referring to the Vietnam War as The Television War.
One wall is covered with a pyramid of old TV sets playing a compilation of United States media 76 Gerald Posner, Citizen Perot.
The soundtrack was composed by multiple Academy Award Winner John Williams.
The living room leads directly into a larger room that contextualizes both the Vietnam War and the Cold War in general.
There is a scenographic presentation of the largest object in the collection of the NMAH – a BellHuey helicopter.
The helicopter is presented in a shaded room; loudspeakers deliver the sound of rotors.
Exhibition designers transformed the surrounding area with grass and sands into a Vietnamese paddy field.
Two display dummies dressed as American soldiers are lying in front of the helicopter on the ground – one holding the other one, who is wounded, in his arms.
This kind of scenic and emotional presentation has a disconcerting effect on European visitors.
Only visitors with background knowledge and the power of endurance will discover contrasting views behind this emotionally loaded presentation.
Covered behind the helicopter are two display cases where the typical equipment of American soldiers and Vietnamese Vietcong are presented.
The comparison of an original Ho Chi Minh Trailwood bike and American military equipment conveys that the Cold War was a real war, not merely a TV-event, with real victims and veterans on both sides.
Unfortunately, there is no reference to international media coverage and reactions on the conflict.
Concerning the international dimension, there is one mandatory element, a segment of the Berlin Wall, but with no elaboration on the European dimension of the Cold War.
The political dimension of historical culture – The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum 84 in Boston, MA is one of thirteen Presidential Libraries in the United States and is administrated by the National Archives 82 Interview with Dick Daso, Curator, 09/29/11.
Third World Interventions and the Making of Our Times, Cambridge, 2007.
The associated museums are sponsored and maintained by both presidential families and private donors.
This step is yet to be completed in the case of John F Kennedy, and is discussed in the following.
The concept behind the exhibition is that John F Kennedy himself tells the story of his life.
Movies and sound files from the Audiovisual Collections87 of the Kennedy Library are used to illustrate his political decisions.
The visitor is to re-experience Kennedy’s extraordinary career, the challenges he faced and his political decisions.
Furthermore, some negative but all too human aspects of his life, including illnesses and his womanizing, are not mentioned at all.
Pei,88 a white structure with many windows, promises openness and transparency for which visitors of the exhibition search in vain.
The ethical guidelines of the National Council on Public History postulate that historians owe society the historical truth, insofar as it can be determined from the available sources.
Presidents and their Administrations in Presidential Museum Exhibits, in: The Public Historian, 28/4 , 118.
He built other cultural institutions like the pyramid of the Louvre in Paris, the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. and the modern wing of the Germany Historical Museum in Berlin.
The Harry S Truman Presidential Library, however, seems to be a positive example for a more critical approach.
The economical dimension of historical culture – The International Spy Museum Open to the public since 2002, the International Spy Museum92 is a private museum and part of the Malrite Company93 based in Cleveland, Ohio.
After having served as a Navy soldier in Korea, he worked for the National Security Agency for some years.
He held on to his fascination for espionage, even after retiring to civil life.
The brand name International Spy Museum was tested in public by an advertising agency before the museum was in business.
Spy Museum was the term with the highest attractiveness for potential visitors.
This procedure demonstrates other possible motives behind a museum besides the sole desire to transfer knowledge about history and espionage, namely as in this case making money.
The company employs about five hundred people, however only eight of them are working in the Exhibition and Programs Department of the museum.
Conceptually the Spy Museum consists of two parts – the School of Spies and the exhibition space The Secret History of History.
The geographical focus clearly lies on the United States; some excursions are made to the British, Soviet and East German intelligence institutions.
The section on Cold War history starts with an animated wall about espionage and the construction of the atomic bomb.
At the end of the story, there is a countdown to an audiovisual detonation of the atomic bomb.
The rest of the area is limited, interestingly enough, to the city of Berlin as a center of the bloc confrontation.
Alongside the following stairs are warning signs and propaganda posters for nuclear war.
The Berlin Wall has its place, as well as a black Trabant that was used to smuggle refugees across the inner German border.
Even a non-scale reconstruction of the spy tunnel of Rudow, the original version of which is shown in the Allied Museum in Berlin, can be passed through by the visitor.
With their scenographic presentation, the makers of the Spy Museum take advantage of the childlike curiosity that arouses even adults when confronted with the topic of espionage.
After paying admission, visitors are told repeatedly things are not what they seem.
Current political developments, such as those in Korea, show the actual importance that the Cold War can claim approximately one generation after the Soviet orbit has collapsed.
NMAH, on the contrary, plays with scenographic presentations with a human factor.
Hiring a stage designer to install an exhibition means that Cold War history can be emotionally experienced by exposure to representations of soldiers in a reproduced Vietnamese landscape.
Music and the noises of a helicopter rotor dislocate the visitor in place and time.
The partly privately funded museum at the Kennedy Library does not yet take advantage of the fact that it has more money to spend on its presentation.
It remains stuck in an old-fashioned and sometimes hagiographic style of historiography.
By choosing a bestseller topic like espionage, a lot of visitors are intrigued right from the beginning.
It actually also attracts the so-called “non-visitors”, a target group that every curator would love to see in his or her institution.
Of course, there are more players in the United States museum landscape dealing with Cold War history.
Francis Gary Powers Jr., for instance, decided as early as 1996 to found a Cold War Museum.
He aims to preserve Cold War history and honor Cold War veterans, such as his father who was shot down on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union in 1961 and later exchanged for the Soviet spy Rudolf Abel in Berlin.
From time to time there are announcements on the progress of the project at the permanent location in Vint Hill, Virginia.
The legally protected title “Cold War Museum” and its mission statement promise a comprehensive discussion of the Cold War era.
Apparently, though, it is not so easy to present Cold War history in a museum.
Today, in times of scarce funding, it is more important than ever for a museum to find and occupy its own niche.
The historical research on the Cold War era, as well as its presentation to the public, need a global perspective to visualize the unique character of this unconventional war.
National master narratives, the scars of the Cold War and actual conflicts resulting from the Cold War, have a strong impact on not only the exhibition agenda of public museums, but also on policymakers and investors.
It is not always sufficient to spend money on the latest exhibition techniques to present a topic in an aesthetically appealing way.
There are plans to establish a Center of Cold War at Checkpoint Charlie in Berlin, Germany.
In September 2012 a temporary exhibition pavilion of the Cold War Center, called Black Box, opened there, at Checkpoint Charlie.
It is thought to have won new supporters for the project and to have given a first glimpse into how an exhibition of the Cold War could look.
Unfortunately, the project faces the obstacle of a political-ideological opposition against the foundation of a new museum.
As a matter of fact it is a question of money as well as a struggle for interpretive predominance.
One must await further political decisions, especially after the uncertain results of recent elections to the German Bundestag.
A museum for the history of the Global Cold War is nevertheless an important and necessary desideratum for the worldwide museum landscape.
This exceptional conflict is longing for historicizing in a museum, which is open at the same time to both its global impacts and to private human fates.
The Plan for a Cold War Center at Checkpoint Charlie, Berlin”, in: Jennifer Dickey, Samir El Azahar, Catherine M Lewis, Museums in a Global Context.
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel and the conservative CDU hold the majority but still have to decide on coalition partner.
Dickey, Jennifer, Samir El Azahar and Catherine M Lewis, Museums in a Global Context.
Füssmann, Klaus, Heinrich Theodor Grütter and Jörn Rüsen, Historische Faszination.
Representing Identiy and diversity in a changing world, Cambridge, 2006, 2.
The novelty of this work is the presentation of the perspectives of the immediate participants with an aim to reveal the existing differences, similarities and conclusions in view of newly released documents.
While performing this kind of comparison, scholars tend to focus disproportionately on one side’s vision, either Soviet or American.
This work will not only provide a reader with both, but will also show the tendencies and understanding of the Cuban side, which was paramount in the crucial October days of 1962.
A common belief is that as time goes by, it is harder to reinvent the wheel, especially in regard to such a well-known case as the Caribbean Crisis.
However, accounting for a number of new sources becoming open to the public each year, there is no doubt the topic can be built on and valuable additions can be made.
The aim of this work, however, is not to present a new truth, but rather to show that there is no monopoly on truth and that the truth is usually found somewhere at the crossroads of a wide variety of opinions and vantage points.
The Caribbean Crisis period was the most tense and dangerous time during the Cold War.
The world was at the brink of an apocalypse and if the two nuclear superpowers had not resolved their disagreements peacefully, our lives today would be very different, if they would be at all.
The quote captures the fatality of the possible Third World War, which was so close in 1962.
Indeed, the state leaders’ fears and mood, wrong interpretations of orders, bad connection or any unfortunate coincidences and mismatches could have lead to a thermonuclear war.
Thus, in-depth and careful research 46 allows us to analyze and comprehend what led the people in power to turn from the cornerstones of national pride and prestige to the realization of human value, dignity and security.
The work puts a particular emphasis on the psychological aspect of the decision-making and consequences evaluation.
The paper captures not only the 13 days of the Caribbean Crisis, but also the period precedating it.
We will start with the victory of the Cuban revolution, which brought Fidel Castro to power as this enabled the conflict to occur, and then we will examine time following the crisis and the “détente” in American-Soviet relations up to Kennedy’s assassination on the 22nd of November, 1963.
A range of literature has been analyzed for this work with a special focus on memoir sources and newly released documents.
The secondary sources used can be conditionally divided into Russian and English language sources.
Russian sources allowed us to understand the Soviet perspective of the crisis and the rationale behind crucial decisions.
Khrushchev’s son wrote an especially revealing book on his interactions with his father in the days during the Cuban Crisis and afterwards.
The Cuban perspective was significantly improved in Alekseev’s memoirs, in which he claims that the missile withdrawal has been a complete surprise for him as well as for the whole Cuban government.
The limitations of the undertaken research are the ongoing time distortion of the events and deeds as well as the shortage of the relevant material.
Work with contemporaries’ memoirs and the declassified files on the period help us to overcome inaccuracies and generalizations.
In order to give an answer to the research question, the work is divided into three interrelated chapters.
First chapter, “Soviet View”, will show the perspective of Soviet officials and modern Russian scholars on the events of 1962.
Second chapter, titled “American Side”, will reveal the American approach and evaluations of the crisis while in the third chapter called “Cuban Perspective”, Castro’s rise to power and assessments and reactions to his leadership and role in the crisis will be provided.
This work will be concluded with some necessary evaluations and a response to the research question.
Having validated itself during the Second World War, the Soviet Union had been only strengthening its international position as a world power and a carrier of Socialism, an ideology pervading more and more states throughout the 20th century while receiving unambiguous approval by many Western states.
Khrushchev took such American steps seriously and viewed a possible Cuban defeat as his own.
He was sure this was a perfect time to show the authority and power of the Soviets.
An assertion by one of Khrushchev’s approximates regarding the existent “inferiority complex” of the Soviet leader is of a particular interest for the understanding of the rationale behind missiles stationing.
According to the assertion, Khrushchev was concerned that the USSR and the hardliner political elite was not given due respect, and he wanted people around him to fear him as they feared Stalin.
While seemingly far-fetched, such thoughts by the closest advisors of the Soviet leader shed light on the psychological background on the fateful decisions of the fall of 1962.
It is imperative to say a few words about the head of the Soviet Union in those difficult times as he played a crucial role in the escalation and resolution of the crisis.
Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev was realistic, pragmatic, understanding and often respondent to the needs of Soviet people.
However, according to Adgubey, the First Secretary’s best qualities were his humanity and compassion.
Braveness equally was an important quality to him, though this occasionally led to unnecessary risk and recklessness, notably during the Caribbean Crisis.
Indeed, as we can judge post factum, the crisis was caused by these qualities of the Soviet leader.
While definitely pessimistic for the manifestation of Soviet power, the given numbers do not account to more than mathematic calculations when it comes to their actual destructive power.
A more important reason for Khrushchev’s psychological unrest were the American naval bases in Turkey and Italy.
American missiles thus could bomb Soviet cities in any moment, which, of course, was not reciprocated and could not be ignored by the Soviet side.
Indeed, Khrushchev is known to point to the other side of the sea when having foreign guests and ask them whether they could see the American base.
After a negative response, he pointed to their bad vision and claimed he could see the change of guard next to American missiles targeting Soviet cities, saying, “probably this summer house is put on the map too”.115 According to contemporaries as well as Khrushchev’s own explanations, the main reason for sending missiles to Cuba was his genuine desire to protect the Cuban revolution.
During his informal visit to Bulgaria, Khrushchev was constantly thinking about the ways Soviet Union could help a newly established ally.
Mikoyan and asked for advice on how to protect Cuba from the imminent invasion.
In terms of how to help the allied state, Khrushchev was contemplating several alternative strategies.
Thoughts on mutual help and cooperation were considered useless and unproductive.
Sending missiles was seen as the only way to drastically change the status quo.
Although Krushchev was the main decision-maker and risk-taker in 1962, he did not make this decision without assistance from his closest advisors.
The Soviet Commission, created for this end, came to a positive evaluation of the Cuban landscape’s appropriateness and its ability to mask all military preparations.
Despite a widespread misconception on the unilateral viewpoint of the Soviet commandership, the assessments and opinions were varied in regards to the plan.
However, people often focus on the facts and opinions that further credit their original views, and thus Khrushchev was absolutely satisfied with Biruzov’s assessment.
In May 1962, the Soviet leader presented to the Central Committee Presidium the plan of Operation “Anadyr”, a transatlantic transportation and secret stationing of Soviet troops and missiles on the Cuban territory.
The question arises as to why the USSR did not inform the United States about missile stationing as the Americans had done regarding United States missiles in Turkey, especially considering the diplomatic advantage and validity it could have lended to the operation.
Some experts believe that Khrushchev was confidant Americans would do everything possible to prevent a public, openly proclaimed stationing.
Thus, Khrushchev deprived himself of such an international tool and the whole operation acquired the flavor of dishonesty and diplomatic cheating in the eyes of the world.
He was sure the Americans would have to put up with the missiles once they were in Cuba.
The Monroe Doctrine, accepted in 1823, was cornerstone of American foreign policy worldview.
The Doctrine prohibited anybody’s military presence in the Western hemisphere, which was incompatible with the presence of nuclear ballistic missiles 90 miles from its border.
Moreover, a secret realization of such an operation was a powerful psychological factor that left the American government with no alternative but to declare the USSR an aggressor and to implement the required measures.
Interestingly, Castro realized the importance and significance an openly proclaimed stationing could bring to his state, as well as to the process of missiles transportation itself.
Shortly after the beginning of the stationing, he suggested that Khrushchev make the operation public.
However, it was the Americans who made it public before the Soviet leadership could blink.
The Soviets had to maintain appearance and international pride after their plan was revealed by an American reconnaissance plane and Kennedy’s speech of October 22.
Therefore, the Soviet government instructed the captains of Soviet ships bound for Cuba to ignore the orders of American naval forces and use weapons in case of an attack.
Despite the quarantine, all other Soviet vessels were let into Cuban waters.
Despite clear political character and motives both leaders were pursuing in this crisis, no one even entertained the idea of sacrificing millions of their citizens’ lives for the sake of a political and tactical victory.
Khrushchev’s quote is best at illustrating the idea, “life is more precious than prestige”.126 While the world was experiencing these tense and dangerous times, the Soviets had to recontemplate how it could benefit from for the situation.
Khrushchev was concerned with the proximity of American missiles and naval bases to the Soviet cities.
These missiles could destroy Soviet cities at any moment, but the same positioning was being denied to the Soviet side in the Cuban crisis.
After a considerable time to weigh the alternatives and evaluate his position, Khrushchev wrote a new letter in which he offered a quid pro quo exchange to withdraw Soviet missiles if Americans did the same in Turkey.
The role of reporters and journalists should not be understated, such as the fateful conversation between Fomin and Scali in “Oxidental” or a report on the pending landing of American troops in Cuba.
Dobrynin, where the same crucial question on Soviet and American missiles was raised.
Robert Kennedy explained to his colleague that due to national pride and allied considerations in NATO, the United States could not withdraw Turkey-based missiles unilaterally as it would look like a weak concession to Soviet pressure131 and a sacrifice of international NATO members’ interests in order to secure those of the US.132 The American side was never short on diplomatic justifications and the art of persuading an opponent.
Another reason for not publically announcing the withdrawal of American missiles was the perceived bureaucracy of NATO and a need for a joint decision to perform a withdrawal, coupled 4-5 month at minimum time frame for withdrawal if approved.
Nevertheless, R Kennedy gave confidential assurances on the secret removal of the missiles in the near future.
Interestingly, later it was written in his memoirs, “President Kennedy was going to remove them shortly anyway”.134 There is no doubt the Soviet side put itself into a diplomatically disadvantageous position and missed out on the opportunities of the period.
As it became later known, Kennedy was ready to publicly announce the withdrawal of American missiles if the situation spun out of control.
After the Soviet leadership was notified of Dobrynin’s unofficial meeting with Robert Kennedy, Kruschev realized his letter was rushed.
Due to technical setbacks, the American side had not received the letter yet, so he decided to write a new one included the quid pro quo request.
Khrushchev wanted to pretend the first letter did not exist, and the Kennedy brothers did the same to his second message.7 On Sunday morning of October 28, the Soviet leadership gathered in Novo-Ogarevo.
Thus, the ball was on the Soviet side and it was obvious that a decision had to be made as soon as possible.
In case the Americans had undertaken a strike on Soviet installations in Cuba, Khrushchev would have had to swallow it or fight back with nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, whatever the American sources could have consequently said, the Soviet side never even entertained the possibility of a nuclear strike.
Khrushchev excluded war as a solution as he understood the consequences.
A recent uncoordinated shooting of an American reconnaissance plane by Soviet generals in Cuba was the last drop in the bucket.
Khrushchev himself said that with the US’s sincere assurances on Cuban security, “the motives which prompted the Soviet side to help Cuba are no longer relevant”.141 From such a vantage point, the Soviet Union achieved its aims.
Of course, the American interpretation differs from the Soviet one and blames Soviet leader’s weakness as a failure in achieving a desired nuclear parity.
Kennedy was assassinated in November of 1963, Khrushchev was ousted from power in 1964, while Castro remained head of an independent and sovereign Cuban state until 2008.
Looking at the situation without prejudice, the USSR plan was pointless.
The transportation of missiles cost millions of dollars and Khrushchev’s political.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the Socialist regime in Cuba would have been destroyed if not for Khrushchev’s decision to play with fire.
A verbal assurance on Turkish missiles allowed Khrushchev to avoid political catastrophe when he agreed to withdraw Soviet weaponry from Cuba.2 The hurried decision taken by the Soviet side was not coordinated with the Cuban government, resulting in grave consequences for Cuban-Soviet relations immediately after the crisis.
Khrushchev, Birth of Superpower, 540. 56 message started before the ending was edited.
Despite the moribund condition of his wife, the First Deputy Chairman was so devoted to his country that he promptly left for Cuba.
Throughout their conversation, Fidel stated outrageously that “the Cuban people did not understand how it was even possible to decide its destiny behind its back"".148 Only the experience and diplomatic skills of the Soviet chairman turned Cuban frustration and rage into a genuine understanding.
Castro left for Moscow in April of 1963 after more than a month in Cuba.9 The direct consequences of the crisis for the Soviet Union were positive.
For the first time, America acknowledged the power and validity of the USSR as a world superpower.
Only after the crisis of 1962 did Kennedy understand the importance of realism in world politics.
The Soviet Union caused a significant psychological change in the American worldview.
Both leaders understood that the nuclear race couldn’t be viewed as a power game as the whole of humanity lay on the other side of the scales.
A sign of relief of the two leaders in the moment of agreement on withdrawal was a guarantee of a great change in the bilateral relations of the world superpowers.
The victory in the Second World War brought money and importance to America.
And if due to some reasons, such as its limited potential caused by an ongoing confrontation, America had not yet succeeded to spread its influence into every corner of the world, the Western Hemisphere had been gained for good.
During periods as intense as the Cold War, this region gained increased importance for the United States as a superpower.
According to Kennedy’s new foreign policy strategy the balance of power should not change to the disadvantage of the US151 , and by no means did the American government intend to lead defensive policies.
The United States was eager to “help oppositions inside the communist regimes” and to pursue programs aimed at eroding the iron curtain.
Obviously, in pursuit of such staunch anti-Communist foreign policy, the American government could not allow the spread of Communism in its main sphere of influence.
It is easy to imagine Kennedy’s amazement and disillusionment when an island, situated 90 miles away from the American coast became Communist.
He stated that the “communist forces should not be underestimated in Cuba or anywhere else”.153 After the failure in the Bay of Pigs, he famously stated that the “""the complacent, the selfindulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away with the debris of history.
Only the strong can possibly survive"".154 America was fast to act upon Castro’s rise.
It brought together members of regional organizations in order to exclude Cuba and take collective measures.
Apart from all the possible legal measures, secret CIA plans became known recently, ranging from cigar poisoning to spattering Castro’s shoes with poisonous chemicals.
There is no official reference of Kennedy’s orders to kill Castro, but the desire to “get rid” of him clearly became an imperative of American foreign policy at the time.
Kennedy’s personality played a crucial role in the Cuban crisis, in its escalation as well as its settlement.
Since early childhood, his father taught him always to be the first and to yield to no one.
Thus, his failure to put up with the presence of Soviet missiles in such proximity to America should not have been a surprise.
Kennedy’s personality as well as political factors such as November mid-term elections led Kennedy to escalate the conflict to a qualitatively new level.
It is possible he was looking for an event to overshadow his Bay of Pigs failure.
As we know “all politics is local”.157 Both Robert McNamara and Roger Hillsman claimed that it was the American administration rather than the country itself that was in mortal danger.
The official Kennedy foreign policy, such as the flexible response doctrine, allowed the American government to find the necessary solutions to arising conflicts and, most importantly, to achieve a compromise in the Cuban Missile crisis.9 The Cuban government’s nationalization of American property at the island was a major reason for the deterioration of American-Cuban relations.
Numerous American companies previously present and dominant at the Cuban market lost their market leverage and profits.
The puppet regime of Batista was overthrown and America had to face the willful and ideological government of Castro, which the United States was reluctant to tolerate.
The Bay of Pigs invasion was the first powerful indication of American hatred towards a new Cuban regime.
The surprising negligence of American forces was the reason for its failure, which brought relentless criticism towards the American President and his advisors from all sides of political spectrum.
The immediate reaction of the United States was diplomatic (exclusion of Cuba from the Organization of American States followed by a cease of diplomatic relations) and economic (they stopped buying Cuban sugar, their main export).161 American actions pushed Cuba towards the Soviet Union, which provided Cuba with economic aid and adopted Cuban support as its major diplomatic strategy.
Historical Consequences and Lessons of a Conflict” Latin America, Nº 4 , p 90. 59 that easily after a recent military defeat.
Thus, he started providing Cuba with military equipment as early as May of 1962.163 The Americans became aware only after their agents started reporting nightly movements of huge machines full of obscure containers on the Cuban territory.4 A threshold moment in the history of the Cold War occured on October 14, 1962, when Mayor Richard Heyser took photographs of Cuban soil showing a drastic divergence from those taken a month before.
American experts concluded that the masked objects in the photos contained medium-range ballistic missiles.
From the start, his goal was to get rid of these missiles by all means possible.
He was confident that if he did not act decisively, his cabinet would stop taking him seriously and the United States would lose the support of its NATO allies.7 “Last month I said we weren’t going to [permit Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba] and last month I should have said … we don’t care.
The discussion was tense and sharp, with the conversation mainly concerning Cuba and the superpowers’ relations with the island.
Nevertheless, missiles were not mentioned during this important dialogue.
According to some Soviet political scientists, instead of looking to deescalate the situation, the United States used “crisis diplomacy”, in which a situation close to military collision is created in order to demand an unconditional surrender from the opposite side,169 since the Americans believedthe Soviets would withdraw from a “hot” confrontation as the decision-making side bearing the responsibility of the possible escalation.
Dean Rusk, the United States Secretary of State from 1961 to 1969, claimed that the fact the crisis had not become public in the first week gave President an opportunity to evaluate all pros and cons in order to make a balanced and mutually acceptable decision.0 On the other side, Thomas Paterson argues that Kennedy has greatly overstated the Cuban threat and exacerbated the already existent problem.
In any case, we should not underestimate the courage and wisdom of the American leader, which not only allowed America to become a perceived winner of a confrontation but also improved its world standing and authority.
Dean Rusk is known to remind American reporters that American and Soviets met eye to eye and the Soviets blinked first.
It is imperative to understand the American interpretation of Soviet motives for the crisis escalation as well as the American evaluation of possible Soviet actions.
Importantly, the United States saw the Cuban affair as a Soviet attempt to change the disadvantageous status quo and achieve a nuclear parity.
Some American experts go as far as to suggest that the Cuban Crisis was the “cry of despair” and the result of Soviet realization that they were losing the Cold War.
Unlike the Soviet citizens, Americans were confident that if the Soviets had an opportunity to push the button, there were no reasons for them not to.
The aforementioned rationale explains a great psychological crisis America experienced during the Cuban crisis and its leaders determination to remove the missiles from Cuban territory as quickly as possible.
Immediately after the spotting of missiles, the crisis group was formed, called ExComm, in which major figures in American politics gathered to achieve a consensus as to how to respond to the aggressive actions of the Soviet government.
This allowed the members to speak openly without trying to please the President.
Kennedy’s brother Robert played a crucial role in the meetings of the ExComm as well as in the crisis resolution in general.
According to Arthur Schlesinger, Robert was an irreplaceable partner, who helped the President resist strong pressure from the military to employ weapons.
Dobrynin, which according to Khrushchev were the most important part of the political dialogue between the states and allowed a peaceful settlement.
However, even the assessment of his role in the crisis is highly debatable, with Sheldon M Stern’s account describing Robert Kennedy as one of the most consistently and recklessly hawkish advisers, pushing not for a blockade or even air strikes against Cuba, but for a full-scale invasion.0 It is important to note how diversity of opinions and ideas of its members within the Executive Committee.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that there was no difference in the territorial stationing of the Soviet missiles, as the USSR-based intercontinental missiles had the same destructive power as the medium-range ones in Cuba.1 The balanced position of such a distinguished person was crucial to pushing back against the doomed “strike scenario”, advocated by higher military commandership.
Robert Kennedy viewed everything through the lens of domestic politics and the President’s standing within the government.
As claimed by American historiography, eventually both Robert Kennedy and McNamara advocated for a blockade.
Gaddis and A.M Schlesinger. 63 neutralization of American troops in Cuba under direct UN supervision, withdrawal of American “Jupiters” from Turkey and Greece and territorial guarantees to Cuba.
The American higher command on the other side was confident that the Bay of Pigs failure was a direct consequence of American indecisiveness and claimed that the Cuban crisis was a perfect moment to solve the problem of revolutionary.
Among the notorious warmongers, Dean Acheson, Paul Nitze and C Douglas Dillon were the most sophisticated and linked the Soviet missiles problem to the American leadership positions in the Western Hemisphere, advocating immediate and decisive military actions such as a tactical strike.
Senator Richard Russell requested an immediate direct invasion of the island.
Eventually the “war party” found itself distanced from the decision-making process, which, while beneficial for world security and settlement of the conflict, was a cause of enduring political disagreements.
Evaluating the possible alternatives, the Americans were also trying to predict the reaction of international actors in view of various historical precedents.
It was hard to overlook the parallel to Pearl Harbor when contemplating a massive air strike.
At the last meeting of ExComm, Robert Kennedy sent his brother a note saying, “now I know what Tojo must have felt planning Pearl Harbor”.186 To the Soviets would likely blockade Berlin in response, which was why this was not an option for an American government.
Finally, McNamara’s assurances that the targeted strike would not be 100% effective was a last straw as remaining missiles could have been directed towards American cities, and the strike option was given up.
In his speech on October 22, Kennedy declared an establishment of naval quarantine for offensive weapons.
He stated that all vessels carrying weapons of mass destruction to Cuba would be stopped and returned to the ports they had left.
The reaction of the world leaders to the American decision varied greatly.
Nevertheless, everyone understood the danger of the situation and the possible consequences of mutual miscommunication.
If such a meeting took place, however, the American President could have been accused of cowardice and incoherence, and the political spectrum of the US could tilt to the Republicans.
Thus, Kennedy took the only possible decision – to put negotiations on hold until the missiles were removed.9 It is hard to overestimate the panic Americans during October of 1962.
People built bomb shelters, bought provision for years to come and waited for the worst while hoping for the best.
Recently declassified sources show that the American government was planning a full-scale military invasion in case a compromise was not reached.
An important factor in such a tense atmosphere was Jacqueline Kennedy’s refusal to evacuate, which, according to some scholars, helped smooth the belligerent attitude of her husband.
Apart from Jackie’s position, the meeting between Aleksandr Fomin, the counselor of the Soviet Embassy, and John A Scali, an ABC reporter, was a decisive point in turning the American position to a more realistic approach.
Schlesinger, A Thousand Days of John Kennedy in the White House, 546. 65 invited Scali for a lunch at the old Occidental Restaurant, two blocks from the White House in hope of getting some first-hand information.
West Berlin was an important American foreign policy success and since it was located in the middle of Soviet East Germany, the Soviet threat was real.
Thus, Scali was instructed by a concerned American government to transmit the newly formed suggestions on the removal of Soviet missiles in exchange for a guarantee of non-intervention on the United States side.
This was the final pronounced deal, apart from the secret assurances on the withdrawal of Turkish missiles.
American assessment of the events can be summarized as a unilateral account of American victory and a shameful backing of the Soviet leader.
Scholarship immediately following the crisis largely supported this harmful idea.
According to James Nathan, such a false characterization of the events had the unfortunate adoption of a “resolve” rather than an acceptable compromise as a main goal of the American Cold War policy.
Despite an apparent victory of the American side, an obvious change in the US attitude towards USSR-directed foreign policy warrants consideration.
A degree of realism shown by Kennedy caused some violent assaults by American reactionary powers.
As a result of this frightening stand-off, the parties were able to get to know each other and form their opinion on the representatives of the opposite camp.
Looking only at the global side of the ideological contestation of two-world systems would be same as playing basketball without a court.
Despite this humble upbringing, his parents strived to give Fidel the best education and from early childhood, his educational success was remarkable.
At age 13, he participated in the workers’ revolt at his father’s sugar plantation.
Max Lestnik, Castro’s school friend said, ""he possessed unbelievable braveness.
Unaware of the pending turn in Cuban foreign policy, Senator Robert Kennedy joined in on the approval of a new Cuban government as an improvement to the “despotic” Batista’s dictatorship.
The mistrust and lack of information on the other side precluded the Soviet Union and Cuba from any meaningful interaction until the Soviets examined Castro’s plans and ideological standing.
Rapid nationalization of American property could not go unnoticed by the Americans and created a fear that the Castro’s regime would have a profound effect on the leftist movements in the other Latin American states and start a detrimental impact on American business.
Cuban agrarian reform led to the expropriation of American property amounting to 1 $ billion.
An ostentatious neglect of the Cuban leader by the American President played a significant role in the decline of mutual relations.
Eisenhower redirected Castro to his Vice-President, R Nixon, choosing to play golf over a scheduled high-level meeting.
Castro considered such an attitude towards the President of an independent and proud Cuban republic humiliating.
International Life Nº 5 , 58. 68 to believe that Washington did everything possible to push Cuba into the Soviet embrace.
The ceasation of sugar imports signified the end of previously blossoming bilateral trade and put Cuba on the brink of economic collapse.
Soon afterwards the United States broke all diplomatic interactions with the republic.
The alternative of a strong ally instead of waiting to be annihilated was a welcoming option.
The USSR was happy to support a friendly Communist regime in the sphere of American interests.
Soon, the Soviet Union became Cuba’s lifeline.8 Due to its reliance on the USSR and in light of the recent Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro announced turned Cuba into a socialist state.
The Americans called Castro’s revolution treason and set out on the annihilation of Castro and his regime.
The 1963 failed plan, Mongoose, is the most well known though many plans existed before 1962, some of which were really curious.
One plan was to apply thallium salts to Castro’s shoes in order for his beard to fall off and destroy his charisma.
Another one was to sprinkle Castro’s cigars with a chemical substance, causing temporary disorientation before he was to give a speech.
A plausible explanation for American reaction at the time of Castro’s rise to power as well as today might be an account of ontological security, thus the need to define itself in opposition to another.
The Monroe Doctrine and the perception of Cuba as a defiant power in American sphere of interests could not leave the Americans silent.
Military exercises called Filbrixlex-2214 involving 40,000 military personnel directed against an imagined dictator called Ortsac was a powerful indication of American intentions to invade as well as a validation for the Soviet missile stationing.
Accounting for the numerous sophisticated plans to invade the island, there is no wonder Cubans constantly felt existentially threatened.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro called Kennedy a “new Hitler”.215 Cuba persisted that its problem was not that the opposition of geopolitical West and East, but rather its pursuit of independence and sovereignty.
Nevertheless, it is important to note a sharp geopolitical contestat over the island.
At a time when the United States was planning yet another full-scale invasion, Soviet leadership was thinking of options to protect the Cuban Revolution.
The drastically different standing towards the Cuban Revolution for the procurement of political objectives was the main reason for the Soviet success with an enduring Cuban government.
Indeed, the missiles’ transportation would prove Soviet ability to strike the heart of American interests with impunity, and thus signify an important victory for the Soviet people, who were used to seeing the world as a zone of geopolitical contests.6 One roll of a dice could restore Soviet international standing, frighten Americans, save Cubans, shut up Stalinists, frustrate the Chinese and gain a potential advantage in the bargain over West Berlin.
Thus, a Soviet delegation was sent to Cuba to explain the situation and reach an agreement for weapons stationing.
Surprisingly, Cubans were more than willing to accept murderous weapons.
Despite being an extravagant character, his decision was motivated by an altruistic sacrifice in the name of socialism .219 Soon afterwards, Raul Castro arrived in the USSR to prepare all the necessary documents.
All materials were written by hand in a single copy.0 The Cubans offered to make the stationing of missiles public.
This not only heightened the prestige of the agreement but also gained Cuba greater importance in the international community.
Kennedy himself declared repeatedly that the Jupiter missiles were “the same” as the Soviet missile in Cuba.
Thus, the only role they performed was to enhance nuclear deterrence by complicating America’s planning for a successful first strike.
The psychological factor of a secret stationing and a newly acquired United States awareness of the fact could not allow them to “sit back and let them do that to us,” as the US Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin put it.
In his speech on October 22, Kennedy did not even try to hide an obviously hostile attitude towards Cuba.
He did not even recognize Cuban attempts to protect itself and ensure its regime’s future.
The State Department published a brochure, which called Castro a traitor to common American interests and viewed its Communist regime as a challenge to the stability of Americas.
According to Gromyko, the roots of Cuban crisis can be found in the American desire to ensure its monopoly on security while rejecting the right of other states to protect themselves.6 Indeed the explanatory force of the security dilemma in the Cuban Crisis case is an astonishing one.
It was at play when Americans refused to accept the validity of the Soviet rationale for the stationing of the missiles as well as when the Cuban government did not trust American guarantees of non-aggression.
In such a situation, the third player was an additional burden on the decision-making and control.
Misl, 1985, 190. 72 come to terms and put themselves into each other’s shoes in order to reach a compromise.
To know what was going on in the heads of mysterious and irascible Cuban leaders was even harder.
In these crucial days when the Cold War tension reached its peak and the order of any Cuban general could cause a nuclear Armageddon, the connection and information exchange with the Cuban side bore a prodigious importance.
An illustrative was the shooting down of an American reconnaissance flight U-2 on October 27, which consequently has been called “Black Saturday”.227 Even though the American public has been long misinformed as to the responsibility of shooting down the plane, it is now known that a Soviet General made the decision without any prior consultation with central command.
This was the turning point in the crisis, when the Soviet government realized the danger of the situation in Cuba.
Thus, the possibility of an unexpected situation was multiplied by the existence of a third decision-maker.
Practically simultaneous with the Soviet order to ignore the flying planes, Castro ordered his soldiers to shoot down American reconnaissance planes.
He believed the Northern neighbor could be influenced by nothing but power.
Indeed, he was the leader of the Cuban Republic and American planes were flying over his territory.
From the newly released documents, we now know that Castro was urging Khrushchev to use missiles if Cuba was invaded.
He was sure that if the Soviet Union struck first, it would end the arrogant Northern neighbors and the era of freedom, welfare and economic prosperity would reign on the Cuban soil.2 Thus, the Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles came out of the blue for the Cuban side.
This was likely the rationale for Castro’s message of October 27, in which he suggested launching a preventive nuclear strike.
The Soviet government, however, decisively rejected such a scenario as one that had never been considered by the Soviets.
However, Castro was not consulted when the final decision on missiles withdrawal was negotiated in the Soviet echelons.
On Sunday, October 28, around 7 AM, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos notified the Soviet ambassador in Cuba, Alekseev ,on the official Soviet resolution.
The following expansive cable addressed to the Cuban leader stressed a dangerous time shortage and informed Castro on the positive consequences of the crisis settlement.
Khrushchev did not understand me or the translation was not correct since in the cable of 27 October I did not suggest to be the first in delivering a blow against the adversary territory during the crisis, but in the case if there were an aggression against Cuba and Soviet people would be perishing together with the Cubans.
The perspective of the Cuban leaders that the Soviet Union completely ignored Castro’s ideas on how to resolve crisis were not only credible but bitterly exacerbated by the outrageous negligence of Castro’s famous 5 Points by the American government right before the settlement of the crisis.
This led to a decline in relations with the Soviet Union and the Cuban regime adopted a general suspiciousness and insular attitude for many years to follow, irritating America and causing the Cuban people to suffer.
Conclusion Drawing a conclusion from such a controversial and crucial period in human history is more than an ambitious task.
The crisis became a turning point in the relations between the two superpowers.
It demonstrated how dangerous the possibility of nuclear showdown was and that the only rational way out in such a case would be through peaceful negotiations.
The American and Soviet leaders understood the insurmountable danger of another similar misunderstanding and established a red line between Kremlin and the White House.
The realization of mutual vulnerability showed the United States that the exercise of power is not limitless and the only acceptable way to regulate power in the nuclear age is by negotiation.
The new concept of “peaceful coexistence” was accepted in the aftermath, which signified the beginning of détente and an understanding that despite a different ideology, the world superpowers do not have to exasperate those differences by military means.
Indeed, if we look at the situation from the position of public appearance and proclamations, there was an unambiguous American victory, but the withdrawal of Turkey-based Jupiters seems to invalidate such a claim.
In terms of geopolitics, American victory could be questioned due to the fact that a hostile political regime acquired a strong footing in close proximity to the American border.
Clearly, these are the only explanations that could afford them to keep up appearances in the aftermath of withdrawal.
Cuba indeed received the assurances of non-intervention and for good or bad, the Cuban regime lasted long.
Despite such a positive outcome for the regime, consequences for the Cuban people were less than satisfactory due to a persisting, destructive, economic embargo.
As for the second reason of deterring the United States from starting a nuclear war, Khrushchev’s strategy worked well as he got assurances of the withdrawal of Turkish missiles and then signed a nuclear test ban treaty in 1963.
This work examined how the differences between American, Soviet and Cuban sides influenced the decisions of the participants of the conflict and how these variations can help explain the differences in crisis assessment.
From the research, it becomes evident that not only can there be no universally correct account of the events, but also that the politically motivated and acceptable national interpretations create a multitude of equally logical and explanatory motivations and assessments of the events.
The main goal of a researcher is to approach all these interpretations from an unbiased point of view and understand the situation in its complexity.
Due to recently released documents of the Soviet side, the account of the event became fuller, eliminating conventional stereotypes and a dominant American view.
Despite the smaller influence of Cuban decision-making, a similar addition of Cuban sources would greatly help to understand the psychology of the crisis and the leaders’ decisions to engage in such irreversible and risky behavior.
As Mark Twain once said “History doesn't repeat itself, but it does rhyme.
And let our prudence and understanding trump over our ambition and self-assertion if we want to continue enjoy the world which we all now take for granted.
Additionally, I will explore the possible reasons that led them to make defensive preparations.
The secret documents of the WP from the 1970s and the 1980s are increasingly available for historians.
This is clearly demonstrated in the nuclear war plans, in which they shifted from a defensive position to an offensive war against NATO forces.
Starting in the 1960s, the Soviets led WP nations to conduct military exercises or Front Command Post exercises every year in some member states involving military forces of the Soviet Union along with those of other WP member states.
Annually, with the approval of the Hungarian political leadership, they formulated and modified plans for waging a possible war.8 These secret documents reveal that even in the 1980s, the Soviet Union was prepared for an offensive war in which they would likely use nuclear weapons.
Recent research by military historian Miklós Horváth indicates there was no significant change to this strategy, even after the 1987 Berlin meeting of the WP Political Consultative Committee, in which they decided to strengthen the defensive nature of the WP's military doctrine.
The purpose of RYAN was to collect intelligence on the presumed, but non-existent, plans of the Reagan administration to launch a nuclear first strike against the Soviet Union.
We still do not have enough information about the function and role of this intelligence operation during the early 1980s, so this issue needs further research.
Among other aspects, they indicated that The USA in favor of increasing its military power began the implementation of monumental armament programs.
In May 1978, NATO adopted a new armament program for the next 15 years, including developing a neutron bomb.
Meanwhile in 1980, the Wartime Statute of the Combined Armed Forces of the WP countries, drafted in 1978, was approved.
If the Soviet Union disarmed all of their missiles in Europe and beyond the Ural Mountains, then NATO would stop enforcing the 1979 Double-Track Decision.
As a result, the USA deployed the American Pershing-II and Cruise Missiles to Greenham, England, Mutlangen, West Germany, and Comiso, Italy.
As a countermove, the Soviets increased the number of the SS-20 missiles in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.
In the military exercise, code-named “Able Archer”, NATO member states, with the participation of the government leaders, also practiced preparations for a nuclear war.
According to Richard Rhodes, this “made the Soviet leadership uneasy, so there was very little that prevented them from making the first nuclear strike”.245 Recently declassified secret documents also reveal that even in the 1980s, the world was extremely close to a thermonuclear war, but this issue needs further research.
Consistent with propaganda materials, the West was the aggressor and the countries of the WP were in the peace camp, the approach assumed that the first nuclear strike would be carried out by the USA, and hence Soviet leaders thought that the Soviet and Hungarian intelligence services had to join forces and make necessary preparations together.
At the beginning of the war, before the first strike, we can read in the letter that despite all the secrecy “the enemy will be forced to make a series of actions in the political, economic, military and social spheres which would be directed to ensure the effectiveness of its nuclear strike and to limit the damage caused by retaliatory strikes.
They detailed the processes, activities and preparations for every area, political, military and economic and civil defense, which the initiator, the USA, would make before an unexpected nuclear attack.
This action plan was not made prior to 1985, because they sent the proposal for it only at the end of the previous year, proving that the Soviets did not inform their allies properly previously, and that prior to the 1980s, they did not prepare for defense against an unexpected nuclear missile attack, because, they had intended to make the preemptive strike at the beginning of the war.
Vladimir Kryuchkov, Deputy Chairman of Soviet Union KGB, sent documents regarding this action plan to János Bogye, a deputy leader in the Hungarian Home Office at that time.
Their top secret correspondence reveals that the predicting an unexpected nuclear attack from NATO and the USA was a problem at this time; hence they emphasized the importance of early detection.
Kryuchkov drew up the actions and signs related to the preparations for an unexpected attack in the political, military and economic areas and for civil defense.
The first half of the 1980s was a critical period in the relations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries, and in my opinion it needs further research.
Pastore insisted on the Agreement's nullification and suggested a reconsideration of the U.S.'s NATO commitments to Germany to emphasise the U.S.'s stance on nonproliferation.
The historical background of Brazil’s foreign relations in the late 1960s and early 1970s puts the controversy generated by the Agreement into perspective and illustrates how politically promiscuous nuclear commerce had become by this time.
The United States role as sole supplier of enriched uranium for many countries in the Third World ended in 1971 with the arrival of the Soviet Union in the nuclear marketplace.
From the 1950s, the delivery of enriched uranium supplies from the United States for the operating lifetime of nuclear reactors was obtained through several bilateral agreements.
The United States subsidised the prices of these supplies as an inducement for buyers to forego alternatives.
However, after raising prices unilaterally in 1971 and 1973, the United States lost its reputation as a reliable supplier.2 Journal do Brasil records that between 1969 and 1973 France, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Germany and Canada all expanded their investments in Brazil at a faster rate than the United States In the year following the world recession of 1973-1974, Brazil’s foreign debt exploded.
Butterworths, 1980, 299. 92 being the principal borrower from the World Bank.
Brazil imported 75% of its, mostly crude oil, making it the developing world’s leading oil importer.
Following the October 1973 Yom Kippur War the country experienced severe balance-of-payments difficulties.
Amongst other benefits, acquisition of the technology and knowledge necessary for the complete nuclear fuel cycle would allow Brazil to earn foreign exchange and reduce the costs of its nuclear program.
The Agreement reflects these ambitions, specifying the development of a native nuclear industry to diversify Brazil’s power resources and, in the long-term, the export of energy and technical services.
In addition, the capability to draw on diverse and copious energy sources would give it leverage in negotiations with energy suppliers, particularly the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries .255 The United States had long been a dominant force in Brazil's economy and was the country's principal source of foreign investment, with $3.5bn committed by 1974.
John Redick, notes that when the United States Atomic Energy Commission Chairman , Glenn Seaborg, visited Brazil in 1967 he asserted that the provision of nuclear fuel enrichment services for Brazil from the U.S. would continue ""unconditionally"" even if Brazil stuck to plans to develop peaceful nuclear explosives.
The United States also provided Brazil with research and consultation on techniques for various uses of nuclear energy in the early 1970s and signed a new cooperative agreement with the country in 1972.
Brazil's agreement for nuclear co-operation with France, announced in May 1967, less than two months prior to Seaborg's visit to the country, included details for the joint development of research and power reactors and the acquisition of French equipment for Brazilian nuclear centers.
Redick suggests that Brazil may have used this agreement as a means of both inducing further technical assistance from the United States and as a reaction to United States non-proliferation initiatives.
Prominent features of the French-Brazilian agreement were joint research on fabrication techniques of thorium fuel and the prospective construction of a thorium/heavy water power reactor, a more expensive process that results in large amounts of easily separated plutonium.
The most important precedent for the Agreement was established during the negotiations and subsequent construction of the Atucha natural uranium power plant in Argentina, built by the German firm Siemens AG in 1968.
This involved the purchase by Argentina of a sensitive element of the nuclear fuel cycle, heavy water, from the AEC the only United States sale of heavy water to a foreign power in that year.
According to David J Myers, Argentina's supply of plutonium from Atucha passed beyond the critical threshold for weapons production in the late 1970s.0 As the Brazilian regime ventured further into nucleonics in 1969, it created a framework for the Agreement by establishing an arrangement with West Germany for nuclear research.
The Brazilian CNEN created a working party of West German and Brazilian technicians to assess a proposal for the construction of a power plant in either Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo by 1976.
A statement by CNEN called, ""Nuclear Plans Based on Natural Uranium Supply"" states that the main goal of the Brazilian nuclear program was the development of all stages in the production of nuclear energy and the development of auxiliary industries in sum the infrastructure for the ""nuclearization"" of Brazil.
The contract to build the first nuclear power plants in Brazil with enriched uranium from the United States, went to the United States firm Westinghouse renewing Brazil's dependence for enriched fuel on a single supplier a restriction that continued the arrangement begun with Brazil's 1956 admission to the United States Atoms for Peace program under which the first research reactors in Brazil were built and maintained.1 Competition in the nuclear reactor export market during 1968 1975 was cutthroat and the Germans alleged several cases of United States interference in this period.
In 1973 KWU considered a sale to Yugoslavia closed when they were suddenly beaten to the punch by Westinghouse.
There were also charges that the United States had threatened to withhold economic assistance from Argentina if it bought another German reactor, and that United States interests had spread rumours of the liquidation of KWU just as the company was negotiating to sell two reactors to Iran.
Today, the United States and Germany are signatories to the Non-Proliferation Treaty , the legal instrument setting out the terms underlying the regulation of trade in nuclear technology and material.
The impetus that gave rise to the NPT was a renewed attempt by the superpowers to halt the international spread of nuclear weapons.
Germany's interpretation of Article IV of the Treaty allowed for access to nuclear energy by non-nuclear weapons states for peaceful purposes.
William Lowerance reports that in a meeting that month between United States President Gerald Ford and German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt the Agreement was not discussed.
Former Brazilian Foreign Minister Araujo Castro, Brazil's ambassador to the United Nations, described the NPT in 1971 as part of an effort by the superpowers to ""freeze"" the Cold War distribution of power.
This view typified the Brazilian attitude throughout the 1970s.5 The wording of the Agreement made it dependent on safeguards agreed upon with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Germany and Brazil, 1975,” Orbis 2 : 293; “Querschüsse aus den USA,” Die Zeit, 20 Juni, 1975.
To Brazil from West Germany, 1975,” International Security, Nº 2 : 163.
France, Britain and the Soviet Union fulfilled Brazilian demands for arms unmet by the U.S., according to Alexandre Barros.8 By mid-1974 negotiations between Brazil and Germany to draft the Agreement were underway.
Several German government officials visited Brazilia in the middle of 1974, including State Secretary of Technology Hans Hilgar Haunschild, former Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss, and State Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Hans George Sachs.
Following a visit by Brazilian Mines and Energy Minister Shigeaki Ueki to Bonn, the Brazilians made the decision to outline a nuclear program founded on the scientific accord of 1969.269 The terms of the deal were agreed on February 12, 1975.
Foreign Policy of a Future World Power, Boulder, CO: Westview, 1976, 50. 97 journal Nucleonics Week.
On April 7, Lowerance records that a four-man delegation from the State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency was sent to Bonn to discuss the Agreement, and apparently helped induce Germany to take a less lenient approach toward existing safeguards.
On all sides decisions were made at the level of ministerial and industrial personnel.1 German officials rebutted critics of the Agreement by stressing that the treaty's safeguards exceeded those required by Canada for its exports of nuclear technology to India and that Brazil had the capability of eventually developing a nuclear industry without foreign assistance.
If this occurred, the Germans contended, there would be no international controls on the Brazilian nuclear industry.
At this point anxiety over Brazil's rivalry with Argentina was on the rise with news that Argentina was planning to construct a nuclear bomb and that plans were afoot for France to supply Argentina with a plant to produce plutonium, later denied by French sources.
Furthermore, the German press had observed that France, which had not signed the NPT, was prepared to provide Brazil with a complete nuclear fuel cycle.
Had Germany not agreed to assist Brazil, a far greater danger of nuclear proliferation would have been posed, so the Agreement's German supporters argued.2 Although it steadfastly refused to yield to United States pressures to withdraw from the Agreement, the West German administration of Helmut Schmidt was consistently flexible and responsive in the face of political pressure on the question of the Agreement’s safeguards.
Analysis of a question and answer session from a press conference at the West German government a day before the signing of the Agreement shows that the Chancellery solicited methods for enhancing IAEA controls over the transfer of nuclear knowledge and material.
Archiv der sozialen Demokratie: Helmut Schmidt Archiv. 98 until after the inauguration of President Carter.
Memoranda from the German Foreign Ministry shows that Germany was sensitive to the objections from the Americans and the Dutch government to the transfer of these blueprints.
German ministerial officials also showed willingness to engage in intergovernmental consultations over the details to a point but were certain of the legality of their position and determined not to undermine their contractual obligations under the Agreement by delaying the transfer any longer.
Vorschlag für ein Gespräch des Herrn Bundesministers mit dem Herrn Bundeskanzler am 9.12.1976”, Berlin: PA, B35, 005723-005724; “Betr.: Ausbau der Zentrifugenanlage Almelo; niederländische Beteiligung an der “Troika”, Berlin: PA, B35, 005794-005797.
Directorate for Scientific and Technical Intelligence, ST-CS-02-212-75, November 1974, NP01389, United States Defense Intelligence Agency.
However, in contrast with Argentina, an attempt at acquiring the technological basis for the complete fuel-cycle by Brazil was not anticipated.
The first was the AEC's notification that it could not guarantee the delivery of previously promised enriched uranium.
The political consequences of this were compounded by the United States refusal to sign contracts committing United States sources to investment in further enrichment capacity.
Westinghouse had tried to persuade Brazil to participate in an enrichment plant to be built in the United States but Brazil insisted that the entire nuclear fuel cycle be under Brazilian control.1 Of equal importance to Brazil in 1974-1975 was the need to expand and diversify her resources of oil and other raw materials.
This, and the soaring cost of Western capital goods also added to the appeal of Soviet products and, in particular Soviet technology.
In addition, Brazil had attempted to promote greater exports of her semi-manufactures, such as shoes and textiles, and import more specialised items including Rumanian oil, Polish coal and machinery and electronic equipment from East Germany and Czechoslovakia.2 Additionally, United States nonproliferation efforts in the 1970s were inconsistent.
Coming to fruition at an extraordinarily tense moment for the global economy, the Agreement represented a highly visible challenge to United States hegemony by the primus inter pares of United States allies in Europe and South America and a contraction of the United States superpower’s sphere of influence.
The United States and West Germany,” Journal of International Affairs, Nº 37, 1984, 291.
Perry, William, Contemporary Brazilian Foreign Policy:The International Strategy of an Emerging Power.
Helmut Schmidt, Jimmy Carter und die Krise der deutsch-amerikanischen Bezeigungen.
Gábor VÖRÖS Introduction While crises are not something out of the ordinary when we talk about the Cold War, the Operation Able Archer 83 and its precursors made the Soviet leaders feel particularly uneasy due to renewed overt antagonism between the two superpowers.
Operation Able Archer 83 was a seemingly routine yearly military exercise in the November of 1983 but the aforementioned convergence of circumstances made it a scholarly contested topic.
While the existence of the exercise was known for a long time, and some of the American and Soviet reactions are documented and available to the public as well, a trove of documents – over 1000 declassified pageswas just recently released to the public by the National Security Archive.
By navigating through the articles characterized by sensationalism, I will try to analyze the event and whether the saying that it was the closest moment to World War III warrants legitimacy.
First, I will describe what the world looked like in the late 1970s and early 1980s, to establish a clear picture of the events running up to the Operation Able Archer 83.
It was a particularly uneasy period in the Cold War which signaled the end of the détente that characterized the period from the late 1960s up until the late 1970s.
Additionally, I will take a look at the military-strategic situation, and the balance of power at that time was in Europe and how the United States and the Soviet Union fared in the defensive aspects.
Following the background history, the intricacies of the Operation Able Archer 83 will be examined.
Then, I will try to uncover how serious the Soviet war scare was in reality.
Therefore, to have a grasp of why the Soviets interpreted it in the way they did, we have to take a look at the worsening US-Soviet relations and what events led to it.
In the midst of the Cold War, it was in a time that many have thought are some of the darkest days of the rivalry between the two superpowers.
The détente, that is the thawing of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union characterizing the majority of the 1960s and 70s, was seen as faltering.
This is in a sharp contrast to what happened in the years starting with 1979.
What made the Operation Able Archer 83 sound so dangerous to the Soviets was actually a confluence of events that led to the severe deterioration of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.
I have found 7 overarching developments and 2 unfortunately timed events that could have led the Soviets to a belief that an American attack is imminent.
The seven overarching developments The first development that is said to signal the breakdown of the détente, hence raising the suspicions of both sides in the coming years, was the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
While the intervention in itself was a surprise to the West, it was an accumulation of events that necessitated the foray of the Soviet Union.
After numerous requests for help by the Socialist oriented government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, the Soviet Politburo decided to send 30 thousand troops into Afghanistan to shore up the government of its client state.
While the gains of the mujahideen, the local tribal fighting groups, were reversed, the situation went exactly the other way the Soviet leadership imagined.
This was one of the first occasions when a modern major power had to fight an insurgency with a military conceived for conventional warfare.
The Soviet military machine was caught unprepared in this kind of warfare and later, in 1988, it had to withdraw its troops without a lasting solution for the South Asian country.
The United States had taken its time to respond to the unfolding events but covertly it armed the mujahideen even in the late 1970s.7 The second factor that further deteriorated the American-Soviet relations was actually the American reciprocation to the invasion.
Geostrategically, the United States responded with the Carter Doctrine which stipulated that the United States will defend the Persian Gulf and use military force against any country which tries to destabilize or take control over the energy-rich region.
For the Soviet Union, the organization of the 1980 Summer Olympics was a prestige issue since no Eastern European country has ever organized a Summer Olympics game before.
The United States reasoned that the invasion of Afghanistan was against the international norms, therefore it will not send any athletes to the Olympic Games.
The American public widely supported it and the United States also tried to rally other countries around its cause and even sent Muhammad Ali to several African nations to gather support.
The boycotters included some Muslim countries which refused to participate due to the invasion of Afghanistan, a fellow Muslim nation, but did so not because of the call of the United States, rather because the Islamic Conference also decided by a boycott.0 This diplomatic step really hurt the Soviets’ image and elevated the Afghanistan issue to worldwide media level through which many more people were familiarized with the events in South Asia.
This United States also imposed a grain and high-tech embargo on the Soviets, in addition to suspending the SALT II ratification in the Congress and increasing the United States naval presence in the Indian Ocean region.
None of these measures could sway the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan, and it maintained troops there until 1988.
But all of this was just the run-up to a more confrontational period between the Soviet Union and the United States.
The political life of the Cold War was heavily personalized, therefore a change in the détente can also have been contributed to personal changes.
First, in 1979 Margaret Thatcher was elected Prime Minister in the United Kingdom.
But what really changed the political landscape of the 1980s was the election of Ronald Reagan in the United States.
He ran on an anti-communist and confrontational platform and won in a landslide against the then-incumbent Jimmy Carter.
The people of the United States demanded a stronger president in the face of the Iranian hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
This vision was based on the rollback strategy of John Foster Dulles and can be deemed quite aggressive in its aims.
What was later called the Reagan Doctrine was actually a strategy captured in the NSC National Security Decision Directives 75.
This will remain the primary focus of United States policy toward the USSR.”.293 But at the same time, it also stipulated that the United States should engage in negotiations with the Soviet Union and promote internal change in the Communist heartland.
While strides have been made in this military buildup, the target was never reached.5 As an additional measure, the Reagan Doctrine stated that outreach must be made to anti-communist proxy forces, like the mujahideen in Afghanistan.
The Reagan Doctrine was the single most important strategic feature of that period, one that contributed enormously to the way the Soviets later perceived the Operation Able Archer 83.
Had it not been for this assertive rollback strategy, the Soviets would not have necessarily been in a mindset anticipating a first-strike from the United States at any given moment.
The system would have used then-non-existing technologies, like space-based lasers for exoatmospheric interception and ground-based interceptors with kill vehicles.
The whole concept struck apprehension into the hearts and minds of Soviet military and political leaders as if built, the system would have broken down the pillars of mutually assured destruction and opened up the possibility of a United States first-strike without the fear of retaliation.
While the breakdown of MAD would have been a disaster in itself for the Soviets , it also signaled a huge technological discrepancy between the two states and forced the Soviet Union to play catch-up.
This development – while still relatively new at the time of the Operation Archer 83heavily influenced the Soviet calculus, since they weren’t sure what capabilities the United States already possesses from the SDI.298 The fifth development, and one of the most important, was the so-called Euromissile Crisis.
It was a period of tit-for-tat missile deployment in Europe that lasted from 1979 up until the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987.
While the missile in itself was not a huge qualitative jump over the previously deployed SS-4s and SS-5s, the transporter-erector-launcher made it road-mobile whereas the previous ones had fixed position launchers.
NATO was forced to counter this by the so-called double-track decision.
Neither did change the military calculus by much but it forced the parties to enter brinkmanship.
These were operations specifically designed to make the Soviets feel uneasy and to expose holes in their early warning systems.
For this reason, the United States conducted naval and air operations around the clock which were meant to gather intelligence about Soviet radar sites, early warning intelligence operations, troop movements and placements, but most importantly they were performed to strike a sense of uncertainty into the minds of the Soviets.
Starting in 1981, United States bombers conducted surprise operations directly towards the Soviets border, then veered off course, and United States attack submarines practiced attacks on Soviet ballistic missile submarines under the North Pole, all of this irregularly and without any observable patterns.
Additionally, United States intelligence ships snooping for data and aircraft carriers practicing naval air operations were stationed near the Soviet coasts.
On the other side of the Soviet landmass, the United States conducted the FLEETEX 83 naval exercise in the Pacific which is described by some as one of the most powerful gathering of naval armada in history.
It happened few weeks after Reagan’s televised speech of the SDI and included 3 carrier battle groups with thousands of sailors.
The exercise was aimed at antisubmarine and antiaircraft warfare, and the participating aircrafts deliberately forced the Soviets to turn on their search radars to have a fix on their positions.
While the exercise was not unusual and uncommon in and of itself, the Soviets clearly could have thought that after devising a plan to counter Soviet strategic nuclear forces, the Americans are exercising the denial of Soviet conventional forces, in particular their air and submarine capabilities.
Consequently, the Soviet Union, fearing a likely first-strike from the US, initiated the Operation RYaN, an unprecedented intelligence gathering operation about a potential surprise United States attack, which is our last, seventh, development.
It is debated whether this was a reactionary measure to the American PSYOPs or to the worsening strategicpolitical situation.
Essentially it was an intelligence alert that required each rezidentura and intelligence agency to swoop up as much intelligence as possible on US/NATO political and strategic developments, as well as on the nuclear balance and early warning of a surprise American first-strike.7 While the massive intelligence collection operation was frightening in itself, a much more precarious – and lesser-known – supplement to the Operation RYaN was the development of a RYaN computer model.
Starting in the 1970s, it was an intelligence data analysis model – a sort of precursor to today’s big data algorithmsthat weighed around 40000 data points regarding military, political and economic situation of the USSR vis a vis the United States.
The model was based on the World War II logic that if the correlation of the forces was heavily skewed towards the United States then they would attempt a first-strike against the Soviet Union.
The system had to be constantly updated with new data, and the leaders of the project demanded huge intelligence data inflows so the RYaN model can present them with an accurate picture.
If the score was above 70 (or even above 60, according to some officials), the Soviet Union was roughly on par with the United States and was considered safe from a first-strike.
As the international situation got more precarious, the score began to diminish, and subsequently, the intelligence officers demanded more and more precise data.
The accuracy of the model is heavily debated and is considered imprecise but this did not stop the Soviet leadership to shudder in fear as they were weekly fed the information by the program.
The concoction of these overlapping strategic developments made this period particularly dangerous and with the militaries on a hair trigger, the two superpowers were often dead reckoning the unfolding situation.
These strategic factors were accompanied by two unfortunately timed events.
The plane had entered Soviet Airspace twice over the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Northern Pacific region but was shot down in international airspace.
The move sparked huge international backlash with the United States trying to rally likeminded nations against the Soviet Union to impose commercial boycotts and the denial of landing rights of Russian commercial planes.
The Soviet leadership was adamant in its position that the plane was spying as part of a Japanese-American reconnaissance mission.
After the FLEETEX 83 exercise, the Soviet air defenses of the region were put on alert, therefore, any overflight over Soviet territory could have been perilous.
This event further exacerbated the tensions between the two rivals and provided the rationale for both sides to criticize the other.
On September 26, 1983, the newly developed Soviet early warning satellite, called Oko, provided a false alarm about an American ICBM launch.
Around this time period, the precursor exercises to Operation Able Archer 83, the Atlantic Forge and Reforger were still ongoing.
The early warning satellite reported five Minuteman II ICBM launches from the United States homeland which it saw due to their infrared signatures.
As the ground-based early warning radars could not have a trace on any missiles, Lt.
Colonel Petrov decided to act against all odds and called it a false alarm.
Later it turned out that he probably saved the world because of his gut instinct.
The alleged heat signatures were actually reflections of sunlight from high-altitude clouds.
An investigation into the Oko system found numerous flaws which were not exactly surprising since not even Lt.
However, the Soviet military leaders were apprehensive because their satellite-based early warning system was not functioning properly and the ground-based radars could only acquire ICBMs after they passed the horizon, thus limiting the time available for deliberating a counterstrike.4 The strategic-military balance On top of all of that, the soviet leaders faced another fear.
Economically, the Soviet Union became stuck in a period of stagnation in which between 1981 and 1985 its GDP expanded only at an annualized 1,9 percent, while that of the United States grew by 3,4 percent in the same time period.
Their agricultural sector was also in shambles but it did not deter the Soviet Union to spend 20 percent of their GDP on military expenditures.
Both the air and naval legs of the Soviet nuclear triad were vulnerable.
It was also assessed that the Soviet leadership would have had 3 minutes of warning while the Pershing II would be able to strike in 6 minutes, potentially making a decapitation strike feasible.1 As I alluded to it earlier, the Soviet Union had a really crude early warning system in the late 1970 and early 1980s.
While developments were ongoing, it was still considered only partially reliable, something a military leader does not want to hear when it comes to nuclear issues.
The USSR also lacked a “nuclear football”, a mobile nuclear control center in the form of a briefcase from which a nuclear strike could be authorized.
The Soviets were also seemingly unable to keep up with the United States in space.
A prime example of this technological discrepancy was the Columbia Space Shuttle which, at least in the view of the USSR, would theoretically be able to lob ordnance at the Soviet Union from the space.
The blend of these seven overarching developments, the strategic inferiority of the USSR and two unfortunately timed events caused a sort of paranoia in the Politburo, thinking they are strategically insecure to an American surprise attack.
There is a clash between opinions about this exercise, as many are saying that this was the peak of the 1983 war scare and a nuclear faceoff was imminent between the superpowers.
Before assessing the credibility of the claims here is a short description of the exercise.
It was an annual ten-day command post exercise in which NATO assessed their command, control and communications capabilities in the event of a nuclear war.
It was the culmination of a months-long exercise series which also included the Autumn Forge and the Reforger 83, in which tens of thousands of NATO troops were moved throughout Europe.
Orange retaliates in the form of an invasion of Yugoslavia, Finland, and eventually Norway.
Blue defends its allies and conventional war descends into chemical, and eventually nuclear war.
This reduction is reportedly attributed to the United States National Security Advisor Robert McFarlane because it would have made the exercise too high-profile.
During the exercise, NATO simulated an elevation up until DEFCON 1 which would have meant that a nuclear war is imminent.
But, from the perspective of Soviets, the exercise ended somewhat abruptly on November 11 after reaching DEFCON 1.
Then the forces on both sides were winding down and the chance of war dropped considerably.
According to a former CIA officer if the exercise had continued even 24 hours “the West might have unwittingly stumbled into a nuclear holocaust”.328 Assessment of the Soviet war scare But even if the Soviets were indeed alarming their forces for a possible nuclear exchange, some in Soviet perches say that they did not even know about the Able Archer 83.
They did know, however, about the precursors to it, the Autumn Forge and Reforger, and deemed them the most dangerous military exercises.
But it would have been very unusual if the Soviets did not know about any NATO exercise since it was one of the general tenets of the Soviet doctrines to keep a close eye on the adversaries military exercises.
While the Soviet leadership was most probably frightened because of the military exercises, the United States Intelligence Community and NATO was not aware or did not want to make others aware of the gravity of the exercise in Soviet eyes at that time.
An American intelligence assessment, the 1984 Special National Intelligence Estimate , concluded that while in their view there was a general paranoia and war scare in their perks, the Soviets did not anticipate an imminent attack on their homeland.
On an added note, I also have to mention that it was also true of the American population as well.
No wonder that at this time came out the famous movie about the aftermath of a nuclear war, The Day After.
Even President Reagan was stunned when he saw it.4 While the American intelligence services downplayed the risk of confrontation, President Reagan was questioning whether the exercises could be interpreted wrongly by the Soviets.
The PFIAB report cites the deterioration of relations and the tilting balance of power in military-strategic terms as a reason for that.
This very same report also concludes that the CIA’s 1984 SNIE report of the war scare underestimated the risks at the time of the exercise.
Now, newly declassified documents show that the war scare was indeed understated by the SNIE report and it was “sanitized” before handing it over to other NATO members.
But even in the wake of these assessments, some are questioning the severity of the situation by saying that both the NATO and the USSR knew about each other’s war plans and could distinguish between a military exercise or actual preparations for a war.
While, based on this information, it does seem that the war scare was indeed real in the Soviet leadership and they really did take some measures to prepare for an imminent American first-strike, the United States leadership, however, could not grasp the whole gravity because of two reasons.
Now, we know that was not the case and the Soviets felt that they were falling behind the United States both in economic and military terms.
There is a dispute about whether Operation Able Archer 83 itself could have been a catalyst for a nuclear exchange.
In my opinion, Operation RyaN is the most responsible for the war scare.
It made the USSR realize that the United States will leave them behind in the long-run and that made them feel anxious.
The exercise series would have been fairly routine if it had not been for the damaged relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States.
It was such a tense period because the Soviets could have thought that the strategic situation and the exercises themselves would have been a good ruse for a surprise attack.
It would have been a really short-sighted way of thinking from the part of the United States to use the wargames as a cover for what would most likely have been the destruction of the Soviet Union but with US/NATO losses also in the millions.
As a counterpoint one could say that, if a perceived weakness was seen in an adversary, it opens up the possibility for a decapitation strike.
But in each case, it has to bear the consequences for it and in this case, in my opinion, it was not worth it for the United States.
It is also very well in the realm of possibility that some in the military and intelligence brass did not interpret the United States’ military and economic position correctly or did not want to see it in that way.
While there are certain second-hand experiences in my work, these cannot be called purely unbiased, and the lack of true first-hand evidence (e.g. transcripts of Politburo meetings in the time period of the exercises) does not make it possible to provide a real answer to this question.
There are documents that assume that the USSR had every right to fear an imminent attack but there are others which challenge it by saying that the Soviets knew that this was just an exercise but they did take some steps to alert their troops nevertheless.
The sheer range of different opinions on this issue keeps me from providing one answer to the question whether the Soviets were fearing and preparing for an immediate US first-strike.
Therefore, the conclusion of the research paper will be based on my opinion on the 1983 Soviet war scare regardless of any first or second-hand account, and solely based on my assessment of the events leading up to it, as well as on the strategicmilitary balance between the superpowers.
Based on this, I conclude this research paper by saying that in my view 1) the Soviet Union was aware of their worsening strategic balance and outlook 2) in its political, military and intelligence leadership there was a permeating war scare 3) they knew the Operation Able Archer 83 and its precursors were just exercises 4) but nonetheless they did anticipate an American first-strike under the guise of the exercises 5) there are, however, no conclusive evidence that the Soviet leadership was actively preparing for a preemptive or counterstrike.
Maybe if a few more documents will be declassified both on the American and Russian side, we can strengthen this conclusion or even arrive at a completely different one.
Introduction With Japan’s role rapidly changing in the 21st century, I think it is important to know the peculiarities of their constitution, and how it is affecting regional and global politics.
But to understand their constitution we must understand under what circumstances it was written.
Furthermore, to see how this limitation on the army was slowly but surely circumvented over the years of the Cold War.
Finally, how the constitution is moving inevitably towards complete abandonment.
My paper will focus on the military aspects of the Japanese disarmament and the legality of certain weapons.
The first Japanese constitution was the Meiji constitution enacted in 1890.
It was based on the Prussian/German and British model because the United States’ was deemed too liberal and the French and Spanish were deemed too despotic.
The constitution gave considerable power to the Emperor; however, in theory, the Prime minister was the actual leader of the government.
In the context of my paper, the most important point of the constitution was Article 11.
During the waning days of World War II after the German surrender, the Allies met in Potsdam to discuss Japan.
Truman, Churchill, and Chiang Kai-shek outlined the Japanese terms of surrender.
After the US dropped two atomic bombs and the Soviets invaded Manchuria with 1. million soldiers the Japanese were shocked sufficiently to surrender on August 15.
The Allies occupied Japan, lead by the Supreme Commander of the Allies Forces Douglas MacArthur.
He was adamant that new constitution should be made with the Japanese and not forced upon them.
The Japanese, however, were reluctant to rewrite the original Meiji constitution so they just made minor adjustments.
MacArthur rejected this and ordered his staff to write a new one from scratch.
Even though the authors were not Japanese they took the old constitution into account and also took the advice of Minister Shidehara to add an article to prevent Japan from declaring war.
The new constitution was completed in less than a week on 13 February 1946.
It was enacted on 3 May 1947 as a continuation of the previous constitution, not as a new one.
Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes.
In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained.
The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized.0 In effect, this article prevented Japan from raising an army, however, global politics steered things in a different direction quite early on.50 saw the beginning of the Korean War and some of the occupying forces were redeployed to Korea.
This left Japan defenseless and without armed protection, so MacArthur ordered the creation of the National Police Reserve to maintain order.
From the National Police Reserve to the Japan Self-Defense Forces The started out as a force of 75,000 men armed with light infantry equipment.
Their main job was to maintain order in post-war Japan instead of the Allied troops.
There was some debate whether to allow a partial remilitarization of Japan, however, these ideas were dismissed by MacArthur.
The police reserve was structured as an army, so even from the beginning there were some contradictions, however, MacArthur insisted that the conflict in the neighboring country would resonate throughout the world so a strong police force was necessary.
MacArthur saw the defeat in Korea so he decided that the Japanese “police” would need something stronger than small arms to defeat the T34s.
To avoid breaking the newly formed constitution they gave all military equipment civilian names, so tanks became special purpose vehicles etc.
It was pretty hard to explain why a police force needed tanks (even if they were not named tanks) so the police force was transformed into a defense force with the primary goal of defending Japan from a perceived invasion.
As the reserve grew and more equipment was arriving, the need for experienced officers also grew.
The need for heavy equipment was dire because of the heavy motorization of communist forces.
There was considerable debate whether former military officers could be reinstated into the police force but despite some opposition, the need for a well trained force was greater.
By 1952 the size of the NPR was more than 110,000 and was renamed National Safety Forces.
A separate branch was added as the coastguard units were within the NPR now they became separate as the Coastal Safety Force.
We can see that even from the beginning the lightly armed police force quickly became the last line of defense against perceived communist forces.
Both required the expertise of former military officers, which joined the police and because of the heavy weapons the militarization, also began.
Since Japan cannot have an army, the police force had to defend the Islands.
Since Japan cannot declare war it is impossible for the army to prosecute it.
However, because others can declare war on Japan again the emphasis is on defense.
I will try to analyze certain aspects of the JSDF like funding, equipment, and personnel to determine whether it’s an army or not.
Today the JSDF has an active personnel count of 247k and a reserve of 56k the budget is fixed at only 1% of the GDP, however, the government circumvents this by assigning certain equipment and tasks the JSDF has and does as civilian, thus financing it outside of the 1% limitation.
The $41 billion budget however still makes Japan the world’s 7th largest military spender but considering the 1% limitation, it is the 17th in the world.
It is widely regarded as one of the world’s best anti-submarine and minesweeper fleets, however recently they started to focus on antimissile warfare, adapting it in 2003.
The changes were due to adapting to post-cold war tactics and the threat of nuclear submarines lessened the threat from North Korea and China Grew.
She has a full flight deck and is similar in every aspect to a traditional carrier, but it is classified on Lloyd’s Register as a helicopter carrier.
Bush’s complement of 90 jets it is still enough to level most countries leadership in minutes.
The approximate size of the ground forces is 150k active personnel and 30k reserve.
During the Cold War, the primary strategic mission of the JGSDF was to hold off a possible Soviet invasion of Hokkaido which, in recent times, changed to counter Chinese threats with a huge emphasis on the areas that are disputed between the two countries.4 In my opinion, the JSDF is an army in every way short of actually being named as such.
While it might not have the numbers to contend with neighboring countries’ armies it is definitely an army.
The organizational structure, the equipment, the doctrines all point toward it being an army.
In a 1988 survey over 74% of the people were favorably impressed by the JSDF and 76% of the people saw disaster relief as its primary role.
First, the physical defense of the island itself, fighting anyone who wants to invade Japan.
Secondly, it can be argued that the growing force of neighboring countries poses a threat to Japan and they need to defend themselves from any aggression.
Thirdly, the imminent threat as described in international law can be used as a preemptive self-defense against a country posing an instant overwhelming threat leaving no choice of means and no moment for deliberation.
Lastly, Japans interest in the world must be defended which in itself creates 2 versions.
The first one being Japanese citizens anywhere in the world, the second one being Japans allies.
The rhetoric behind the latter is that if Japans allies are attacked it would weaken Japan so it is self-defense.
It started out as 1st then quickly turned into the 2nd and now with Shinzo Abe veering the country into a more active foreign policy, it is moving into the 4th Category.
The 3rd category is obviously off limits to Japan because there is no legal way to declare war.
As I described it before the usage of offensive weapons are strictly forbidden.
These weapons include ICBMs, nuclear weapons, aircraft carriers and/or bomber fleets.
I will now describe the current situation of each of these weapons in Japan.
Inter Continental Ballistic Missiles are forbidden, however, Japan has a very developed and active commercial space program.
If the solid fuel rockets were converted to ballistic missiles they would be comparable to the LGM-118A Peacekeeper ICBMs used by the USA 2.
In 2012 Japan had enough plutonium to produce 1000 warheads and additional plutonium in Europe for a further 4000.
The previous point also explains that they could have the necessary delivery system.6 3.
I have already explained the ambiguousness of the “helicopter destroyers” and in my opinion, they should be considered carriers.
Proponents of Japanese armament argue that since some neighbors of Japan, specifically China, has a significantly larger army in every sense, a major increase of Japans forces wouldn’t necessarily mean war potential because she is merely defending herself from a much larger force.
We can see that almost anything short of changing the constitution has been done to create an army.
Arguments surrounding the Constitution Pacifism After the war Japan was disillusioned and humiliated, the imperial and nationalistic tendencies were abandoned.
The new government wanted to prevent another disaster and adopted pacifism to prevent the country from going to war again.
The idea of pacifism since then has become a major part of the culture and the population widely supports pacifists and there is a considerable backlash against every law that would suggest a more warlike state, even though that is prohibited still.
The recent bill introduced in 2014 which I will discuss later is opposed by 54% of the population while only 29% supported it.
This brings up the question whether the population truly supports pacifism or just opposes the bill since Japan has an already well-developed army.
Irrelevance We can see that the government is using every loophole it can find to expand the power of the army.
Finding alternative ways to finance the army to compensate for the 1% GDP limit, classifying carriers as “helicopter destroyers” and attacking the very words of the constitution are just a few examples.
International politics force countries to abandon values they might hold dear we just have to think about the USA PATRIOT Act and we can clearly see that abandoning certain points in the constitution is hard but bending the law is much easier.
Considering the general population’s deep-seated love and belief in pacifism we can see that Japan will, most likely, won’t abandon clause 9, however, it will pass a series of laws that will inevitably damage the spirit of the clause itself.
This means that the JSDF would be able to come to the aid and defend allies in trouble, as opposed to the use of strict self-defense.
The prime minister said that this would not mean that Japan would be involved in any land war, but would act as a deterrent.
Japan would be able to help the United States or other allies directly (protecting shipping, convoys, bases) but still without deploying troops.
This reinterpretation uses the broadest meaning of self-defense arguing that if an ally is attacked Japan itself would weaken.
When the idea of pacifism must be defended with force we inevitably get into the quagmire violating said pacifism.
The leaders of a country must defend it from actual or perceived threats, the population may believe in peaceful coexistence but again, the reality is different.
Japan was diplomatically isolated from neighboring countries since the II World War; but this tendency has changed.
However, we can see also that the threat of North Korea is looming over the whole region and it can explode like a powder keg.
In my opinion, it is important to understand that while voting to abandon the article 9 and “remilitarizing” Japan will definitely change the East-Asian balance of power somewhat, we also have to understand that not being able to use diplomatic means, that all neighboring countries can, is a severe hindrance for Japan.
While we can argue about whether Japan has an army or not we can certainly say that the abandonment of one is the special circumstance, not the reestablishment.
If Japan chooses to create an official army again then it will only return to a normal state, where a country can have one, and not to a state of extreme militarism.
The neighbors perceive that they have a strategic advantage over Japan, even if there is a de facto army they can out-produce it anytime.
If Japan increases its military spending then Korea and China will have to do the same even if they want to avoid it.
We can consider that the Article 9 at this point is a hindrance for Japan.
This country has already a well-developed army, global presence, and diplomatic weight to influence on global politics.
While it can be seen as a rearmament process, we interpret it just as a technicality, especially because of the already existing navy and army.
Although it is certain that U S. supports Japan, Korea and China, it will definitely try to convince Japan to keep its pacifist policy.
On the long run, we can hypothesize that the restriction could be abandoned; however, it’s impredictable its effects especially having North Koreas as neighbor.
It was one of the most delicate situations of the Cold War, one in which the Cold War could have become an actual war.
When trying to interpret the crisis, historiography mainly focused on the development of relations between the two blocs.
Recently, however, it has been noted that, in order to fully understand the significance of the crisis, we have to focus on relations within the Eastern bloc.
The aim of this work is, first of all, to effectuate an analysis of the main facts in the “traditional” way of conflict between the two antagonist blocs.
Then, and this will constitute the core part of the paper, I would like to analyze the internal dynamics between the Eastern bloc in order to show how important they were during the evolution of crisis.
In particular, it will be explored the ambiguous relationship between the Eastern Germany leadership and the Soviet Union leadership, which during the course of the crisis became at times very tense.
Finally, I will assert that the construction of the wall -in retrospect and with the benefit of hindsightcan be seen as an acceptable outcome for all the parties involved in the crisis.
The dynamics between blocs The city of Berlin had strategic importance during the Cold War years.
Because of this special status and the responsibilities of the allied powers towards the city, the problems connected to Berlin were never just a national question, but they were always connected with East-West relations.
It soon became evident the superior appeal of Occidental democracy and of free market economy; in other words, the Western-dominated part of the city was considered the outpost of freedom and the showcase of the West.
The cultural and ideal link with the West shaped the roots of its identity and was ostentatiously shown in the oriental part of the city.9 Two different and antithetical systems had to cohabit in the same city, which was a situation not to be found anywhere else.
East Germany feared that in a not too far-off future the economy would collapse.
The table below shows the flow of people that fled East Berlin from 1950 until the edification of the Berlin Wall.
After a peak in 1953, the massive emigration gained again momentum in 1960.
The long-serving Secretary of the SED and deus ex machina of the GDR Walter Ulbricht became increasingly concerned with the massive emigration of people.
In late 1957, he promoted a strong campaign against the Republikflucht.
The people who tried to escape from the GDR were threatened to be punished with up to three years in jail.
Even Khrushchev said that the situation “was not normal” and accused the Western Powers of exploiting West Berlin to organize subversive activities in the GDR.352 The Soviets were very concerned with the possible nuclear build-up of the Federal Republic.
The Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom and the United States once more reaffirmed the determination of their governments to maintain their position and their rights with respect to Berlin including the right of free access.
They found unacceptable a unilateral repudiation by the Soviet Government of its obligations to the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States in relation to their presence in Berlin and the freedom of access to that city or the substitution of the German authorities of the Soviet Zone for the Soviet Government insofar as those rights are concerned.
It must be stressed that, according to some, Khrushchev had begun the crisis without knowing where his bullish stance would lead and without clarifying which consequences a missed agreement with the Western Powers would have.
In March 1959, his lack of a clear vision caused him to retire the ultimatum he had handed the Western Powers a few months prior.
The crisis would come back on the table of negotiations at the Conference of Foreign Ministries in Geneva in May-August 1959.
Despite some attempts, perhaps a little tentative, to solve the question, no agreement was reached in Geneva and the two opposing parties decided to try to solve the question in Camp David in September 1959.
President Eisenhower invited Khrushchev but even this meeting turned out to be quite inconclusive.
Nevertheless, the Soviet leader promised that in the future he would avoid sending ultimatums.
This contributed, for a while, to a decrease in tensions.0 Moreover, Khrushchev and Eisenhower enjoyed a good personal relationship, which was however suddenly brought to an end by the U2 accident.
Actually, it is not clear if the U2 accident had genuinely contributed to the worsening of relations between US and USSR or if Khrushchev, since the negotiations in West Berlin were not going according to his wishes, sought a pretext to start the crisis over again.
Khrushchev affirmed that he did not want to negotiate with Eisenhower any longer.
The Republican President had almost arrived at the end of his second term and at the beginning of 1961 was replaced by John F Kennedy.
Eisenhower could not deny the plane intentions and Khrushchev, to further increase United States uneasiness, decided to publicly criticize the fact.
The Soviet leader handed Kennedy a memorandum, which more or less resembled the 1958 ultimatum.
Kennedy told Khrushchev that he would accept the USSR’s right to sign a separate peace with the GDR,363 but the United States did not want the Soviet Union to unilaterally modify West Berlin’s status.
The Soviet leader, after the abortive invasion of Cuba by US-backed anti-communist exiles, was convinced that Kennedy was an inexperienced adversary, and threatened war; in turn, also the American President did not rule out that war was a possibility.
For the first time since the start of the crisis the two superpowers openly threatened a nuclear war.
The situation was especially risky because the two rivals did not define the casus belli and it remained unclear for both parties what was negotiable and what was not negotiable, what they could concede to the opponent and what instead could not be object of discussion.
These referred only to West Berlin so it seemed that, for the US, original rights in the whole of Berlin were no longer considered of vital interest; he was even available to negotiate with East Germany.
British Premier MacMillan would have been “available” to “get closer” to the Soviet Union (he feared that a military escalation could lead to a nuclear war); France’s de Gaulle was rather content with the American attitude, but did not want to modify the four powers presence in Berlin; in the Federal Republic, the limitation to the three essentials was interpreted as a clear alarm signal of a change in American attitude.
While the two superpowers faced each other and the Soviet frustration grew stronger because of the impossibility to modify the status quo, the flow of East Germans who went to West Berlin further increased.
The sealing off proceeded in stages – at the beginning “with barbed wire and only later by the construction of a concrete wall, all on Sovietcontrolled territory.
However, the East German leadership was partially soothed as the outflow of people strongly decreased even though it did not come to a complete stop.
Moreover, the GDR government recognized the border between East and West as a state frontier between East and West Germany and so they abandoned the claim for the entire Berlin as part of the territory of East Germany.
The GDR de facto respected the three essentials and so military countermeasures were not taken into consideration.0 A few weeks after the division of Berlin over an issue affecting the freedom of access for Western allies in West Berlin, Soviets and Americans troops directly faced each other.
The barrier that was erected – which de facto prevented access to the western sectors by East Germans, but allowed it to Westerners – made it possible to solve the Berlin crisis in practice.
However, the larger German problem could be solved only at the end of the cold war.
On July 25, 1963, after negotiating a moratorium on nuclear tests, the United States and the USSR reached a verbal agreement on the Berlin question, which, de facto, brought a final end to the crisis.
The USSR made it clear that in the future they would recognize the status of West Berlin, including the presence of Western troops and would not discuss the three essential principles.
After reviewing the crisis from the traditional East-West angle, it is important to concentrate on what happened within the Eastern bloc.
In order to fully understand Khrushchev’s behavior, it is essential to focus on his ambiguous relation with Ulbricht and on Chinese pressure.
The ambiguous Ulbricht–Khrushchev relationship First of all, it must be stressed that East Germany was very important for the USSR in general and for Khrushchev in particular.
In 1953 he accused Beria and Malenkov of wanting to betray socialism in East Germany.
Ulbricht was aware of the importance of his country and cunningly used this leverage during the crisis.5 The East German leader had long pushed for Soviet leadership to close the border around West Berlin.
Also some Soviet representatives in the German Democratic Republic agreed with his view.
The evidence from the newly opened archives also shows that the Soviet leader, Nikita S Khrushchev, was more interested in reaching a German settlement with the West and preoccupied with preventing East German leader Walter Ulbricht from sabotaging this process than has been recognized.
In addition, the documents confirm the view of several scholars that Soviet fear of West German acquisition of nuclear weapons was an important influence on Soviet Deutschlandpolitik (policy on Germany) connected with the crisis.
We must proceed from the fact that the Berlin question can be resolved independently from resolving the entire German problem, by the gradual economic and political conquest of West Berlin.
Regarding various types of administrative measures, we should turn to these only in the extreme circumstance of avoiding an undesired aggravation of the situation in the city.6 The Soviet leader resisted for a while, in order not to increase the tension against the Western governments.
He was still looking for a broader agreement with the Western Powers, which would have included not only the resolution of the Berlin question but also a peaceful settlement of the German question as a whole.
That motive should not be forgotten as it is as important as the other motives (the Soviet willingness to prevent West Germany from building up, the attempts to break the unity of the Western Powers, or Khrushchev’s determination to show his internal opposition and the Chinese that he was tough enough) when it comes to analyzing the causes which pushed Khrushchev to start the crisis.
Ulbricht wanted to revise the status quo as soon as possible and in the following two years pushed Khrushchev to action.
Soviet Brinkmanship Seen from Inside”, Cold War History, Vol., Nº 2, 2003, 64.
The SED’s Secretary was concerned by the fact that the Soviet Union had recognized West Germany in 1955, while the Western Powers refused to recognize East Germany.
In September 1960 “the East Germans announced that Western diplomats accredited to embassies in Bonn had to obtain permission from the East German Foreign Ministry to enter East Berlin”.381 The Soviet Union thought that these provocations were useless or harmful.
The main problem was that there were deep differences between Soviet and German views.2 Ulbricht was uninterested in détente with the Western Powers; his main preoccupation was the annexation of West Berlin.
Khrushchev, even if he did not accept the status quo, wanted the city to be neutral.
Besides, the ongoing flow of young and skilled people from East Berlin was a problem of vital importance for Ulbricht, whereas for Khrushchev, Berlin was overall a tactical weapon to use against the Western Powers.
He needed it both as a geostrategic Achilles's heel of the Western security system and a Western Hong Kong, a trade link between the communist East and capitalist West Germany.
He was prepared to negotiate with Americans, British and French over their presence in and access to West Berlin.
When the so-called Chinese-Soviet schism did occur,386 Ulbricht did not hesitate to use the “Chinese card” to put pressure on Khrushchev and to exploit the differences between Moscow and Peking in order to get advantages as far as Berlin was concerned.
The Soviets did not know about the trip and only found out about it later.
The Soviet leader managed to contain Ulbricht’s requests to modify the status quo only for a few months.
After criticizing the Soviet posture with Mao, Ulbricht in the successive months of 1961 decided to use the Chinese card in another way.
The East European Socialist leaders all emphasized that they had their own pressing economic issues and so they lacked the capacity to grant significant aid to the German Democratic Republic.
Probably this was “the final straw leading Khrushchev to see that he had to agree to close the border around West Berlin to help the GDR”.389 The economic situation in East Germany, strained by the massive emigration, was too difficult.
In general Mao thought that the Soviet leader was too soft with Western Powers.
When Tito was rehabilitated and during the management of the Berlin crisis the relations between the two countries collapsed.
At the end of the sixties there was even a short war because of unresolved border problems.
Ennio di Nolfo, Dagli imperi militari agli imperi tecnologici, La politica internazionale nel XX secolo, 2002, 309.
Of course we had similar difficulties with the transition to agricultural cooperatives as in other People’s Democracies.
In all the other People’s Democracies, in the context of their closed borders, such political–economic issues could be tackled differently than was possible under our political circumstances.0 Besides, Khrushchev did care about the standard of living of the GDR, as he feared that if the country living standards would fall down to the Soviet ones, the regime would collapse.
However, it is difficult to assess whether Ulbricht’s bleak portraits were completely accurate as he clearly intended to gain support among others Warsaw Pact states for the closure of the border.
Anyhow, the SED Secretary finally won over Khrushchev and could eventually proceed to seal off East Berlin.
Popular Opinion and Social Change before and after the Border Closure of August 1961”, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol., 2004, 25.
In other words, the superpower is compelled by the logic of the system to protect the smaller allies even if the latter have an adventurist posture.
A loss for one side would mean a gain for the other side hence “de-alignment by the smaller states is ultimately illusory, since their protector will defend them”.396 In sum, on the one hand, it is therefore likely that Ulbricht exaggerated the negativity of East Germany’s economic situation.
In October he clearly stated that the USSR would not have supported or even tolerated any unilateral attempt of East Germany against West Berlin to force the new status quo.
The tension continued until 1962 when a diplomatic accident between East Germany and the USSR occurred.
In May, Ulbricht enigmatically told Soviet ambassador Pervukhin, that should tension rise around the wall, he would not feel responsible for further complications.
The Soviet politburo ordered Pervukhin to warn Ulbricht that any action concerning West Berlin should have been previously decided with Moscow.
Snyder emphasizes that his considerations mainly refer to the European arena.
Even if the two rival parts got very close to the outbreak of a war, which was due to the vagueness of the threats and the unclear aims of the Soviet leadership, no superpowers actually wanted to be involved in a conflict.
The Soviet leader Khrushchev, maybe underrating Ulbricht tenacity, was in the most uncomfortable position during the entire crisis, having to deal with opposing pressures from the Western Powers and East Germany.
The differences between Khrushchev and Ulbricht, which were never fully resolved, made the Berlin Crisis a Soviet-East German as well as an East-West crisis, and Ulbricht behavior added to the intensity of the crisis.
Niederschrift über die wichtigsten Gedanken, die Genosse Mikojan in einem Gespräch mit dem Genossen Leuschner in kleinstem Kreis . . . äusserte,’ SAPMO-BArch ZPA, J IV 2/2/766, 1–3.
However, the construction of the Berlin Wall, a dramatic event for the German population, was ultimately accepted by the Western Powers but also by the Soviet Union404, which feared that Ulbricht would try to annex West Berlin manu militari.
Moreover, the Soviets thought that the Berlin Wall was a good solution to protect the GDR’s weak economy, without deeply involving the Soviet Union.
In the words of Khrushchev they “achieved the maximum of what was possible”.406 In retrospect, the apparently makeshift solution of erecting a wall turned out to be an acceptable outcome for all parties involved in the crisis.
For the United States the construction of the wall turned out to be a “blessing in disguise”,407 as it enabled the government to withdraw from a direct confrontation with the USSR without denying the West its access rights to the city.
For the USSR, also, the wall blocked the outflow of people from East Germany and proved to be a powerful tool not only to isolate East Berlin from Western interference but also to contain Ulbricht’s ambitions – namely the signing of a peace treaty and the seizure of West Berlin.
By pushing through the construction of the Wall, Ulbricht achieved his primary aim, but also lost his most powerful bargaining tool for achieving his above-mentioned goals.
Soviet-East German Relations, 1953-1961” Princeton Studies in International History and Politics, 200, 141.
New Evidence from the Polish and East German Archives,” CWIHPB, 11 , 221.
In other words, also for the GDR the wall marked the beginning of a period of greater social and economic stability – and of oppressive control for the East German population.
Bibliography Primary Sources Four Power Communiqué on Berlin in Paris, NSA/Berlin , 14 December 1958.
Conference of first secretaries of Central Committees of Communist and workers parties of socialist countries for the exchange of views on the questions related to preparation and conclusion of German peace treaty, 3-5 August 1961.
Dagli imperi militari agli imperi tecnologici, La politica internazionale nel XX secolo.
Hungary’s Road to IMF Membership Ágnes REMETE Introduction Hungary became a member of the International Monetary Fund in May 1982, after a very fast accession procedure lasting only six months.
The membership can be considered an ending point to a nearly 20 year period, during which Hungary strove to achieve a peaceful, potentially even fruitful relationship with the Western Bloc based on mutual interests.
Since the countries of the Socialist Bloc could not conduct independent foreign policy, Hungary had to push through this maneuvering operation in such a way that the interests of the Soviet Union and the countries of the the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance could not be damaged, which was a quite challenging task, considering the international context of the time.
In this situation, as highlighted by Csaba Békés, the only option for the respective Hungarian leadership was to exploit the available foreign political space for manoeuvre, always within the given framework of constraints.
Moreover, Hungary’s foreign political manoeuvrability was not determined solely by the changing relations of the two opposing blocs, but by a more complex system of “tripartite determinism”, including the Soviet Union, the Western countries and the East Central European states.
We can conclude that “Hungary had to perform a balancing act to pursue specific objectives in terms of an all-East-Central-European lobby-contest”409, which was no simple task.
As I have mentioned, the question of the possible membership was first considered more seriously almost 20 years before Hungary’s admission, already in the 1960s.
Thus the essay will concentrate only on this short period of time, which finally led to the country’s accession to the IMF in 1982.
Besides this, I would also like to mention some basic agreements that the country managed to conclude in the first years of its membership that rescued the country from a state of complete insolvency.
I would like to present the events in chronological order, concentrating only on the most important steps and highlighting the different character of certain phases influenced by partly international, partly national necessities.
I do not intend to give an overall analysis of the broader international situation of this period, thus I am going to take into consideration only those factors that are relevant, certainly bearing in mind the deterministic nature of the international circumstances and especially Hungary’s place in the international bipolar system.
Firstly, I would like to briefly cover the period from after the Second World War to 1968, with special regard to the first timid steps towards the new, Western-based financial organizations.
Moreover, I would like to present those economic driving forces, or rather constraints, which pushed Hungary towards considering the issue of membership.
The country’s economy was in such a ruined state that it would have been crucial to obtain additional financial resources to rebuild and modernize the structure of the economy.
In 1946, despite the unfavorable international circumstances, Hungary submitted its membership application to the IMF and to the World Bank, but being an ally of the Nazi Germany during the war was obviously not a proper reference for the country.
Thus the application was rejected at that time and the question was not seriously reconsidered until the 1960s.
However, it would have been a logical step to join the Washington twins at the time Hungary joined the United Nations in 1955.
This was indeed discussed by the government, but the return to power of the Stalinist Mátyás Rákosi in July 1955 and the return to the pre-1953 economic policies made this step untimely.2 For the Soviet Union, it was extremely important to represent the interests of the socialist countries with the votes of its satellite states in the UN, where real decisions were not made.
It was unwilling, however, to join the IMF, and expressively “advised” socialist countries to stay away from the “extended arms of imperialism”.413 Brezhnev purposefully emphasized at the Warsaw Pact Political Consultative Committee meeting in 1965 that the imperialists were trying to extend their contacts into the socialist countries to influence their domestic lives and to undermine their unity by offering technical and economic incentives.
Schönfeld, Roland ed., The role of international financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe.
The real economic situation was not at all in compliance with the loudly preached promises of accelerating growth.
In October 1964, a new reform committee was convened to discuss how to get out of this dead-end.
The most radical reform variant was approved and 1968 was chosen as the year to implement the timid version of this reform.71-1972 were the targeted years for the introduction of the more radical market socialist variant.5 In parallel with the elaboration of the economic reform concepts, the idea of IMF membership also came up in the 1960s.
At this time only Yugoslavia was a member of the organization from the Soviet Bloc.
Yugoslavia had obtained more than $2 billion in credit from the capitalist international financial organizations by 1968, and a total amount of $312. million only from the IMF, which was quite an attractive amount from the Hungarian point of view as well.
The financial minister already indicated the possibility of applying for a total amount of $150-200 million in long-term credit from Western countries in 1966 and the idea of IMF membership was also introduced as a means to reach this goal.
The National Bank of Hungary submitted a resolution in March 1966 which proposed a start to negotiations with the IMF and the World Bank.
Hungarian policymakers regarded IMF membership important because of its possible contributions to reach the goals of the New Economic Mechanism.
The initiators of the proposal pointed out that it would have been preferable to obtain the needed credits from socialist countries instead, but it was already clear in the 1960s that it is an unrealistic presumption to hope for financial help from the CMEA countries, simply because of their similarly harsh economic situations.
Thus, according to the initiators, Hungary had to turn to international financial institutions for help, and this was to be achieved through personal contacts, not on an official level.
The role of international financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe.
However, they also highlighted the importance of informing the Soviet Union about the Hungarian intentions.
The proposal gives an overview concerning the functioning and operation mechanisms of the IMF, and it lists the possible advantages and dangers resulting from membership.
The proposal concludes that IMF membership would entail significant economic advantages for the country, and the Articles of Agreement does not contain any unacceptable clauses and conditions from the Hungarian point of view.7 From 1966, discreet negotiations began concerning the possibility of Hungary’s IMF membership.
Principally, the leaders of the National Bank, Chairman Andor László and Managing Director János Fekete played an outstanding role in the negotiations.
In June 1966, Fekete held confidential negotiations with the deputy governor of the institution, Jaspers Rootham, and asked him to intimately inquire about the Hungarian question.
Fekete also had an informal meeting with a representative from the Bank of England who assured him that the Hungarian case was welcomed within British Foreign Ministry circles.8 France also supported the Hungarian case expressively and fostered the admission of socialist countries to the IMF and to the World Bank, with the intention to reduce the already existing Anglo-Saxon hegemony within the international financial life.
However, it was obvious that the leading capitalist country, the United States, could not be circumvented, as it alone gave 25% of the total quotas of the IMF member states.
Thus Fekete met with American politicians as well; he even had a negotiation with Brzezinski, an advisor from the United States Department of State and with Robert Roosa, former Deputy Secretary of Finance.
Besides Bulgaria, Hungary was the most loyal member of the group of ""closely co-operating socialist countries"" being formed within the Warsaw Pact at this time.
The Hungarian leadership maintained good relations with the EEC and the GDR in the 1960s, and even concluded a partial agreement with the Vatican in 1964.
These steps made it possible for Hungary to then break out from the isolation period of 1956-1962.
The culmination of this process could have been Hungary’s membership in the IMF, but by this time the Soviet anti-reformist forces, led by Brezhnev and Kosygin, strongly opposed the idea of such a dependent relationship.3 Following the invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968, such a decision again became inappropriate.
The “Golden Age” and the New Economic Mechanism The 1968 Czechoslovak intervention significantly overshadowed the relations of the socialist countries and the international financial organizations.
Változó erőtérben – változó egyensúlyozás: Adalék Magyarország háború utáni gazdaságtörténetéhez.
After the “Prague Spring”, it was feared that the events in Czechoslovakia, sooner or later, would transgress the limits that could be tolerated by the Soviet leadership and would disqualify all kinds of reform in the Soviet Bloc, including the Hungarian economic reform.
Still, economic reform was already on its way in the form of the launched New Economic Mechanism, and the reform process even resulted in unexpected, however only initial, economic successes.
Therefore, besides the changed international environment and the Soviet opposition to the Hungarian IMF related conceptions, the positive economic results of the NEM also contributed to the drop of consideration of IMF membership for a period of time.
He highlights that the Soviet Union did not support Hungary’s membership either in 1982; still it managed to join the organization.
This could have happened because the USSR finally agreed to accept every step that did not entail a profound change of the socialist system.
And besides this, for Hungary, membership was an urgent necessity rather than a matter of choice.
For the Hungarian leadership, the main question was not the Soviet opinion in regard to membership, but rather the state of the national economic balance and other, basically economic factors.
On the other hand, concerning the New Economic Mechanism and the Hungarian reform process, Csaba László argues that since the main characteristic of the Hungarian economy in the 1960s and 1970s was the unilateral, absolute dependence on the Soviet and in general on the socialist countries’ economies, which were far behind the world economy in the sense of modernity and effectiveness, it is quite imaginary and nostalgic to claim that we can talk about any real modernization and reform in the case of Hungary.
Besides this, it would put a limit on Hungary’s independent activities, and these institutions would have the opportunity to get an inside view on the country’s present economic situation, development goals, etc.
In addition to this, the opinion stated that the advantages gained from membership were not considerable at all.
Considering the absolutely negative approach towards the Hungarian intentions, it is quite surprising – as Csaba Nagy points it out – that the members and even the leaders of the Hungarian administration responsible for the guidelines of the economic policy were not aware of the real profoundness of the Soviet political shift.
However, at the above-mentioned meeting of the PC, Kádár made it clear that without the consent of the Soviet Union, Hungary could not make a decision in this issue.
He also pointed out that to address such a question, political deliberation was needed in the first place.
Considering these circumstances, we can conclude that the decision of the Hungarian leadership was absolutely realistic when they suspended the negotiations with regard to the IMF membership.
Nevertheless, a few years later the decision was no longer a question of deliberate consideration, but rather of urgent necessity.
And the years in between these deliberations meanwhile proved to be waste of time, regarding the Hungarian economic situation.
IMF Membership as a Possibility The “age of illusions” refers to the policymakers’ response to the external shocks Hungary suffered after the oil crisis of 1973: rising energy and raw material prices, large deterioration in terms of trade, and consequently the rising level of convertible currency debt.
Policymakers believed that the shocks were temporary and that the best policy response was to accelerate the rate of economic growth.
For this, Hungary needed to purchase a rising share of energy and raw materials on the world market for convertible currency.
The modern technology was available largely in the West, again only for convertible currency.
Moreover, at the beginning of 1974, most of the people in leadership positions were replaced by anti-reformist forces, which was a crucial point since without them, Hungary could have elaborated a program of adaptation in response to the new economic environment, and it may have avoided serious indebtedness in the following years.
Nevertheless, the fifth five-year plan did not contain any economically rational response to the deteriorating external balance of the country.7 With regard to Hungary’s international relations, it was at this time when the philosophy of ranking the country’s foreign relations took shape.
The most important partners were – not surprisingly – the socialist countries; they were the first contact if the country needed any kind of goods or had any problems.
The Third World countries were regarded as the second in this rank, and the Western capitalist countries were regarded as “last resorts”.438 However, Hungary’s economic needs dictated the continual fostering of relations with the West.
Only a gradually growing economy could secure political stability and a rise in the standard of living promised by the Kádárist concept.
Talks were successful, but the Hungarian leadership asked for formal approval from the Soviet Union.
However, the question of indebtedness was handled in top secret; even members of the Central Committee did not know the exact numbers concerning the country’s debt.1 In October 1977, the leadership decided to turn westward again.
But before this, in July, the Political Committee examined the question of the country’s economic situation.2 The Committee concluded that Hungary was in severe economic trouble, and because of this, they should ask for the help of the Soviet Union, in compliance with the idea of hierarchical economic relations.
Prime Minister of Hungary György Lázár indicated, however, that another possible solution for overcoming the financial distress by expanding credit resources could be through the settlement of relations with the IMF and the World Bank.
From that time on, the issue of IMF membership was on the agenda of Hungarian policymakers, even if the Prime Minister’s proposal was ultimately not included in the PC resolution.
Also in July 1977, Kádár met Brezhnev at the usual Crimean summer meeting443 and asked for Soviet financial help in order to remedy the problems of the Hungarian balance of payments.
Surprisingly, Brezhnev was quite receptive and promised to grant financial support to Hungary.4 In October 1977, the question was again discussed by the Central Committee445, where Rezső Nyers pointed out that it was in the crucial interest of Hungary to join the IMF, even if it was definitely not in the interest of the Soviet Union.
However, he also considered it important to get the approval of the Soviets to start the negotiations.
At this time, the proposal was again rejected and was not included in the final resolution.
As for Kádár’s position, we can deduce that he was convinced that Hungary had to examine the question seriously, since it was mainly and primarily a political question.
Thus the Soviet leadership had to be consulted before any decision.6 However, a new element to the arguments of the Hungarian leadership by this time was the fact that it was stated expressly that the chance for Hungary to obtain another financial bailout from the Soviet Union was extremely low.
Consequently, the question of membership was gradually evolving into a constraint for Hungary.
IMF Membership As an Inescapable Necessity In the 1970s, the communist regime institutionalized economically unrealistic, utopian ideas.
Foreign credits in the period from 1974 to 1987 partially financed excess demand for public goods and personal consumption of individual products.7 After the oil crisis of 1979, Hungarian foreign debt reached 50% of the country’s GDP,448 thus by this time the Kádár regime could not remedy the effects of the external shock by growing indebtedness, as it had done after the oil crisis of 1973.
In 1979, even this possibility was unavailable, since the conditions were not given to obtain more credits from financial markets.
As a result, Hungary got “caught” in a severe balance of payments crisis.
The Kádár leadership turned its back on Moscow again, but before that, a significant change happened within the Hungarian leadership.
The Political Committee discussed the issue of IMF membership again in February 1979450.
This time Kádár’s proposal was included in the resolution, and it can be regarded as the first formal political decision in favor of Hungarian IMF membership.
They told the Soviets that Hungary would follow Romania, which had joined the IMF in 1971 without prior discussion.
The Hungarian “bargaining strategy” was based on the argument that Hungary was ready to refrain from this step if the Soviet Union could find an extra couple million tons of crude oil to be paid for in soft currency.
Brezhnev began his talk with Kádár by stating that joining the IMF would be an infringement of socialist brotherhood and a couple million tons of oil would not be an issue among true allies.2 The Hungarians took Brezhnev’s words at face value and convinced Kádár that in this situation, it would not be appropriate to decide for the Hungarian access.
Consequently, the Political Committee decided to postpone the question of membership, and again – but for the last time – the Soviet veto encumbered the culmination of a long process.3 This could have happened because the Hungarian policymakers neglected the fact that the world had changed, and there was absolutely no reason to believe that the Soviets would honor their promise.
Two years later, in July 1981, Brezhnev could not bring up any new arguments against Hungarian IMF membership and he implicitly accepted the idea as an inevitable fact.4 He simply could not do anything else, because the economic problems of Hungary were so severe that the situation threatened with the possibility of political destabilization, not only in the case of Hungary, but within the whole Socialist Bloc as well.
This was an extremely well-timed announcement, and after a few decades of flattering and opposition, personal anger was the last motive that convinced Kádár and the regime of neglecting the old dogma of “eternal socialist brotherhood”.456 After the decision of the Political Committee, the Central Committee formally declared the access of Hungary to the IMF and the World Bank, on 22nd October 1981.457 The decision was, however, not so simple and unanimous.
During the debate, the antireformist forces, led by Mihály Komócsin and Gyula Dabrónaki presented their reservations.
However, Ferenc Havasi, Rezső Nyers and Kádár himself stood up for access, and this was enough to convince reluctant members in favor of the membership.8 Just 60 minutes after the Central Committee had approved Hungary’s IMF access, János Fekete’s plane was taking off for Washington.
Hungary had formally applied to join the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on November 4th, 1981.
Since all the macroeconomic data related to the country’s economic situation were handled as top secret issues, the news of the accession arrived as a shock to the general public.
From an economic point of view, however, it is unquestionable that there remained no other possibility for the Hungarian leadership to escape from the serious economic problems.
May 1981 had been the last time the country could tap medium-term international funds.
Following the imposition of martial law, a lending embargo on the Soviet Bloc was declared.
This prompted the de facto Soviet-run International Bank of Economic Cooperation and some Arab investors to withdraw deposits of $1. billion from the National Bank of Hungary, to relend the money to Poland and to bridge Soviet cash-flow problems.
This would surely have knocked out the Hungarian economy, had not the Bank for International Settlements and Margaret Thatcher both extended their help.
These exceptional forms of assistance would hardly have been conceivable had not the Hungarian application for IMF membership been well underway.
Thanks to these operations, Hungary could maintain its solvency.1 Whether the timing was foresight or just plain luck is difficult for an outsider to judge.
Hungary became a member of the IMF and the World Bank at record speed462 in May 1982; since then it has obtained a considerable amount of financial assistance from, or with the help of these institutions.
In December 1982, the IMF approved a $600 million stand-by loan to Hungary to support its economic stabilization program.
Upon the completion of the first program, in January 1984, Hungary obtained a second stand-by loan of $440 million to support the government’s further economic and financial program.
Thus, during its first two years of membership, Hungary obtained almost $1 billion in loans from the IMF, which it used largely to repay the BIS and for debt service payments to other lenders.3 Without these, Hungary could not escape from the “result” of the “age of illusions”, which was dominated by unrealistic economic ideas.
First, it was appreciated that during the two-three years before the accession there was a marked shift from the stimulation of growth to the improvement of the external balance took place in Hungary’s economic policy.
Thirdly, Hungary enjoyed the support and the confidence of the international financial community.
They were not in a position to help us… Then we were turning to our Western partners.
It was based on the concept that the current Soviet standpoint should always be supported, or at least, steps should not be openly taken against it.
However, this did not mean that Hungarian behavior was passive within the Warsaw Pact.
The Hungarian leadership often made independent initiatives, but only if they knew that these were not contrary to Soviet intentions.
The policy of “constructive loyalty”, as Csaba Békés denotes it, included conflict prevention on the one hand, and flexibility and adjustment to Soviet requirements, with a willingness to cooperate on the other.
In practice, it meant that the Hungarian leadership tried to influence the Soviet leadership within the framework of bilateral relations, which served the concrete interests of Hungary.
The Western credits granted to socialist countries served the same purpose; that is to make the Eastern Bloc dependent on Western capital as much as possible.
They knew that beyond a certain period of time, economic reforms would implicate political and social changes as well.8 I agree with Matolcsy on the point that it was definitely in the interest of the Western organizations to enhance closer relations with the socialist countries, even with the intention of loosening cohesion within the Soviet Bloc.
It is also true that the BIS deliberately granted credits to Hungary in order to prevent the fall of the Hungarian “liberal socialism”.469 But I assume that this relationship with Western financial organizations was not a unilateral interest at all; Hungary had a considerable stake in the “transaction” as well.
Based on mutual benefits, the attempts made by the Hungarian leadership to open up the country’s economy towards the West can be regarded as an endeavor to gradually turn away from the Soviet Bloc.
Hungarian foreign policy, however, always remained within the framework of the “socialist brotherhood” and therefore it did not challenge the unity of the Bloc directly.
In conclusion, the final answer to the heading question of the paper could be summarized as the following.
However, due to international circumstances and the deterministic nature of Soviet-Hungarian relations, Hungary was understandably not in the situation to act freely with regard to its international relations.
It had to rely on the financial help of the IMF, and this was an inevitable necessity for the country to survive.
In contrast to the cases of armed anti-communist struggles in the Baltic countries as well as in Ukraine or Romania for instance the anti-communist resistance in Slovenia represents a fairly understudied, rarely addressed and relatively unknown topic.
It has not yet received much attention from the Slovene historiography.
Thus, it has also not become an object of public discussion, as most Slovenes are not even aware of its existence.
This is not only due to the important fact that the scale and intensity of this resistance was fairly low, but partly also due to the considerable difference in the public perceptions of the communist past.
Secondly and even more importantly – the available sources on this topic are scarce.
They mostly consist of documents created by and for the use of Yugoslav communist secret services and of records from court trials that took place against the real or alleged insurgents.
A few rather short memoirs also exist, written either by former members of the security forces or by people who had been involved in organizing the anticommunist resistance, but were usually not fighting on the ground.
Premk’s 2005 book attributed this role primarily to the activities of émigré centres in conjunction with the British and American secret services.
Mateja Čoh, on the other hand, laid more stress on the participants’ individual motives for rebelling against the regime – most importantly the discontent with regime policies among Slovene peasantry.
Albeit being based on the above discussed sources, my paper will leave the questions of principal causes and primary motives aside and shall limit itself to an account of some general figures and facts that can be discerned from the known data.
The main aim shall be to provide an overview of the forms and activities of the armed anti-communist groups, as well as the measures employed by the Yugoslav security forces for fighting them.
The Origins of Communist Rule in Yugoslavia Yugoslavia, which was invaded by the Axis forces on April 6, 1941 and in turn carved up into annexed territories, occupation zones and puppet states, subsequently experienced a number of internal conflicts.
In addition to the anti-Axis struggle, interethnic wars raged in most of the nationally and religiously mixed parts of the country, such as Dalmatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina and Kosovo.
These were in most cases also intertwined with ideologically-based conflicts, above all between the Communist-led partisans, which were apart from fighting the occupiers also engaging in a revolutionary struggle for power, and various counterrevolutionary military organizations.
Most notable of the latter were the forces under the command of General Dragoljub Mihailović, who was acting as Minister of War for the Yugoslav King and the official government in London.
Competing with the official Yugoslav Army in the Fatherland (popularly called the Chetniks), the partisans led by Josip Broz Tito gradually gained an upper-hand in achieving Anglo-American support.
The constant struggles between Croat and Serb members of consequently unstable royal governments also contributed to the Western Allies’ decision to transfer their support to Tito’s Communists.
After the June 1944 Allied-sponsored agreement between Tito and Ivan Šubašić, the Prime Minister of the Yugoslav government in-exile, Mihailović was deposed as War Minister and the partisans proclaimed the official Yugoslav army.
In contrast to the other parts of Yugoslavia where the situation was more complicated due to interethnic conflicts and to an extent similarly as in Serbia the internal conflict in Slovene lands was based exclusively on ideological lines.
These occurred in Slovenia under foreign occupation and simultaneously with resistance to it.
Since the latter came to be monopolized by the Communist-dominated Liberation Front of Slovene Nation and due to various other factors, the counterrevolution in large part came to adopt the role of military collaboration with first the Italian and later the German occupying forces.
At the end of the war in May 1945, Communist rule was swiftly established.
During the summer of the same year, the great majority of returned or captured counterrevolutionaries were systematically massacred – the approximate figure of those killed stands at 13,500.
Its nature was thus counterrevolutionary and, due to special conditions, also partly took the form of military collaboration with the occupational forces.
They were armed by the Germans and formally acted as an auxiliary police force under German command.
In fact, in certain respects, the Home Guard nonetheless operated quite autonomously, being in addition perceived as the Slovenian army by a considerable part of the population in the territories where it operated.
The “Chetniks”, on the other hand, were numerically few, at no point numbering more than a couple hundred soldiers.
They did not stand under German command and enjoyed secret support by some of the Home Guard units, whose officers were secretly members of the Chetnik movement.
In June of 1944 he was arrested by the Gestapo, sent to Dachau concentration camp, and after the war acted as one of the most important organizers of armed resistance against communist rule.5 Armed Resistance Against the Communist Regime During the first postwar years, a number of armed groupings existed throughout Yugoslavia with the common characteristics of illegality and hostility towards the Crimes Committed by Totalitarian Regimes, Peter Jambrek ed.
Their origins and goals, affiliations and motives, however, varied highly between various parts of the country and among specific groups within them.
In Croatia, Dalmatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, for instance, groups of Croatian separatists usually also of the Ustasha background prevailed, although pro-Yugoslav, as well as Serb nationalist, “Chetnik” ones were also present.
Some of them were composed of members of WWII military formations that had remained in Yugoslavia and were hiding from authorities, whereas some others were formed by discontented peasants, army deserters and former partisans.
The extent and intensity of the armed anti-communist resistance in Slovenia (and Yugoslavia in general) never reached or even approached the state of full scale war.
It was fairly limited in terms of the number of people involved or immediately affected, and did not include larger combat actions from either of the both sides.
Nevertheless, in Slovenia alone, around 35 larger illegal armed groups operated between 1945 and 1950 that had emerged as a form of resistance to the measures of the communist authorities.
It affected a major portion of the Slovene territory, but was at the same time far more intense in the northeast, which had previously been left largely unaffected by the civil war.
In terms of periodization, three different “phases” may be discerned when speaking about the type and dynamics of post-WWII insurgency in Slovenia.
This periodization corresponds roughly to the phases that were defined already in the detailed reports on insurgency written by officers of the Slovenian Administration for State Security .479 During the first “phase”, immediately after the end of the war and the subsequent establishment of communist rule, large groups of WWII counter-revolutionary and collaborationist troops were still present in Slovenia, scattered throughout its territory.
These were mainly uncoordinated groups of former Home Guards that were hiding from the winning side, although there were also some better organized Chetnik units that had most probably remained in Slovenia intentionally.
Altogether there were around 2000-armed men hiding in Slovenian forests in June 1945.480 These armed groups were, however, quickly diminishing in strength.
The main goal of most of these men being to survive, most of them managed to escape over the Austrian or Italian border or turned themselves over to the authorities after general amnesty had been proclaimed in August 1945.
Some of them though also organized themselves as rebel units, conducted acts of sabotage, attacked military installations and transport infrastructure and were particularly active in spreading anti-communist and royalist propaganda.
These groups sometimes even organized secret political meetings in villages, where they agitated against the elections.
By the time of the general elections, the establishment of an organized and coordinated resistance had already begun.
A few of the above discussed groups established contacts with émigré centres in Italy and Austria, from where they started receiving instructions and propaganda materials.
Already by the autumn of 1945 they were joined by new, “genuine”, rebel groups, which were not comprised of former Home Guards in hiding, but of civilians and army deserters.
These groups operated mostly in the northeast of Slovenia, close to the border area.
Originally they had operated on their own, but at the same time had sought to establish contacts with the émigré anti-communist organizers across the border.
Mainly belonging to the ranks of former Chetniks and Home Guards, some of these messengers – most notably the first leader of “Intelligence Center 400” in Graz, Miloš Glišić were also trying to establish links with the Yugoslav Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović, who was still hiding in Bosnia with some of his remaining troops.
This did not succeed though, and Mihailović himself was captured in March 1946 and executed after a public trial.3 By the spring of 1946, most of the remaining groups of WWII fighters were already gone from Slovenia while, at the same time, intelligence centres had been established by the Yugoslav political emigrants in Austria.
The “second phase” of illegal group’ activity in Slovenia had commenced, distinguished by the highest degree of insurgency activity.
Most importantly, coordinated attempts from the outside (that is from émigré centres in Austria and Italy) to create broad-scale armed resistance took place.
Armed units, called “assault groups” and “assault detachments” (usually between 5 and 50 people), some of them trained in espionage and military tactics, were permanently present in Slovenia.
Intelligence centres in Austria and Italy succeeded in establishing contacts with some of the already existing units and in sending groups of organizers across the border.
The aim was to create a guerrilla force along with an organized network of supporters.
Skilled propagandists and intelligence officers from the former Home Guard and Chetnik ranks were sent to accomplish this task.
The units on the ground were furthermore provided with arms and logistical equipment.
Some of them maintained radio contacts with intelligence centres abroad.
The clandestine groups operated at night and were hiding in secret bunkers in forests or on desolate farms during the daytime.
They perpetrated acts of sabotage, gathered intelligence and spread anti-communist, royalist, pro-Western and pro-democratic propaganda.
Illegal groups operated in all parts of Slovenia but were most numerous, active and successful in the northeast, where they managed to establish a broad network of supporters.
Most of the armed actions happened there, and the presence of guerrilla groups was permanent.
In other parts of Slovenia, the activities of the clandestine groups were less overt and more sporadic, being limited mostly to propaganda, espionage and single acts of sabotage.
They presented themselves as anti-communist, pro-democratic and loyal to the monarchy – often also carrying the official royal Yugoslav insignia486 and were, to some extent, coordinated from centres abroad.
Several other national committees were subordinated to the central one in Rome.
Among those was also the “National Committee of Kingdom of Yugoslavia” in Salzburg led by former Chetnik officer and Serbian Radical politician Stevan Trifunac.
After that, its operations were headed by Karel Kornhauser up until 1948 and Avgust Kovač and Lieutenant Jože Saje thereafter. “101/501” – Located in Klagenfurt and led by former Home Guard and Chetnik officers Ivan Drčar and France Grum. “305” – Located in Trieste and led by Dušan Lajovic. “505” located in Gorizia and led by Anton Kostnapfl.
All of these centres were supported by and cooperated with the United States Army’s “Counter Intelligence Corps” and the British “Field Secret Service”, the extent and significance of this cooperation not being entirely clear.
Creation of an underground network of supporters succeeded only in parts of northeastern Slovenia, and even there only partly.
More successful was the propaganda activity, which included dissemination of Matjažev glas , a newspaper printed in Austria, secretly brought to Slovenia and usually distributed there by mail.
It delivered accounts about better life in the West, the undemocratic nature of the Yugoslav regime and political repression.
Appeals were issued to the Slovene people to rebel against the regime, whereby the strength of the “Matthias’s Army” was often deliberately grossly overestimated.
During 1947 and 1948, a radio program was broadcast to Slovenia from the intelligence centres in Austria.
Apart from espionage and propaganda, the insurgents also engaged in assaults on police stations, local administration offices and military installations.
Since a majority of them consisted of peasants, and with collectivization of agriculture being one of the most directly hated government measures, collective farms represented the most common targets of armed attacks.
Local communists, public officials and supporters of the regime were threatened by the insurgents; some were also killed.
The latter actions were conducted mostly without previous approval from abroad, as the armed groups acted quite independently and did not always strictly follow the instructions that were given to them.
In addition to the “Matthias’s Army” units, entirely independent groups also existed, including the “Yugoslav Liberation Movement” , “Slovene Voluntary Army” , Slovene Anti-Communist Organization and Balkan Guard , as well as a few groups of common criminals.
These units regularly launched large-scale missions in which they examined large sections of terrain, thereby searching for insurgents and destroying them.
Their task was to assassinate the leaders or bring the group into an ambush.
UDBA succeeded in developing a widespread field network of informants and infiltrating agents into the insurgent groups.
This enabled a fairly successful uncovering of the groups’ operations and collection of data on their members.
There were cases of UDBA arresting groups of civilians as “collectively responsible” when an act of sabotage happened or propaganda leaflets appeared, basically taking hostages to put pressure on the insurgents to turn themselves in.
This extreme measure is however not known to have ever been implemented in Slovenia.
Alleged supporters of the illegal groups, very often family members as well as many Catholic priests also received punishment by forced labour, usually between 1 and 10 years.
UDBA noted in its reports that in 1947 “the emigration suffered a final defeat in the field of banditry” and that most of the armed units were destroyed.
Nevertheless, anticommunist activities led by intelligence centres persisted but adopted new strategies.
Thus, the “third phase” of anti-communist resistance between 1948 and 1950 was distinguished by smaller units of commandos, spies and messengers.
Their activities were mainly limited to espionage and propaganda, although they also committed acts of sabotage.
Even in February 1950, 1,000 leaflets with anti-communist content were disseminated in the streets of the Slovenian capital Ljubljana alone.5 Moreover, in 1949 the émigré centres lost Anglo-American support as the Western powers began supporting Tito, after Yugoslavia came into conflict with the Soviet Union and its allies.
In the second half of the year, the centres were disbanded because their activities were banned by American and British authorities.
The last messenger tried to cross the Yugoslav border in September 1950.
This figure does not include the remains of counterrevolutionary forces in 1945.
Judging on the basis of available data, one may conclude that the presence and activity of armed anti-communist groups in Slovenia was relatively limited and small-scale, and could therefore not have posed a serious threat to the regime.
At the same time, however, the figures concerning killed and arrested fighters and supporters reveal that it was not a completely negligible force either.
As such, it represents a topic of Slovene modern history that should certainly not be overlooked, as well as a small piece in the mosaic of Central and Eastern European Cold War history.
Many questions remain open especially the ones concerning the role of the Western Allies and the exact extent of influence and control over the armed groups on part the émigré intelligence centres.
The degree of possible involvement of the Yugoslav secret police, which might have used “banditry” as a precedent and an instrument for persecuting the “class enemy” or any other alleged opponents of the regime, remains also unclear.
Moreover, most of the analyses of these similarities are formed in the Jewish-Armenian perspective.
For example, in comparison to processing the trauma of the Holocaust, Armenian survivors and future generations also reacted to the events similarly, while various parallels were shown during the organization and execution of the extermination plans.
Viewing the consequences of the Armenian genocide, both constructive and destructive responses to – processing strategies of or attitudes towards – the trauma are present, which may serve as bases to prognoses concerning the aftermath of other mass traumas – not only genocides, but also civil wars and international and ethnic conflicts.
When analysing the aftermath of the Armenian genocide it can be assumed that all survivors and refugees experienced nearly the same traumatic events, the effects of which influenced all survivors psychologicallyirrespective of their future location.
The six ideal types of reflections do not constitute a scale and are possibly present on the individual level in each community of survivors and their descendants.
Another attitude is resignation and despair, which may also result in silence, albeit by a conscious refusal – in contrast to avoidance described above – of the events.
Reconciliation and forgiveness is also present among survivor attitudes.
This means recalling the events regularly and, on the other hand, having an optimist view of the future.
Outrage and anger is another strategy, which involves verbal or non-physical violence towards the direct perpetrators and those who were responsible for the genocide as organizers or supporters.
The last form of trauma progressing is revenge and restitution, which means physical aggression against the above mentioned perpetrators or those who are symbolic targets as “followers” of the perpetrators.
In other words, against those who still deny the Armenian genocide and burden its recognition.
In one of their works, Miller and Touryan-Miller also consider symbolic revenge –g. when survivors assume that natural disasters affecting real or supposed perpetrators mean divine retribution – corresponding to this strategy.
In contrast, the author of this study classifies the latter phenomenon as outrage and anger because it does not result in physical violence.
Although the trauma was common for all survivors; furthermore, a periodical generational change in their attitudes is present, Armenian communities settled in different parts and countries of the world have not reacted unanimously in a given period.
There has usually been a given community which played a leading role or served as a catalyst in promoting different attitudes from previous ones during a given phase, while some other communities did not even participate in the progress of the given period and were following their earlier strategies.
Similarly, when public progressing of the trauma began, Armenians in Turkey stayed silent, as the state had condemned Armenian genocide commemoration.
Futhermore, the third generation terrorist movement probably would not have evolved without the often tense and militarily active social and political environment of Armenians in Lebanon.
Finally, the phase usually labelled as integration by Armenian scholars was encouraged by Gorbachev’s reforms.
Reviving national sentiments of the latter period also contributed to the Karabakh conflict, during which Armenians in the Armenian SSR started to feel threatened in a manner like the Armenian Genocide.
Due to these events, Armenians in the diaspora started to cooperate in supporting those living in the home country, which had become independent a few years after the mentioned events.
In conclusion, apparently only those of the six individual trauma processing strategies described by Miller and Touryan-Miller have been present on the collective – social, political or public – level, which has been made possible by the given Armenian communities’ host state.
The collective speak out of the trauma started simultaneously in the Armenian SSR and the United States.
Experts on the topic consider 1965, the 50th anniversary of the beginning of the Armenian genocide, as the initial year.
The Metamorphosis of the Post-Genocide Armenian Identity as Reflected in Artistic Literature.
Therefore, it cannot be stated that they lived in a socio-political environment determined by a host state or its respective dominant ethnic group.
In contrast, the Armenian SSR did not act independently in domestic and foreign politics; the principles of these areas had been determined by the actual Soviet central power in Moscow.
Therefore, while testing the hypothesis, instead of a host state, the term ‘host environment’ will be used in the study.
The society of the Armenian SSR had to adapt to the frameworks of this environment.
The examination period lasts from the beginning of Soviet rule in Armenia in 1920 until 1985 the beginning of the first secretary period of Gorbachev.
The establishment of Soviet state power ensured quite different frameworks of genocide commemoration and reflections than the previous environment of the Republic of Armenia.
While in the Gorbachev era three parallel processes – the collapse of the USSR, the demand for social and political reforms, the re-evoked Armenian nation-building process and the Karabakh conflict with Azerbaijan – resulted in dynamic changes and a diversity of collective approaches to the genocide within a very short period.
An analysis of these newly emerged trends would exceed the scope of this study.
In testing the hypothesis, various elements of the Soviet-Armenian public will be examined in which indicators of the need for speaking out the trauma could have appeared, thereby the strategies of trauma processing possibly affected a broader part of society.
As a result of societal impacts, political actions related to the trauma could have been initiated.
The non-governmental sector was totally absent and the sectors mentioned above probably reflected what state power tolerated.
Furthermore, changes in activities within these fields had possibly followed changes of the central party-state ideology; while on the other hand, possibly reflected some bottom-up initiations.
In parallel, the quite narrow ways, aspects and frameworks of scientific research related to the genocide will be also examined.
As it has been mentioned, the non-governmental sector was prohibited in the Soviet Union, but one certain, partly non-governmental movement, the process of “re”-settling diaspora-Armenians in the Soviet Union is possible to analyse.
The local organisations of the diaspora lacked total control by the Soviet authorities and most of them were at least partly based on civic initiation.
Also, political actions naturally related to the examined social phenomena will be examined.
Beside these collective trends, there is a useful instrument to reconstruct individual responses.
Ethnographer Verjiné Svazlian has collected hundreds of interviews from survivors.
A feature of these is that due to the frequently non-party-conformist content and the restricted ways and areas of Armenian genocide research, this oral history collection was published only after the change of the regime.
As a result, these interviews most probably offer a non-restricted overall picture of the reactions of Soviet-Armenian individuals.
In the initial post-genocide period most Armenian literary authors in the diaspora did not mention the traumatic experience in their works.
They either reconstructed the memories of the homeland or were occupied with issues concerning the rebuilding of their lives.
At that time a new generation of writers were emerging who started to deal with questions of Armenian historical and cultural heritage.
A very plastic example for genocide trauma processing is a short story entitled Lar Margar508 by Axel Bakunts.
The main character Margar had become supervisor of the irrigation canal in the village he settled.
He had started a fresh life in a new homeland by bringing up his grandson and planting apricot trees.
He let go of the memory of his old home through a symbolic act, throwing the keys of his old house into the sea while being transported by ship away from the Ottoman Empire.
The short story ends with an image of Margar seeing his grandson at the schoolyard and simultaneously viewing his growing apricot trees.
Bakunts does not contradict communist ideas, such as equality, for Margar pays attention to providing equal quantities of water to all in the village.
In addition, there is no sign in this work of an attempt to defeat communism.
On the other hand, in this period merely mentioning the Armenian genocide was labelled as nationalistic.
Furthermore, Bakunts used the national symbols of Mount Ararat and apricots in this short story.
This and similar kinds of approaches to Armenian cultural and historical heritage including the genocide resulted in the extermination, imprisonment and/or Siberian exile of the writers’ generation of the 1930s.
Most of them were imprisoned and the Union of Writers of the Armenian SSR was filled with artists loyal to the regime after having silenced Bakunts, Yeghishe Charents and Vahan Totovents, together with other writers or poets.
On the contrary, after the 1937-1938 extermination wave silence was not a sign of repression and avoidance anymore, but a present need for dealing with the trauma of the genocide, which was not allowed to gain public space.
The next experiment for collective processing began in the Khrushchev era.
Paruyr Sevak’s philosophical and epic poem, “The Unsilenceable Belfry,” which was written in 1957 and published in 1969, was among one of the earliest attempts of this period to reflect on the genocide.
The work is about Komitas, the Armenian clergyman, folk music collector and composer who was deported among the first Armenian intellectuals in 1915.
Hovhannes Shiraz, another emblematic member of this generation, also started to publish his works on the genocide and Armenian heritage in the late 1950s.
His most famous genocide-related work is The Armenian Dante-esque calling for the establishment of a spiritual monument to the victims of the Armenian genocide.1 Similarly to them, Silva Kaputikyan also started to turn towards the issues of Armenian national identity in the same period.
Her 1961 poem, “Midway Reflections”513 lists and addresses the various trauma-progressing attitudes, including revenge and resignation.
She gives an extensive explanation of the strategy she chooses and calls for Armenians to follow her.
Ter-Minasjan “Silva Kaputikjani mtorumnerǝ čanaparhi kesin ev heto” [Silva Kaputikyan’s reflections at the midway and after”, Lraber Hasarakakan Gituthjunneri, HH GAA hratarakčuthjun, Erevan, 2001.
Amongst authors of Armenian prose of the same period, Hrachya Qochar wrote his novel Nahapet in 1964.
Beside the intent to rise from the tragedy of the Armenian genocide, the novel frequently indicates respect towards the Soviet ideal of life, while some episodes introduce the ways of interpretation of communism by average Armenians living at the periphery of the Soviet Empire.
In addition to the demand for genocide remembrance and representation of the memories, the novel expresses an optimistic view of the future.
The political system had not silenced such opinions during this period; therefore, literature represented the atmosphere of a meltdown after the Stalin era, and the strategy to be followed became reconciliation.
During the 1970s and early 1980s many of the above mentioned works had been reprinted516 or were adapted for motion pictures.
Similarly, the majority of authors from the 1930s writers’ generation were rehabilitated by the state and their works became authorized for publication.
The meltdown in literature had been an indicator and, most probably, also a catalyst for political developments concerning the genocide-issue.
Such initiations had been previously banned and were prohibited also after the 1965 events in the Soviet Union.
On April 24, the 50th anniversary of the imprisonment and extermination of Constantinople’s Armenian intelligentsia and the beginning of deportations, demonstrations evolved in numerous Soviet Armenian cities and in the capital.
As a result of social pressure, state permission was given in May 1965 for a public competition to plan and construct a memorial for the victims of the Armenian genocide.
An entire people, an entire nation coming from the depths of millennia was killed, was dying.
We condemn genocide or zhoghovrtasbanutiun [“folkmurder”] with all our heart and soul.
There is and there cannot be either juridical justification or any motion of prescription for genocide.
Genocide, be it the horrifying slaughter of Armenians in Der or in the banks of the Euphrates in 1915, or the torturing death by massacre of the other peoples during World War II in Majdanek and Bchenwald, must always be condemned without reservations, and its perpetrators must be condemned by all of humankind”518 This approach not only raises the issue of genocide commemoration to the state level, but a broader perspective of the speaker can be observed by associating the Armenian genocide with the Holocaust.
Thereby, this is an attempt to prove that both events were rooted in racist ideologies.
The Soviet Union considered these ideologies and their supporters as their enemies.
Therefore, in this speech, a possible way of the genocideissue’s implementation into Soviet ideology is represented.
Therefore, its location became Tsisternakaberd, a hill in the surroundings of the centre of Yerevan.
By choosing this place the state willingly or unwillingly adapted genocide commemoration to Armenian funeral and burial traditions.
As a result, the Armenian Genocide Memorial Complex became a sacral place in the officially atheist Soviet social and political environment.
In a similar way, the eternal flame and the surrounding open circular walls of the monument symbolize resurrection and the eternal life of the victims’ souls, while the obelisk belonging to the monument represents the rise of the Armenian nation.
In conclusion, through the memorial complex optimism and remembrance was manifested in an architectural form.
Thereby expressing the strategy of reconciliation as suggested by literary forerunners of collective trauma progressing.
The monument was opened in 1967 and the inauguration ceremony was synchronized with the celebration of the establishment of Soviet power in Armenia.
After this, the memorial complex served yearly on April 24 as the place for mass-processions, which were also attended by state leaders.
From the 1970s on, the political leadership of the country had started the official commemoration on the Memorial Day.
Therefore, it is obvious that the strategy of reconciliation had become internalized by the state.
As it has been expressed before, the process of Armenians’‘re’-turning from the diaspora was also a crucial factor in the Armenian SSR’s social and political life.
The issue of masses of Armenian refugees had become an essential concern for the newly established communist leadership of the 1920s.
This had been constantly a subject for Soviet Armenian political leaders reminding them of the Armenian genocide despite any restriction.
Even if he criticised the two further historical Armenian parties, he considered cooperation with these organisations as vital for the creation of a communist homeland and he projected Armenians of the diaspora as instruments for spreading the communist world revolution.
Finally, cooperation between Armenian organizations became broader in scale than a mere political step.
The Armenian Assistance Commission had been established by diaspora and Soviet Armenian intellectuals to achieve cooperation for the development of refugees’ social circumstances.
A similarly broadscale cooperation was founded for the ‘re’-patriation of Armenian refugees in Soviet Armenia.
The process involved public promotion of the possible return, gathering refugees willing to settle in Armenia, and organization of their travel and accommodation.
Cooperation and organizing projects in the diaspora communities were completed by the local Armenian National Fronts.2 The “Great Home Turn”523 of tens of thousands started in the 1930s and reached its peak between 1946 and 1948.
In spite of widespread efforts, the new homeland had been lost for more than 20,000 returnees.
Hamahajkakan gitažołov: Zekuumneri žołovau, [Repatriation and Its Lessons.
For humanities and social sciences the Armenian genocide had also been a forbidden topic.
Mentioning the trauma was labelled as nationalism, in the same way as it had been also characteristic in literature.
Due to this past, she started to research the heritage of the Armenian Genocide.
Her work in this field began in the mid 1950s, when she started to visit places where immigrants from the diaspora had settled in en masse.
Moreover, she was also hiding another archive, in which she had systematized the memoirs of genocide survivors.
Presently, the further atmosphere of scientific work in the field is described.
According to Svazlian’s accounts, her interviewees would first – fearing repeated persecution – not let her into their homes, even if she asked for their cooperation in documenting the folk culture of these migrants.
Moreover, she had to make even greater efforts when she asked them to share their painful memories with her.
Facing these facts, it is evident that research related to the genocide was not supported by state power and gathering information on this issue was a hard task.
After the meltdown, which can be also observed in literature and politics, social scientists and experts in humanities received the possibility to research some questions related to the genocide, albeit in a restricted way.
Only those events which had been recorded during the genocide in documents were permitted for research.
For the reason that the memory of the genocide has been maintained mainly by oral history, several distortions can be observed within the historiography of the Armenian genocide in the Soviet period.
The existence of such Armenian efforts at other, littleknown places has recently begun to appear; such that, average Armenians have had even more limited access to this information than historians.
The ‘lack’ of resistance still undermines the self-esteem of many Armenians, who rely on the collective self-image suggesting that Armenians had been slaughtered like sheep during the genocide.7 With the intent of completing historical research in the examination period, Verjiné Svazlian made several efforts after 1965 to introduce survivors and their experiences during the genocide on television thus creating public access to their memories.
Her attempts were not supported by the state during that period.8 Remembering and commemorating the genocide therefore still remained between restricted frameworks.
The efforts of Soviet Armenian leaders and the presumable early resistance by Moscow suggests that the central power had tolerated, rather than supported, the political frameworks while the Soviet Armenian political leadership attempted to find the balance between social pressure and the central power.
Having viewed the collective responses to the genocide, in order to create a comparison to the individual strategies the latter have to be reconstructed.
Two of these testimonies have been maintained as manuscripts from the period before Svazlian’s research.
Eighteen of the interviews only described the events experienced by the survivors during the genocide without mentioning their future lives or interpreting the genocide in any way.
One of them stated, “ Let our new generation understand well what kind of hypocritical, bestial, criminal, plundering, ruthless, unjust, perfidious enemy we lived with in order to maintain our existence.
The third testimony in this group only states the intensive hatred the given survivor felt against Turks.
These describe the most unique interpretations of the reasons for the genocide ranging from the Turks’ jealousy of Armenians’ wealth, their need for Armenians’ goods, to some mythical descriptions as Talaat pasha’s gambling with one prominent Armenian leader or Russians selling the Armenian lands to the Turks for treasures.
In two cases, the escape of the certain person or of numerous survivors is rationalized.
One of these describes the escape of the interviewee as being a result of divine wonder.
In a further case, the survival of the participants of the Musa Dagh resistance is explained also by a miraculous apparition that stopped soldiers from further attacks on the mountain and its inhabitants.5 Sixty-seven interviews, a vast majority of the examined testimonies, reflect a positive image of the future of the refugees.
The possibility of a new start, emphasized by most of them, was offered most probably by the ‘Soviet dream’ through the promise of equality, education, work, home, financial security and social welfare.
Even if these had been limited by the totalitarian regime, Armenians had been deprived of these completely during the genocide.
Some of these memoirs also reflect on the exile of ‘re’-settled Armenians to Siberia or describe temporarily returning post-traumatic symptoms of the interviewees.
However, the vast majority still remembered the genocide while reflecting positively on the future, thereby again the strategy of reconciliation can be observed.
These individual responses do not correspond to the tendencies observed on the collective level.
For example, all but one interview reflecting on the aftermath of genocide recorded before the meltdown already expressed the strategy of reconciliation.
This individual strategy was overwhelming during Soviet times irrespective of the philosophy emphasized by the actual state and party ideology, while other approaches had been also present at the individual level, albeit at a lesser extent.
However, concerning the small number of memoirs recorded before the mid 1950s, it cannot be stated for sure whether the official ideological principles had caused the dominance of reconciliation, or whether these principles had been created and shaped by social majority.
Four trauma processing strategies were surely present at the individual level in Soviet Armenian society.
Furthermore, the existence of the remaining two other approaches cannot be excluded.
Three of the undoubtedly existent ones – outrage and anger, revenge and restitution, and finally rationalisation – had not become official state strategies.
It has been also mentioned that during the Stalin era the fourth strategy, reconciliation and forgiveness was not permitted either.
Beside this fact, further research and analysis are needed to prove whether reconciliation as a collective strategy evolved from a bottom-up initiation.
This would have been an exceptional phenomenon in a totalitarian regime.
On the other hand, a topdown effort for controlling the commemoration processes was also present after the meltdown.
This is represented by the attempt of literary authors and political leaders who consciously and explicitly tried to interpret the need for speaking out and commemoration within the official ideological framework of the Soviet state.
The latter phenomenon does not clearly suggest the direction of the process, but offers the possibility of a crossing point of top-down and bottom-up moves, which could have been also a unique phenomenon in the Soviet Union.
The appearance of reconciliation and forgiveness on the collective level is also worthy of further analysis, as this is the one of the few trauma processing strategies described by Miller and Touryan-Miller among Armenians which shows a creation or recreation oriented path for survivors and their descendants, while it does not have a threatening impact on the descendants of perpetrators.
In addition, this strategy keeps the memories of the past alive, thereby possibly making signs for future genocides more visible, and thereby contributes to genocide prevention.
Finally, it also proves that a revival of a community after mass trauma is possible, and that trauma processing is feasible without self-blaming, self-destructive or revengeful actions.
This has to be considered especially when lobbyists attempt to restrict Armenian genocide commemoration for fear of the negative reactions by the victims’ community.
Hajastani Hanrapetuthjan Sphjurchi Naxararuthjun, HH Gituthjunneri Azgajin Akademia, Erevani Petakan Hamalsaran, <<Noravanch>> gitachrtakan himnadram , 1946-48 thth.
Marutyan, Harutyun, Iconography of Armenian Identity The Memory of Genocide and the Karabagh Movement.
As one of many West Germans who were interested in Africa and privately sought for an increase of German-African relations, she espoused an intensification of the commitment of the West German state on the African continent.
Already in 1959, KühnLeitz had semi-privately undertaken – as she was acquainted with Chancellor Adenauer – a journey to Africa.
She was one of the first West Germans who were able to make semi-governmental contacts with African politicians, parties, and mass organisations.
On 23 February 1960, a bus of the DFG Wetzlar crossed the German-Belgian border in the direction of Wetzlar on her initiative.
Their trip initiated a new phase of the West German activities not just in the Belgian Congo, but also in the Central African region as a whole.
Accordingly, their entrance to the Federal Republic of Germany was accompanied by difficulties, as several Belgian officials still wished to maintain a purely Belgian sphere of influence in the Belgian-Congo.
Just one day before, the Belgian intelligence service Sûreté de l'État had successfully prevented their border crossing.
But as the Belgian government Eyskens was divided in this question538 and Kühn-Leitz had several contacts within the Belgian government and intelligence service at her disposal, she finally succeeded in bringing the future Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Congo to her private mansion Haus Friedwart in Wetzlar.
During the following two days, Lumumba and his party colleagues established contacts with the semi-governmental organisation Deutsche Afrikagesellschaft , the Press and Information Office of the Federal Government, and several agents of the West German private economy.
The Congolese asked for permission and state support to establish a MNC-L office in the FRG539 and further support of their party – most likely for the upcoming election campaigns in May – by West German companies.
As a matter of fact, Marcel Lengema, representative of the MNC-L in Germany and special secretary to Lumumba, received an office for party politics from the DAG in March.
Not for no reason, the popular West German magazine Der Spiegel published a six-page interview with Lumumba in June.
It might even be that the MNC-L received two further offices from the company Burger-Eisenwerke, which had already operated in the East of the Congo for several years and since then had maintained intense contacts with the MNC-L and Lumumba.3 In return for this support, Lumumba bound himself and his party – by contract – to lead the MNC-L on a pro-western political course.4 Meanwhile, the German Democratic Republic had unexpectedly established first contacts with the future Congolese political elite either.
Furthermore, he requested – if the Belgians should deny a quickly completed independence of Belgian Congo – to establish the office of a Congolese exilegovernment in East Berlin.6 The fact that these Congolese, who soon would play major roles in the development of the DRC, had chosen Germany of all possible allies to strengthen their position in the process of decolonization had not been a coincidence.
Furthermore, the FRG and the GDR were able to manoeuvre – even though officially involved in the global system contradiction of Cold War – their foreign policy concepts between the ones of the global super powers and the ones of the European colonial powers.
This provided the German states with a unique profile that many Africans perceived attractive enough to wish for a close partnership.
Though it was not just the preference of the Congolese that had led to this example of German-African encounter.
Already a decade prior, officials of both German states had realized the economic and political potential of the Belgian Congo in regard to the purposes of their respective states.
Resources – mineral as well as botanical – were abundant in the Belgian colony.
Furthermore, its infrastructure was highly developed by African standards.
However, it was not just the Belgian Congo in which the West and the East German state had shown interest.
In the wake of decolonization, a second struggle on spheres of influence had begun in the Belgian Congo, the Central African region, the African continent, and the emerging 'Third World' as a whole – a struggle, the FRG and the GDR could not afford to ignore.
The thesis The practical execution of this struggle by West and East Germany – their activities – is central in my macrohistoric and comparative arranged thesis of which this paper shall give a brief insight into.
In it the developments of the activities of governments, economies, and societies of both German states are represented and analysed by using the Central African region as a projection surface.
In doing so not a simple case study on a single state of German interest but a complete region serves as a geographical frame of this German-German topic.
Usually, studies regarding this topic focus on main areas of German interest as Western and Eastern Europe or North America, to draw their pictures of the German foreign relations – thereby often trying to enlarge it to a global view.
Against this, I argue in my thesis – and this paper – that it is reasonable to undertake research regarding this topic in such an area precisely because of its peripheral position.
As main areas of interest usually form an exception – leading to an exceptional German behaviour – it is reasonable to focus on the much more common periphery, to make general statements on the German foreign relations.
It said that a diplomatic recognition of the GDR would implicate its recognition as 'a' German state and thereby undermine the West German claim of representing 'the' German state as a whole.
To prevent such a development, the West German Foreign Office was allowed and equipped to initialize counter-measures coming down to a full termination of diplomatic relations with each state threatening this doctrine.
To this day, the German-German contradiction is one of the most popular myths in German history.
German Activities in the Central African Region During the Second Scramble.
In it, the German activities in an area, defined by the UNO as Middle Africa,549 but by myself as the Central African region, are examined.
Chad, Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, the Central African Republic, the Republic of Congo, the DRC, Angola, and Sao Tome and Principe.
In addition, a brief look is taken on the German activities on the African continent as a whole either.
The subjects, this thesis tries to outline and analyse – defined as German activities – involve a wide range of activities of the German states, economies, and societies.
The activities of the German states include regular diplomatic activities, development policy and aid, economic policy and aid, cultural policy and aid, public relations and the support of foreign media, military policy and aid, and finally, unconventional and intelligence policy and aid.
The activities of the German private, semi-governmental, and state-owned economies involve activities of manufacturing companies, trade companies, and banks as well as financiers.
Furthermore, the dealing of Central African issues within German societies and media will be analysed briefly either.
As this thesis attends to basic research, it had to fall back on a wide range of sources, situated in a great number of archives.
In addition, some contemporary witnesses were interviewed and a wide range of secondary literature was consulted.
When the African states gained their independence around 1960, a global run on the African continent – a second scramble for Africa – began.
It was contingent on imperial, postcolonial and Cold War550 conflicts, as its catalyst – the contemporaneous process of decolonisation.
Usually, the term 'second scramble' was and is still used as a postcolonial catchphrase – commonly, by African politicians and progressive authors.
Therefore, this paper shall provide a brief insight into its actual meaning.
Around 1950, according to the West German foreign office, the West produced 97% of its diamonds, 62% of its manganese, 55% of its gold and 47% of its chrome on the African continent – to a large extent in the Central African region.
Uranium and Cobalt were produced here as well, but in their cases information on their precise production quantities cannot be provided, as they were military relevant and therefore information on their production rates highly classified.
Furthermore in the case of botanical resources, 81% of palm kernel, 64% of palm kernel oil, 70% of cocoa beans, 52% of sisal and 100% of gum Arabic were produced in Africa – to a large part in the Central African region either.
In the cases of wood, fur and fruits, no indication on their quantity, compared to their global production rates, can be made.
This high relevance, which Africa had not just for Western, but also for global imports of several vitally needed products, was also reflected in the value of African exports.
In Western Europe, the former colonial powers, France, Great Britain, Belgium, Portugal and Spain, but also the FRG and Italy became significant competitors.
Although the commitment of the former colonial powers, especially the ones of France557 and Great Britain,558 remained mainly concentrated on their former colonial empires.
In Eastern Europe, it primarily was the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that participated.
Additionally, Czechoslovakia and the GDR took part to a certain extent.
The Near and the Middle East were initially represented mainly by Israel.
Since the end of the 1960s, it was joined by Iraq, Persia and Saudi Arabia.
In East Asia, the People's Republic of China and Japan became involved primarily in the scramble, but also Taiwan, North and South Korea showed some interest.
In North and Central America, the United States of America , Canada and Cuba participated, in South America, Brasilia showed most notably some commitment.
On the African continent, Algeria and Egypt – later on, Libya either – participated in the north, the Republic of South Africa in the south.
Also regional centres of power, like Nigeria, Zaire, Tanzania, Guinea and Ghana, can be mentioned here.
Already in the late colonial period of the 1950s, first non-colonial powers had started to invest bigger amounts of money in the African territories of the colonial powers.
Thus, they had not just done some business but also established and consolidated their influence in the respective regions.
Nevertheless, the colonial powers could most widely retain their influence monopoly, as it was backed by the colonial status of these territories.
When the Treaties of Rome were signed in 1957, the colonies became associated with the European Economic Community , whose member states confirmed the influence monopoly of the colonial powers.
In return, EEC member states received additional liberties and rights for their activities in the associated territories.
This provided them with several economic, political and diplomatic advantages against their non-European competitors.
After decolonisation, this arrangement of influence distribution continued.
Admittedly, a jurisdiction backing it no longer existed, but the actual structures, that had grown over the years, were sufficient.
The networks of the former colonial powers were able to assert themselves against their new international competition.
The EEC and its member states were able to achieve a similar successful economic position.
In doing so, they were able to retain the independent associated states under West European influence and to interconnect their markets with the markets of the EEC.560 Almost exclusively super powers, like the USA, the USSR, and later also the PRC, could actually challenge this hegemony of the EEC and its member states, including the former colonial powers.
The superpowers also had a stimulating effect on the involvement of the Cold War in the second scramble.
The USA pursued a radical policy of “global transformation” to establish “societies in conformity with system”, and integrate them in the USAmerican sphere of influence.
Furthermore, regional powers, which were powerful enough to influence the hinterland and their surrounding neighbour states for Western purposes, should receive an intense support either.
The primary objective of the West was to secure transportation routes with strategic importance, like the route around the cape – 65% of Western European and 28 % of US-American oil imports were transported on this route563 –, and the production of several strategic resources.
In contrast to the USA and the West, the USSR exercised primarily restraint.
In the case of the PRC, this contradiction even lead to an open competition with the USSR on supremacy of the socialist movement in Africa.
Furthermore, the European, Asian and African communist parties showed a radical commitment either, thereby animating the USSR and the SSC to a radicalisation of their Africa policies.
For the execution of the latter, the socialist states operated primarily from bases in Egypt, Guinea, Ghana, and later also Tanzania.
From these bases, they tried to gain influence on the African continent.
Similar to the West, their preferred target areas were the North African states and the bigger regional powers.5 Primarily here, the conflicts of Cold War inflamed.
Besides the Egyptian Suez Crisis, the Central African region – with its Congo Crisis and its Angola Crisis – became the hot spot of the Cold War in Africa between the 1950s and 1970s.
The much smaller conflict which appeared in Cameroon between the mid-1950s and the beginning of the 1960s can be put in this context as well.
After that, refugee villages and fortified villages were build and a counter revolution was initiated, to take the movement its support in the population once and for all.
This strategy worked out in the Congo but failed in the Portuguese overseas territory Angola, where in 1975 the socialist People's Republic of Angola was founded.
At the beginning of the 1970s, the ties between the Western and the Eastern states fell loose.
Joined projects of Western, Eastern and 'Third World' countries were initiated.
It was in this context, the East German ambassador Heinz Deutschland wrote to the East German Ministry for Foreign Affairs in July 1970, “For us it is important that the line Kairo-Brazza could become a barrier for the further expansion of the American imperialism and its allies in the South of Africa to the North.
Besides the Cold War and besides the super powers, even powers as the PRC, Japan and Brasilia – and West and East Germany – got a chance and were able to expand their spheres of influence on the continent.
Hier muß man sogar einmal den Gedanken erwägen, inwieweit es sogar gemeinsame Interessen des soz.
Quality and quantity of the two German states varied from target area to target area and therefore make it difficult to provide exact information which applies to the Central African region as a whole.
The German commitment was notably intense in states with large strategic mineral and energy carrier resources and with a simultaneous high endangerment of security of supply.
Here, the FRG supported primarily the moderate powers, who sought an evolutionary development of their states towards the West which would ensure an adequate security of supply for the West German private economy.
Therefore, in the Belgian Congo, a greater financial support for the Belgian colonial power was initiated already during the process of decolonisation.
Besides, when the Congo Crisis erupted, the FRG at first supported the moderate, antilumumbist powers, like the political party Alliance des Bakongo , later, after the murder of Lumumba, also partly radical pro-western powers.
In doing so, the West German state supported indirectly the anti-lumumbist opposition movement.
Another West German option to intervene indirectly into the political development of the Congo formed its media support.
A printing office, the Imprimerie Concordia, was installed in the Congolese capitol Léopoldville by the West German intelligence service Bundesnachrichtendienst for 23 million DM to raise a printing monopoly for the West in the Congo and to establish a BND headquarters for the complete West and Central African region.
Its revenue financed briberies of politicians, unionists, journalists, and editors.
Even the renegade government Tshombé of the Katanga province received West German weapons and vehicles as well as mercenaries.
In Angola the West German support was concentrated on moderate powers as well.
During the Portuguese Colonial War, the FRG supported the Portuguese colonial power financially and militarily.
Since the beginning of the 1960s, this support contained indirect financial support and supplies of military equipment and since 1967 small amounts of weapons supplies.
Not until some months before the outbreak of the Angola Crisis in November 1975, the aid was extended.
Following this, greater amounts of military equipment and weapons were shipped from the East German international port Rostock to the harbour of the People's Republic of Congo and from there flown with a socialist airlift to the Angolan capital Luanda.
In this way, the MPLA received ten recoilless guns B-10 with 2,000 fragmentation grenades and 2,000 cavity grenades, 10,000 sub-machine guns with 10 million bullets ammunition, forty pistols, and 10,000 grenades.
Ulrich van der Heyden, Ilona Schleicher and Hans-Georg Schleicher , 26.
During the Portuguese colonial war, the GDR supported the pro-soviet powers in the MPLA and therefore seems to have had a share in its government takeover in November 1975.
Compared on an international level, the East German commitment kept within limits.
Be that as it may, a tighter research on the exact worth and extent of the East German investments still remains to be done.
Anyway, the FRG seems most likely to have been one of the most important powers, operating at these African hot spots.
But as empirical studies on the concrete activities of the further involved states are still limited to date, a comparison is possible, but should only be undertaken while being conscious of its weak empirical basis.
Contrary to these hot spots, the German commitment was low in countries with small strategic mineral and energy carrier resources and with a simultaneous low endangerment of security of supply.
The FRG concentrated its commitment in the development of its already existing economic networks by the extension of already existing economic structures.
In Angola, the West German company Krupp cooperated with the Companhia Mineira do Lobito and the Sociedade Mineira de Lombige to build a mining and production site for iron ore near Lobito.
In exchange, Krupp and several West German steel companies should receive the major part of the Lobito iron ore production for a reduced price for several years.
In exchange for industrialisation of this region, the members of Assinez should receive resources, like copper, manganese, wolframite, zinc, and lead, at a discount on a longterm basis.
In contrast, the GDR abstained from these activities – at least until 1975.
Thus, the activities of both German states seem to have effected and accelerated an evolutionary development of the Central African economies and their networking not just with with the international and the respective European, but also with the German markets.
By international comparison, it is a hard task to specify the German rank in the Central African second scramble.
What is sure is that it was high enough to increase the German economic influence in the region.
The share Central Africa had in the West and East German global commerce may have decreased financially – as secondary literature shows –, but simultaneously, it increased materially.
Here, the success of the German Africa policies – fixated on trade and not on economic investments – becomes apparent.
During the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, quantity and quality of the products, which Germany imported from Africa, could be raised, while the prices of the products could simultaneously be lowered.
Therefore, the German participation in the second scramble in Central Africa was a success – at least from the standpoint of the two German states.
In the following, my disapproval of the most important of them – the superior relevance of the Hallstein doctrine – shall serve as a brief summing up of this paper.
Only when the German-German basic treaty was signed in 1972, was this policy replaced by a 'new' leitmotif – the German economic interests.
However, this superior relevance, in which the German-German contradiction was awarded, can be questioned.
Already before the issuing of the Hallstein doctrine in 1955, a commitment on behalf of the FRG and the GDR on the African continent had existed.
Admittedly, the German-German contradiction became a significant argument in the internal discussions to handle the regulation and utilization of the available resources in both German states in the 1950s and 1960s.
But its excessive usage originated primarily in the official formalities and unofficial regulations of the German ministerial bureaucracy.
Nearly all project proposals – written to receive resources from the state – forwarded to the respective ministries, were reasoned with the German–German contradiction.
But, only a fraction of these proposals finally received government subsidies.
Instead, economic – sometimes also geostrategic – arguments led much more often to a successful proposal.
Their implementation received a substantial amount of the economic, cultural, and military aid of the German states.
Indeed, several cases of development and intelligence aid can be made out as attempts to influence African decision makers – but just not in context of the Hallstein doctrine.
Every survey on German history and foreign policy mentions and respects this paradigm.
Therefore, it is impossible to give an overview on the secondary literature applying to this point.
In this case, not millions or billions, but hundreds, thousands and ten thousands of DM were invested.
In contrast, millions and even hundred of millions were invested for economic and geostrategic reasons –g. in projects of development and military aid.
Certainly in the case of the GDR, parts of its commitment can also be interpreted as an attempt to breach the Hallstein doctrine.
But looked at more closely, the overtures of the GDR concentrated themselves mainly on some economically relevant states and therefore suggest an economic background either.
Therefore, the German-German contradiction cannot be referred to as the leitmotif in context of an evaluation of the West and East German activities.
At best, the doctrine can be conceded a greater meaning in the field of propaganda and public relations.
The German-German contradiction only flanked this and the other interests and masked them with its popularity in the German societies.
Therefore, the paradigm of a primacy of the Hallstein doctrine seems to have been something propaganda and public relations always produce – more fiction than reality.
Wirtschaftsbeziehungen der Bundesrepublik Deutschland zu Angola und Mozambique.
Frey, Marc, “Die Vereinigten Staaten und die Dritte Welt im Kalten Krieg,” in Heiße Kriege im Kalten Krieg, ed.
Eine historische Analyse über die Entstehungsbedingungen der eurafrikanischen Gemeinschaft von der Weltwirtschaftskrise bis zum Jaunde-Vertrag.29-1963.
In Heiße Kriege im Kalten Krieg, edited by Bernd Greiner, Christian Th.
Tüttenberg, Elke, Der Beitrag der Staaten des Ostblocks zur Wirtschaft der Entwicklungsländer Afrikas.
Relations between Hungary and countries of the Middle East during the Cold War Dániel VÉKONY Introduction This paper will focus on Hungary’s relationship with Middle Eastern countries in the following aspects: First, after this short introduction I would like to give a glance at the background of the political relationship between Hungary and the countries of the region, paying special attention to the role of communist parties of these countries.
Second, the paper will shed some light on the economic aspects of the links between the states in question.
Finally, I would like to present a short analysis of Hungary’s role in the Eastern Bloc’s policy regarding the Middle Eastern region.
Due to scarcity of secondary literature at the time of writing this paper, I will mainly lean on the relevant primary sources we collected during the above mentioned research process.
Nevertheless, in order to put the whole subject into a sound context, I will use some vital secondary sources that cover the Middle Eastern region during the Cold War era.
The reason for this is that because of the reasonably large number of Hungarians with Jewish background in Hungary and likewise many Israeli citizens with Hungarian roots means that this relationship was such a special and delicate one during this era that it would not be possible to fully present this relationship together with those, Hungary had to other Middle Eastern countries in one conference paper.
This is why the paper will ignore relations between Hungary and Israel and focus mainly on the links to other Middle Eastern countries that were “friendly” as far as the Eastern Bloc is concerned.
By this expression I mean those states that were part of the Soviet sphere of influence at a certain time during the Cold War.
I will further demonstrate this by presenting some examples in the domain of economic cooperation.
Consequently, relations with other Middle Eastern states that decided to side with the United States and its allies will not be covered here.
The other objective of this paper is to demonstrate that although Hungary’s foreign policy was largely influenced by Moscow, Budapest was still able to play a somewhat autonomous role as part of the Soviet Bloc.
Besides, the post-war Soviet occupation and the ensuing Stalinization of the country left little room for manoeuvre as far as foreign policy was concerned598.
After the take-over by the communist party in 1948, Hungary had to follow the foreign policy dictated by Moscow.
For a number of possible reasons Stalin chose not to focus his attention on the Middle East.
Shortly afterwards he was called back to Budapest, tried and sentenced to death by the Rákosi government in 1948.
Moreover, one has to keep in mind that during the late 1940s into the early 1950s most of the Middle Eastern territories were still under the control of European colonial powers.
As United States President Harry Truman chose to leave this region to be dealt with by the colonial rulers600, Stalin probably considered this region either as in the sphere of interest of the UK and France or did not personally feel powerful enough to deal with the Middle East when there were much to worry about in other regions as well.
Since during the last years of Stalin Hungarian foreign policy was very closely aligned to that of the Soviet Union, this era is characterised by very low-key connections between Hungary and the Middle East.
Relations between the Soviet Bloc and the Middle East intensified after Stalin’s death.
Nevertheless, what Bernard Lewis described as the Soviet Union’s “leap-frogging” into the region after 1955602 led to a more active Hungarian foreign policy as well.
Connections with “friendly” states such as Egypt , Syria, Iraq and Libya lay on a double-layered foundation.
On the one hand, there were the official channels between governments and embassies.
On the other hand, however, the Hungarian government kept close working relationships with the communist parties of these countries as well.
There were regular meetings of communist party delegations from several countries in Hungary including those from the Middle East603.
HSWP Central Committee Department for Foreign Affairs, Motion fro the PC for the plan o the nonsocialist inter-party relations in 1979.
The above-mentioned communist parties provided some vital, but many times flawed, information to the Hungarian officials and through Foreign Ministry officials residing in these countries.
Besides, the official connections between the states obviously provided data through the Foreign Ministry as well.
Moreover, Moscow made sure its allies were provided with all necessary data and insight in order to enable them to keep to the line favoured by the Soviet Union604.
The reconciliation of all the information from these sources meant a challenge.
One good example is presented by László J Nagy in connection with the 1965 coup d’état in Algeria605.
Foreign Ministry officials in Budapest, however, were much more sober in their analysis of the same situation, and thought twice about condemning the coup606.
This turned out to be the good decision, because the new government decided to keep a positive attitude towards the Eastern Bloc.
In this situation, we can clearly see a dilemma between realpolitik and foreign policy based on ideology.
It was not always easy to reconcile these two factors during the Cold War era for a member of the Soviet Bloc, but most of the time, realpolitik gained the upper hand.
In spite of this, Központi Bizottság Külügyi Osztály, Javaslat a Politikai Bizottságnak a nem szocialista reláció pártközi kapcsolatainak 1979. évi tervére] Hungarian National Archives, henceforward MOL M-KS 288.
It seems the communist movement in Egypt was expendable in order to keep Egypt in the Soviet sphere of influence and to avoid damaging valuable economic ties.
Ideology played only a secondary or even less significant role in the relationship with these “friendly” Middle Eastern countries.
In this sense, Egypt is one of the best examples as to why we need to use the term friendly with a citation mark.
While it is true that Nasser adopted many leftist elements as far as the government was concerned such as nationalisation of key sectors, land reform, anti-western foreign policy (rooted in anti-colonialism and Arab nationalism), secular state structure, and a conscious choice of not implementing the separation of powers,608 it did not mean that the Egyptian government was ready to go down the road of communism.
These leaders used, and sometimes abused, the relationship between them and the Soviet Bloc, and within it Hungary, in order to further their own and their nation’s interests.
Economic Relations The economy and especially trade played a major role in the relations between Hungary and the Middle Eastern countries.
The Middle Eastern countries’ markets presented an opportunity to market not only agricultural goods and products of the food industry, but those industrial products that were otherwise not competitive on the Western capitalist markets610.
This reliance on the flow of foreign currency meant that Budapest needed the goodwill of the partner governments.
Firstly, some of these countries themselves lacked the hard currency Hungary needed so badly.
But in many cases the problem was that these countries did not have the kind of goods that Hungarian industry could absorb on a mass scale.
By re-exporting vast quantities of a given good such as cotton, the result was a downward pressure on the price of that good in question on the world market.
The consequent decrease of the price of the good meant huge damages for the country that tried to make up its accounts to Hungary.
Indeed, this paradoxical nature of trade relations towards some countries of the region can be best described by the above mentioned memorandum from the Foreign Ministry in 1965, warning about the deteriorating foreign currency conditions of some of these countries, which meant Hungary needed to allocate loans to these countries in order to keep these relations from freezing altogether612.
This is indeed a damning picture of the partners that were supposed to act as markets for products of the Hungarian industry.
This difficult situation eased somewhat after the skyrocketing of oil prices after 1973.
Afterwards, a number of Middle Eastern countries boasted major income from petroleum exports, thus they found themselves in a much better financial position.
As the financial situations of countries such as Iraq and Libya further improved during the 1970s and 1980s,614 so did Hungary’s financial situation become increasingly worrisome.
This issue was caused by the ever-present negative trade-balance as mentioned earlier.
The fact that during these months the financial institutions of these Arab countries chose to remove deposits in question from Budapest further demonstrates the limited scope and trust of these “friendly” governments towards Hungary616.
When talking about export markets for products of heavy industry, one must not forget the “special” trade relations with these countries.
The word “special” obviously refers to the defence industry in the archive documents.
As early as 1947, Egyptian politicians tried to set up cooperation between Budapest and Cairo in this dimension as well, but it only materialised some years later in the 1950s617.
However, one has to keep in mind that Hungary never played a significant role in providing military hardware to countries in the Middle East.
In Kádár’s words, “the actual suppliers were two socialist countries”618.
It is more than likely that the two countries in question were the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia.
The intention of importing civilian and military products from non-western countries was part of a wider attempt by the governments of the Middle East to break ties once and for all between them and their former colonial masters.
The determination to develop an industrial sector that is not dependent upon the post-colonial economies of Western Europe naturally pushed these countries towards the Eastern Bloc.
On the one hand, with the military cooperation inevitably had some spill-over effects into the civilian sectors of the economy.
For instance, the deepening “special” ties between Egypt and the Soviet Bloc meant interest for other products of the Hungarian heavy industry, such as diesel engines, bridges, etc.,619 increased significantly from the 1950s onwards.
This resulted in Hungary’s offering of some hardware from its own stocks.
So, in some instances, the very shortages that strained the relations between the Soviet Union and some countries of the Middle East could have positive effects on the Hungarian defense industry.
Hungary’s Role as a Member of the Soviet Bloc It is true that Hungary played a secondary role in foreign policy between the Soviet Bloc and the countries of the Middle East.
As a member of the Warsaw Pact, the country needed to align itself to the policies dictated by Moscow but there was always some limited room for maneuver.
After all, the national interest of Hungary sometimes differed from those of other Eastern Bloc countries.
A good example for this is the official visit of a highprofile Hungarian delegation to Syria in 1972.
At the end of the visit, the two sides failed to issue a joint statement, which would have been a sign of political understanding.
However, a Czechoslovak delegation visiting about the same time did not have such a problem623.
These events demonstrate that the foreign policy of the Eastern Bloc countries were not hand-controlled from Moscow.
Hungary’s role in respect to negotiations with Iran further supports this idea.
Thus, the Soviets asked the Hungarian government to act as a mediator between the two sides624.
This document further demonstrates that Moscow did not shy away from using the diplomatic services of its allies when there was a problem in a bilateral relationship with a given country.
Besides, this further increased the significance of the autonomous role the countries of the Eastern Bloc could play in foreign policy during the years of Soviet dominance.
Conclusion This paper presented a quick glance into the complex relationship between Hungary and the countries of the Middle East.
While pursuing its own self-interest Budapest needed to keep a delicate balance in regards to the realities of the Soviet Bloc.
As far as the “friendly” states of the Middle East are concerned, this “friendly” attitude was a result of domestic and historic necessities.
The anti-colonialist ideology paired up with a leftleaning nationalist agenda made the Eastern Bloc a convenient “friend” to these regimes.
However, the “friendliness” of these governments had their clear-cut limits.
The way the communists treated their own communist parties is very telling alone.
But the fact that the persecution of Middle Eastern communist activists never really jeopardized the relations between the Soviet Bloc and these governments sheds light on the fact that political and economic interests were always above ideology as far as these relationships are concerned.
The effects of the closer than average relations between these countries and Hungary can still be felt today.
Some of these students returned to their homelands, but many remained, creating a small, but rather well-educated, Muslim population in Hungary625.
The current government’s new foreign policy agenda, the so-called Opening to the East, also aims to warm up these relations between the Middle Eastern countries and Hungary.
Relations that were friendly at times, but never lacked the clear aim of maximizing benefits, even if it meant sacrificing ideology.
Nagy, J László, Hungary and the Arab World – Connections, opinions, standpoints 1947-1975 [Magyarország és az arab térség – Kapcsolatok, vélemények, álláspontok 1947-1975], JATE Press, Szeged, Hungary, 2006.
Jaroslav Bureš Muslims in Visegrad, Institute of International Relations, Prague, Checz Republic, 2011.
Hungarian Foreign Ministry, Annual report of the Hungarian embassy from 1958.
Austrian foreign policy under four power occupation Dóra HORVÁTH Following the Second World War, the situation of Austria was special.
On the one hand, the country was occupied by both Eastern and Western powers, just like as in Germany.
On the other hand, there was no coherent verdict about the role of Austria in the War.
According to the Moscow Declaration, Austria was the first free country to fall victim to Adolf Hitler’s aggression.
However, Austria was also deemed responsible by the Declaration for its participation on Nazi Germany’s side.
Due to this paradox, the legal form of the post-war treaty raised some questions.
They wanted to sign a state treaty because this would have meant the re-establishment of an independent and democratic Austria following the occupation by the German troops.
Austrian politicians wanted to avoid signing a peace-treaty which the Allies used with defeated countries.
While Austria was trying to run away from its past troubled by the Anschluss, it found itself exposed to a cross-fire between the East and West.
The young republic had to learn how to balance between the East and West in order to achieve sovereignty.
In this paper I would like to investigate the question whether Austria could have an influence on the treaty with the Allied powers and on its own future, or its destiny was at the mercy of the Cold War.
I would like to prove that Austrian leading politicians and diplomats could affect the decisions of the four occupying powers on the Austrian treaty, even though Austria had a narrow room for maneuver as I will demonstrate later.
The sovereignty of Austria promised both economic and political advantages to the United States in this region and could impede the long-term occupation of the Eastern Zone by the Soviets.
However, such a treaty did not materialize because of the opposition of the USSR which wanted to economically exploit the Austrian Soviet Zone.
The occupation was also important for the Soviets as a pretext for stationing the Soviet Army in Hungary and Romania.7 The four occupying powers signed the First Control Agreement on July 4, 1945.
This was meant as a short term solution for the period up to the establishment of a freely elected Austrian government recognized by the four powers.
The Austrian Treaty Commission had to create a preparatory form for the Austrian treaty.
It became clear that the process of drawing up a treaty for Austria would take more time and would be strongly influenced by the relationship between the occupying powers.
The Second Control Agreement gave certain rights to the Austrian government.
The government had a certain degree of maneuvering in foreign policy decisions as well; however, any international agreement required a notice to the four powers.
One was the economic interests of the main occupying powers, perceptible especially during the first part of the negotiation process.
The other was their international political strategies during the Cold War.
United States leaders after World War II were aware that the wartime economic boom would soon be over and that the international economy would need new stimulation to grow.
American economists were convinced that only a liberal world trade environment could sustain demand.
In the American strategy after 1947, the economic factor gained an especially important role.
The United States wanted to focus on economic initiatives rather than military rearmament because they saw the Soviet threat in this first period of the Cold War primarily as political and psychological, not a military one.
They wanted to answer to the Soviet challenge with economic strength and with a network of economically strong, self-supporting European and Asian power centers which stayed outside the Soviet orbit.
The so-called Marshall Plan was essential to the postwar European economy because it successfully addressed the continent’s serious dollar shortfall and thereby enabled its economic recovery.
It became possible for the beneficiary states to put in place costly welfare systems which also defined their political choices.
Beside the economic importance of the Marshall Plan, its political and cultural impact on the beneficiary states was enormous as well.
Therefore, the ERP was especially important both for Austria’s economy and for the political and cultural attitude of the country.
Secondly, Austria was the only Soviet-occupied country to join the ERP, the Soviets having refused the Marshall Plan.
The idea of the ERP marked “the Rubicon” with no return in the course of the Cold War.
Therefore, the fact that the divided Austria joined the program enhanced tensions and slowed down the negotiation process.
Smart diplomacy on Austria’s side was needed to avoid a more serious crisis with the Soviet Union.
Economic Strategy of the USSR After having lost at least 27 million people and about a quarter of its reproducible wealth637 as a result of the war, the USSR’s main economic interest was the acquisition of as many assets as possible in the occupied territories.
They acquired the whole oil industry of the Eastern Zone and the facilities of the Danube Steam Shipping Company.
Around 63,000 people worked in the so-called USIA-factories owned by the USSR in Austria.
Because of this confiscation, the relationship between the Austrian government and the occupying Soviets became strained at an early stage.
The tension and rivalry between the two superpowers started to grow immediately following the end of the World War.
Their strategies and actions were determined by their fears and beliefs concerning the aims of the other.
In the years I am examining, their strategies changed according to the current international situation which of course had an effect on the fate of the Austrian treaty.
The tension between them was growing constantly until the death of Stalin.
There were some international cases during the Cold War which had a particularly strong effect on the Austrian story; such as the deterioration of the relationship between the USSR and Yugoslavia, the proclamation of the ERP, the communist takeover in Czechoslovakia and the negotiations on Germany.
Stalin spoke in February 1946 in which he called capitalism the main source of wars and a threat to Soviet security.
This speech was understood by the West as a call for ideological struggle and Soviet expansion.
The West’s answer was the demand that the Soviets leave Iran and the famous speech of Winston Churchill about the Iron Curtain in Fulton in March 1946.
The relationship between the Western powers and the USSR began to deteriorate even further at this time.
The creation of the Austrian treaty was stymied during thePfirst committee meeting in 1947.
Besides the problem of how to define the German assets, the Yugoslavian territorial and material claims also caused difficulties because they were accepted by the USSR but refused by the Western powers and Austria.
Yugoslavia, as a socialist country, was supported by the Soviet Union, despite the fact that it was not a Soviet bloc country, but not by the Western countries.
However, at this time the Cold War powers did not want to negotiate any longer.
On March 12th 1947, two days after opening the conference in Moscow about the Austrian treaty, the American President, Harry Truman, proclaimed his doctrine against Soviet expansion.
Moreover, international tensions increased in June when the ERP was proclaimed.
A modified form of the Cherriére Plan came again into play at the London conference between 25th of November and 15th of December 1947643.
This plan would have given the Soviets a significant influence on the Austrian economy.
The USSR would have gained control of 58% of Austrian oil production for thirty years, certain equipment of the Danube Steam Shipping Company would have remain in Soviet possession and Austria would have supplied commodities to the value of one hundred million dollar within seven years.
Austria was an important strategic point between north and south, between the western zone of Germany and Italy.5 In 1948 the negotiations on the treaty continued, but soon stopped, as the news of the communist takeover in Czechoslovakia spread.
This shocked the Western powers and Austria because Czechoslovakia appeared to be successful in balancing between the East and West and because there was not even one Soviet soldier in this country.
The USSR became more flexible about the content of the treaty; the Western powers were rather uncertain.
The tension further rose as the USSR set up a blockade around WestBerlin, following currency reform in Western Germany.
The breakdown in relations between Tito and Stalin created a good opportunity for the Austrian treaty.
However, the real reason behind the failure of the meeting had more to do once again with the current international situation.
The USSR succeeded in detonating its atom bomb so the United States no longer possessed a monopoly on nuclear weapons.
This increased American concerns regarding the Soviet intentions; this also slowed down the negotiations between the two countries.
In May 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany was established in the West, while in October the German Democratic Republic was proclaimed in the East.
German unity obviously failed which was especially relevant regarding Austria.
The two cases were often mentioned together on international negotiations.
Both countries were occupied by Western and Eastern Eastern and Western powers and they both needed an agreement between the Eastern and Western occupiers in order to be independent and unified.
Besides all of these international happenings which resulted in a deep gap between the West and East, even the American policy was divided on the issue of Austria.
As the European strategy of the United States changed in the 1950s,647 the latter got a larger role in American politics.
They wanted to strengthen their European presence not only economically, but also militarily as underlined by the establishment of NATO in 1949.
At the beginning of the 1950s, only five uncertain points remained in regards to the treaty.
Both the United States and the USSR offered options for agreement which the other side could simply not accept.
For example, the Soviets linked the Austrian issue with the situation in Trieste.
They impugned the Austrian measures against former Nazis and the remilitarization of Austria by the Western powers.
They wanted Austria to reimburse the aid they gave after the World War.
Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, representing the USSR, created the solution for Germany with a precondition for the reduction of the occupying troops from Austria.
The Western powers also had enough fantasy; they created a draft for a short treaty, which did not even mention the case of the German assets.
It became clear that none of the Cold War powers wanted an agreement on the Austrian question.
As a result, Austria tried to bring its case to the forum of the United Nations.
The Security Council of the UN could make binding decisions, but both the United States and the USSR held veto power in the Council.
Only consensus between the United States and the USSR could have offered a solution.
These two events fundamentally changed the relationship between the Soviet Union and Austria.
The USSR took over the costs of the maintenance of the Soviet occupation.
In 1953, a marked-change of tone between the two countries gradually took place.
In 1947, Trieste was declared an independent city state under the protection of the UN as the Free Territory of Trieste.
It would forbid Austria any involvement in coalitions or military alliances and the establishment of foreign military bases on Austrian territory.
Molotov also proposed that the occupying powers would defer the deduction of their troops from Austria until the conclusion of the peace treaty with Germany.
According to Dulles, only an independent state could decide not to join any alliances.
This idea played an important role later when it was agreed that Austria would declare neutrality as an independent state.4 In early 1955, Molotov became more flexible about the connection of the German and Austrian cases.
He mentioned the need for bipolar reconciliation between the USSR and Austria in order to reach an agreement.
The Austrian government responded that it was glad that the USSR was open to settle the unresolved issues; however, all occupying powers should be involved.
Furthermore, the Austrian government agreed to make sure an Anschluss would not occur again.
The government wanted to understand how they should guarantee that Anschluss would not occur anymore.
The USSR promised to investigate the question of the guarantee against the Anschluss and agreed that all powers would have to be involved in the developments.
The above presented exchange of notes was a prelude for an invitation of Austrian statesmen to a Moscow bipolar meeting.
The parties agreed on the redemption of the German assets by Austria for a much lower price than stated in the earlier plans.
However, Austrian policy played a significant role in the birth of this treaty as well.
This was not an easy role considering that Austria did not have the needed sovereignty to follow its own ways in political decision making.
Because of this, Austrian political leaders had to find unconventional ways to enforce the country’s interests.
I would like to present some resources of Austrian politics and diplomacy which helped Austria to drive the occupying countries towards an agreement.
This aimed at gaining tangible advantages , while also avoiding unilateral constraints by continuously maintaining good relations with both sides.
The unified strategy of the Austrian foreign policy after the Second World War pointed to a policy of balance.
Austria tried to build good relations with both of the Cold War superpowers without any commitment;661 just as Switzerland did.
The main goal of the political leaders was to obtain the sovereignty of the country.
After 1945, the Austrian people, the political elite at least, believed in the viability and the future of their country, which was not the case in 1918.
The first important step was the meeting of the Austrian regions from the Western zones in 1945.
They urged for the expansion of its competence to the whole of Austria.
They did so even though the Renner government was established in the communist zone with some communist ministers.
One of the main perspectives of Austrian politicians was that they wanted to forestall the partition of the country.
It also helped to forward the Austrian interest that in contrast to the interwar period both political sides now paid attention to the stability of their internal affairs.
Although there were occasionally tensions and disputes between the two main political parties concerning some concrete decisions, on the general line and the main orientation of the foreign policy there was a consensus between the two parties.4 The political elite exploited everything for the aim of independence.
Austrian leaders agreed that it would only serve the country’s swift independence and its future in the international community if Austria would be seen as a victim of the German aggression rather than an ally of the Nazi Germany.
Hence they wanted to avoid bearing any responsibility for the crimes of National Socialism.
For this reason the Austrian government and the state authorities were not open for discussion on questions such as reparations for Jewish victims or the facilitation of the return of Austrian emigrants.
Moreover, because of this aspiration, no real confrontation and discussion could emerge about Austria’s recent past and the role of Austrian National Socialism.
In foreign policy issues Austria could take decisions except of certain fields.
The occupied country was allowed to establish diplomatic relations with other governments for example.
However, any international agreement required a notice to the Allied powers and could be considered as accepted only if it was not appealed within 31 days by the Allied Council.8 The structure of foreign policy had to be organized as well.
Actually, this began before the provisional government was established.
On April 16th 1945 a fruitful, efficient meeting of the former employees of the foreign affairs institution took place, where they negotiated about reorganizing.
In this first established institution of foreign affairs, onetime Christian Socials predominated.
In the developing state framework foreign affairs belonged to the Chancellor’s Office and this remained until 1959.
Guidelines were published aiming at the unified action of the Foreign Service, keeping in mind the interests of the state.
These guides were among others about topics such as Austria’s victim role or the viability of the country.
For the control of the country’s international image the Foreign Service sent delegates to the Austrian News Agency.1 Having established the internal organization of Foreign Service, Austria started to build up relations abroad.
However, the country was dependent upon the permission of the occupying powers.
First, Austria could only establish representations in the capitals of the occupying countries.
Upon the request of Foreign Service leader Karl Gruber, the Allied Council allowed the Austrian government to set up political representations in states which acknowledged Austria – except for Japan and Germany.
After the Second Control Agreement Austria could commence diplomatic relations with member states of the UN without the special permission of the Allied Council.
Despite the modest financial and human possibilities, the Austrian Foreign Service under Karl Gruber’s management made a big effort to expand the network of representations all over the world.
In 1949 there were already twenty embassies, four political representation and twelve consulates.
Austria also built up relations as soon as possible with international institutions;675 it joined the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund by 1948 and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1951.
Even though Austria had not yet joined the UN, the Austrian League for the United Nations was established in 1946 which aimed at spreading the objectives of the UN and at raising awareness on the need for Austria's integration into the international community of states.6 The Austrian government exploited every auditing opportunity at the negotiations to bring its conception closer to the occupying powers.
Austrian diplomacy even confronted Washington after 1949 when the United States was reluctant to restart the negotiations.
Politicians of both big parties tried to exploit their party-relations as well for the aim of speeding up treaty negotiations.
In 1947, Figl, then Austrian chancellor, turned to the French president, Léon Blum with his claims about the treaty.
Until 1955 the whole infrastructure of the Foreign Service was working for a swift contract with the occupiers.9 Austria’s Case and the UN After the failure of negotiations in 1952, Austria sent a memorandum to all members of the UN concerning its case.
Az osztrák külpolitika a szövetséges megszállástól az európai integrációig (19451995), 30 -31.
Der UN-Standort Österreich und der außenpolitische Status Österreichs nach 1945, 20.
However, Austrian politicians were of the opinion that Austria could not be effective if it would turn to the General Assembly alone, as a non-member state.
This initiative would be only effective if a member state of the UN would bring the case in front of the Assembly.
They planned to start negotiations with a state which was a member of the UN, but was not a member of the NATO so that Austria could avoid that the initiative looks as a unilateral action.
In the end, Austrian leaders decided to make contact with Brazil for this aim.
According to Gruber’s explanation681 Brazil would be a suitable partner as it was a UN member, but non-member of the NATO; it was an important country and quite independent from the two superpowers.
Gruber writes that the government was choosing between Brazil and India.
They found that India represented neutrality too strongly to come up with this initiative in front of the Assembly which was sensitive and did not affect the Indian sphere of interest.
As a result Brazil urged the General Assembly of the UN to make a statement to the four powers insisting on their responsibility for reorganizing a free and independent Austria.
In December 1952, Gruber gave a speech in front of the UN General Assembly.
He explained the country’s situation, highlighted Austria’s merits and stressed the need for an early agreement.
All of these efforts resulted in an appeal of the General Assembly on December 20,1952 to the signing powers of the 1943 Moscow Declaration for the fulfillment of their pledges towards Austria.
The General Assembly addressed an “earnest appeal”690 to the governments concerned to reach an agreement and sign an Austrian treaty “with a view to an early termination of the occupation of Austria and full exercise by Austria of the powers inherent in its sovereignty”691.
The Austrian State Treaty – 1955 Despite earlier Austrian struggles, the foreign policy of the Austrian government became very determined after 1953, under the government of Julius Raab.
He succeeded in reaching an agreement with the USSR, with whom Austria had had the most conflicts.
It was a big step because the USSR gave up most of its claims and its significant impact on the strategic industrial branches of Austria.
However, we have to bear in mind that at this time the USSR also wanted the quick realization of the treaty because they hoped it would set a good precedent for the question of the German case to prevent West-Germany from joining NATO.692 After a process lasting ten years, on May 14, 1955, the occupying powers met in Vienna to sign the Austrian State Treaty.
Figl, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, succeeded in the last minute in removing the clause about the responsibility of Austria for participation in the war on the side of Nazi Germany.
It is also important for Austria that the Treaty restored the independent state not established it.
This expression also confirmed that Germany had occupied the sovereign state before.
On May 15, the State Treaty was signed by the ministers for foreign affairs of the occupying powers, ensuring sovereignty and freedom for Austria during the thick of the Cold War.
Later other twelve countries joined the treaty acknowledging Austria as a sovereign, independent and democratic state and pledged to respect Austria’s independence and territorial inviolability.6 Since the process of the Austrian treaty negotiations took place during the Cold War which created a very tense international environment; the destiny of the treaty and of Austria depended highly upon the relationship between the two blocks.
On the one hand, I wanted to demonstrate how the history of the Cold War period and the international environment affected the arrangement of the treaty.
On the other hand, I wanted to prove that Austrian politicians and diplomats did still have an affect on the decisions of the four occupying powers.
They could speed up the negotiations and influence the final decision, even though they had only a narrow room for maneuver.
Albrecht, Robert Karl: „Der UN-Standort Österreich und der außenpolitische Status Österreichs nach 1945.
Institutional Change in Austrian Foreign Policy and Security Structures in the 20th Century.
Der österreichische Staatsvertrag und die Voraussetzungen seines Zustandekommens.
War operates as an explicit mechanism aimed at either annihilating the enemy or forcing surrender by completely damaging the enemy’s capability for resistance.
While extermination could be the most direct and physical means to facilitate disarmament from an enemy force, the concept of war also entails various non-lethal activities, targeted at the minds of enemies instead of their bodies.
These activities aim to assault not just enemy combatants, but also the entire political body of the enemy.
The term “psychological warfare” has been used to represent these activities that target minds in order to destroy the morale of the enemy, enhance the morale of friendly forces and allies and to win support from neutral audiences.
This shift toward unorthodox methods of warfare, however, has changes the dynamics of how strategic warfare in the battlefield is understood.
This article intends to explore the relationship between psychological warfare and soft power in context of the Cold War.
In doing so, this article aims to argue that when psychological warfare interacts with soft power, it civilianizes the battlefield, creating a perpetual state of total war.
The Cold War Propaganda Machine The Cold War propaganda machine is a profound case study that demonstrates sophisticated frameworks that shaped the totality of war beyond a nuclear battlefield that never materialized between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The lack of physical confrontation needed to civilianize the conflict between the two powers.
Nearly every aspect of civilian life was weaponized with psychwar and viewed as a potential battlefield for the “hearts and minds”699 of the population.
Soft power tactics and propaganda interacted with dynamics of civilian culture, media, radio and social capital to broaden and modify the understanding of unconventional warfare for the fulfillment of strategic aims of the Cold War rivals.
The enhanced role of the intelligence and military community within the distinctly civilian consciousness of the body politic played a pivotal role in blurring the identity of combatants and non-combatants.
Even though intelligence and military are understood to be central to the conventional operations of armed warfare, interaction between psychological warfare and soft power reshaped this understanding during the Cold War.
Public communications and information dissemination were viewed as part of the war strategy.
Consequently, intelligence and military became more pertinent to civilian spheres.
This production of a civilianised battlefield of psychological warfare and tactics of soft power that were employed does not follow the hard power dynamic of two or more well-identified rivals.
Instead, the identity of the perpetrators and planners of propaganda in many cases was purposefully obscured, while inherently combatant bodies of the war machine, such as the intelligence community and army found enhanced roles in non-combatant civilian parts of the body politic.
The consequence of this perpetual state of war was an appearance of a mainstream American culture of conformity that relied heavily on propagation rather than substantial realizations of material life.
Disillusionment with this propagation gave birth to the counterculture movement as a backlash to the state of total war and culture of conformity.
Radio was one of the most profound mechanisms in which the battlefield infiltrated civilian life and attempted to include non-combatants into the variables of war.
Jackson, authored by John Allen Stern, quotes the example of Radio Free Europe , an American radio station used as a pivotal instrument of propaganda to exercise American soft power and psychological warfare in countries behind the Iron Curtain700.
RFE gave voice to the European political exiles with a strategic ambition to empower internal opposition to Communism in Eastern Europe.
As a result, RFE exploited a wide range of elements of civilian life including news, music and culture to operationalize the battlefield of psychological warfare, thereby facilitating the creation of total war.
Stern emphasized that the identity of the perpetrators behind RFE propaganda was kept a mystery for strategic reasons and the Central Intelligence Agency’s relationship with RFE was not disclosed.
Thus, only the soft power dimension of this form of warfare allowed for such obscurement of the identities of the perpetrators of psychological warfare tactics, and the example of RFE reinforces this.
The relationship between soft power and psychological warfare also civilianized the identities of combatant intelligence outfits such as the CIA, which furthered the formation of total war.
RFE was a significant public communications project that emerged out of the interaction between soft power and psychological warfare that transformed the role of the intelligence community away from the combat zone and into civilian life.
Importance of Credibility As revealed by the relationship between the CIA and RFE, the intelligence community not only became increasingly relevant to the civilianized battlefield that it facilitated, but it also went to the farthest extent possible to remain credible within this civilian sphere.
Great emphasis was placed on establishing and maintaining the identity of RFE as private.
One method that was adopted was the use of philanthropic foundations because it was “the most convenient way to pass large sums of money… without alerting the recipients to their source”.703 However, the nature of this mechanism was only a guise and the actual relationship was much different than a typical private organization.
This is because, as Saunders mentioned in a quote from the 1952 Congress Committee, the power of the relationship was unchecked by the stockholders which made the relationship starkly different from a typical public corporate structure.
This led to the question of the strategic necessity behind this effort of maintaining a private identity, especially in ensuring that the monetary relationship with the CIA remained a well kept secret.
The answer to this question can be found in the dynamics of the civilianized battlefield and total war.
Creators of RFE understood that when civilians were viewed as variables of war, credibility was an important weapon to achieve victory in the battle of ideas and information.
Consequently, the necessary goal to accomplish credibility among civilians could not be achieved if ties with the CIA were exposed because civilian views of intelligence community were largely associated with deception.
Author Cord Meyer in “The CIA and Radio Free Europe” agreed with this assertion when he wrote that the later decision to make news reports as accurate and as objective as possible was crucial to the RFE operation, a function not assumed by Voice of America and BBC because they were known as government-supported entities.
From this understanding, it can be deduced that exposing the CIA’s relationship with the Committee and the radio stations would have worked against the interest in establishing credibility.
Hence, great caution was adopted in ensuring that the relationship remained a secret.
Civilian Role of American Military Along with the intelligence community, the military also facilitated the creation of total war by civilianizing the battlefield.
The American military entered the civilian sphere when it assumed responsibility for cultural dissemination, which included activities that were inherently non-combatant and non-violent in nature.
The military attempted to use soft power to introduce American way of life to civilian populations particularly in Germany.
It conducted psychological warfare by using artistic and cultural expression to shape opinions and control information.
For example, music served as a compelling soft power instrument in postwar Germany as noted by Amy C Beal.
Even though OMGUS was a strictly military organization, it facilitated the ICD in conducting cultural renewal within civilian spheres of Germany.
Officers of the military government undertook tasks of popularizing American classical music and diversifying German views of Western music.
The Cold War policies that civilianized the battlefield and created a state of total war had consequences that impacted social and cultural dynamics of civilian lifestyle, as discussed in the next section.
Conformity Culture and the Global Counter-Culture Movement A mainstream American culture of conformity emerged as the most ardent consequence of state of total war in the 1950s.
As the state of total war deepened, it impacted cultural aspects of an increasingly weaponized civilian life and created a lifestyle of conformity.
The overarching societal impetus was to conform to the Cold War narrative and to live a life consistent with that narrative in every aspect of behavioral expectations.
The culture was based on an American way of life that upheld ideals of freedom and prosperity that allegedly depicted the American ideology of democracy as opposed to the communist tyranny of the Soviet Union.
This culture operated through massive levels of consumption and the free market economy.
Hence, it created a culture of conformity to a way of life that reflected an ideal living standard of the American middle class.
Ownership of comfortable homes in growing urban areas along with an income that allowed purchasing of consumable goods became central to the projected culture of ideal American life rooted in conformity.
The Rebellions Against the Cold War Order, 19651975” argued that the state of total war created a need to project a certain image of American prosperity asserted as the core of good and democratic American life in order to confront the image of communist Soviet Union707.
Because the battlefield entered civilian lives, there was a strong pressure to conform as American civilians had to fall in line with the anti-communist expectations of the American way life.
The Rebellions Against the Cold War Order, 1965-1975,” The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume II: Crises and Détente, ed.
However, this culture that emerged out of a civilianized battlefield was based largely on propagated ideas instead of substantial realizations of material life.
Heavy dependence on propagation caused overarching disillusionment in the American people708.
This disillusionment was created by what was perceived to be an empty ideology, and it gave rise to the counter-culture movement as a backlash to state of total war and culture of conformity.
The counter-culture movement was not confined to America, but was global.
Counterculture was a unique rebellion that took shape differently from previous forms of resistance to dominant Cold War ideas and policies.
This rebellion originated not externally, but within “the universities, the literary circles and even bedrooms of mainstream society”710.
Counter-culture posed challenges not only to the authority but also to the very basic ideas about the good life and underlying notions of social life.
Thus, counter-culture can be viewed as the unintended consequence of Cold War policies meant to resist social change.
These policies unintentionally established and encouraged the social change that they were intended to prevent.
Leaders of states introduced policies of research, development, education and innovation to initiate strong competition against global adversaries.
However, these policies equipped citizens with intellectual and ideological tools to rebel against social norms that emerged from the policies of Cold War.
Citizens began to question not just the credentials of their leaders, but also their values.
Consequently, the United States, West Germany and even the Soviet Bloc witnessed youth movements that protested the state of total war created by the Cold War narrative.
In the United States, the Civil Rights movement, which protested racism in a society propagated as epitome of equality, freedom and liberty emerged as a subgenre of the counter-culture movement.
The environmental movement, anti-war movement and feminist movement also surfaced as progressive subgenres of the counter-culture movement.
However, along with these progressive movements, backlash to civilianization of battlefield also took the shape of domestic terrorism and violence.
As Jeremi Suri argued, right-wing conservative groups “mixed counter-culture politics with paramilitary behavior,”712 which gave rise to politics of “law and order”713 in the early 1970s.
Consequently, mainstream politics moved away from the revolutionary sentiment of counter-culture because of its violent streak.
Media served as the impetus to internationalize the counter-culture sentiments that arose as a backlash to the state of total war.
The growth of media acted as a mechanism to increase exposure to international events that embodied frustration with the dominant Cold War culture.
Media gave voice to the sentiments of revolution and became a platform for civilians to project disillusionment with the Cold War narrative that civilianized the battlefield.
Both television and film played a pivotal role in spreading the disillusionment with the state of total war created by Cold War politics.
The Vietnam War in particular was the first armed conflict to be televised all over the world.
With the help of television, American citizens in particular were subjected to first hand accounts of thedevastation of war for the first time in history ,which strengthened the anti-war sentiment within the counter-culture revolution.
Hollywood films, as a part of counter-culture revolution, shaped the views of Soviet civilians about their own leaders while Soviet films shaped American views.
In the Soviet Union, American movies made by filmmakers who enjoyed freedom from bureaucratic and governmental influences, infiltrated the cinematic world and reinforced the superiority of American ideals and values.
Thus, the media and the interplay of American and Soviet films served as platforms for civilian discontent created by the total state of Cold War.
Conclusion The perpetual state of war of ideas and information targeted minds of whole populations for political support.
Hence, as a result of Cold War policies, the battlefield entered the civilian world and civilians became decisive factors in determining victory or defeat.
Military and intelligence communities became more pertinent to civilian life.
Rather than indulging in conventional warfare, they employed policies of culture and media as a tool to bring the combat zone into civilian life.
This civilianization of the combat zone created a total state of war which perpetuated a culture of conformity in American life.
However, this culture eventually faced backlash as sentiment of counter-revolution exhibiting disillusionment with the total war narrative of Cold War gained momentum globally.
Cord Meyer, “The CIA and RFE,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, Winter/Spring 2000.
Though a minority, the communist constituencies were still large and influential in both political and social aspects.
The legacy of the anti-fascist struggle was not the only factor for such a large political consent.
The events of 1956, and particularly the outbreak of the 1956 Hungarian crisis, were the first serious challenge to the very ideology of the PCI.717 That situation urged the communists to react to the crisis and to produce their own narrative on the Hungarian crisis through propaganda means.
With a focus on the 1956 Hungarian crisis as a case study, the concern of this paper is to analyze the evolution of the Italian CP’s propaganda and to highlight political and strategic factors that influenced its decision-making during the Hungarian crisis, and contributed to shape the elements of the communist political discourse on Hungary 1956.
As a result of this political-symbolic linkage, the public prestige of the Italian CP became dependent on the international prestige of the USSR itself and of it’s very model of democracy.
Second, by mid-1950s, the Direzione – the leading organ of the Italian CP – was trying to restore the unity of the Leftist front, firmly in the belief that a united Left could challenge more effectively the predominance of the centrist political forces in the domestic scenario.
Third, one of Togliatti’s major achievements had been the creation of a new party model , embodied by a mass-party organization relying on democratic centralism.
But the outbreak of the Hungarian crisis might have paved the way to the emergence of “non-muscovite” voices within the party, and the leadership perceived the risk of potential alternative currents within the party itself.
In other words, the communist establishment was concerned about potential disintegrative effects of the Hungarian crisis.
Therefore, in the attempt to pursue its strategic interests, the PCI had to appear as a trustworthy political agent to the left-friendly public opinion and to its political interlocutors.
One implication was that public opinion and political discourse were crucial in this strategy.
In order to defend its strategic interests from the impact of the crisis, the PCI indeed mobilized its propaganda means to construct a communist-friendly political discourse diametrically opposed to that of centrist parties.
The communists tried to create and disseminate a narrative of the Hungarian crisis that was seemingly coherent with its vision of domestic and international politics.
Additionally, the analysis of the PCI’s strategic thinking in constructing its political discourse and in defining the characters of its propaganda cannot miss to take into account that the decision-making of Botteghe Oscure – the Rome-based headquarters of the PCI – was connected to multiple centers.
The first was surely Moscow as a center of final political decisions that the PCI cared about never contradicting.
This implied that the exchanges of views between the Italian and the Soviet party had a clear influence on the Italian party’s political discourse and on its propaganda.
These considerations imply that the evolution of the PCI’s political discourse must be understood in the context of a strategy whose centers of decision-making were not all located in Italy only but are necessarily connected and influenced by the international actors involved.
In this context, the very first reaction of the Italian communist establishment was characterized by a state of shock and astonishment combined with a growing anxiety for the unpredictable outcome of the events in Hungary.
The lack of a clear Soviet strategy to face and overcome the crisis contributed to this perception.
The Kremlin, indeed, moved troops into Hungary but it still remained in a waiting position basically.
This move had the twofold purpose to consolidate the control of the communists and to isolate radical elements and insurgency.
However, in the very first stages of the crisisneither the new Hungarian leaders nor the Soviets managed to keep the escalation under control.
The intervention of the Red Army, in fact, provoked a radicalization of the confrontation and an escalation of the guerrilla.3 As of 24 October, the political position of the Italian CP on the Hungarian events mirrored the Soviet one.
In the communist political discourse a strong criticism of the upheaval itself coexisted with an attempt to provide an endorsement.
The very first interpretation of the crisis found its theoretical foundations on a distortive syllogism that qualified the masses as “democratic” because of their “socialist” connotation.
One implication of this was that, though paradoxical, the communists depicted the tension between the HWP and the masses as an ideological victory for the world workers’ movement.
Imre Nagy was described as an enlightened figure whose “brave opposition to the crimes of Stalin and Rákosi well-known all around the country” – wrote Orfeo Vangelista, correspondent from Prague, on 25 October.5 Another significant implication of this interpretative pattern was the definition of the enemy.
In the midst of confusing news coming to Italy from Hungary, this propaganda was persuasive in the eyes of the communist-friendly public opinion, but the Italian CP’s response to the outbreak of the crisis jeopardized the chances of the party to continue the dialogue with their potential alliesthe socialists.
Italian socialists, like the communists, were concerned about the potential contribution of fascist-type and reactionary elements in the riots.8 Yet, the close-minded attitude of the communists, so much involved in a dogmatic defense of the USSR, contributed to enlarge the distance about the two leftist parties.
On 26 October, Pietro Nenni himself spoke out from the pages of the party’s newspaper and his words sound like a criticism of the PCI-line.
But further problems for the PCI might originate within the party itself.
Interestingly, one day later after the publication of Nenni’s article, Giuseppe Di Vittorio, leader of the CGIL and influential member of the PCI, stated a position, which showed views quite close to Nenni’sand in contrast to Togliatti’s.
Yet, the reports of Soviet troops shooting on factory workers were sharply in contradiction with the communist statements, and this factor impacted negatively on the relations between the PCI and the socialist and the unions alike.
Yet, the extent of a reform process was still unpredictable because Nagy and Kádár were still experiencing relevant troubles in taking full control of the internal situation.
The leftist base could believe either that the insurgents were fascists or that the USSR and the HWP would come to terms with them, but not the two together.
Furthermore, this perception of uncertainty combined with an ideological radicalization that was also a reaction to the “bourgeois” press celebrating the Hungarian freedom regained and comparing the Soviet domination to the fascist rule in Europe.
Togliatti, in fact, was nervous about the latest Soviet moves and urged the Kremlin to reconsider their choices.
Aware of the inherent risk in compromising with the counter-revolution – Togliatti sought to break the stalemate and to stimulate the Soviets to take a clearer chance about what to do with the Hungarian case.
On 30 October, the Italian leader sent a telegram to the Soviet Central Committee with a warning about the reactionary tendencies in the Hungarian government and pinpointed the contradictions in the Soviet moves.
Even if the party had reached a deadlock, the PCI had to reshape its political discourse by mixing an uncompromising condemnation of the counter-revolution with a sort of prudent approach to any outcome of the crisis.
According to our information, Nagy is occupying a two-faced position and is increasingly falling under the influence of reactionary forces.
Suslov and Mikoyan suggested on 29 October, the Kremlin kept on gathering troops at the Hungarian-Soviet border while withdrawing the units deployed in Hungary as a tactical move.
This new perspective allowed the Italian CP to redefine its propaganda and to inject new elements in its political discourse.
Such change was possible due to a number of external factors that did not occur before 31 October – 1 November.
The first factor was not dependent on any of the political actors involved, but rather a matter of organization and timing.
Most of the Western press – correspondents, photographers, journalists – had been just unable to enter Hungary before the Soviet withdrawal and many of journalists arrived in Budapest on the very last days of October – as the Italian press did.
Therefore, as soon as they were actually able to report the events from Budapest, they witnessed directly or indirectly, episodes of mob-violence at their highest peak.
One of them was the rise of the scale of verbal violence and of confrontation.
From the viewpoint of the Italian communists, a violent counter-propaganda could succeed to regain the confidence of the popular base after the embarrassment of the last days.
Aiming at that objective, the communist press employed the category of “white terror” to construct in the mindset of the readers a sort of horror-like scene, with images that continuously recalled bodies hanged in the streets and illegal executions of partymembers.
Significant examples of that was the exaggeration of the role of the Church – and of Cardinal Mindszenty, a concept that Italian communists had learnt from their own experience within the domestic context.
The news reported and the writing style was intended to “translate” the Hungarian crisis in the same terms political confrontation and class struggle were related in Italy.
The result of this construction was intended to evoke empathy between the Italian communist base and the victims of the uprising in Budapest.
This political discourse became even trustworthier in the eyes of the communistfriendly public opinion after the Hungarian declaration of neutrality In fact, the chronological sequence of the events was misleading.
Correspondents in Budapest truly thought that the Soviet attack was a consequence of the declaration of 1 November.
However, historians now know that the Hungarian government chose to declare neutrality because the Soviet troops were already maneuvering into the Hungarian territory as early as 1 November.
Although paradoxical, this interpretation of the second Soviet invasion as a humanitarian intervention was coherent with the international climate following the outbreak of the Suez crisis.
The most relevant is the so-called “Manifesto dei Centouno” – a document of dissent signed by one hundred-one communist intellectuals in the last days of October.
Yet, unlike some party members and a few of intellectuals, the communist political base reacted to the crisis alongside with the party, and accepted the party-line because the followers and the party actually shared the same vision of the world.
In this way, Togliatti intended to save the party from a potential loss of votes.
The electoral performance of the PCI was in fact positive, with a slight increase in spite of a loss of members at the end of 1956.
This observation demonstrates that the Italian CP managed to respond the impact of the Hungarian crisis, whose dangerous potential consequences it never disregarded.
Through a considerate usage of propaganda the Italian communists were able to keep and to consolidate the symbolic-political linkage between the party and the USSR as well as the ideologycentered empathy with the communist-friendly public opinion.
Nonetheless, the consequences of the Italian CP’s position on Hungary 1956 had a very negative impact on the alliance strategy resulting into a political isolation of the communists.
Békés, Csaba and János Rainer, Malcom Byrne , The 1956 Hungarian Revolution.
Intellectual Backlash against Radio Free Europe Adriana POPA Introduction: Radio Free Europe in the Context of Cold War Propaganda RFE was a vital part of America’s “battle for hearts and minds” in the Cold War.
While both sides brought radio into the field as a powerful weapon of propaganda, the West eventually triumphed.
Beyond technical maneuvers of backlash , meant to stop or limit its influence, RFE had to fight intellectual backlash , such as disparaging or invalidating commentary.
The radio had to contend with its share of criticism, both from its listeners and from its supporters back in the US, and its brand of broadcasting was not universally convincing, as it is often believed.
This area of RFE’s history is rarely mentioned, and a limited body of research exists regarding it.
Reading critical letters from listeners seems all the more surprising given the impression of almost non-existent contestation and religious following RFE seems to have had in formerly communist Eastern European countries.
Testimony on the impact of RFE’s work has come from leaders, as well as citizens in Eastern Europe.
This is especially relevant in today’s age, when the United States is once again facing at least one great ideological foe , and where radio remains an important instrument in the battle for hearts and minds.
Perhaps the West’s biggest vulnerability would be reliance on what is believed to be the universal appeal of its values, message, and way of life.
This appeal wasn’t guaranteed in the Cold War, when dealing with populations much more similar culturally and historically, and it is not guaranteed now, in a world brought together by globalization, but still marked by profound rifts.
A Mouthpiece for Truth and for An Émigré Community American Cold War radios, RFE in particular, brought accurate, timely information to the people behind the Iron Curtain, information often obtained and broadcast by its workers, émigrés from communist countries.
RFE and RL became “full-service substitute national broadcasters, surrogate broadcasters”755 for the people behind the Iron Curtain.
For all of their insistence on truth and accuracy, and the reputation that they achieved for adhering to these, all United States radios during the Cold War presented United States history and culture in somewhat romantic terms, glossing over negative episodes such as race relations or Native American treatment.
While the image they succeeded in portraying of the free, prosperous, exuberant West was certainly a decisive victory against Soviet propaganda, it also contradicts the moral high ground upon which the US pronounced and believed itself to be on.
The people behind the Iron Curtain could not have verified the reality of life across the ocean – the only reality they knew was that of their own countries, which indeed did not match was communist authorities tried to portray.
But for all of America’s insistence that they were presenting “the truth” to those captives behind the Curtain, United States propaganda, like Soviet propaganda, minimized negatives to the point of complete omission.
Perhaps it was America’s understanding that the goal justifies the means, or perhaps the people in the United States at that time truly believed their propaganda was morally meritorious than that of their enemy.
Indeed, not only the public but crucially, those involved in the propaganda efforts seemed to truly believe that the truth was a distinct American monopoly.
Some of the intellectual backlashes RFE had to contend with was false or “ordered”, such as attempts at infiltration/misrepresentation authored by Soviet and Eastern European communist authorities.
These attempts mostly failed, but RFE still had to contend with criticism on both sides of the Atlantic.
US Nay-Sayers/Contestation from the West The intellectual backlash against was not so much RFE’s mission, but the form its activity took, marked its very beginnings in its country of origin.
This suggested a potentially Machiavellian use by Americans, RFE’s creators, of its non-American staff, for their own national security objectives.
RFE’s now legendary accuracy and objective reporting was not its hallmark from the beginning.
RFE and RL also had to contend with contestation and accusations in the 1970s, a “perfect storm”801 that almost saw them closed in 1971.
Iron Curtain Contestation/Backlash from the East RFE also faced criticism and accusations from its target audience, the people behind the Iron Curtain, the very people it sought to help.
One of the darkest episodes in the history of RFE relates to its role during the 1956 Hungarian revolution.
RFE was accused of having induced listeners into believing that Western military support for their revolt would come, and therefore was directly responsible for the chaos and violence that occurred in Hungary in 1956.
Direct contestation from listeners from behind the Iron Curtain also came directly, in the form of letters addressed to RFE, or phone calls during RFE’s programs and outside of them.
Even so, these accounts provide an original and valuable view of the types of contestations ordinary listeners could have plausibly made.
My research on this body of evidence is still advancing, and these pieces are often not easy to find, but for the purpose of this paper, the below examples are illustrative.
The letter describes opposition to the “reality” of kolkhoz life in Poland presented in one of RFE’s programs.
Jackson complains about the misrepresentation of facts in RFE programming.
Jackson’s legacy is permanent”827, and, as that of its creators, so is RFE’s.
Defectors Who Did Not Defect, Or the Wishful Thinking of Radio Free Europe, Rude Pravo, 1967, Open Society Archives, Budapest.
Radio Free Europe’s Call for “Truth Dollars” Monique KIL Introduction Anxieties over a breakdown in social order characterized the early years of the Cold War.
The Second World War had disrupted formerly entrenched social patterns of class, race, gender and religion.
The national draft had lumped men of diverse backgrounds together in the army.
While these men were shipped off to Europe to join the war effort, women, African-Americans, and other groups previously excluded from the workforce enjoyed unprecedented opportunities.
However, when the soldiers returned home, many of them advocated for the status quo ante.
This caused frictions, which in turn increased the concerns over social unrest.
From the New Deal to the Civil Rights Movement , 168; For other causes for social unrest in postwar America, see for instance Campbell Craig & Frederik Logevall, America's Cold War: The Politics of Insecurity ; Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era. , 2008.
Among these core values were American-style capitalism and American freedom.
The Ad Council was the creator of the “Crusade for Freedom” advertisements and the inventor of “Truth Dollars,” a concept used in these advertisements.
The Crusade for Freedom was a domestic fund-raising campaign for Radio Free Europe.
Through visuals and rhetoric, three advertisements created for the “Truth Dollars” campaign exemplify the manner in which they promoted the ‘’American Way,’’ often setting it in opposition to the Soviet Union.
An analysis of the very concept of “Truth Dollars” demonstrates its association with the Cold War American ideology.
Truth became a commodity, and the Ad Council used the same strategy for selling it as it would have used for any other consumer item.
However, scholars have considered this objective ambiguous and have interpreted RFE’s intentions differently.
Wall notes that the Ad Council justified its decision to cut its ties with the government by claiming that centralized federal control was at odds with the principles of a democracy.
In reality, RFE was heavily subsidized and influenced by the CIA.835 In addition, the public-private relationship of a number of directors and board members of the overarching NCFE was blurred.
Eisenhower.6 Crusade for Freedom To maintain the illusion of RFE being a privately financed organization, parent organization NCFE initiated a domestic fundraising campaign in 1950.837 They called it the “Crusade for Freedom” and highly publicized it during the early years.
The Freedom Bell, modeled after the iconic Liberty Bell, became the symbol of the fundraising campaign and of RFE in general.
General Dwight D Eisenhower officially opened the campaign on Labor Day, September 4, 1950.
Indeed, mobilizing the support of American citizens was one of the prime objectives of the campaign.
Some of the organizations with whom RFE/NCFE collaborated were similarly ambiguous in their private-public relationships.
Besides the salience of the Freedom Bell and the Freedom Scrolls, many activities were carried out to gain publicity for the CFF and prominent individuals like Eleanor Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan openly endorsed the campaign.
Advertisements created and dispersed for the cause were another key component.
Start of the Advertising Campaign In June 1949, before the CFF had officially started, the NCFE had formed an advertising committee.
The main difference between propaganda and soft power is that the latter uses more subtle and less overt messages to “shape the preferences of others’’ through appeal and attraction.
Shift to ‘’Truth Dollar’’ Advertisements The concept of “Truth Dollars” was first introduced in the 1953-1954 campaign.
After 1956, “Truth Dollars” were still mentioned, but they were no longer the focus of the advertisements.
They seemed to have become an integrated concept, mentioned matter-of-factly in a smallsized line at the bottom.
Consequently, three advertisements from the 1953-1956 period, when the concept of “Truth Dollars” was most pronounced, were most important.9 During this period, the propaganda became more coercive in nature when compared to the advertisements from 1950-1952.
Whereas the earlier dated advertisements were quite placid, they bordered on aggressive from 1953 onwards.
The previously discussed “Give us this day…” advertisement can serve as an illustration here, when contrasted with the later “Truth Dollars” advertisements.
This is different for the advertisements centering on “Truth Dollars,” in which the headlines stand out.
For instance, in one advertisement, “World War III” is written at the top in bold, capitalized, large-sized letters, threatening with war if “truth” would not be broadcasted.
There is also an increased emphasis on certain words, these being either in italics, underlined or in bold.
Besides the assertive typography, the printed images are more violent too.
The “Give us this Day…” advertisement depicts the harmonious scene of a Czechoslovakian family at home, while the “Truth Dollars” advertisements feature, among others, a raised fist and a battleground with armed soldiers.
The CFF advertisements likely used more forceful propaganda from 1953 onwards because by that time RFE and its fund-raising campaign had become known at the grassroots level.
Local communities had set up their own activities in support of the campaign, ranging from the lighting of “Freedom Fires” to the performance of special “Crusade for Freedom” dances.
Due to all these promotional efforts, the objectives of the Crusade could shift away from pure publicity and focus directly on gaining moral support, as well as financial contributions.
The very idea of “Truth Dollars”–raising money, raising dollars, raising Truth dollars–obviously fit well with this undertaking.
How $1,00 from you can help end it before it starts This 1952-1953 advertisement opens with the line “World War III,” which is without doubt the focal point with its large-sized, capitalized, bold letters.
It should be viewed in light of the historical circumstances, when the nuclear arms race had heightened the anxieties about the Cold War turning into a hot war, leading to global destruction.
The last three words of this sentence are underlined to give them more emphasis.
They stress that the viewers must act now, “before it starts,” and should not wait until it is too late.
The audience of this advertisement must have felt relief in learning that such a simple act as donating one dollar could help prevent a worldwide catastrophe.
Yet while the viewers might have been convinced of the significance of donating dollars, they must have been curious about the ways in which their dollars would be able to make a difference.
The answer is already hinted at the bottom of the page, where the viewers’ attention is drawn to next.
The large-sized, bold word between inverted commas, “Truth-Dollars,” signifies that these dollars are not just ordinary dollars, but that they carry a special meaning.
Your dollar may be the one that exposes a Soviet informer in Cracow, gives the lie to a Communist broadcast in Prague, saves the life of a patriot in Budapest.
One dollar from you can help build the extra transmitters we need, send more messages instead of less, defeat the Kremlin in this battle for free men’s souls.
This narrative asserts that dollars can buy hope, information and the truth.
A few vivid examples are given as to what a donated dollar could achieve.
They can be the “salvation” , a religious connotation similar to the ones in the earlier published advertisement.
The image shows two microphones transmitting messages to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria.
The microphone positioned at the western side of the Iron Curtain has “truth” written on it, while the microphone drawn on the eastern side has “lies” inscribed in it.
It is not hard to infer that the “truth” microphone represents the United States, more specifically RFE, whereas the “lies” microphone denotes the Soviet Union.
Two armed soldiers are also drawn on the eastern side, highlighting the captivity of the people behind the Iron Curtain, as opposed to the freedom these people would enjoy in the west.
Its message is enforced by a cartoon of Uncle Sam, who casually sits in a chair, and, with a grin on his face, watches a number of people being boiled to death in a big cooking pot.
The advertisement urges the readers of this lie to get a $1 bill out of their pocket and to physically cover it.
This little activity provided meaning to the concept of “Truth Dollars,” by making a literal association between dollars and their ability to cover up lies.
The advertisement analyzed next employed the concept of “Truth Dollars” in similar manners.
In the top-half of this advertisement, dating to 1954-1955, a white, middle-aged man is depicted.
The viewer can discern that he is pondering the question written next to him.
The latter two words are printed in a larger font, giving more emphasis to these.
This was particularly true in light of the ever-increasing threat of communist conspiracies within the US, an anxiety fueled by McCarthyism.
The second part of the man’s response likewise expressed common sentiments among the American population.
As patriotic citizens, they wished to combat communism and assert their commitment to the nation, but they were unsure how to go about this.
Thus, this is the most important part of the answer; or in fact, this is the answer.
The rhetoric is explicitly propagandistic and plays into the assumed responsibilities of American citizens, calling upon their patriotism.
In this case, fighting is not perceived in the conventional sense of man-to-man combat, but as a battle between ideologies, with the dollar as the choice of weapon in the west.
This advertisement was the female counterpart of the advertisement just discussed, also dating to 1954-1955.
In the top-half of the advertisement, a white, middle-aged woman is depicted.
She looks into the camera directly, with a surprised expression on her face.
Her frowned eyebrows and somewhat dropped jaw bear testimony to her surprise.
This emotion seems to be a reaction to the question written next to her.
Following up on the argument that the man represented the views of his fellow countrymen, the woman seemed to serve as the spokesperson for fellow American women.
Like men, women wished to contribute to the fight against communism, but they did not realize they could provide any substantial help.
This reflected the gender roles of the 1950s patriarchic society, in which women were commonly identified solely as housewives and mothers.
This highlights that supporting the campaign, and with it anti-communism, required a minor commitment.
Women, generally seen as the ones making the purchasing decisions in the 1950s consumer society, would not need to alter their budget drastically.
Each dollar, just “one for every member of your family,” would help fight communism.
Recurring Elements The “Truth Dollars” advertisements share recurring elements.
First, the dichotomies between the United States and the Soviet Union are striking.
This objectification of the Soviet Union strengthened the Crusade’s efforts, as the American people felt greater justification for their fight against this grand system of oppression, rather than a direct fight against fellow human beings, who are being depicted as victims in the advertisements.
The idea of freedom is another prevalent theme in these advertisements and links in to the US-USSR dichotomy.
The choice of words implies that all “70 million” Eastern Europeans are longing for freedom.
A second commonality between the advertisements is the focus on the American individual.
This fit in with the broader historical context, more elaborately outlined in the first section.
This attempt to mobilize the United States citizen was also one of the key goals of the Crusade.
Their advertisements claim that one person can make a difference to 70 million people.
All advertisements play into the constant anxiety of American citizens over the Cold War turning into a hot war in the blink of an eye.
Caution was always warranted in light of the ever-lurking communist threat.
At the same time, the viewers are rest assured that RFE is being successful in its efforts to combat communism–a fourth and final aspect each advertisement touches upon.
Clearly, RFE’s mission was in line with the national endeavor to spread American ideals.
For instance, the Freedom Scroll that each person could sign to express personal support.
It assures the superiority of RFE, of the United States, and of their American “truth” over the USSR and its lies.
Conclusion Although the CFF was officially a fund-raising campaign, this was never its sole purpose.
In the disrupted postwar society, its main objective was to mobilize American citizens in support of a domestic consensus on America’s core values.
The CFF set out to enroll symbolic soldiers for this cause and to, during its 1953-1956 “Truth Dollars” campaigns, directly fight the communist threat with the weapon of capitalism.
Interestingly, in opting for this focus on capitalism, the Ad Council championed both American-style capitalism and individualism, which they and the government had considered threatening in the late 1930s under liberal New Deal policies.9 The epitome of capitalism, the dollar, was linked to “truth,” which tied in with the American core values of democracy and freedom.
The “Truth Dollars” advertisements, in both visuals and rhetoric, portrayed RFE and the United States as the ones who had the true, objective story.
It could be further suggested that the rhetoric in these advertisements exaggerated these gender roles.
These symbolize the traditional inside/outside dichotomy, with the backyard being a distinctly male space and the home being a distinctly female space.
However, these could only be bought by those who had dollars, thus by those who partook in capitalism.
Being part of the capitalist system allowed one access to the truth, while being part of the communist, totalitarian system only exposed one to lies.
Dollars were literally needed to cover up the lies, as one of the advertisements advocated for.
The power of capitalism, with the dollar as its symbol, would lead one to the truth.
Both in their visuals and rhetoric, the advertisements conveyed the message that the American truth was the only truth, and a commodity readily available for purchase.
These advertisements are prime examples of classic Cold War propaganda.
Wall, Wendy L Inventing the ""American Way:"" The Politics of Consensus from the New Deal to the Civil Rights Movement.
Propaganda, Youth Organizations and the Cultural Cold War Orsolya PÓSFAI In the summer of 1957, the Sixth World Festival for Youth and Students was held in Moscow.
The Cold War that erupted after the Second World War between the United States and the Soviet Union was not only a political and military confrontation – a cultural cold war unprecedented in history also developed between the two superpowers.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union strived to propagate their own world view through culture, trying to convince the world of the superiority of one set of values.
The armament race came hand in hand with a cultural race.2 After Stalin’s death a period of reform called the ‘thaw’ began, triggered by Khrushchev’s infamous Secret Speech, in which he denounced the cult of personality and the crimes committed by Stalin.
This period of thaw allowed the Sixth World Youth Festival to be held in Moscow in 1957.
The organization of the festival in Moscow was impossible until Stalin’s death, when inviting tens of thousands of foreigners behind the iron curtain was unimaginable.
There were no pictures of political leaders at the festival either (in previous years, pictures of Lenin, Stalin and local communist leaders could be seen everywhere).863 The events of 1956, however, raised questions about the sincerity of these peaceful intentions in the eyes of the West as well as in some Communist countries.
The Polish uprising was followed by the Hungarian revolution in October, which resulted in international outrage directed at the Soviet Union.
These events occurred at a time when it was already too late to cancel the festival, and resulted in a frostier international climate and therefore had a negative impact on the festival itself.
It was decided that the sixth festival would be held in Moscow, and in October 1955, a Soviet preparatory committee was set up.
The festival itself was preceded by an extensive cleansing of Moscow; many buildings were renovated and new ones were built.
Additionally, people who were found undesirable to the aesthetic of the city were relocated.
The stiliagi were young people, who dressed fashionably, listened to jazz and rock and roll, and gave each other American nicknames.
After 1956, the Soviet Union viewed the festival as an opportunity to give Westerners the “correct” answers to their questions regarding Communist ideology, the freedom of the Soviet people and the intervention in Hungary.
H Ragsdale and E Zubkova, Russia after the War: Hopes, Illusions and Disappointments, 1945-1957.
The United States State Department’s official view for instance, was that no official American delegation should attend the festival.
In a series of letters to the editor of the Times, published between 1956 October 26th and November 1st, several readers stated their opinions on the question of whether an official delegation should represent Britain at the festival or not.
The festivals were among the most important propaganda events of the Soviet Union and its allies, meant to demonstrate the Soviet lifestyle and superior Soviet ideology to westerners.
Their first and foremost purpose however, was to educate all socialist youth in Communist and Soviet ideology.
These meetings contribute to the consolidation of democratic forces of youth in capitalist and dependent colonial countries and to convince them that only by joint struggle is it possible to preserve peace on earth and to guarantee a better future for youth.
As the ultimate goal of the world revolution was to establish a new, socialist society, providing youth with a socialist education which would train them to become good socialists was of utmost importance.
We must be patient with their faults and strive to correct them gradually, mainly by persuasion, and not by fighting them.
Karl Liebknecht was among the first to realize the power that could be wielded through youth.
Liebknecht recognized that “in order to combat bourgeois influences over the youth, it was necessary to organize independent youth organizations.
The conference’s main accomplishment was establishing the International Union of Socialist Youth.
The conference sharply condemned the war, characterizing it as “one of banditry and the result of capitalist politics”881.
A new International Bureau was organized, with Willi Munzenburg as its Secretary.
During the First World War, communication between the IUSY’s separate fractions was broken and the union seemingly disintegrated under the pressure of war and radically differing opinions among its members.
After Munzenburg was arrested, Trostel was elected as Secretary, and the German, Hungarian and Russian sectors of the International Union reestablished relations with each other.
In August 1919, a new international conference was called in Vienna, where the Provisional Committee called a world conference, which was held on November 20, 1919, in Berlin.
This conference was later called the first congress of the Young Communist International, where the Young Communist League was organized.
From its inception, the socialist youth movement had struggled with leftist parties for their independence, since the official political parties had a tendency of trying to control them from the top.
However, the Communist Youth International remained active until 1943, alongside the Communist International 882.
In November, 1945, the World Federation of Democratic Youth was founded in London at a world youth congress as a general, worldwide youth organization.
In August 1946, the International Union of Students was founded in Prague at a world student congress.
These members soon left the groups, as Communist influence and agenda became more and more apparent.
After Stalin’s death in 1953, the WFDY and the IUS softened some of its anti-West rhetoric and showed some effort in neutralizing relations with non-Communist youth organizations.
However, when the 1956 October revolution broke out in Budapest, where the headquarters of the WFDY were stationed, the Federation’s officers fled the city to Prague and remained silent on the question of the Soviet intervention.5 The Komsomol The Soviet youth organization, the Komsomol , played a significant part in organizing the Moscow Youth Festival.
He emphasized the importance of the organization’s role, stating “the Komsomol’s independence and high responsibility really showed during the organization of the Festival of Students and Youth in Moscow in 1957.
No governmental commissions for organizing the festival were formed – everything was decided by the Komsomol Central Committee.
During the revolutionary events of 1905-1907 and 1917, the youth movement played a significant part, but it wasn’t institutionalized until October, 1918, when the Komsomol was founded.
Lenin himself gave the answer at the Third Congress of the Komsomol, in Moscow on October 2, 1920.
The older generation, he said, had been brought up in a capitalist society and at most could only destroy the foundations of the old capitalist way of life.
The trials against them were part of Stalin’s radical “purges” or “cleansing” in the thirties.
Most of the persecuted were eventually executed, among them the Komsomol First Secretary, Aleksandr Kosarev.
The Hungarian Communist Youth Association Among the most widely discussed topics before and during the Moscow Youth Festival was the question of the Hungarian revolution/counter-revolution.
The Soviet intervention in November 1956 caused some Westerners to boycott the festival or to start intense debates on the matter at the festival.
After the Second World War, Hungarian youth was eager to establish a new, democratic youth organization, and in 1944, the Hungarian Democratic Youth Organization was founded, mainly by students.
The MEFESZ was more successful than its predecessor, but it was still only an organization for students.
The five member organizations retained their organizational independence.4 In 1949-1950, the MIOT member organizations gradually lost their independence, until in June, 1950, a new, completely unified youth organization was established.
The new organization was called the Association of Working Youth , and followed the example of the new communist party, MDP and the Soviet youth organization, the Komsomol, in establishing a single party structure.
Any political activity on their part was prevented as well.5 After Stalin’s death, political discourse was renewed in Hungary, which was joined enthusiastically by Hungarian youth.
Within these circles it was customary to discuss contemporary political problems and offer up ideas on possible reforms.
They demanded that Soviet-Hungarian relations become more balanced and be reduced to economic relations; they demanded that the current Hungarian leaders be replaced by others ; they demanded that national traditions be respected and asked for greater freedom in Hungary.
There were also a few points concerning the problems of higher education.
These requests were published and distributed as pamphlets, and on October 23d, a peaceful demonstration started in Budapest, which eventually erupted as a nationwide revolt.6 During the revolution, the DISZ gradually fell apart, and many of its former leaders joined the Soviet army upon their return to the city on November 4th.
Many of the prominent representatives of the Petőfi Circle left the country, while others were captured and eventually faced trials.
Zoltán Komócsin was appointed president of the KISZ National Executive Committee.
Organizational and financial questions concerning the Festival were raised at several of the MSZMP’s Provisional Central Committee meetings in 1957.
Az MSZMP ideiglenes vezető testületeinek jegyzőkönyvei III. kötet, 1957. április 5. 1957. május 17. , 56.
The presidency of the Hungarian National Free Unions’ Association provided 2 million Forints to cover the costs of sending a delegation to the festival.4 Before the delegation left for Moscow, a storm of propaganda filled Hungarian newspapers, mostly attacking the “counter-revolution” and viciously criticizing Western perceptions of the country.
Komócsin Zoltán nyilatkozata a Világifjúsági Találkozóról”, Népszabadság, July 9, 1957.
At the Sixth Festival, this goal was doubly important for the Hungarian delegation; it was absolutely necessary that Hungarians show the outside world that the counterrevolution had ended, and that their only aim was peace and friendship with foreigners.
The socialist camp, but especially western capitalist countries and colonial and semi-colonial countries are very interested in the Hungarian situation, the Communist Youth Association and the Hungarian youth.
The Hungarian young people will have to answer these questions, relying only upon the truth and their own, personal experiences and memories of what happened during the days of the counter-revolution.
We have to solemnly face the very real fact that there will be young people who will be completely under the influence of imperialist propaganda, even amongst our friends.
These people will have completely or partially false knowledge of these events.
The Hungarian youth will have to stand their ground calmly and with patience, in the full knowledge of our truth.
The chapter describes precisely what the delegates were supposed to say about the counter-revolution and the treason of the ex Prime Minister, Imre Nagy.3 The delegation arrived in Moscow on July 25th, and was greeted by a crowd of enthusiastic Muscovites.
A forest of arms reaches towards the slow, tired passengers on the train as they are practically lifted to the ground.
The Hungarians met with 30 nations’ delegations, among them the Chinese, Danish, Korean, Swiss, Soviet, German, French, Syrian, Egyptian, Canadian, Italian, Polish, British delegations, and delegations from Luxembourg and the USA.916 Most of these meetings were amiable with nothing out of the ordinary.
According to a radio broadcast, which aired on the Hungarian national radio on August 7, 1957, the meeting between the American and the Hungarian delegations was surprisingly hostile compared to the overall amiable atmosphere of the festival.
The meeting began with the two delegations agreeing on a question and answer format, with the Americans posing the first questions.
The very first question was about the revolution, to which the answer was that it was not a revolution, but a counter-revolution.
After about one and a half hours of questioning, it was the Hungarian delegation’s turn to question the Americans.
The Americans replied that they weren’t detaining anyone from leaving the country.
The next question was whether there were any workers in the American government, to which the answer was no.
The Americans retaliated by saying that in the USA, nobody could be thrown into prison for political activity.
However, there are other, perhaps less biased accounts of the Hungarians’ altercation with the American delegation, as well as of similar discussions with the British and Polish delegations.
The Polish delegation would not accept the position the Hungarians took in saying that the October events were the actions of reactionaries and capitalists, and shouted at the Hungarians that it had been a revolution.4 It is interesting to note how differently the Polish delegation behaved at the festival after having experienced a similar situation the previous year as the Hungarians had.
The Polish youth argued with many delegations who spouted Soviet propaganda, and according to Radio Warsaw, the “original ideological” approach of the Polish youth delegation to “certain questions” was “opening the eyes” of other delegations from the socialist camp.
Of course, a main difference between the Polish and Hungarian delegation could have been the fact that revolutionary youth in Hungary had either left the country or had been imprisoned or executed, or had simply not been chosen to participate in the festival, whereas Polish youth had not been similarly prosecuted after the uprising of 1956.
The purpose of the festival had been first of all to give Russian youth the impression that Western youth stood by their side.
Few things were discussed more than Hungary and the Russians were often able to hear versions other than they had read in their papers – which had stated that the inhabitants of Budapest had wept with gratitude for the intervention of the Red Army.
For example, I was traveling in a railway car filled with English and Russians, and the English gave the Russians a complete account of the underlying causes of the Hungarian Revolution and its terrible conclusion.
In Moscow, the festival is still remembered today, and its fiftieth anniversary was officially celebrated.
It is now impossible to try to explain to the newer generations what the word foreigner meant at that time.
The constant propaganda aimed at cultivating hate towards all things foreign led to the Soviet citizen feeling a mixture of fear and admiration upon hearing the word foreign.
Tourists and businessmen had not yet come to the country, and diplomats and journalists seldom just appeared on the streets.
So when we suddenly saw thousands of foreigners on the streets of Moscow, with whom we could talk, a feeling close to euphoria possessed us.
They were young people, and the strange thing was that they weren't like the usual caricaturist stereotype painted of them by politicians.
At the festival, we were introduced to an uncomplicated sportyplayboy youth fashion and with it to the idea of the existence of a new independent class in society youth and teenagers.
According to this myth, nine months after the festival, a slew of biracial babies were born.
Local youth and foreigners didn’t have a lot of opportunity to discuss serious topics with each other outside of the official programs.
According to persistent reports during the festival, instructions were issued to householders not to invite visitors into their homes but this was frequently ignored.
The visitors therefore had many opportunities to meet non-Communist members of the public, but a number of them were affronted by the clarity efforts of the authorities to prevent this.
Naturally, the authorities tried to establish control over contacts made, but controlling every contact was impossible.
Disputes arose at every turn and on any topic, except, perhaps politics.
People didn't discuss politics first of all because they were afraid, but most importantly because in its purest form it did not interest them.
The contact with another culture, the very idea of a multiplicity of models of the world reflected in a variety of artistic styles, contrasted sharply with the customary monocultural thought and the oppressive monotony of official Soviet art.
The event later became symbolic of the cultural and political shift that occurred after Stalin’s death in the USSR; however, it was only one event amongst the many that served the purpose of creating friendlier ties with the West and possibly ending the Cold War.
As we now know, Khrushchev’s thaw did not bring about the end of the Cold War, and the cultural events of the time were later relegated to personal memories and recollections.
It seemed incredible that Moscow could accommodate so many people and emotions.
The artists involved in it acted well”, so said Nikita Khrushchev in an interview with an American journalist in July 1962.934 Khrushchev allowed the showing of the Magnificent Seven in that same year.
It was among the best-selling movies of that year, spawning a popular fascination for the Western genre of cinema in the Soviet Union.
However, the license for showing the movie was rescinded in 1963, 10 months before it was due to expire, despite its immense viewership of 63. million people, and without any explanation given.
In the years that followed, Soviet filmmakers produced their own films to appeal to the popular fascination with the Western film.
These films have been coined as ‘isterns’, Westerns set in a Soviet context – usually during the Russian Civil war, in the theatres of war in Ukraine or central Asia.
Yet there is a clear ideological problem with the American Western, which established the American national myth of the rugged individualist.
This thesis will examine this example of cultural adaptation, an example of how the Soviets succeeded in absorbing a powerful Hollywood culture while ensuring it was ideologically acceptable.
Throughout the 1970s, the Soviet take on the Western became a part of popular cinema.
The Soviet government viewed these films, overwhelmingly imported, as a way of compensating for a deficit in entertainment at the movies, but also simultaneously “represent a mass culture that, by Soviet standards, is far from ideal or not even quite healthy”.939 The influence of the Magnificent Seven was such that people began to learn by heart key phrases from the film, exchanged between Steve McQueen and Yul Brynner.
There have been some analyses that touch on the Soviet Western, but they have tended to either be descriptive or, if argument driven, then they have been selective in their treatment of the Western, only discussing the genre in passing or in reference to a single film.
In grouping these films together, I am not suggesting that they are a clearly cohesive set without variation between them.
In this sense, this thesis does not claim to be comprehensive in its coverage of Soviet Westerns, but instead takes an analytical approach – studying certain critical examples as a way of studying films as cultural artefacts, evidence of contemporary social values and political anxieties.
There has been one work published that directly focuses on the Soviet Western, a Russian book called Krasnyi Vestern by Sergei Lavrentiev, and there has been no English language attempt to tackle the Soviet Western as a collection of films or as a genre.
Lavrentiev’s is broadly descriptive and non-analytical, providing an importantly detailed look at Soviet Westerns, but not offering argumentation or linking in with broader historical and historiographical themes.
Beumers, Mickiewicz, Zorkaya, among others, have looked at the role of film within Soviet society in the 1970s and, and have also alluded to Soviet Westerns.
Film historians such as Elena Prokurovka and David Bohllinger have made analytical contributions to the historiography by looking at individual films.
Bemünden and Seán Allan and John Sandford, HansMichael Bock have explored the East German Western, or Indianerfilme, an interpretation of the Western genre which spun Native American tribes as heroic in their struggle against the oppressive colonising onslaught of westward American expansion and extermination.
These films were screened in the Soviet Union, but were not as popular as their Soviet or American counterparts.
Anikó Imre has looked at Central and Eastern European Western films on television and in cinemas, and drawn some conclusions about the influence of American culture on the Eastern Bloc, but without looking at the Soviet Union.
Katerina Clark’s work on the Soviet novel will also be incorporated as a way of understanding models of heroism in these films.
Kitses, Robert Warshow, David Cook, Mary Hall, and Martin Winkler, on Hollywood and on the Western, are crucial to grounding any valuable study of the Soviet Western in its American scholarly origins.
In particular Cook has written in detail on the ‘modernist’ or ‘anti-Western’, terms used to describe a variety of films from the 1960s to 1970s which implicitly critique traditional views on race and gender, as well as critique contemporary American politics and the conduct of Nixon in Vietnam and Watergate.4 Despite being overwhelmingly American in its setting and origin and cultural significance, the Western could be a powerful vehicle for the specific concerns and themes of different countries.
It will be argued that while Soviets encountered problems in adaptation, and there were tensions between genre and ideology, that these films were remarkably successful in their viewership.
The surprising adaptability of this American genre, the jewel of popular Hollywood cinema, to the context of a cultural and political rival, perhaps suggests something of the similarity between American and Soviet histories and values.
This will contribute to emerging literature on complex cultural exchange between East and West in the Cold War.
Rana Mitter and Patrick Major edited an important set of essays on the cultural contacts across the Iron Curtain, stressing the need to look towards the peripheries and to de-Americanise the focus of cultural historical studies.
They point to the relatively paucity of work written on post-war Soviet culture, and that frequently it appears “at best as an epilogue to high Stalinism”946.
Their desire to see Cold War studies diversify, and for the distance of post-1989 to result in the de-centring of diplomacy and high-politics, is supported by this thesis.
Some important by virtue of their popularity, such as The Elusive Avengers or The White Sun of the Desert, and have had a cultural legacy throughout the Soviet Union and even in Russia today.
Works such as The Bodyguard and The Seventh Bullet, Central Asian Soviet Westerns, show how the Western genre was adapted by Soviet filmmakers to appeal to Central Asian audiences.
All of these films were, however, produced among a tightly-knit group of people trained in Moscow who went on to work for the various production companies of Mosfil’m, Leninfil’m, Uzbekfil’m, and others.
In addition to films, I have used Iskusstvo Kino, as the main intellectual film journal in the Soviet Union, offers the historian an insight into specific perceptions of Soviet Western films, and more generally to allusions to the Western made by Soviet film critics.
Sovetsky Ekran was more directly concerned with influencing the interpretations of the general Soviet reader, and was a popular glossy bimonthly magazine.
Both film publications offer us some insight into the tensions between popular and elite interpretations of film, especially over the role of Hollywood films.
Chapaev and Ford One of the principal questions in both the Western and the Soviet interpretation of the Western, is the nature of protagonist – of the hero.
The hero is central to the action and meaning of cinema, and protagonists are by their very nature at the forefront of the audience’s attention.
Given the importance of the hero to the adventure film more broadly, in the context of which the Western can be understood, it is important that we attempt to understand how heroes and heroism are constructed within these Soviet Westerns.
An outline will be made of the models of heroism, Soviet and Hollywoodian, followed by an exploration of the evidence and applicability of those models within the Soviet Western.
Rugged individualism with frontier mentality are key to Hollywood models of heroism.
The hero in the western is a stoic silent type, and a vigilante on the outside of the law and state.
Stoicism, strength, and vigilantism are three of the most crucial aspects to the Western hero.
Despite some debate over the nature of the centrality of the hero in the Western, the importance of the hero protagonist is undeniable.
One way of looking at the importance of the hero is as the focal point of frontier oppositions, articulating a space between Law and the Other, the natural landscape and the community, and the body of the hero at its centre.
The hero has a central visual and ideological place in the context of the Wild West, a strong vigilante hero imprinting order and justice over the lawless and impoverished natural landscape and community.
Westerns, from Ford to Eastwood, frequently feature heroes with near superhuman abilities.
For example, in the final gunfight in Stagecoach ; a hero can be accurate with a pistol at two hundred yards.
Hollywood’s Western hero embodies an American model of masculinity, imbued with male emotional repression and feats of physical strength.
The heroism of the Western culminates in the imposition of order and vigilante justice on the ‘Wild West’ in all its perceived disorder and lawlessness.
The heroic devotion to Soviet values was a legacy of socialist realist influence.
Socialist Realism refers to an idealised form of realism, a depiction not just of life as it is, but life as it should be.
It focusses primarily on workers, farmers, class-conflict, and the realisation of class-consciousness and the victory of the proletariat.
Ideology and party mindedness are at the heart of socialist realism, a glorification of communist values through realistic imagery.
In the early 1930s, in Soviet literature, there was a move towards a romanticised hero, with the rise of the bogatyr.
Furthermore, the notion of vigilantism or solitary action that is so associated with the American hero, can also be found in the manifestation of the bogatyr.
These bogatyry were essentially ‘rebels’, directing their efforts against bureaucratic obstacles to the heroic physical achievements of the hero in service of their prince, Stalin.
She suggests that the irony of the ‘freedom-loving’ and ‘daring’ hero-bogatyr and the authoritarian dogmatic society in which he operates is reconciled by his ritual role as the model son in service of the ‘father’, or Stalin.9 The Soviet Westerns of the 1960s and 1970s do not reveal a bogatyr-orientated concern with presenting the transformation from natural freedom-loving, rebellious spontaneity into skills in the service of the state.
The hero’s rebelliousness is not a notable feature , his vigilantism and solitariness is always grounded in the knowledge that he serves Soviet power, which is made evidently clear.
The individual is implicitly in service of the state, rather than explicitly achieving ‘consciousness’ in the style of the 1930s, in a way comparable to the absence of the hand of the state in the Western – where the Wild West manifests itself in the individual hero taking on the responsibilities of the state.
These films feature the hero as a dispenser of justice within an uncertain and lawless time and place.
The relationship between the state and the hero differs in Hollywood and Socialist realist models.
The socialist realist model of the 1930s involved the hero acting unconsciously with socialist principles, before realising ideology and achieving consciousness.
In contrast, this idea of character development is absent from the Soviet Western films of the 1960s and 1970s.
The hero in the Soviet Western undergoes a journey or task in order to help defeat the enemy of Soviet power, summoning remarkable emotional strength and tactical thinking from a profound ideological belief in the righteousness of the Marxist-Leninist mission in service of the state.
Yet this is not following realisation after a period of ‘spontaneity’ but a driving constant.
In Tachanka from the South, the Red Army Officer Bardin and his assistant Shura are driven by a mission to infiltrate a White Army gang to help win the Civil War for the Bolsheviks.
Shilov in At Home Among Strangers is one such hero whose allegiance to the party and the ideology of the state is implicitly constant rather than realised after a period of spontaneity.
The state stands behind Shilov’s heroism, because he is an employee of the state as a member of the Cheka, but it is not the state which principally motivates his heroic actions.
He must prove his innocence by recapturing the gold that has been stolen by a gang of bandits, acting out of a personal desire to redeem himself in the eyes of his friends.
Shilov is reminiscent of the Western hero as in service of American values and westward expansion.
In the classical Hollywood Western, the hero has no realisation of American values or initial stage of spontaneity that one could compare with the character development outlined in socialist realist novels, but is instead heroic partially because of his consistency.
In some respects, Shilov’s conception of the ‘state’ itself is that of his friends in the Cheka –a personal motivation and connection.
Personal moral decisions also shape the American state-building orientated expansion west through the Western’s hero, who seeks to use his immutable skill and sense of justice, as an individual, to help create America in the Wild West.
In The Elusive Avengers, the main hero of the gang, the ‘avengers’ , Danka, acts in service of the Bolshevik state, but principally infiltrates the group of bandits because of a personal vendetta.
His father – a Red agent – was tortured and executed by the warlord Lyuty.
Personal vendetta, as well as the mutual bonds of friendship between the avengers, means this film presents a version of socialist heroism that allows for ‘spontaneity-toconsciousness’ to be superseded by a constant, personal commitment in the interests of the state for the hero.
In an unexpected scene the film ends on a strongly rhetorical note – with the entry of the children, the ‘avengers’, into the Red Army.
In a modification to the socialist realist formula of achieving consciousness, the ‘avengers’ are always conscious of their ideology, but are in this instance rewarded by the Red Army for how their small efforts contribute to the consolidation of state power.
In White Sun, the film is interspersed with Sukhov’s flashbacks to images of his wife surrounded by the greenery of his hometown.
Furthermore, the film was to include more scenes flashing back to Sukhov’s wife, including nudity, but the censors forced Motyl to cut them.
In the same way as Hollywood’s depiction of heroic expansion westwards did not involve any sudden epiphany of the hero, Sukhov in White Sun serves the interests of the state but undergoes no character development in the way that Chapaev does, who undergoes the epiphany of attaining consciousness.
The relationship between gender relations and heroes in Soviet Westerns reveals how, although American and Soviet society in the 1960s and 1970s differed in the official values ascribed for gender relations, the forces of male patronisation were strikingly similar.
In the USSR there was an official enunciation of the virtues of equality enshrined in the revolution, that women had equal rights to men and that the revolution had liberated women by providing them with equal pay, abortion rights, and legal protection.
In spite of repressive measures introduced in the 1930s under Stalin, improvements were made in the 1960s.
There were measures which provided surprisingly legal recourse for women, with new laws in 1965 and 1968 which kept the Soviet Union at the forefront of divorce rights for women.
In the USA, equality for women was also something constitutionally enshrined and socially popular, but with a greater emphasis on traditional family roles.
Yet, while these values underpinning notions of gender relations may differ, the fact of patriarchy did not.
Hollywood and Soviet cinema, both adopted a paternalistic attitude in their presentation of women and their relationship to male heroes.
In John Ford’s The Searchers , the heroes Ethan and Martin go on a hunt to find Ethan’s niece, Debbie, who’s been abducted by a gang of Comanche native Americans.
Finding Debbie, Ethan tries to kill her after she says that she would rather stay with the Comanche.
In a similar way, the hero of White Sun, Sukhov, rescues the veiled multiple wives of Abdullah.
Yet both have the same underlying male patronisation of women, who are deprived of the choice of their own actions, so as to serve the social-political values motivating male heroic missions.
In The Elusive Avengers, one of the gang of protagonists is a young girl Ksanka.
She is characterised as meek and traditional, even when around the other avengers.
Ksanka actively use her own meekness and innocence to spring a trap on the bandits at a tavern.
While on some level the message is that Bolshevik heroes can utilise existing gender roles in heroic ways, the very use of the conservative gender role suggests that the female heroes were still limited in their agency.
Keosayan did not write a character who radically fought on the same terms as men as a Bolshevik revolutionary, subverting gender roles, but one who found her traditional gender role to be a revolutionary asset in and of itself.
The agency of women is an aspect of the Hollywood Western which was hardly challenged by several so-called ‘anti-Westerns’ of the late 1960s and 1970s which had heterodox approaches to race and violence to the traditional classic Westerns of John Ford and his contemporaries.
A common feature of the Western is that of the hero as the conquer of nature.
Stagecoach is a classic example of the journey made through harsh conditions to an ultimate destination which resolves the action of the film.
This journey is in many respects a taming of nature, the physical victory over the harsh environment in which the quest is situated.
A Revisionist View’, Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature, 34/4 , 243.
Winkler, ‘Classical Mythology and the Western Film’, Comparative Literature Studies, 22/4 , 524.
He travels on horseback into the wilderness to pursue on foot the thieves of the gold.
The film features a chase along river rapids, in a culmination of the journey into the wilderness.
Shilov’s success is shown in of his ability to defeat Brylov and Sarychev, but also his ability to transverse the rapids and rocks that stand as nature’s obstacle against him.
Similarly, Sukhov in White Sun defines his heroism through battling against the hostility of his environment.
In the opening titles sequence, the camera pans multiple shots of Sukhov walking across the desert at different angles and distances, accompanied by a tentative marching-style timpani beat.
Sukhov has to travel over sand and sea in order to capture the rebel warlord, Abdullah.
The hero’s success, framed by harsh landscapes, is a crucial way in which the hardiness of the Western hero was incorporated into the territorial and physical mission of the Soviet hero in the Civil War era and early 1920s in these films.
The cowboy hero was a powerful symbol of the American other – a visual reminder of difference in values and cultural practice.
In 1968, the Soviet satirical magazine, Krokodil, published a piece on how the actor Ronald Reagan had just become Governor of California.
The bogatyr hero of the 1920s to 1940s offered a domestic Soviet model for which the Hollywood hero could be adapted to, but yet it was not.
The bogatyr as a hero involved a focus on the taming of youthful rebellion and achievement of consciousness, but no such transformation occurs in the Soviet Western.
The influence of the Western in Soviet cinema’s heroes, on a basic level, was the influence of a genre and set of images and themes from Hollywood.
What is revealing is that the Western, for heroes, could be interpreted and adapted into a Soviet context because it ultimately had much in common with Soviet values of heroism.
The films revealed an underlying parallel between the horrors of the past in the Wild West and of state mandated violence and war in the early 1970s.
Corkin suggests that “the western has the mythic power to define the past not simply as a body of material and ideological events that are recognizable and subject to analysis but as a triumphal moment when a compendium of quintessentially American traditions took hold”976.
The Wild West is a frontier, on the very brink of American territorial control, but one representing a better future for those who seek it.
In this sense, the Wild West is as much a temporal frontier, of a bygone era, as it is a geographical one.
This notion of the temporal frontier, the cusp of historical development, can be applied to the Soviet Western.
Most of these films are set in the Russian Civil War, the defining moment for the birth of the Soviet Union.
The glorification of America’s past was, at the same time, critiqued and complicated by several aforementioned ‘anti-Westerns’ whereby a “historically realistic depiction of the harshness of Western life” was depicted – in films such as Monte Walsh , Zandy’s Bride , and The Outlaw – Josey Wales .977 This is not to say that the classic Western glorification of the frontier and westward expansion was not present in 1970s Hollywood; John Wayne’s own production company, Ratjac, created four such films for Warner Brothers, among many others.
Soviet Westerns could have used these new anti-Western models which demystified the past and showed the reality of historic suffering and harshness, but instead focussed on traditional nostalgic Western representations of the frontier past.9 By the 1960s and 1970s the struggles for the development of communism’s future were happening in the corridors of power in Moscow.
Filmmakers reflect on a heroic past space, lost to urbanisation and bureaucratisation.
The focus on nostalgia in cinema is evidenced from movie attendance and sales; Soviet films that dealt with contemporary themes were the most highly recommended by the authorities and the most frequently produced, but also among the least profitable films.
To put this into context, The Elusive Avengers drew in a staggering 54. million viewers, White Sun 34. million viewers, and At Home Among Strangers saw 23. million.
The Civil War landscape of the Soviet Western reflected a nostalgia for the loss of daring and heroism in the wilderness.
Landscape is crucial to the Western in terms of its articulation of ‘the frontier’, the frontier between the past and present, between civilisation and wilderness, between stability and disorder.
The battle for communism was no longer one of bureaucracy not train robberies, horses, and guns, and Soviet filmmakers wanted to use the Western to recapture that exciting and revolutionary stage of the battle.
The American Western is used as a vehicle for nostalgia by Soviet filmmakers because the backdrop of wilderness and the fact of being set in a ‘bygone era’, allow these films to utilise long standing narratives of heroism and Soviet glory though the lens of adventure and fantastical action.
In White Sun, the barren desert of central Asia is used to create a environment distinctly alien to the majority of Soviet viewers.
The desert, a near ubiquitous setting for Hollywood Westerns, is here consciously employed to draw a parallel for a Soviet context.
The cinematography uses the sparsity of the desert background to draw the viewer’s eye towards the foreground, with the frequent recurrence of the protagonists, and their horses, as the centre of the camera’s attention.
The old clay-bricked buildings, the inhabitants of the desert in traditional dress, and the half-a-century old Civil War uniforms, evoke a bygone era situated in the desert.
The only purpose for Sukhov’s mission in the desert, to fight for the survival of the new Bolshevik state, is emphasised by nostalgic glimpses into Sukhov’s lusciously green hometown – with his wife at the centre of his flashbacks.
These flashbacks further emphasise the distance between the desert of central Asia, as the place for the chapter of the Civil War in Soviet history, and the greenery of European Russia which both precedes and follows the Civil War desert in Sukhov’s life.
Sukhov cannot return to his beautiful and fertile home until his mission in the barren and alien desert of the Civil War is finished.
The film is set in the Siberian forests and steppe, and used to create a sense of distance and particularity from the urban political elites in Moscow.
Shilov’s mission is one which requires him to go beyond the bounds of city life, and to pursue the danger and adventure of fighting by himself in the ‘wild east’ of immediate post Civil War era Siberia.
The start of the film is a sequence in which an old carriage is loaded up and sent down a hill crashing into the distance by a group of the future Chekists, including Shilov, in their youth.
This black-and-white sequence, accompanied by a mournful ballad composed by Eduard Artemyev, consciously symbolises the destruction of the past and joint creation of the future by the combined act of pushing the carriage down the hill.
Revolutionary cries to action are used to further embed the film in a sentimental and emotionally charged interpretation of the past.
Furthermore, contemporaries of Mikhalkov recognised the use of nostalgia, with E Stishova writing in 1977 that the carriage is first and foremost a deliberate echo of John Ford’s Stagecoach.
The bureaucracy of the office of the Cheka is tragically distant from the romanticised revolutionary-era activity.
The motorcar symbolises that move from the Civil War era of personal courage and physical exertion in the establishment of Soviet power, to the comfortable but unromantic time of the post Civil War maintenance of Soviet power.
Moreover, The Elusive Avengers was directly influenced by Hollywood in its use of the wildness and its relation to a nostalgic view of past adventure.
Fistful of Dollars; bottom: The Soviet state during the civil war with its young Elusive Avengers] daring protagonists moving across that steppe, in ways that echo the Western.
A common feature of the Western, notably in Stagecoach and My Darling Clementine , is the wide angle shot of the hero riding off into the sunset.
The Elusive Avengers opens with the striking silhouettes of the four avengers on horseback, riding towards the viewer, against a backdrop of an enormous glowing red sunset.
The image clearly situates the film within the nostalgia of the Western genre.
Although Leone’s film was not publicly screened in the Soviet Union until the 1980s, directors and studios had access to foreign films for private screenings for the purposes of studying American culture and significant works of cinema from around the world.
By consciously borrowing from the Western genre, situating the heroes, the avengers, within this stark wilderness nostalgically draws the entire focus of the viewer on the simplicity and concentration on the glory of the Civil War age.
Although mostly achieved visually, nostalgia also is present in the music of these films through the use of ballads.
In White Sun, Motyl uses a ballad written by the famous artist, Bulat Okudzhav.
The ballad, “Vashe blagorodie, gospozha razluka”, is sung by by Pasha Vereshchagin, a former Russian customs officer lamenting the home and life that he used to know before the chaos of war and revolution.
Vereshchagin's homesickness is transferred to Sukhov who is sitting outside the house, listening.3 Sukhov’s nostalgic longing for his home and his wife is linked to the Vereshchagin’s longing for a lost world and his long-suffering wife through the opening lines of both verses.
The first verse’s “госпожа Разлука” , referring to Sukhov’s situation, is linked to the next verse’s “госпожа Удача” , referring to Vereshchagin’s.
Bulat Okudzhava, who provided the lyrics and music for White Sun, also did so for Belorusskiy Vokzal , a film about the disillusionment of veterans twenty five years after the end of the war.
The ballad in White Sun is used to rouse feelings of nostalgia for a time long past by 1970.
The song evokes a fleeting romance, with the repetition of ‘ноч прошла, ночь прошла’ to emphasises how time has past.
The dancing villagers and the spectacle of performance evokes nostalgia for the past but in a way that evokes the loss of the traditional Russian village in the push for industrialisation and collectivisation.
The late 1960s and 1970s saw increasing popularity of Village Prose, reflecting a keen self-awareness of the loss of pastoral settings and lifestyles and a nostalgia for what had been lost.7 In contrast, At Home Among Strangers and Tachanka from the South, nostalgic ballads reflect the loss of a mythic revolutionary zeal of the Civil War.
In At Home the opening montage sequence is accompanied by a soulful ballad written by Mikhalkov’s mother.
Similarly, in Tachanka from the South, а central ballad song is repeated throughout the film, culminating in a final shoot-out accompanied by the song before the credits role.
If the Western locates the Wild West within a visual and auditory landscape of old-world charm and excitement, then the Soviet Western seeks to achieve the same things but in the context of the Civil War.
The use of the ballad is poignant in these films for trying to evoke a bygone era of past nostalgia and glory.
The success of the Western genre in the Soviet context related to the ways in which the genre could use the past.
In the Soviet Union the very use of a genre that utilised the past facilitated the implicit criticism of the present, whereas in America the development of the ‘anti-Western’ involved the use of the Western genre’s past-setting to make modern-day criticisms of Nixon’s government and political conspiracy in the wake of Watergate.00 Soviet filmmakers could shape the Western’s use of nostalgia to fit with a state endorsed emphasis on past Soviet victories.
Sovietisation could, if not override Americanness, at least contribute alternate currents of thought for viewers of these films.
Drawing on the past may have demonstrated correct Soviet values to viewers, and even roused party and ideological pride, but it ultimately did so using history.
In the 1920s, a multi-ethnic project was envisioned in the creation of the Soviet Union – that nationalisms were secondary to the creation of a communist utopia, before which bourgeois nationalism would dissipate.
In the 1930s, however, Stalin initiated a programme, which actively sought to minimise the role of national identities within a broader Soviet identity.
Terry Martin has argued that, for the cultures and peoples of the constituent republics (e.g.
Uzbek, Ukrainian, Armenian, etc.), there was minimal threat of forced assimilation, but instead that the Soviet state valued the voluntary absorption of Russian culture and language by these constituent identities.05 Soviet ideas of ethnicity rested around an official rejection of nationalism as a dangerous and bourgeois concept, while promoting an ideologically based Soviet identity – which rested on political and social convictions rather than blood or language.
Francine Hirsch rejects comparisons between Nazi and Soviet ethnic and racial policies, claiming that the Soviet nationalities policy in the 1930s was one principally invested in protecting against perceived ‘enemy nations’ rather than ‘enemy races’.1006 Soviet political theory held that Russians were the most developed, and they would lead other peoples, with their own special but compatible cultures, along the path of development so they ultimately would be as modern as the Russian people.
While not explicitly to do with ethnic difference, but rather cultural 1002 Zhuk, ‘Hollywood’s Insidious Charms, 595.
Mel’vil’, ‘Amerikanskoe Kino S Trekh Tochek Zreniia’, Iskusstvo Kino, 12 , 79.
In this thinking, the potential arose in Soviet film and television for the characterisation of ethnic and cultural difference as underdevelopment, even as far as permitting racist depictions of difference that dehumanised Central Asians.
In the Hollywood Western, a central theme is that of ‘degenerate barbarism’ as the enemy of rising civilisation out in the West, and that the ultimate exemplification of that barbarism is the non-white Native-American tribalism – the personification of unmastered nature.07 Sturges’ presentation in The Magnificent Seven is a development of this, imposing the superiority of the white man as coloniser and civiliser.
Produced during the height of the Civil Rights movement, in 1960, the film starts with a scene in which the white protagonists (Steve McQueen and Yul Brynner) take up the task of burying a native American whom the latino townspeople refuse to bury on racial grounds.
As an important founding film for the birth of the Soviet Western, The Magnificent Seven’s attempt at dealing with racial equality made it less of a target for derision by Soviet authorities seeking to bolster anti-American propaganda, and was even viewed in a positive light.
In this sense, Sturges’ work offered a positive encouragement, through exploring racial politics, for Soviet filmmakers to incorporate the themes and tropes of the genre into their work without appearing overtly American.
Yasha is, on one level, emblematic of racial equality – a token minority within an all white case of heroes.
Yet his ethnicity is presented as an impediment to his heroic Soviet credentials.
His Roma identity, as just ‘Yasha’, is insufficient for the Red Army – and part of his commitment towards the revolutionary cause is the Russification of his name.
In the original Little Red Devils (Krasnyie d’yavolyata, 1923), which was remade into The Elusive Avengers, the character of Yasha was a black circus performer called Tom.
The replacement of a black character with a gypsy one is emblematic of how ethnicity is important to Soviet filmmakers and studios primarily within a Soviet context.
J Jarmusch’s Dead Man and Traditions of Revisionism in the Western’, Journal of Film and Video , 3.
The issue of ethnicity in 1966 was not one of showing an international egalitarianism of different peoples, but rather to show the multiplicity of equal races within the Soviet Union – with the use of a Roma boy.14 The white-saviour complex, so frequent in the depictions of race or ethnicity in Hollywood Westerns, is clearly also seen in the racist notion that Roma need to be Russified to achieve higher levels of development.
In At Home, ethnicity also relates to Soviet ideas of levels of development, although in this instance the white saviour complex manifests itself in visually shocking racism towards the ‘uncivilised’ Asian Tartar man.
In the film, the Muslim Tartar bandit, Kayum, is discovered by Shilov to have stolen the gold which was destined for the new revolutionary government in Moscow.
Kayum is presented as an unintelligent, childlike, treacherous, and at times even animalistic – speaking with agitated frenzy and moving with bent back and limbs.
Rather than being presented as willfully ignorant and evil, Kayum is presented as simply too uneducated and perhaps unintelligent to comprehend MarxistLeninist logic.
Soviet ideology argued that ethnic difference was important insofar as it related to how developed, politically, different narodi were.
This presentation of the non-white character of Kayum is as physically different, sub-human, and in need of the white Bolshevik man to educate him.
The notion that ‘cultural backwardness’ can be remedied by a Russian speaking Soviet officer’s rhetoric is connected to the legacy of Russification of the 1930s.15 The notion that ‘Russianness’, as opposed to Tartar or any non-white and non Russian speaking identity, is connected to forces of civilisation in the character of Kayum – whose poor Russian is linked to cultural backwardness.
In a scene in the corn-fields, Shilov transfixes Kayum with a simple magic trick.
Kayum is held in rapture by superstition and an ‘uncivilised’ belief in magic, contrasting with the hard realism and pragmatism of the Cheka officer Shilov.
The hero, Sukhov, presents his mission as not just of the immediate liberation of the wives of Abdullah – but the general liberation of all women from traditional moral conservatism and restrictive religious practice.
The women are presented as a naive and even idiotic, when in one scene to avoid being seen without wearing the traditional hijab and violating their modesty, they frantically pull their garments up over their heads – ironically revealing their underwear in the process.16 Cultural differences are seen by Sukhov not as a permanent difference between Russian Bolsheviks and Central Asian Muslims, but as a challenge to be overcome, which he, as the culturally and politically enlightened white Soviet man, is bound to achieve.
The Soviet emancipatory project, while arguing that ethnic difference is not important, in the notion of levels of development, ultimately argued for the voluntary sovietisation of different groups.
This involved more than the absorption of political ideology, but the assimilation of cultural and religious practice in an attempt imitate the white man from Moscow.
In the vein of classic Hollywood Westerns, and even ‘Anti-Westerns’, the Soviet presentation of ethnicity in their Westerns was inherently a patronising one.
These films reflect an imbedded hypocrisy on the part of Soviet filmmakers and authorities, who sought to criticise the racism of American society, while implicitly constructing Soviet ideals out of ethnically and culturally Russian models.
This is not to say that Soviet identity was a form of Russian nationalism – Soviet leaders were fearful of the threat from Russian nationalism as a reactionary ideology – but that within a Soviet identity the Russian language and cultural attributes were desired.
The connection is made in these films between cultural and ethnic pride and a lack of development among Soviet nations.
The principal Central Asian Soviet film studios, Uzbekfil’m, Kazakhfil’m, Kyrgzfil’m, and Tajikfil’m, all produced an array of Civil War era adventure movies in the 1970s,1017 which Birgit Beumers directly attributes to the popularity of White Sun, released in 1970.
In line with Soviet hierarchies of development, a positive-Bolshevik model for the Central Asian man forms a contrast to a negative model of ethnic and cultural pride embodied by the nationalists or Basmachi separatists.
Such a contrast is perhaps best viewed through the lens of Franz Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks, wherein Fanon argued that colonised peoples self-colonised with the whiteness of their coloniser and denied their own ethnic and cultural heritage.20 It is this internalisation of the Soviet idea of hierarchies of development among different Soviet nations, and the rejection of ethnic and cultural identity in favour of a Soviet one (albeit one that incorporates selective elements of Central Asian culture), that is central to these films.
Both films are from Uzbekfil’m and directed by the acclaimed Ali Khamraev.
In The Seventh Bullet, the hero, Maksumov, is presented as the same sort of ‘civilising force’ that we find in the Western – the hero imbued with a foreign ideology conquering the wildness and unruliness of natives in distant desert lands.
Although he is ethnically Uzbek he exhibits no signs of being Uzbek other than his skin, and fully inhabits the role of an officer in the Red Army – on a civilising mission to subdue his own, less politically and culturally developed, people.
His mission is to go on a journey across the desert and try to win back his men, who have switched allegiance to the anti-Bolshevik Basmachi warlord, Khairulla.
The enemy, Khairulla, is portrayed a backwards embodiment of Uzbek identity; undoubtedly connected to the ethnic and cultural roots of the nation, but morally and politically bankrupt because of it, attempting to flee to Britain with his two wives at the last moment rather than fight.
The hero, Maksumov, serves as a positive Soviet role model of Central Asian identity as a counterpoint to the failings of the traditionalist and ethnically and culturally arrogant Khairulla.
He manages to persuade his men that their futures are better under his personal command and in the service of the Soviet state.
As a group of 20 or so Uzbek men, their anxieties over who to fight for are representative of the wider anxieties of Uzbek society during the Civil War – whether to fight for the communist forces or the islamist, nationalist Basmachi forces.
Ultimately, Maksumov’s victory in managing to persuade his men to recommit themselves to the communist cause under his leadership is a way of showing to audiences the positive role that non-white Soviet citizens could have within the Soviet state.
Khamraev dismisses an ethnic or cultural conception of Uzbek identity in his presentation of the native villagers he encounters on his journey.
Ismail almost kills Maksumov in a rage, before realising Maksumov was not the person who stole his horse and killed his brother.
Discovering that it was actually the Bamachi warlord, Khairulla, who killed his brother, positions Ismail as a friend and ally of Maksumov.
The rage and irrationality of the Uzbek villager is presented as having to be soothed by Maksumov’s rational communist ideals, and in doing so he turns the villager into an anti-Basmachi ally.
In this way, the Red Army officer, with this superior western ideology, is capable of convincing a villager to turn his back on the traditional and anti-Soviet ethno-religious identity promoted by the Basmachi.
Whereas in The Seventh Bullet criticisms of native levels of cultural and political development are explored through moral and personal failings, in The Bodyguard, traditional cultural practices are explicitly ridiculed.
At one point, Saifulo, Nazar’s slave, dresses up in the ostentatious military uniform of his grandfather,1023 he shouts that “мужества и храбрость моих предков вселяется в меня!”.1024 Saifulo is shown to be foolish in his belief that pretentious dress can give the courage and strength that the Bolsheviks find in their common belief in MarxismLeninism.
The culture of the Basmachi is presented as antiquated and alien to SovietUzbek values.
An alternative is created by Khamraev in the form of the all Uzbek Bolshevik forces in the film, led by the hero Mirzo.
The Basmachi company are blissfully ignorant that the performers are allies of Mirzo, and use the performance as a distraction – while a young boy severs the ropes of the awning covering the Basmachi.
The cultural practices of the traditional Basmachi are reduced to an emblematic farce performance, where their engrossment in their native forms of entertainment lead to their ambush.
This contrasts sharply with the presentation of tradition in the next scene, where an old man, Nazarat, laments his lack of land because of local Basmachi tyranny.
Suimenkul Chokmorov, who played Maksumov, also played a revolutionary captain in The Red Poppy Seeds at Isk-Uslk, a Krygzfil’m production, in which the revolutionary Red Army protagonist attempts to sabotage a gang attempting to smuggle opium.
The film presents the smugglers as more invested in their Central Asian heritage, and that their cultural self-indulgence is linked to their lack of Soviet moral and political values – additionally the film ties itself in with orientalist notions of opium as a part of eastern decadence and moral corruption.
These Central Asian films, in the manner of the Western, 1026 focus on the racial conflict of the frontier, presenting developed civilisation as the Soviet imposed force of modernity emanating from the west.
Both American and Soviet views on the historic imposition of their states and ideologies over peoples who drastically differed, ethnically and religious, are linked to conceptions of development and civilisation.
The American and Soviet projects of state building in far and ‘exotic’ lands, and the domination of their peoples, were forms of colonialism masked as modernisation.
Conclusion The Soviet project involved the mission to capture the hearts and minds of citizens, to try and create the novyi sovietskyi chelovek .1027 The creation of a new kind of person, an active citizen invested in Soviet values on an emotional and intellectual level was one of the core goals behind the official cultural policies of the state.
The Soviet Western in the 1960s and 1970s was on such attempt to help create citizens through cultural output, requiring a balance between entertainment and ideology.
These films are emblematic of more than the influence of the USA on Soviet culture, but actively demonstrates the way that genre could be used as a new way for ideology to coexist with entertainment.
In many respects, the surprising similarities between American and Soviet influences on the Soviet Western, demonstrate to us that cinema – and in particular genre cinema – could offer more than just culturally specific expressions.
Even if the Western was a genre which was always “quintessentially American”,1028 it was also able to adapted into a Soviet context and still be popular.
One of the problems with Socialist Realism, raised by Katerina Clark, is how to create a work that adheres fully to ideological demands without being boring and unreadable.29 In some respect, the fact that these Soviet Westerns could be enjoyed is reflective of the fact that the ideological demands on artists after 1953 were fewer, and more freedom was given.
The fact that these films were Westerns and were successfully sovietised and made popular suggests that cultural policy under Brezhnev had some successes in balancing ideology with popularity.
Yet the irony is that while these films appeared to Soviet authorities to be adhering sufficiently to Soviet views on ethnicity, nostalgia, and heroism, they were doing so in a way that actually illuminated some of the underlying similarities between American and Soviet culture and society.
John Ford Svoy Sredi Chuzhikh, Chuzhoy Sredi Svoikh (At Home among Strangers, A Stranger among Friends), dir.
How the 1960s Cold War Made Russians Likeable in Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE Thalia ERTMAN Introduction “To be different is not necessarily to be wrong or ugly,” is one of the central themes of Star Trek according to its creator Gene Roddenberry.30 This is, in fact, a central theme for the 1960s in the United States.
While the decade that proceeded had been one of conformity and fear of being targeted as a suspected communist, the 1960s saw the rise of counterculture and protest movements.
Popular culture in the mid-1960s reflected these changes in popular consciousness, as well as changes in political relations with the Soviet Union in the midst of the Cold War.
Two 1960s television shows, Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE each represented genres particularly indicative of Cold War preoccupations.
Science fiction dealt with space travel and nuclear fear, but was also able to make social commentary from its setting in the future or in galaxies far away.
Espionage shows fed on public imaginings of spies, while also commenting on growing international.
Pavel Chekov and Illya Kuryakin were appealing, especially to young female fans, and they were also likeable Russian characters, which had certainly not been present in 1950s popular culture.
These popular Russian characters were possible because of a combination of the political thaw in Cold War tensions, which made Russians less of a threat, and the counterculture movement in the United States, which made rebelling and disagreeing with authority the norm.
Additionally, their portrayal and character traits speak to popular opinions at the time, as well as the greater public consciousness in the United States in the 1960s.
In the 1950s, the percentage of American households with televisions rose from approximately nine to 90.
Because of the ubiquity of television, it was beholden to the will of its viewers and was forced to be adaptable to changing social currents.
Thus, television is a useful medium through which to study social and cultural trends of the Cold War.
This adaptability allows scholars to periodize television in a similar way that Hollywood is periodized.
While this periodization refers to Hollywood films, the larger social and cultural trends it reflects are useful in the examination of Cold War television.
While television was still a relatively new medium in this era, these events affected both creators and viewers, causing the rising popularity of shows that pushed back against the conformity of the 1950s, even if they did so indirectly.
Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE each fall into one of these generic categories, making them excellent signifiers of broader Cold War tropes.
Both of these genres had long lives before the Cold War, but the midcentury conflict forever shaped and changed them.
While sci-fi became simultaneously an updated version of the western as well as a vehicle through which to explore modernism, spy-fi grappled with the globalizing world and the shifting image of espionage.
Each of these genres reflected Cold War themes in different ways and were also forced to adapt in the climate of counterculture.
These two shows offer a new perspective on the cultural Cold War, as well as a renewed understanding of the broader cultural climate.
Often times, the actions of the crew reflect a principle closer to the Wilsonian impulse to remake the rest of the world in United States’ image.
Additionally, the very nature of the mission “to explore strange new worlds” could also be neocolonialist.
The 60 Television Shows and Events That Made Us Who We Are Today , 260.
The Perspective of the Original Star Trek Series,” Journal of Cold War Studies 7, Nº 4 : 78, doi:10.1162/1520397055012488.
Initially, Star Trek was not incredibly popular, although it would grow to carve out a distinct presence in American popular culture.
However, because it did not have wider success, NBC eventually cancelled the show.
Soon after its cancellation, several stations picked Star Trek up for syndication, showing reruns of its three seasons.
It was in syndication that Star Trek became widely popular, soon rising to be one of the most successful syndicated shows.48 This popularity and the resulting other additions to the Original Series led Star Trek to become a popular culture mainstay in the United States.
The allegorical nature of Star Trek allowed the story of a starship in the 23rd century to stand in for contemporary America.50 Many episodes centered on plots that dealt specifically with events viewers would have read about in their newspapers.
Aside from political liberalism, the show was also known for being relatively diverse and forward thinking, especially for its time.
Additionally, Star Trek is credited as being the first television show to have a scripted interracial kiss (between Captain Kirk and Lieutenant Uhura).1054 While the diversity of the cast certainly “made a progressive statement on race and gender relations that few in the late 1960s would have missed,”1055 the race relations that were depicted in the show were still complicated.
Much like the purported anticolonialist sentiment behind the Prime Directive, sometimes the attempts to be progressive and diverse could backfire on themselves.
However, through its futuristic setting, Star Trek and its creators were able to advocate for a future in which equality had been achieved, even if their own personal view of what that equality looked like was sometimes colored by internalized prejudices.
In fact, diversity and progressive 1051 While most networks would not allow specific references to the Vietnam for fear of provoking unnecessary controversy, Star Trek could deal with the war because of its futuristic setting.
Additionally, several members of the creative team behind Star Trek, including show creator Gene Roddenberry, signed a petition in 1968 that stated “We oppose the participation of the united States in the war in Vietnam,” making their political position even clearer than it was through the allegorical episodes of the show.
Nuclear fear and space travel were two major Cold War themes that influenced this new form of sci-fi.
Pessimism and dystopian themes were prevalent because of the nuclear fear, but the real possibility of space travel caused the genre to take on tropes of a different generic form – the western.
Typically western themes like exploration, conquest, and survival dominated science fiction stories during the Cold War.
While the frontier in the western is the American West, in sci-fi it is space.
The idea of manifest destiny and conquering the American frontier is engrained in conceptions of American identity.60 Thus, by positing space as the new frontier, or the “final frontier,” science fiction was able to rely not only on western generic tropes, but also on a part of the broader American story.
Star Trek is the epitome of Cold War science fiction because of its social commentary and its excitement about expanding in the new frontier of space.
The other camp claims that science fiction only became possible after the scientific revolution, placing its origins somewhere between the 17th-19th centuries.
He ends this essay with the claim that a new frontier must be found now that the west has been won in order to preserve American identity.
Henry Luce, in his “American Century” essay, follows Turner’s line of thought and claims that the new frontier in the 1930s is the rest of the world, which American can become a great power of.
These are just two examples of the centrality of the frontier conception in the imaginings of American identity and American history.
By the 1950s modernism had become a part of American mainstream culture.61 During the Cold War, what had once been a rebellious concept became the American symbol of freedom and the superiority of capitalism over communism.
In many ways, Cold War science fiction relied on this mainstream conception of modernism, as well as on the emphasis it placed on technology.
In the midst of the space race, a genre like science fiction was very appealing.
In this era, whoever had the most technology and whoever could prove they were the most modern could also prove that their ideological system was better.
Additionally, the spaceships and alien civilizations of sci-fi largely followed simplistic, modernist design.62 These themes were present in American Cold War architecture, especially in embassies as a tool of soft power to prove American modernity and freedom of thought.63 Modernism and futurism collided in Cold War sci-fi, making it a genre that held promises of what the future could be if the American way championed over the Soviet way.
The show is about an American from the CIA and a Soviet from the KGB who work for the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement, a fictional international spy organization.
No, the first Bond film, came out in 1962, building on the popularity of Ian Fleming’s novels.
Fleming himself was actually consulted in the creation of the show and is credited with creating and naming one of the show’s main characters, Napoleon Solo, who is very much like James Bond.66 Originally, the show was just supposed to focus on Solo as the main character, but then a Russian agent in one episode, Illya Kuryakin, was so popular with fans that the two were paired up as partners.
The interactions between the two characters, each from opposing sides of the Cold War conflict, became one of the defining features of the show.
Napoleon and Illya’s relationship seems very progressive for a spy show made during the Cold War.
While they sometimes have disagreements that are rooted in their differing ideologies, they always remain civil.
In fact, the trust and friendship that forms between the CIA agent and the KGB agent certainly seems to run contrary to Cold War tropes.
But, where UNCLE was committed to the cause of international peace and stability, THRUSH acted completely in its own interest, driven by greed and lust for power.
Despite its lack of allegiance to any particular country, THRUSH is described as believing in a natural order that consists of masters and slaves, which sounds suspiciously like the early American Cold War rhetoric about the Soviet Union.67 Thus, in some ways, the evil organization is still aligned with the Soviet Union, even if not directly.
Additionally, The Man from UNCLE used consumerism to reinvent the spy genre, further idealizing American capitalism.
Spies in Fiction and Film (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 2005), 117.
The Man from UNCLE was very popular while it was on air, a part of which is credited to the two main characters, but also to the satiric tone of the show.
UNCLE departed from the spy-fi of the 1950s in its more complex worldview and its refusal to play directly in the Cold War trope of United States good, Soviet Union bad.
However, the crucial difference between the spy shows of the 1950s and those of the 1960s was their satiric depiction of the Cold War conflict.
This parody can be seen in the mock thank you message at the end of each episode and in the banter between Napoleon and Illya.
While many credit UNCLE with being at the forefront of this satirical trend, it was a theme that permeated the whole spy-fi genre in the 1960s.
In the espionage dramas of the 1950s the agent models “appropriate” American citizenship and more broadly represents the United States in his missions.69 While UNCLE does revisit the authoritative 1950s model, it “reconfigures the agent’s relationship to the state as an implausible farce,” meaning that by the mid-1960s, the notion that the spy was an “uncompromising symbol of American moral leadership” began to fall apart.70 This spoofing of a previously serious genre was a direct result of the growing disillusionment that accompanied the counterculture movement of the 1960s.
Spy shows that represented the moral goodness and rightness of the state were no longer popular or necessary.
Instead, the 1960s saw shows that poked fun at the infallibility of the American government, but still showed that the American way was ultimately the best.
Spy-fi changed from the dramatic nationalist project of the 1950s to the more comical international parody of the 1960s.
Shows like Get Smart, I Spy, and The Avengers relied on UNCLE’s popularity and built upon its themes.
Thus, the satirical spy shows of the mid 1960s are examples of the growing pains of the greater genre, and can explain why these shows did not have particularly long lasting popular culture lives.
One of the generic tropes of spy-fi that developed in the 1960s and helped to form the modern imagining of the genre, however, was the idea of international and world travel.
Klaus Dodds discusses the geopolitics of James Bond based on the locations the fictional agent travels to, but his arguments can be expanded to the greater espionage genre.72 Dodds argues that scholars can learn about popular conceptions of geopolitics at a certain historical moment by looking at the role and significance of places and their inhabitants in popular culture.
The people in these locations are represented in a certain way – often in a racist or patronizing way – while the Western agents come in and save the day.
However, the international travel of spy-fi also hints at a broader popular conception of a globalized world.
Espionage shows portray a world that is connected enough that agents have no problem traveling all over the globe.
Additionally, international organizations dominate the spy shows of the 1960s and international cooperation is often necessary to defeat the villains.
The geopolitics of travel and the notion of a connected world were particularly important popular notions during the Cold War.
Pavel Chekov and Illya Kuryakin In the 1950s, as Cold War tensions solidified into what many considered a new world order, official propaganda in the United States was extremely anti-Soviet and antiRussian.
However, by the mid-1960s, two network television shows, Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE had exceptionally popular Russian characters, marking what appears to be a drastic change from the inhuman Russian characters of the 1950s.
In order to investigate how this change occurred, we can look to the greater geopolitical and cultural context of the era.
In 1953, Joseph Stalin died and in 1956 the new Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin and his policies.
This led to what historians call “the thaw” in Cold War tensions, which lasts roughly from 1956-1968.
Khrushchev visited the United States and Vice President Richard Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1959.
Additionally, with the election of President John F Kennedy and his somewhat amenable relationships with Khrushchev, the thaw did create a Cold War environment that was significantly less chilly than during Stalin’s time.
These targeted filmmakers, accused them of communist leanings, and destroyed their careers.
Thus, many in Hollywood felt it necessarily to be obviously anti-communist.
Aside from this greater thaw culture in the 1960s, cultural changes also occurred within the United States.
Counterculture and protest movements began to take over the compulsory conformity and anti-communism of the 1950s, creating a space for dissenting voices.
Both the Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War were major causes for unrest.
People began to disagree with U.S. political policy and to mistrust, even resent the government.
This translated into a larger mistrust and resentment of authority and societal norms.
These sentiments are part of what made popular Russian characters possible in the mid-1960s.
The combination of the thaw and counterculture created an environment in which American television creators could make likeable, even good, Russian characters and in which American television viewers were more able to like and identify with those Russian characters.
This was true of various forms of popular culture, not just television.
Hollywood in particular changed its attitude both because the larger political climate and because of large structural shifts within Hollywood that did away with the old studio system and brought in younger filmmakers.78 This broader sentiment made it possible for shows like Star Trek to provide social commentary on the Vietnam War and shows like The Man from UNCLE to present a multinational spy organization as the arbiter of good.
While they both still fall into certain stereotypes of Russian characters, the fact that they are presented as firmly on the side of good is an important development in 1960s popular culture.
Additionally, both of these characters had wide and avid fanbases, showing that viewers were also ready to like Russian characters.
Gene Roddenberry, the creator of Star Trek, added the character of Pavel Chekov to the crew of the USS Enterprise in the show’s second season, which ran from 1967-1968.
Being a younger character, he was certainly meant to appeal to younger female fans.
Chekov’s addition stresses that “by the twenty-third century the cold war is long gone,”1081 yet another instance in which the sci-fi genre allows for poignant social commentary.
Chekov did appeal to a lot of young female fans, bringing in a teen audience who loved this character and who helped elevate him to series regular status.
Here is an example of a Russian character who is no longer portrayed as evil or inhuman as he might have been in the 1950s.
Instead, he is not only one of the main crewmembers, but also very popular in the fan community.
Pavel Andreievich Chekov joins the crew of the Enterprise when he is in his early twenties.
He is portrayed as at once young and naïve, but also as an extremely smart and capable graduate of Starfleet Academy.
His youth and exuberance certainly were part of what made him appealing to teenage viewers, who felt they had much more in common with him than with the older members of the crew.
Additionally, Chekov is very proud of his Russian heritage, reminding viewers time and again where he is from, if Koenig’s strong Russian accent had not already tipped them off.
Chekov’s naivety and his Russian heritage became defining features of his character.
Across many different episodes, Chekov claims that some of the most famous inventions and stories in the world originated in Russia.
If Chekov, someone who is so smart and well educated because of Starfleet Academy, still thinks that Russia is responsible for all of these things, then there is something wrong with the way Russians look at history.
If most Russian characters in film and television over the past decade had been inhuman and evil, presenting a Russian character who is naïve and silly would seem a good antidote to preconceived notions.
However, this also plays into an older stereotype of Russian characters and communist characters as ignorant.
However, the fact that his Russian origins were never seen as a sign of evil or bad intentions was certainly indicative of a change in perceptions of Russians in the 1960s.
The Man from UNCLE was originally supposed to focus on CIA agent Napoleon Solo and his exploits working for the international UNCLE agency.
Another similarity Kuryakin had to Chekov was his comparison to a pop music star.
McCallum’s good looks and the enigmatic persona he created for Illya Kuryakin earned him nicknames like “the blonde Beatle” or “the fifth Beatle,” comparing the hysteria surrounding him to the hysteria 1086 surrounding the British pop group.
McCallum’s approach to the character was to build a persona based on ambiguity and enigma in which he would often hide rather than reveal aspects of the agent’s backstory and personality.
What is known about him is that he is a Soviet citizen of good standing rather than a defector.
In the episode “The Neptune Affair” he even appears in the uniform of the Soviet Navy, suggesting a history in the military.88 Kuryakin’s mysterious and exotic character plays on many tropes of Russian characters from before the Cold War, like the brooding heroes of Dostoevsky’s novels.
This “sexy and enigmatic” Russian spy soon became a heartthrob character, appealing to many female viewers.89 Additionally, Kuryakin was a good foil for his American partner, Napoleon Solo.
While Solo’s outgoing, risk-taking personality is more like James Bond, Kuryakin is more intellectual, pessimistic, practical, and intense.
This trope of the sexy and mysterious Russian is not a new one, and in fact was present in anti-communist popular culture of the 1950s.
However, in those cases, it was often a sexy Russian woman who was trying to seduce a man to the side of communism.90 Kuryakin’s sex appeal can be seen as building upon that particular Russian character trope.
In addition, his mysteriousness exoticizes him, which may have fed into viewers seeing him as not quite human.
However, his heartthrob status also made him someone that women could desire and who men could want to be like.
While he was not harmless the way Chekov was, he certainly was a far cry from the Russian and communist characters of the 1950s who were often portrayed as grotesque or evil.
The characters of Pavel Chekov in Star Trek and Illya Kuryakin in The Man from UNCLE are both Russians in mid-1960s television shows.
They both appeal to young women because of the parallels drawn between them and pop stars and they both manage to overcome the negative stereotypes of Russian characters that ran rampant in 1087 Worland, “The Man From U.N.C.L.E. and TV Espionage in the 1960s,”155.
Chekov is innocent and naïve, and therefor harmless, but Kuryakin is mysterious, exotic, and a deadly secret agent.
Chekov’s eagerness and youthfulness are played for laughs, while Kuryakin’s taciturn character balances out his more excitable partner.
This variety in popular Russian characters of the mid-1960s also says something interesting about the perceptions of Russians at that time.
While these Russian characters can be diverse, if we compare the two major American characters from each of their shows, we find them to be eerily similar.
Captain Jim Kirk from Star Trek and Napoleon Solo from The Man from U.N.C.L.E. are both somewhat reckless risk-takers whose optimism and charm get them through most tough situations.
The lone American leader with the burden of morality is a trope that is very entangled with American notions of masculinity.91 While Russian characters grow and change in the 1960s, American characters stay relatively consistent.
This can be broadened into the concept that American identity is constant during the Cold War because the United States was never in the wrong.
The Soviets, on the other hand, have begun to realize the error of their ways and are changing, hence the greater thaw atmosphere and the more likeable portrayal of Russian characters.
The other interesting thing to note about both Pavel Chekov and Illya Kuryakin is that they were made popular largely by young female fans.
Certainly both were loved for their sex appeal, but there is also something interesting about the intensity of their female fandoms.
Female fans of science fiction and espionage shows in the 1960s would not have had many female characters to idolize and look up to.
In Star Trek there was Uhura and The Girl from UNCLE ended up being a spinoff show staring a female lead.
However, the people having the adventures and making the decisions were largely men.
Additionally, the popular culture craze that surrounded musicians at the time, like the Beatles, certainly had an influence on young girls’ infatuation with Chekov, Kuryakin, and other male characters.
Women, as they were becoming more liberated from the gender expectations of the 1950s, might have felt that liking a Russian character was a small rebellion.
The gendered aspect of these characters and their fans is certainly something that deserves further insight and research.
Conclusion The memory of these two shows is still present in contemporary popular culture, just as the memory of the Cold War is.
Both Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE have had modern reboots through film franchises in the twenty-first century.
Both certainly pay homage to their origins, but they have also been updated.
The nostalgia for the Cold War is still very much present in the United States today, and part of it can be seen in the revival of these Cold War shows.
However, in terms of legacy and influence in American popular culture, Star Trek is much more prominent and well known.
In fact, until the release of the updated Man from UNCLE film, the fandom was relatively small and niche, with many people not really knowing anything about the show.
This is indicative of the adaptability of the sci-fi genre, while spy-fi has in many ways struggled to stay relevant in the post Cold War world.
In the 1960s, however, the sci-fi and spy-fi genres were both particularly representative of Cold War themes and concerns.
Sci-fi was an update on the western, while also dealing with nuclear fears and space travel.
Espionage shows played on popular conceptions of spies and spoke to the growing connectedness of the globe.
Within each of these genres, two representative television shows each featured a Russian character who was made popular by female fans.
Star Trek’s Pavel Chekov and The Man from UNCLE’s Illya Kuryakin are both evidence that the changing geopolitical and cultural climate of 1960s America was changing the way people thought.
These Russian characters were stunning departures from the Russian characters of 1950s popular culture.
Instead of being evil, ugly, and stupid, Chekov and Kuryakin were likeable, relatable, and fought for the side of good, alongside Americans.
Because of the greater thaw in political relations between the Soviet Union and the United States and because of the growing counterculture movement, these characters were not only possible to create, they were also possible to love.
With Russian-American tensions escalating on the geopolitical scene, we are once again in dire need of regaining a basic understanding of the “other” by means of rebuilding the communication bridge that no longer connects the two former superpowers.
Although in the past several years, specifically since Vladimir Putin’s re-election for the third term followed by the Ukraine Crisis and the annexation of Crimea, scholars on both sides have resumed debates on whether the turbulent U.S.Russia relations are entering a new phase of a new Cold War.
The relationship includes almost as many serious conflicts as it did during the Cold War,”1094 writes Stephen F Cohen.
Jack Matlock, the former United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, disagrees.
While during the cold war there was a “mutual fear” and “respect” between the two superpowers, at present, the relationship is largely based on “mutual scorn and contempt, with the United States having many more important priorities in the world than Russia,” such as the Middle East and the global problem of terrorism.
Pozner laments, “The gorilla is no longer afraid, nor does the gorilla respect the chimp , which makes the chimp extremely angry.
But ultimately, actions rather than mere emotions are causing a deeper split between the gorilla and the chimp, whereby anger leads to arguments, which in turn results in prolonged periods of sulking at best and severe political conflicts at worst.
He concluded by stressing the need to establish a common ground between the United States and the Soviets that would be portrayed through a hypothetical set of couples—Ivan and Anya and Jim and Sally.
It was instituted by Mikhail Gorbachev in the late 1980s and began the democratization of the Soviet Union.
Glasnost also permitted criticism of government officials and allowed the media freer dissemination of news and information.
Although the unedited version of the broadcast that included limited opposition and “clashes” between the two opponents, they “virtually disappeared” in the final cut.
Yet certain exchanges remained sharp, including those voiced by Donahue who was visibly more “dramatic” and “adversarial”1114 than the average “Jim and Sally” in the studio.
This skepticism, Zhuk argues, was ignited by both curiosity and deeply rooted suspicion of Soviet “aliens” seen as “different species” altogether.
Melvyn P Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War (The Cambridge History of the Cold War.
Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977 (London: Harvester Press, 1980), 133.
Indeed, from the 1940s the father of Cold War containment constructed these stereotypes that helped form the nucleus of foreign policy.
Kennan’s prognosis about the intricacies of dealing with the Russians—an issue that remains problematic in the U.S.-Russian relations—can be partially attributed to a severe lack of insight into the Russian psyche and Soviet mentality in general, primarily stemming from stereotypical cultural, sociological and geopolitical observations made from the outside looking in.
After all, the American observer perceives himself to be the Chosen One, whose mission as a proud citizen of the country waving a flag of exceptionalism is to convert the “other” to the universal answer that lies in Capitalism.
But if these assumptions are dangerous to our understanding of the communist movement itself, how much more so when it comes to our understanding of the Russian people.
Literary icon and Soviet historian, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, believes these seemingly unintentional tendencies to be highly dangerous.
Kennan’s early Cold War trope lasted through the 1980s, to the chagrin of both television newsmen.
In Space Bridges, Phil Donahue, on his part, highlighted the presence of this Soviet “disease of communism” in the Western media.
It had the potential to culminate in an idealistically tilted “peaceful coexistence” beyond meticulously-crafted political statements that could rarely be applied to the real world inhabited by real people, not just cleverly scripted talking-heads on political programs.
Soft power practiced through citizen diplomacy shaped social and psychological factors that accelerated internal changes within the Soviet society.
But as with all forms of power, soft power1131 undoubtedly has its limits and ramifications.
Although hardly perfect and clearly limited in its abilities, returning to the very basics of citizen diplomacy is a vital piece that is missing from the complex puzzle of diplomacy.
Indeed, a collective bond—though temporary in its previous incarnation—has likely vanished in transition, along with a mutual understanding that has, yet again, been lost in translation.
In the closing remarks of the first Space Bridge between Leningrad and Seattle, Phil Donahue asked his Soviet counterpart to share his honest feelings about the dialogue that had just taken place between the two rivaling nations.
The reluctance to understand—let alone accept—the other side of the argument continues to dominate U.S.-Russian relations in the new post-Cold War world.
In light of the increasingly strenuous relations between the two global actors, it is time for Space Bridges 2016 as a vital communication platform that has the potential to help resume dialogue to start rebuilding the human-to-human bridge through citizen diplomacy beyond politics.
Melvyn P Leffler and Odd Arne Westad The Cambridge History of the Cold War, The Cambridge History of the Cold War.
Building a Nation of Global Citizen Diplomats, ” Public Diplomacy Magazine.
A comparative study with special reference to Russia and Iran Matteo DE SIMONE Introduction Over the last two decades, an unprecedented trend toward democratization has taken place all across the globe.
In a relatively short time span, military dictatorships and authoritarian regimes have collapsed in Latin America, Southern Europe, sub-Saharan Africa and the former Communist bloc.
Nearly the totality of the new regimes adopted the institutional formulas of western democracies, with multiparty elections being the trademark.
Unfortunately, the ensuing democratic optimism over a possible “end of history”, 1138 brought about by the seemingly unchallenged supremacy of liberal democracy, was soon thwarted by the empirical observation of a much different reality.
In fact, only some of the countries that embarked on a transition away from authoritarianism consolidated into stable liberal democracies.
The majority of them did not follow suit and as of today, not only are these regimes not democratic, but they are no longer even “in transition” to democracy.
The present paper tries to address these questions by reviewing the existing literature and attempting a classification.
It will further formulate a theory with regard to the role of contestation as a pivotal concept for the regime’s stability.
The transition paradigm and the illusion of dynamicity Guillermo O’Donnell and Philippe Schmitter, in their seminal work in 1986, were already warning about the uncertain outcome of transition, which could easily lead to hybrid forms that they labeled as democradura and dictablanda.40 Yet much of the transition literature that followed has been flawed by a “democratization bias,” whereby regimes breaking away from authoritarianism were seen as necessarily heading towards democracy.
As a consequence, their political situation is analyzed in terms of their movement toward or away from it.41 This bias has led analysts to overstretch the concepts of “transition” and “consolidation,” encompassing cases where no real move towards democracy can be observed, such as in Russia, Congo or Cambodia.
Indeed, adjectives such as “flawed,” “protracted,” “unfinished” or “stuck” transitions reveal the inadequacy of this interpretative lens.
Through the empirical test, only a minority of the so-called “third wave countries” became fully-fledged democracies, while the majority entered the grey zone of hybrid regimes.
Still, Larry Diamond, in one of his contributions on democratic consolidation, seems to maintain that this is the case when arguing that “if the shallow, troubled, and recently established democracies of the world do not move forward they are likely to move backward”.1144 Yet the persistence of some hybrid regimes for nearly two decades has shown that they can have some stability as they are, reaching a “dysfunctional equilibrium”1145 which may be long-lasting.
Another crucial flaw highlighted by Carothers is the excessive reliance on electoral processes as “generators” of democracy.
As mentioned above, most hybrid regimes, even those with the strongest authoritarian flavor, possess some formal characteristics of democratic elections.
The voting process shall be secret, transparent and free, without pressures on voters nor relevant frauds.
Regimes that do not fulfill these criteria, regardless of the formal setup of multiparty elections that they may display, violate the minimal democratic “rules of the game” to such an extent that defining them as democracies, no matter how “flawed,” “virtual” or “unconsolidated,” is plainly misleading.
As highlighted by Larry Diamond, the debate on hybrid regimes brings back to the table the never-completely-settled debate about what democracy actually is.48 By looking at these countries’ political systems, we can spot the pitfalls of a minimalist, procedural, “Schumpeterian” definition of democracy that only focuses on the electoral process.
For a democracy to be liberal, in fact, the protection of civil liberties, fundamental rights, media pluralism and the rule of law are of vital importance.
Focusing on the electoral processes alone, without adopting a broader definition of democracy, results in an inflated use of the democratic label which, although not totally misplaced, still misleadingly puts liberal and illiberal democracies on an equal foot.
Hence, hybrid regimes constitute a heterogeneous category that can be conceptualized by referring to the similarities with the closer extreme ideal types , without for this renouncing to its conceptual independence, nor its multi-dimensionality.
Hybrid regime “is not an exceptional category … it is a state of normality for many societies”.1151 One common characteristic of virtually all these regimes is that they try to portray themselves as democratic.
International pressure has played a large role in establishing democracy as the only legitimate game in town.
Yet if more regimes than ever before are shaping themselves into the form of democracy, most of them fail to meet the 1148 Diamond, “Thinking About Hybrid Regimes”, op. cit.
Following Linz’s early mapping of regime types (published originally in 1975), where he makes a reference to “pseudo-multiparty systems”, 1152 we can generally label these regimes as pseudodemocratic, “in that the existence of formally democratic political institutions, such as multiparty electoral competition, masks (often, in part, to legitimate) the reality of authoritarian domination”1153.
An attempted classification The ambiguous, shaky nature of hybrid regimes has favored the proliferation of labels and categories among scholars of democratization.
Semi-democracy, delegative, electoral or limited democracy, competitive, electoral, soft or liberalized authoritarianism, together with Freedom House’s “partly free” are just some examples.
Yet not all of these regimes share the same features, and a rough classification is both possible and necessary.
Schedler divides hybrid regimes into defective democracies, new authoritarianisms and hybrid regimes strictosensu.54 Although this latter category seems to be merely residual, the division between what we may call “democracies with adjectives”1155 and new authoritarianisms is helpful.
Under the former label, we can put those regimes that fulfill the minimum requirement for electoral democracies, namely free and fair elections, but lack essential attributes of liberal democracies.
The adjective usually refers to the particular flaw, such as delegative, 1156 illiberal, 1157 or clientelist.58 To this category belong also O’Donnell and 1152 Juan J Linz.
Lynne Rienner, xviii 1154 Schedler, Electoral Authoritarianism, op. cit.
A different case is that of “new authoritarianisms”, where the democratic façade is a 1161 mere deception.
This category encompasses disguised dictatorships, dictablandas 1162 , dominant-power politics, 1163 competitive authoritarianisms 1164 and electoral authoritarianisms.65 These regimes “play the game of multiparty elections by holding regular elections for the chief executive and a national legislative assembly.
They are nevertheless markedly different from the classic authoritarianism, where “no viable channels exist for opposition to contest legally for executive power”,1167 such as in Saudi Arabia, China or the former Soviet Union.
On the contrary, here elections take place with some minimal degree of contestation and some limited forms of pluralism.
Unlike classic oligarchic regimes, they endorse universal suffrage and mass participation, and unlike monarchies, the head of state or government are subject to electoral confirmation.
These concepts are utterly similar and can be employed almost interchangeably, 1159 O’Donnell and Schmitter.
As detected by Diamond, in competitive authoritarian regimes authoritarian rulers are insecure, while in “hegemonic” electoral regimes they are invincible.
The following pages will be dedicated to the analysis of “electoral authoritarianisms,” whereby Schedler’s term is used as a general category for those authoritarian regimes in which elections present some form of contestation of any degree.
The gown does not make the friar One thing is to draw theoretic typologies; another is to empirically categorize political regimes.
For electoral authoritarianisms, scholarly consensus is usually difficult to reach, given the dissonance between the declared and the actual nature of the regime.
They promulgate constitutions, organize elections, set up parliaments, courts, local governments and supervisory authorities.
They even allow private media and some degree of civic society organisms.
None of these institutions, however, are designed to serve as counterbalancing mechanisms to governmental power.
Although they portray a liberal-democratic landscape, their contribution to the rule of law and accountability is fictive.
While outspoken supporters will praise their political system as “democratic,” or at least as “in transition to democracy,” or even pursuing “its own form of democracy,” the reality, especially as seen from the point of view of the opposition, may be extremely different.
The incumbent rulers may even be so skilled in their manipulation of the channels of access to power that the illusion of a multiparty system may be even credible and subject to only minor criticism.
In this case, the continuous defeat and marginalization of the opposition forces is usually justified as an exogenous consequence of the opposition’s incapacity or the genuine preference of the population for the incumbent party.
Of course, it may well be the case that the opposition is actually ravaged by internal strife, organizational weakness and an incapacity to reach the wider electorate, but this condition of inferiority in this sort of regime has to be seen rather as a consequence, and not as a cause of the opposition’s exclusion from political power.
It is then clear to what extent “the main methodological difficulty in identifying electoral authoritarian regimes lies in the obstacles that they establish to the visibility of their manipulative practices”, 1169 thus compelling the analysis to operate a distinction between form and substance, between institutional approach and more actor-based ones, such as resource mobilization, power networks, political culture and informal practices.
Another difficulty is dictated by the imperfect information we possess on citizens’ opinion formation.
In this context, even a methodology based on opinion-surveys would not shed light on the dilemma as to what extent citizens’ preferences are formed independently from the authoritarian context.
If this is the case, electoral manipulation – although existent – would then amount only to a small share of the overall cast votes.
For a relatively small percentage of votes to successfully determine the electoral outcome and a sufficient margin to secure the lead to the regime, the electoral outcome must be already sufficiently skewed in favor of the incumbent (or at least not excessively unfavorable to it) prior to the manipulation.
This is compatible with the idea that the regime’s electoral manipulation starts already at the moment of opinion creation, and not simply at the time of voting.
Yet their degree of contestation is equal to zero, as the control of public authority over the result is nearly complete.
In electoral authoritarian regimes, however, “official election results are the combined outcome of two unknown and unobservable variables – popular preferences and authoritarian manipulation”.1172 “Competition is thus real but unfair”.1173 Manipulation of elections can take many forms, including discriminatory rules, control over the media and financing sources, restriction to public meetings and demonstrations, corruption and patronage, establishment of mock parties and formal and informal pressure on voters, until outright repression, coercion and electoral fraud.
If they can demonstrate the popularity of the authoritarian rulers, they at the same time create an opportunity structure for opposition forces to present alternative views and unmask the democratic façade of the political process.
It is their very nature, characterized by a mismatch between norms and behavior (both necessary for consolidation to happen, according to Diamond), 1176 that prevents it.
Although this usually takes the tone of reckless populism and remains highly skewed in terms of advantaged over the opponents, it is still a step into the antechamber of democracy.
Case studies The two cases, Russia and Iran, are both situated on the rather “authoritarian edge” of hybrid regimes.
Although Russia’s hybrid nature is relatively undisputed, 1177 the literature is more reticent on Iran.
Levitsky and Way exclude the Islamic Republic from their analysis of “competitive authoritarian” regimes, since they consider the Iranian case to fall under a different type of hybrid regime type, namely “tutelary regime,” a polity where “elections are competitive but the power of elected governments is constrained by nonelected religious … authorities”.1178 However, this classification is based on the forms of exercise of power rather on the mechanisms of access to it.
If it is true that in Iran the religious “supreme leader” acts as a non-elected tutelary power, then it can hardly be claimed on the other hand that electoral competition for offices is genuine.
Electoral manipulation, repression of opposition and freedom of expression, as well as candidates vetting, contribute to the balance of the 1176 Diamond.99.
Taking this crucial element as our case selection criteria, it becomes clear that the Iranian case is well-suited for comparison with Russia.
Russia Russia was considered for a long time to be a “country in transition”, and sometimes it still is.79 It has however become clear, especially since the 2012 elections that “reinstated” Vladimir Putin as president of the Federation that Russia is not heading towards liberal democracy.
With this catchphrase, the Kremlin intends to make the point that the Russian Federation is indeed a democracy, just not a liberal, western one.
In reaction to what it perceives as intrusive western pressure, and in line with its anti-unipolar foreign policy, Russian leaders are eager to reaffirm their autonomy in handling the country’s political course, both at the level of principles and in political practice.
This “sovereignty” translates into an exclusive and all-encompassing right of the government to supervise the definition of its institutional forms and political procedures, a monopoly over collective memory, political decisions, economic priorities and a strong grip over civil society, deemed necessary in order to ensure stability and, through national cohesion, strength.
In a society where – after the chaotic years of Yeltsin’s presidency – order and stability are perceived as far more important principles than democracy, a strong leader and a strong state still remain the main legitimizing elements of Putinism and his preservation of a centralized, hierarchic and personalized institutional setting1180.
The concept of “sovereign democracy” betrays the hybrid nature of the Russian regime, as well as its ambivalent relation with the west, primarily with the European Union.
In its external relations, Russia punctually subscribes to the declarations of the Council of Europe and sees the west as one of its main points of cultural references.
On the domestic front, if, on the one hand, Russia formally upholds the general principles of democracy, on the other hand the notions of “national interest” and “sovereignty” sanction their negation.
The Russian 1993 constitution is, after all, a fundamentally liberal document, proclaiming civil rights and freedoms as well as democratic representative institutionsthe internet is not censored, freedom of movement across the borders is granted and numerous political parties exist.
But as the theory on electoral authoritarianisms predicts, these guarantees turn out to be voided by what Sakwa calls “paraconstitutionalist behavior”,1181 where strict constitutional conservatism is coupled with the practice of bending and adapting the rules to the political end.
In Russia this was pursued through the logic of a “power vertical,” namely the creation of agencies accountable to the executive power replacing the intermediary autonomous bodies.
A gulf has opened between state and society, whereby the constitutional institutions supposed to fill this gap have either been disempowered or coopted and corrupted from above.
Not casually, when Sakwa postulates a Russian “dual state,” divided between a formal-constitutional and an administrative-informal one, he replicates precisely that sort of dualism between form and substance that is the hallmark of hybrid regimes.
This trend is especially visible in the “arena of contestation” 1182 most crucial for electoral authoritarian regimes, that is to say the elections.
It has become almost a truism that “in Russian elections, it is the outcome that is certain, while the electoral rules are protean and constantly rewritten to effect the desired result.83 It is true that Russia has a number of political parties and that the 2012 elections took place in a context of mass mobilization in the main urban centers, against electoral frauds and for a “Russia without Putin,” but this did not prevent the expected result from materializing.
The mixed use of repression, cooptation, vote-falsification, nationalist rhetoric, control over the media, state finances and local administrative elites, along with a strong 1181 Sakwa.
As Krastev and Holmes have argued, Russia’s rigged elections are not just a decorative façade.84 Their role is not to select the country’s leadership, but they are a complete fabrication either.
Krastev and Holmes have a point when they suggest that these serve “to construct and drive home, on a regular basis, the ‘no alternative’ rationale for Putin’s rule”.1186 Rather than a risk for the perpetuation of the elite’s power, then, elections serve the role of consolidating it by displaying national cohesion, which is instrumental to the stability that a strong determined leader can offer.
Although differently from the former Soviet Republic, whose revolution had been rather “passive,” the Iranian regime emerged from a strongly domestic and popular movement, initially a great degree of legitimacy.
This important feature has been crucial for providing the necessary political and cultural capital to the idea of 1184 Ibid.
However, the forces that united to overthrow the Shah were not composed only of religious factions opposed to his pro-western attitude, but also of democratic, socialist and secular forces who advocated a democratization of the institutions and popular participation.
Although the instauration of the Islamic Republic by the Ayatollah Khomeini marked the success of the first over the second, still this mix of ideological sources of inspiration that composed the revolution have materialized in the fundamentally hybrid nature of the Iranian regime.
The second, inferior level is represented by the executive itself, which since the 2005 election of Ahmadinejad as president has greatly increased the deployment of the state’s repressive apparatus against oppositional voices.
This dual-tier system limits the prerogatives of the president while it multiplies, while simultaneously limiting the possible sources of repression.
This duality of power has created a sort of inconsistency in the system which allowed, in 1997, the election of the reformist leader Mohammad Khatami to the presidency, and which later, in May 2011, caused the outbreak of an internal power-struggle between President Ahmadinejad and the Supreme Leader, threatening the President himself with impeachment.
Elections in fact represent one of the few channels to express preferences independently from the ruling clerics.
Conclusions The Iranian case demonstrates even more clearly than the Russian one that, as argued in the theoretical part, elections may represent a threat for leaders in electoral authoritarian regimes.
This is especially the case in regimes where apparent stability in reality hides a latent, non-consolidated regime characterized by internal power struggles and where opposition leaders represent a credible alternative.
In order to maintain a “dysfunctional equilibrium,” the regime must therefore increase its dose of repression and control.
More regime opening implies often a stronger burden for the state, to keep it under control.
The existence of some degree of media freedom, for example, implies the necessity to constantly repress it.94 This tendency towards a more accentuated 1191 Ibid.
However, the deeper sedimentation of the system and the absence of viable opposition leaders reduce the risks of the regime’s order being challenged.
Hybrid regimes and electoral authoritarian regimes in particular, do possess their own modus vivendi and can be enduring if they manage to maintain the suboptimal equilibrium that represents one of their main features.
As the Russian and the Iranian cases show, elections can be both a source of empowerment and a threat.
While in Russia they are functional to consolidate the idea of national unity and the supremacy of the incumbent over all other opponents and apparatchiks, in Iran – where they are arguably more free and fair – they represent a channel of “voice” outside the hegemonic powers, which exposes the deep division of the society.
The apparent internal contradictions of hybrid regimes, then, represent a threat only if coupled with other, structural pitfalls and/or agency-based “strengths” (or weaknesses, from the regime’s point of view), such as an active civil society and oppositional parties capable of aggregating consensus.
At this point, the only way to survive without further opening to real contestation is an increase in repression, a strategy that, while effective in the short run, may prove counter-productive in the long run.
The Impact of United States Aid on Democratization in Ukraine Thomas Alexander GILLIS Since the collapse of the USSR, the United States pushed to democratize the former Soviet sphere of influence.
Continuing North Atlantic Treaty Organization expansion and the enlargement of the European Union have smashed the formerly impenetrable Iron Curtain, pushing Russia’s area of control further and further back.
Over the last decade and continuing to today, Ukraine, the cradle of Russian civilization, has become the most vital and revealing arena for these powers to compete, both symbolically and pragmatically.
With the Orange Revolution in 2004 and the surge of protests towards the end of 2013, it became apparent that Ukraine has a realistic chance at reforming into a functional democracy.
The most powerful weapon each player possesses in this conflict is the mercenary incentive of financial aid.
In order to properly assess the success and shortcomings of democratization efforts in Ukraine, it is first necessary to determine the goals of the United States.
The main question that must be answered is whether the United States has been more interested in fostering a real shift towards democracy or merely establishing another friendly government in the former territory of its archrival.
Explaining EU Policies Toward Lebanon from an IR Perspective,” Comparative European Politics 9, Nº 4 www.palgravejournals.com/cep/journal/v9/n4/full/cep201117a.html, acesssed May 3, 2013, 562.
Despite lofty words about the importance of human rights and democracy, aid patterns suggest the United States acted opportunistically, using financial incentives in an attempt to foster closer ties and friendly relations with the Ukrainian government, particularly capitalizing on the initial success of the Orange Revolution in 2004.
This normative-realist approach provides a number of advantages over better established frameworks in International Relations Theory.
Normative-realism bridges the incomplete analysis offered by structural realist and liberal theory on their own.
This article will consider United States aid to Ukraine as a product of these goals.
Hyde-Price’s approach helps move beyond the “explicitly normative” “liberal-idealist” view that is unable to objectively examine the power-seeking strategies that come with the promotion of “normative” goals.98 This approach is crucial to explaining why Western aid fluctuated and shifted recipients at key political junctures throughout Ukraine’s existence as a sovereign state, leading to the results that will be the ultimate focus of this research.
The Orange Revolution marks a change in the relationship Ukraine had with these the United States power which correlates to change in the aid pattern.
Although it is impossible to draw a causal conclusion from this data alone, establishing a correlation provides meaningful evidence of a link between aid to civil society organizations and steps towards democratization, as well as a framework that can be used to test other cases.
The economy was characterized by hyperinflation, poverty, and high disparities in per capita income.
This aid flow seemed to correlate with the maintenance of a steady political relationship with the United States and Ukraine's consistently poor economy.
Ukraine,” Fride: A European Think Tank for Global Action, www.fride.org/descarga/IP_WMD_Ucrania_ENG_jul10.pdf (accessed April 26, 2013): 3.
The heavily weighted emphasis on economic assistance began to change drastically in the 2000s.
From 2001 onward, USAID Economic Analysis Data Service makes available its expenditures by sector and implementing partner type.
Although data from 2001-2003 will not reflect trends in the 1990s, these years can help establish a basis of comparison for the revolutionary and post-revolutionary period from 2004-2011.
The pre-revolution era’s aid scheme can be characterized by its emphasis on economic stimulation over politicized democracy promotion.
There is also a marked lack of aid flowing directly to non-US governmental recipients,e. the Ukrainian government.
Donor Motivation and Effectiveness US aid to Ukraine in the period directly following independence was a reflection of the US’s neorealist agenda, as outlined by Hyde Price.
Because of its proximity, historical connection, and entrenched social as well as political relationship with Russia, Ukraine is a priority for any international actor at odds with Russia.
Of course, funding the development of a free market economy and promoting democracy, rule of law, and civil society are normative endeavors.
Though the promotion of these goals is seen as being to the benefit of Ukraine’s population, they also serve to align Ukraine ideologically and politically with the United States This particular period, between independence and the Orange Revolution, featured a greater emphasis on Ukraine’s market economy.
This matter got the most attention in this financially struggling nation because it was a particularly pressing issue, the amelioration of which the United States assumed would bring natural strides in progress with regard to humanitarian and democratic issues.
However, United States aid must be viewed as politically motivated and not strictly an effort to improve the lives of Ukrainians by spreading democratic ideals.
If the latter were true, explaining the surge in aid around elections would be difficult.
Presidential election years have higher funding than either the preceding or the following year and parliamentary election years show more mild spikes in funding.
This trend holds true not only for the pre-revolutionary period, but for Ukraine’s entire existence as a sovereign state.
Peaks in aid were seen in 1994, 1999, 2004-2005, and 2010, all years in which presidential elections were to be held.09 This suggests that aid, though not necessarily geared toward campaigns, governmental parties, or other political groups, is designed to have an impact on the elections.
As Copsey noted, there was often a pro-Western and a pro-Russian candidate.
By bolstering efforts in general for election years, the US’s aid patterns could be seen as trying to influence the elections and maximize its political influence over the Ukrainian state.10 However, if this is either the direct intent or indirect intent of this pattern, its effectiveness is dubious.
Although it has been suggested that the West’s role is frequently “overestimated,” the pivotal role played by the OSCE, a multilateral governmental organization, should not go unmentioned.12 It is also pertinent to justify claiming the OSCE as a representative of the West.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s election monitoring results that indicated fraud in favor of Viktor Yanukovych were the only truly causal contribution of the West.
The “neutral and disinterested” party’s findings were taken seriously and led to outrage among Ukrainians and the international community alike.13 Foreign powers of the West demanded that the OSCE’s findings be addressed.
For example, the European Parliament went so far as to pass a resolution calling for another election.14 Different funds for democracy promotion experienced differing patterns.
In the midst of the Orange Revolution, democracy promotion funds of USAID were at a record high in 2005 at 58 million USD, nearly a 170% increase from the previous year.15 Increased funding for democracy assistance came from the NED as well as from the Millennium Challenge Corporation from 2006/2007 onward.
From 2004 to 2005, United States aid increased overall, but “Governance and Civil Society” expenditures rose nearly 10 million dollars.19 Another trend that emerged from 2004-2010 was increased aid given to the government.
Between 2004 and 2007, there was 70% less funding being awarded to all non-state actors, while the government sector received 59% more.20 Although higher totals persisted for the US government itself as an implementing agency, rates also dramatically increased for aid granted to the Ukrainian government.
This was presumably a symptom of the US government’s faith in the Yushchenko administration to successfully promote democratization efforts.
In comparison to the period before the revolution, some significant changes in aid patterns can be observed from 2004-2011.
Most significantly, general rates of aid decreased, democracy assistance received more funding, and there was an increase in assistance given to governmental sectors.
This was a clear break from patterns that characterize the previous era.
The outbreak of the Orange Revolution and Yushchenko eventually taking office indicated that United States aid efforts helped move the situation in a favorable direction from a Western perspective.
However, the United States was criticized for its sudden drop-offs in democracy assistance through the promotion of civil society and its persistent contributions to the Ukrainian government under Yushchenko.21 This evidence supported the claim that the United States “viewed the new leadership and the primary 1217 Gillis, op. cit.
Certain practices, such as a minor development of civil society infrastructure and slightly freer media, can be seen as enduring products of the revolution.24 However, Ukraine remains, simply, “a more complex semidemocracy” that saw limited progress in the Yushchenko years as a result of the lackluster performance of his administration.25 In some ways, the funding provided to the Ukrainian government was wasted.
For example, The Millennium Challenge Corporation funding which totaled $64.58 million between 2006 and 2010 was largely awarded to the Ukrainian government.
Meanwhile, Freedom House’s democracy ratings chart gives Ukraine an unfavorable score of 5.75 for that period, only to have it drop to 6.00 in 2010.
Perhaps due to the failure of the Orange Revolution to produce any lasting figures of political change, the United States found that CSOs offered the only opportunity to spur the democratization process.
The aid may have been “misguided” as Mitchell claims because the quantity that was issued to its recipient did not result in major progress.29 Alternatively, the aid may have been issued in order to spur political stability and promote an amicable relationship between the two governments, after the turbulence of the Kuchma years.
The data supports the proposition that excessive aid to the government and little aid to civil society contributed to the stagnation of democratization processes in Ukraine.
This leads to the ultimate conclusion that the development of civil society is a useful process to the development of democracy, particularly when new governments cannot be expected to initiate or implement democratic reform.
We can speak about “real” neighborhood policy just after the transition.
I would also like to present its main objectives, as well as hindrances that have occurred over the last 20 years.
Furthermore, this essay summarizes the necessity of neighborhood policy during the Euro-Atlantic integration process.
The case of Hungarian minorities will also be discussed, as when dealing with neighborhood policy we cannot pass over the question of their situation.
Additionally, I will try to underline those events, which have had a determinant and main role in the process of composing a neighborhood policy.
Of course, this essay cannot specify each of them and would be a topic of a future study.
Similarly, the role played by Hungarian political organizations and/or parties in neighboring policy will only be referred to and not explained in details due to the limits of the essay.
Definitions When we use the term of neighborhood policy we talk about the relations of the country concerned towards its neighbors.
It is generally an important part of foreign policy; due to geography each country has land and/or maritime neighbors therefore they have to define their relations to their neighbors.
We can speak about good neighborhood policy in that case when the parties can handle the common issues successfully.
In case of Hungary, the issue of neighborhood policy is inseparable from minority policy and regional cooperation.30 Both of them have to rely on humaneness and stability.
Minority policy is an instrument of the government to deal with the issue of different minorities within the borders of Hungary as well as to handle the questions related to the Hungarian minorities beyond the borders.
Regional policy became more important after the change of regime in 1989-90.
Prior to the change of regime, within the Warsaw Pact and Comecon, 1231 Moscow sought to prevent any intra bloc horizontal regional cooperation having learnt from the case of Yugoslavia when regional initiatives of Tito resulted in deviation from the one centered communist regime.32 As a result, there was no possibility for the East Central European countries to form a regional coalition without the participation of the Soviet Union.33 After the transition, regional cooperation has become more relevant and could intensify the neighborhood policy.
As we will see, EU membership offers, and in some cases, necessitates the maintenance of regional policy.34 The term of ‘nation policy’ is a particular expression in this region.
On the other hand, EU decision-making sometimes presses the set up of regional coalitions of certain Member States to defend their interests,g. in case of European Neighborhood Policy, etc.
State interest implies the interests of Hungarian citizens within the borders of Hungary while national interest includes additionally the interests of Hungarian minorities beyond the borders.
Nation policy generally links the question of identity and the conditions essential for maintaining the identity and does not treat the concept of nation as belonging to borders and territories.
Since nation policy is a constitutional responsibility of Hungary, for the Hungarian public the issue of Hungarian minority living beyond the borders, especially in Romania,1238 is a crucial point.
Therefore, the question of nation policy cannot be ignored when we analyze neighborhood policy.
The end of the eighties Antecedents Since communist policy neglected the issue of nationalism it did not deal with the problem of national minorities on the surface.
The Hungarian Status Law: Nation Building and/or Minority Protection. , 105.
According to the census of 1990, 1,603,923 persons declared themselves Hungarian in Romania; in 2002 1,414,718; and in 2012 1,238,000.
In Romania, the Hungarian Autonomic Territory was set up in 1952 under Soviet pressure led by ethnic Hungarian communists.
The autonomous region had a population of more than half a million Hungarians whose rights could have been protected in a more efficient way;1242 in contrast to the rest of the Hungarian minority living in Transylvania, outside the autonomous region, whose assimilation proceeded continuously.
In the meantime, Hungary, following the World War II, declared the policy of “new beginning” referring to the reconciliation with her neighbors; and accepting the borders.43 During the communist era, de-nationalization in Hungary was more intense than in other countries of the bloc.44 For quite a long time, the issue of Hungarian minorities targeted by assimilation policies of neighboring countries was not put on the table of the Hungarian leadership.
On the other hand, the communist leadership was opposed to the national “irredentism” of Hungary’s pre-war government.
For the management of the deriving social tensions, parochial nationalism proved to be a useful means in multiethnic societies.45 In most cases this resulted in the oppression of minorities.
However, the quasi freezing of this issue did not solve the problem at all, but rather prolonged it.
Nicolae Ceausescu, the Romanian party leader consolidated this approach to legitimize his power.
As a result, the situation of Hungarians living in Romania became gradually worse.
After Ceausescu came into power in 1965 he dissolved the Hungarian Autonomic Territory in the frame of administrative reorganization of the country.47 Then in 1972 Ceausescu announced the national homogenization program.
Officially the program aimed at a reinforced industrialization of the country and rationalization of its resources; however, in fact, it resulted in an ethnic cleansing including the selling of Jews and Germans to their kin-states, as well as the colonization of Transylvania by the settlement of Romanian inhabitants to change its ethnic composition.48 Its aim was the total elimination of minorities in Romania and the establishment of the unitary Romanian state.
But its space for maneuvering was decreasing from 1956 gradually due to the sympathy movements of Hungarian minorities with the Hungarian revolution.
The ideology of dual loyalty (to the kin-state and the state of citizenship) and the bridge role of minorities (providing a space for dialogue between countries) were formulated.49 Nevertheless, the first steps taken by the Hungarian government were rather negligible therefore they had to face a certain degree of criticism from the society having not dealt with this particular problem.
The relationship between Hungary and Romania became tenser partly because of the actions of the Ceausescu regime.
Since bilateral negotiations were unsuccessful, the aim of Hungarian foreign policy was to “achieve the international denunciation of the Romanian policy in international forums directly”1250.
The main argument was the issue of human rights, which was reasonable as the Hungarian government was the main promoter of the Helsinki process within the Eastern bloc.
The protection of national minorities, especially thereof Hungarian minorities living in neighboring countries, including Romania was not explicitly mentioned.
Nevertheless, Hungary had the legal basis to compel Romania on the treatment of Hungarian minorities at international fora.
Although it corresponded to the expectations of Western countries in that time, nothing happened concerning the situation of Hungarians in Romania.
Formally, its aim was the enforcement of urbanization through the demolition of villages in the countryside and reconstruction of villages to industrial centers.
However, since it resulted in the destruction of historical buildings, including churches, monasteries, theaters belonging mainly to the historical minorities of the country, the Federal Republic of Germany and Hungary harshly protested against the program claiming that its goal was the final elimination of minorities.
These operations resulted in a huge number of Romanian emigrants, which motivated both the Hungarian government and the Hungarian public to do something.54 The most enormous public protest was held at the Heroes Square in Budapest.
In consequence of the Soviet pressure and initiative, a meeting of secretary generals of the two countries was held in Arad on 28 August 1988.
Ceausescu did not want to make any compromises, what is more, offered two days to the Hungarian party to accept his conditions.
The meeting was unsuccessful aggravating the problems further.55 In July 1989, in parallel with the session of the Political Consultative Body of the Warsaw Pact in Bucharest, the Hungarian politicians (chairman of the HSWP Rezső Nyers, Prime Minister Miklós Németh and Foreign Minister Gyula Horn) had an ‘unofficial meeting’ with Ceausescu on the invitation of the Romanian leader.
That time Hungarians leaders had a more powerful negotiating position by envisioning asking for an international supervision of Hungarian minorities.
Furthermore, it declared the principles of the Hungarian Foreign Policy.
Since then the targets have not changed significantly, but different governments gave different interpretations for them.
In Salat, Levente and Enache, Smaranda , A román-magyar kapcsolatok és a francia-német megbékélési model.
For the Antall-government, a precondition for the establishment of good neighborly relations was the proper treatment of Hungarian minorities within the countries concerned, including Romania.
On the other hand, it must be admitted that the Euro-Atlantic integration was considered to be the most important priority for the East Central European countries , which meant that other problems like neighborhood policy, minority rights, etc. had only second-rank importance.
Consequently, the development of the neighborhood policy was mainly the answer for an external need from the point of view of Hungary’s neighbors, including Romania.
International pressure For Western countries the preservation of stability was regarded as one of the most important goal in East Central Europe.
Due to the limited knowledge of Western countries on the region, ethnic conflicts in the Balkans and the Soviet Union anticipated the fear of similar conflicts in East Central Europe.
During the Yugoslav wars Hungary undertook several efforts in order to prove its capacity for maintaining peaceful and effective relations with her neighbors.
Its aim was to dispose the countries to regularize their neighborly relationships in the form of bilateral agreements, which would contain guarantees on the inviolability of borders and minority rights.
It represented a huge development even though the Declaration was not legally binding which proved to be an enormous defect.
Although it contained the list of requirements of good neighborliness, cooperation agreements and arrangements, there is no sanction for the violation of the prescription.
The so-called Copenhagen criteria1261 also defined the eligibility of a country for EU accession.
Their importance derives from the fact that they emphasize the protection of minority rights as well.
Hungary and Romania perceived the need for the settlement of their relations in an agreement, but the negotiations were moving on quite slowly.
Ion Iliescu, the leader of the National Salvation Front was elected as president of Romania in 1990.
Iliescu’s policy was determined by the slow and gradual reform in all spheres from the economy to foreign policy.
In the beginning of the presidency he did not commit himself and his country to Western integration or comfort Hungary with the requested minority policy.
It resulted in a turnaround of Hungarian neighborhood policy because the government declared that minority policy was only one element of its neighborhood policy.64 However, it was difficult to reach a real breakthrough even with this approach.
The merit of the Horngovernment is that it managed to reach an agreement with Romania though it was partly the result of the international situation.
The failure of this policy resulted in the fact that the right-wing parties could blame the social-liberal government for abandoning the minority groups beyond the borders.
In György Lengyel and Zsolt Rostoványi , The small transformation – Society, Economy and Politics in Hungary and the New European Architecture.
Similarly, the right to education on mother tongue was tolerated, whereas the only language enjoying official status was Romanian according to Article 13.
Notwithstanding the necessity of an agreement was urgent for both countries since the NATO Foreign Ministers’ Summit was to be held in December 1996 and would name the states invited to the organization.
Both countries believed that in case of having solved the problems they would be able to join.
Nevertheless, many political actors opposed to the conclusion of the treaty both in Hungary and in Romania by rejecting the compromise on both sides, and also because of the upcoming elections in Romania.
The Basic Treaty between Hungary and Romania on Good Neighborly Relations and Friendly Cooperation1269 was signed on 16 September 1996.
It contained mutual recognition of borders; furthermore, Hungary explicitly renounced all territorial claims on Transylvania.70 At the same time, Romania reiterated its respect for the rights of its minorities and bound herself to meet EU standards.
The parties agreed on mutual support of their Euro-Atlantic integration process.
The two countries decided to develop their economic and trade cooperation and relations.71 Other forms of cooperation were also objectives of the treaty,g. in the field of science and technology; Danubian shipping; culture and education; preservation of cultural heritage; health care; mass media; and regional level cooperation as well.
In addition, as a real breakthrough, the Recommendation 1201 was accepted by Romania as a legal obligation.
The Treaty contained the rights of minorities, in addition to the means of implementation of these rights.
Although collective rights of minorities including the concept of autonomy were rejected, the Treaty represents a milestone in Hungarian-Romanian relations.
Despite of the fact that an intergovernmental expert commission was charged with the monitoring of the implementation of the Treaty, the control mechanism of the agreement became weak.
After that the situation of minorities has improved less than expected, but otherwise the relations between the two countries began to develop.
Launching of deeper cooperation In November, 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections were held in Romania.
Subsequently, the Democratic Convention was elected as the majority in the legislature, and it contained the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania , the party of Hungarian minorities.
In the next few years, neighborhood relations developed immensely since the presence of DAHR in the government put real pressure on the executive branch.
Regarding neighborhood policy, the results of the elections implied that the executive branch would begin to put more emphasis on nation policy patterned by the Antall-government.
Moreover, according to the Basic Treaty Romania was not only neutralized,1272 but there were also good relations between the Heads of Governments of the two countries.
As a result, the government maintained more proactiveness in neighborhood policy.
Its aim was to give support on the field to education, science or culture to the members of Hungarian communities living beyond the borders.
Additionally, it provided recourse of health care insurance, as well as financial support for the families if their children went to a Hungarian educational institution.
Since the law had extra-territorial applicability, the lack of consultation complicated Hungary’s relations with its neighbors.
The Hungarian government’s wrong-headed communication was also demonstrated by the inaccurate translation of the law.
Subsequently, international discourse on the Status Law denounced Hungary mainly due to the extra-territorial feature of the law without looking at its initial aims.
Investigation of the European Parliament led by MEP Eric Jürgens declared the law extra-territorial and discriminative in his report due to the fact that the definition of the 1273 Hungarian-Hungarian relationship refers to the connection between Hungary, as kin-state, and Hungarian communities living beyond the border.
The adoption of the law of such a great majority can be considered mainly to a tactical choice of the then opposition preparing for the upcoming elections in 2002.
Over and above, they decided that preferences on employment would be available for every Romanian citizen, not only for Hungarian minorities.84 Also, importantly, the issue of certificates for benefits could only be done by Hungarian authorities instead of Hungarian associations functioning in the territory of Romania.
Moreover, they agreed on the necessity of general, bilateral top-level meetings.
Since then, the Hungarian Romanian relationships have changed for the better, although there are still some crucial points, such as the official use of Hungarian language at local and regional authorities, the fact that Romania is still considered as a unitary state, etc.
This agreement improved Romanian Hungarian relations ostensibly, which was a prerequisite to ensure stability in East Central Europe.
Redefinition of neighborhood policy to meet EU criteria From 2002 Hungary had a socialist-liberal government meaning that the focus from nation policy turned to the neighborhood policy.86 There was a big challenge for the governments of East Central Europe to form their policies to meet the EU requirements.
The oncoming EU accession provided extra benefits for the neighborly states, which meant more possibilities for the cooperation.
In 2003 the government announced the necessity of modification to the Status Law causing violent protests from the side of the exgovernmental parties.
Even so, the government submitted and passed the amendment of the law and made an agreement with Romania according to the modifications.
Second, the law formulated the relation of Hungarian minorities to the kin-state through the share of the Hungarian culture.87 The aim was to urge Hungarian minorities to stay in their homeland where they were going to be supported to preserve their culture, national identity through the above described benefits provided by the Hungarian government.88 Relations within the European Union The European Union has had several opportunities for the development and improvement of cooperation between Hungary and its neighboring countries, including Romania.
Several joint programmes were launched to enhance regional cross-border cooperation.
The fact that Hungary joined the European Union in 2004 and Romania just 3 years later was a bit problematic, because some envisaged a new iron curtain due to the strict control of EU borders and visa requirements and different benefits and rights of EU citizens and citizens of a non-Member States.
Question of minorities The hope that the EU would solve the question of minority rights was unsubstantiated since within the framework of European institutions there is no single uniform system regarding their situation.
Countries who want to join the European Union have to meet the above-mentioned Copenhagen Criteria.
Many accused the socialist-liberal government because during accession negotiations Romania was not forced to guarantee 1287 Kántor, “Status Laws and ‘Nation Policy’”, , 118.
Furthermore, during the elaboration of the Constitutional Treaty there was also a possibility to enforce the protection of minority rights including collective rights, which was not exploited by the Hungarian government.89 Nevertheless, since the accession of Hungary and then of Romania, it became clear that Member States, following the fulfillment of Copenhagen criteria are not called to account for respecting them.
However, it shall be admitted that after the 2004 and 2007 enlargement of the European Union, another forum became an instrument for the law enforcement of minority rights.
The European Parliament offers the opportunity for the deputies to fight for minority rights,g. either within the committees or intergroups such as the ‘Traditional minorities, national communities and languages’ or through non-legislative reports.
On the other hand, European institutions have the additional advantage to offer a platform for closer cooperation among the members from different nations.
So far the European Union aims to be the community of communities, though this feature can have different understanding for the Member States.
Hungarians living beyond the borders were guaranteed the rights of EU citizens throughout the Community, but at first place, in Hungary.
Following this, in 2007 the nation policy was reformed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Its main objective was to meet the EU requirements and to enforce closer cooperation with neighboring countries and organizations within the EU in order to enforce the regional development policy.91 1289 After the French and Danish referenda rejecting the Constitutional Treaty, during the elaboration of the quasi successor of the Constitutional Treaty, minority rights were dropped out from the text, so the Treaty of Lisbon does not include them anymore.
Additionally, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union did not become part of the Treaty; consequently it is not legally binding.
Regarding Romania it did not result in major problems, but Slovakia exploited this approached and violated the rights of Hungarian minorities several times.
However, what is even more important, that Romania and Hungary belong to the same group of countries (which can be called as EU-12 or new Member States) representing the same interests at EU-level negotiations,e. either in the field of cohesion or agricultural policy, etc.
As a result, bilateral dialogue can hardly be stuck by certain debates especially in the field of minority policy.
The recognition of the necessity and the perspectives of neighborhood cooperation facilitated the further deepening of relations along common objectives and interests.
Since 2005, there are annual meetings of the ministers of foreign affairs of Romania and Hungary.
Additionally, Hungary and Romania jointly asked for EU support for several projects; for instance, for the construction of a motorway which was to connect Budapest and Bucharest through Transylvania.
Since 2007, Romania and Hungary have harmonized their National Development Strategies, which was necessary for the better exploitation of EU resources.
There are also many lower level initiatives, which are supported by the government.
The Hungary-Romania Cross-Border Co-operation Programme can also be highlighted.
Its aim on the one hand is to improve the key conditions of joint, sustainable development of the cooperation area; on the other hand, to strengthen the social and economic cohesion of the border area.92 Hence, there are other common issues like environmental protection, energy supply, gas pipeline links (e.g. the Nabucco project) and transport networks (e.g. the construction of a Vienna-Budapest-Bucharest express rail line) which encourage cooperation.
The role of non-government organizations is improving and NGOs are gaining greater importance in the formation and realization of neighborhood policy.
Multinational companies, research institutes and Churches can add surplus to the intensification of Hungarian-Romanian relations.
Romania, due to its geographical position, formulated its foreign policy in a way to enhance its interest in the Black Sea region on the one hand; on the other hand, in the Balkans, as well, as in the Danube Region.
In relation to the latter, Hungary also considers the relations with Western Balkan and Danube countries of utmost importance.
High-level meetings among Serbia, Hungary and Romania took place to discuss issues of common interest, such as transport, energy, and environment.
The support of the EU accession of Serbia was put also on the table.93 Furthermore, the elaboration of the European Danube Strategy which is supposed approximate the countries concerned is of mutual interest.94 Accordingly, following the example of the Baltic Sea Strategy, countries along the Danube aims to set up a macro regional strategy including topics of common interests, such as environmental, transport, energy, education and science to address them in a more tailor-made approach with the better use of EU funds.
Although the Romanian parties have lost their radical nationalist views and propaganda in the last decade, opposition to the national and Europeanist forces still exist at a certain extent, which can hinder sometimes the efforts of neighborhood policy.
Additionally, the question of minority rights is still used by certain political parties as a source of propaganda.
Meanwhile in Hungary the change of discourse of governments influence the intensity of both neighboring and minority policy.
Secondly, the EU support for the Danube Region was initiated by Austria and Romania, which was endorsed by the EU Commissioner responsible for Regional Policy, Danuta Hübner.
Although Hungarian government generally changed the priorities of neighborhood policy according to their own perceptions, they never rejected its necessity and importance.
Although the EU accession did not solve the problem of minority rights, it has provided wider opportunities for further cooperation which are supposed to be exploited successfully in the near future.
This positive process shows that neighborhood policy works in East Central Europe but depends on mutual willingness and actions.
Achievements in this field are strongly dependent on the actual governing powers.
Second, both countries had to commit themselves to Western integration which was not totally evident in case of Romania in the beginning of the 90s.
Nevertheless, the Euro-Atlantic integration processes demanded the efficient consolidation of neighboring relations between Hungary and Romania which was also time-consuming and required compromises on both sides.
In contrast to the Hungarian expectations, the European Union prescribes to pursue of a consistent and advanced minority policy and provides only limited opportunities to enforce minority rights as such.
Nevertheless, common interests in this framework and the room for continuous dialogue contribute to a more successful neighborhood policy which does not ignore minority policy.
European Council, Conclusions of the Presidency – Pact on Stability in Europe.
Jeszenszky, Géza, Post-communist Europe and its national/ethnic problems.
In Lengyel, György and Rostoványi, Zsolt , The small transformation – Society, Economy and Politics in Hungary and the New European Architecture.
In the years of the first Estonian Republic, the vast majority of its inhabitants were ethnic Estonians.
Due to Soviet national policies and migration by the end of the 1980s, only 61.5% of the inhabitants were ethnic Estonian.95 The issue of nationality became the main point of contention during the years following independence, and it has continued to be one of the largest problems for the new Estonian Republic.
The Republic of Estonia first became an independent state in 1920 after the Tartu Treaty.
Estonia possessed lands that extended in the northeast close to the city of Narva and in the southeast to the city of Petsory.
Ethnic Russians had also lived on the bank of Lake Peipus for centuries and smaller groups in other regions of Estonia.
The majority of them lived in rural areas , but a strong Russian-speaking elite also existed.96 In the entirety of the pre-war state, approximately 12% of the population was non-Estonian, but Estonia was still considered to be a nation-state.
During the Second World War, Estonia was also occupied by Nazi Germany from 1941 to 1944, and in 1944, the second Soviet occupation began.
During these years, thousands of Estonians emigrated or were either imprisoned or killed.
In the first years after the war, the Soviets had several means of taking control over society.
The exact number of deported, imprisoned and killed people is still unknown.
The real power was in Moscow, and at the local level, Russians or Estonians from Russia controlled everything.
He came to Tallinn from Moscow, and he became the ‘voice of Moscow’ under Stalin, Khrushchev, and into the Brezhnev era.
Between Käbin and Väljas the First Secretary was Karl Vaino, an ethnic Estonian, who was born in Tomsk, Russian SSR, and whom as a true “internationalist”, could speak only Russian.
In order to rejuvenate the area, thousands of people moved to Estonia from other republics of the Soviet Union.
Alongside the other historically present minorities (Germans, Latvians, and Finns ), a significant group of Ukrainians and Belarusians emerged.98 The title of my paper is phrased as the Russian-speaking minority, rather than the Russian minority.
This is because ethnic Russians were not the only people who spoke Russian in everyday life.
Since education was in Russian or in Estonian, in one generation, these minorities changed their language.
Their first “task” was to become the elite of the new Soviet power as previously mentioned.
During this time, there were huge industrial constructions, and the new “colonists” were the workforce for the new factories and other facilities.
Another large group of inhabitants were soldiers and leaders of the Soviet army.
While it is still unknown exactly how many soldiers served in the territory of ESSR, it was definitely a large number.
The geopolitical location of Estonia also demanded a strong naval presence.
Though troops lived separately from society, the military leaders held influence in several cities.
The millions of young soldiers also played an important role maintaining cohesion of the USSR after their years of service.
This Russian-speaking group was supposed to be the new “Soviet nation”, the leaders of the communist Soviet Union.
This population was seen as being the majority and were the only major “Soviet nation” that held power in every state and city of the Soviet Empire.
They could move anywhere within it and usually were given better opportunities than native populations.
Most of the Russian-speaking people in the ESSR even had Soviet identities.99 1298 Ibid.
According to a survey taken in 1959, 81% of Russians lived in an apartment with all amenities, in comparison to only 54.5% of Estonians.00 86% of Russians lived in towns and cities.
In the cities of Ida-Viru County, there were huge construction projects during the Soviet era because of the oil shale industry.
Kohtla-Järve, Sillmäe and Narva became Russianspeaking cities, though it should be noted that Narva, a border city, had an important Russian minority even in the pre-war period.01 Today, as the third largest city in Estonia, Narva still has a large Russian-speaking majority.
Tallinn, the capital of the ESSR, became a Russian-speaking city according to Soviet policies.
Until the collapse of the Soviet Union, the rate of ethnic Russians in the capital was growing constantly, and by 1989, nearly 50% of the population was part of the Russian-speaking community.
In rural areas of the ESSR, Russian speakers were still a small minority.
They were essentially migrant workers who had come to Estonia for a few years to make up the workforce.
The Russian-speaking minority who lived in bigger cities did not need to learn Estonian and could function using only Russian.
Though a large percentage lived in the same place for decades, most did not learn Estonian.
The Estonians were not forced to learn Russian, but for several jobs, knowing Russian was a necessity.
By the end of the 1980s, an odd situation emerged in which more people spoke Russian than Estonian.
In 1993, 83% of the inhabitants spoke Russian fluently while only 77% could speak Estonian.
In Soviet propaganda and in the Soviet Constitution, the right to use languages was declared, and everybody had the right to 1300 Ibid.
However, this right was never actualized for millions of Soviet citizens.
The party saw emphasis on the importance of any other language as nationalism, which jeopardized communist ideals.
The effects of Soviet policies were only the facilitation of the “natural process” according to propaganda.
Russification reached millions of Soviet citizens in every corner of the empire.
In the economy, public administration and science, Russian was the most important language.
Because centralization of all of the important decisions in Moscow, the use of Russian was inevitable.
In the Soviet Union Republics, each Republic’s native language was declared the official language, so in the Estonian SSR the official language was Estonian.
However, in different republics, the same legal status had very different meanings.
The majority of Estonians felt that the Estonian language was in danger.
One important linguistic division was that knowledge of Russian was required for high positions.
Estonian was excluded from city life and was on the precipice of becoming a rural language as it was until the mid-16th century.
In public places and special environments, such as transportation, post, and administration, Russian became the first language and there was a real risk of the diminution of Estonian to it being only used in the private sphere.02 Over the years of glasnost and perestroika, the Estonian nation began to question the Soviet past.
Public opinion came to view Estonia’s incorporation into the Soviet Union as military occupation.
Initially, the goal was to see the ESSR continue its existence in a federal Soviet Union.
However, this changed over the course of a few years, and the will was formed to achieve full sovereignty and an independent Estonian Republic.
In the Gorbachev era, the Russian-speaking population (including ethnic Russians and other Russified Slavic groups) did not share any common ground or goals with the 1302 Sinilind, op. cit.
One reason for this was the lack of a locally integrated intelligentsia.
The biggest protests in the late 1980s were huge concerts like the Tallinn Song Festival Ground where hundreds of thousands Estonians gathered.
In Estonia, song festivals were significant traditions since the 19th century, and formed an important part of their national identity.
The stages of transition in the three Baltic States paralleled each other.
While in the Caucasus region, ethnic conflicts caused violence, the most brutal event in the Baltic States was in Vilnius when in 1991, Soviet tanks attacked unarmed protesters, killing 14 people.
It was not until the end of the 1980s that ethnic Estonians held important positions in politics.
Newly formed political organizations such as the Popular Front of Estonia, the Congress of Estonia, etc. were predominantly ethnic Estonian.
However, each of these groups had a small proportion of non-Estonian members.
In May 1990, 96% of ethnic Estonians and 26% of nonEstonians supported independence from the Soviet Union.
However, a group of “internationalists” continued to fight against “nationalist Estonians” and supported the continued unity of the empire.
They drew support from a vocal section of Russian workers in Estonia who were worried about losing their privileges in a new regime.
Unlike ethnic Estonians, non-Estonians did not have a shared identity or history except for perhaps victory in World War II, which to the local population signified the beginning of the occupation.
The status of Estonia depended on Moscow and the situation in the Soviet Union.
A day after a coup in Moscow against Gorbachev, Estonia declared its independence.
The division in nationality continued to be significant following the independence of Estonia.
The Russian-speaking minority did not have special representation in the democratic transition.
Though in 1990 and 1991, a large proportion supported democratization, there were no special Russian-speaking parties.
The most popular politicians among Russian speakers were ethnic Estonians.
This minority group, around one-third of the population, had special needs, but without real representation, there was no one to act on their behalf.
As a result, it was a shock when they suddenly became the minority in a small independent state after being part of the majority in a huge empire.
Not every person within the new Republic of Estonia was granted Estonian citizenship.
According to the nationality law, only those who lived in the jurisdiction before 1940 and their descendants automatically became Estonian citizens.
People who either did not wish to take up the new citizenship or could not pass the exams required became noncitizens, otherwise known as aliens.
These people could apply for Russian citizenship, but the majority did not do so.
This issue has continued to be one of the most difficult issues for the state.
However, there has been significant progress in integration over the last 21 years.
European integration was one of the main goals for the new state, but the issue of non-citizens was a major obstacle to this goal.
In 2011, only 7% of the population did not have citizenship, and around 9% of these non-citizens were the citizens of a different state.
In conclusion, in the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, the local ethnic Estonian majority was only a minority in the whole empire.
Due to Soviet policies and migration, a significant proportion of the population of the territory was non-Estonian, mostly ethnic Russians.
This issue became visible in the transition years, as Estonians were demanding their own rights.
Non-Estonians were not a homogenous group, but a significant number of them took part in the Singing Revolution that paved the way for the newly independent Republic of Estonia, where this particular issue has persisted over the last two decades.
However, in wake of the devastating events of the June 1989 Tiananmen Square incident, the CCP has demonstrated a remarkable resilience to the titanic pressures of the ‘Third Wave of Democratisation’, which saw 75% of the world’s existing communist regimes swept away by the ‘Leninist Mass 1303 Susan Shirk, ‘China, Fragile Superpower’, 2008, 5.
Nationalism has proved potentially in conflict with peaceful development.
With reference to comparative political theories and specific schools of Chinese 1316 Michel Oskenberg, ‘The Nature of Chinese Politics, from Mao to Jiang’, Unger, Jonathon , 2002, p.4.
Next, an overview of key reforms will lead us to consider the burgeoning social, economic, and political pressures that the CCP faces in the 21st Century.
These have culminated in the cynicism of scholars such as Shirk, who claim that in the face of such challenges, the CCP’s grip on power is inherently unstable and unsustainable.21 Finally, we will consider how the CCP’s innovative strategies of pre-emptive reform and adaptation provide a bridge for both the CCP and the Chinese state to embark on an era of greater economic freedoms and potential political reform with distinct Chinese characteristics.
This will allow the CCP both to successfully surmount the challenges presented by reform and avoid the apocalyptic fate predicted by critics.
Along with concluding thoughts, contrasting scholarly opinions surrounding the topics of adaptation and regime survival must also be analyzed.
The Nature of Reform – ‘Opening Pandora’s Box’ For the purposes of this essay, we will focus upon the post-Maoist reform era, which began under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping in 1978 and then develop under the successive leadership of Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao respectively.
First, we will consider Mao’s legacy and the need for pragmatic reform for the CCP to have survived.
Second, we will consider Deng Xiaoping’s moves towards pragmatic economic development in contrast to Maoist utopianism.
Then we will consider the variety of reform undertaken on economic policy.
After that, we will consider challenges presented to reform between 1985 and 1991.
The PRC was left politically, economically and socially exhausted by the instability created by the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976.
While appreciating the necessary and innovative nature of these reforms for CCP rejuvenation and survival, Minxin Pei is careful to remind scholars that Deng Xiaoping was no counter-revolutionary but a true believer in the Communist ideology that the PRC was founded upon.
Tacit support was given to modernizing 1332 factions within the CCP, which oversaw the prioritization of economic modernization in all party work, and the role of market forces in the economy were boldly increased in stark contrast to the strictly planned-economy of the Maoist-era.33 Deng allowed the creation of small private plots and private markets in which farmers could sell grain that was surplus to their quota.
This experimentation was an important precursory image of the reforms that were to come.
Opposition Movements, Wall Poster Campaigns, and Underground Journals’, 1981, 748.
The crowds began to directly challenge the regime, and the Democracy Goddess, a statue built to imitate the iconic Statue of Liberty, cast an shadow over Mao’s portrait.41 It became clear that the students wanted something that the CCP had refused to concede, glasnost (political liberalization), to accompany Deng’s perestroika.
Tyson argues that many young and middle-aged Chinese thinkers were raised not as obedient Confucian servants of the state, but as Maoist rebels.
Many young people looked to Western alternatives and began agitating for democratic reforms.42 Deng was a reformer, but Deng was no Gorbachev.
China’s economic achievements were so successful that the PRC was granted membership in the WTO in 2001.
The Internal and Comparative Lessons Learned by the CCP Crucially, the CCP prevailed where the communist regimes of Central and Eastern Europe, and even the Soviet Union had unraveled.50 John Wong analyzes the factors that explain the ability of the CCP to retain power in China, while considering the varying opinions on the validity and importance of each factor.
The challenges arising as a consequence of three decades of reform and their implications for the CCP will be outlined in the next chapter.
The challenges of reform have significantly threatened to undermine the stability of the PRC and have threatened the CCP’s ability to maintain control.57 As a result of growing inequality, unemployment, and corruption, there have been widespread protests, particularly in the impoverished interior.
First, we will consider the problems presented by growing inequality and a weak social welfare system.
Rising unemployment levels and the collapse of the “Iron Rice Bowl” exacerbate the problem of inequality.
The loss of housing and social welfare coincides with the increasingly transparent opulence of cadres, who enjoy a standard of living far beyond a civil servants’ salary.61 In many instances, the government is no longer willing to support State Owned Enterprises that are not competitive, and staggering numbers were closed from 1995 to 2001, leaving 65 million workers unemployed.62 Solinger even claims that in 1999, the real unemployment figure could 1358 Willy Wo-Lap Lam, ‘Chinese Politics in the Hu Jintao Era, New Leaders, New Challenges’, 2006, 90.
Moreover, ineffective rule of law governing the norms of the fledgling economy and a drastically diminished sense of ideological fervor, 1367 has led to estimates that corruption accounted for 14.9% of GDP between 1999-2001.1368 Wedeman argues that during the 1990s, corruption underwent a qualitative change as the increasingly highstakes involved have led to a proliferation of high-profile cases.
The Shift of the Urban Proletariat from Master to Mendicant’, in Gries and Rosen, ‘State and Society’, 50.
The Rise of the Middle Class Most significantly, economic liberalization has led to the rise of a prominent middlestrata of Chinese society.
Henan and Guangdong provinces’ in ‘Grassroots Reform in Contemporary China’, Elizabeth Perry , 2007, 47.
Two imperial dynasties succumbed to the chaos caused by similar revolutionary movements .1381 The most significant strategies developed by the CCP to ensure its maintenance of power, followed by an overview of scholarly debate on their effectiveness and concluding thoughts, will follow in the next section.
Tsai, ‘Capitalism Without Democracy, the Politics of Private Sector Development in China’, 2007.
In the post-Tiananmen era and following the recognition of the domestic pressures emerging in the 1990’s, Deng’s eudemonic development strategy, which largely disregarded the social and political consequences of economic reform, has been augmented by both Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao’s leadership.
In recognition of the sociopolitical pressures that aggregate from below as a result of economic growth and wealth accumulation,1382 the CCP leadership has sought adaptive strategies to supplement the CCP’s legitimacy beyond that of continued economic growth and coercion.
The CCP has experimented with direct elections of village and township government committees, including contests between multiple CCP candidates and even a limited number of non-CCP members.
Normatively, the CCP has portrayed the PLA as the muscular embodiment of the PRC’s nationalism, giving them a considerable face after the humiliation of June 4th.
Instrumentally, the CCP has been careful to make it clear that their fates are intertwined.
Analyzing the Scholarly Debate The magnitude to which the aforementioned adaptations have empowered the CCP to survive and rejuvenate is intensely debated by scholars.
Yet the CCP has been remarkably proactive, adapting to retain power, and this adaptive strategy can stabilize, and even reverse, atrophy.20 Weiss eloquently augments the debate, explaining that most states possess the ability to adapt.
However, the inability of scholars to immediately identify these capabilities may lead to their mistaken assumption that the state is in decline.21 Adhering to the Weiss’ contribution, this essay identified somecrucial factors that may sway the balance of atrophy and adaptation in favour of the CCP’s survival.
This reached as high as 10.7% in the final quarter of 2009, leaving the West trailing behind.27 With China’s economy emerging from the global recession intact, the current situation appears fortuitous.
These factors underpin the window of opportunity, which scholars have earmarked as a crossroads for the CCP in the second decade of the 21st Century.
This transition will be a difficult process, and relies on the choices and innovation of China’s 5th generation leaders.
Crucial political reform (or an absence thereof) will most likely come from the top and is dependant on sustaining fragile economic stability, but there is hope.
Chinese Dissident Use of the Internet and Beijing’s Counter-Strategies, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2002.
Chao, Chien-min and Dickinson, Bruce J.,Remaking the Chinese State, Strategies, Society and Security, London, Routledge Press, 2001.
Power and Motivation in Chinese Foreign Policy, Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2005.
Determinants, Progress, and Limits under Hu Jintao"", Journal Of Current Chinese Affairs’, 38, 35-6, 2009.
Huang, Yasheng, ‘Why China will not Collapse’, Foreign Policy, 99 Summer, 1995.
Joffe, E., ‘Ruling China After Deng,’ Journal of East Asian Affairs, Winter-Spring, 1997.
Mahbubani, Kishore, ‘Understanding China’, Foreign Affairs, September-October, 2005.
Nathan, Andrew, ‘Authoritarian Resilience’, Journal of Democracy, Volume 14, Number 1, January 2003.
Ong, R., ‘'Peaceful Evolution', 'Regime Change' and China's Political Security’, Journal of Contemporary China, Vol.
Pei, Minxin, ""Made In China"" Label Won't Survive Without Rule of Law,’ Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, June 16, 2007.
Tsing-yuan, Tsao, Wasserstrom, Jeffrey N and J Perry, Elizabeth, , The Birth of the Goddess of Democracy from Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China, Boulder CO., Westview Press, 1994.
Wang, F and Deng, Y , ‘China Rising, Power and Motivation in Chinese Foreign Policy’, Rowman & Littlefield Publisher, Lanham, 2005.
Wedeman, A., ‘The Intensification of Corruption in China,’ The China Quarterly 180, 2004.
Yong, Zhang, ‘Withering Governmental Power in China?’, Communist and PostCommunist Studies, 29, 1996.
The extinction of the Mammoths,1429 the traces of lead in the Greenland ice from the times of the Roman Empire 1430 are examples that mankind has had a transboundary and global impact on its environment.
Humankind however has developed even more significantly and exponentially in the last two centuries.
The effects of using more and more natural resources, such as fossil fuels can already be felt.
Since these effects know no boundaries, they are global problems without a doubt.
Nevertheless, the ever-growing danger was neglected in the international field until the 20th century.
Although, humanity has had an impact on its environment throughout history, the general acknowledgment of this by scientists and the society is fairly recent.
A historical perspective helps us to contextualize why the recognition of the issue is still disproportionately low among scientists, policymakers and members of the public alike.
It also presents how environmental protection changed over the decades.
Protection of the environment has existed for centuries in some shape or form.
However, since cause-causality links were seldom established between pollution and 1429 D Burney & T Flannery.
Some of the IR’s subfields, such as environmental protection has yet to fully develop and incorporate the key principles of the discipline, such as multidisciplinarity.
Treaties predominantly addressed conservation issues rather than transboundary pollution.
It was not until the second half of the 20th century that international treaties emerged dealing with broader issues.
From the beginning of the Cold War there were several scientists on the Soviet side as well.
They predicted new phases of the Scientific Technological Revolution, when the main issue would be to heal the damages caused by the previous phases.34 Nevertheless, environmental protection was mostly neglected up until the nineteen-seventies.
In the first half of the Cold War period, however, many believed a nuclear war was imminent and would wipe out the human race anyways.
Most of the resources by the two superpowers and their spheres of influence were focused on the political mechanisms of the competing camps.
Peaceful coexistence, the new doctrine emerging in the 1950s, were spreading very slowly towards such topics as global health or environment.
Consequently, one of the first treaties was the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water of 1963.
In this framework, the Hungarian government proposed several steps to tackle environmental problems.36 In 1972, the United Nations Environmental Programme was established, which is the world’s most important environmental organization.37 Connected to the establishment was the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes or Other Matter in 1972.1438 This is the first treaty that is relevant to connecting land-based factors to ocean-based ones, although it made no mention of CO2 from atmospheric sources.
In 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was signed, which addressed marine pollution from different sources.39 Later on, the 1986 Chernobyl accident further highlighted the importance of international standards and safeguards, and several related treaties conventions were signed.
At the end of the decade, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was established by the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP in 1988.
This is a scientific body that assesses the findings of various scholars on climate change, and enables the UN and the world to formulate an effective response to the challenge.40 After the Cold War the wider international scientific community started to identify the key problems and solutions.
Social sciences were lagging behind even more, especially the relatively new discipline of international relations.
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water.
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.
Land-based factors The 1990s were the starting point to address harmful anthropogenic CO2 emissions, the key factor in ocean acidification.
These emissions were addressed by the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
Most recently a different instrument under the UNFCCC was established, the Paris Agreement, which contains self-established targets.
Thanks to the aforementioned process of organizing an effective informational response to climate change, by now most of the world has realized that the main causes for climate change are Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
There are several initiatives to battle the GHG emissions, regionally and globally as well.
Countries are mostly focused on halting climate change, to protect their terrestrial environment.
It is important to see what incentives countries may have to enact in order to reduce emissions, and what fault lines there are.
As for drawbacks, scientists can say that the biggest problem of the 1441 UNCED secretariat.
Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Although environmentally-friendly technologies exist and are cheaper than before, they are still not always a viable alternative to polluting fossil-fuel based ones.
In addition, developing countries say that they have to go through the same phases of development as developed ones, and this is just a simple tool of discrimination.
Moreover, developed ones do not want to limit their economies by any means.
As well, recently the world price of oil dropped significantly, possibly weakening the costeffectiveness of renewables, providing less incentive to invest in them.
However, a fluctuating world price makes for a bad investment, whereas the cost of renewables is constantly decreasing.
On the international level the deciding factor of cooperation on reduction is the participation of the biggest emitters, the Unites States and China, who make up of almost half of all emissions.
Blind spots in international cooperation There is, however, another obstacle to effective solutions besides the reluctance of international actors.
The treaties and measures regarding the environment (particularly Greenhouse Gas Emissions) either focus only on the marine environment, or on land.
Therefore, they do not recognize the interconnectedness of the two spheres, namely the effect of CO2 emissions on the marine environment.
Because of this narrowly focused scientific and environmental-diplomatic viewpoint there are grand discrepancies and blind spots between the fields of science, methods of implementation and information sharing.
This results in ineffective and incomplete solutions, and the consequences of this will be presumably serious.
Without firm action on all aspects of climate change, a global catastrophe is imminent.
Case study All these can be strikingly presented through connection with ocean acidification, the prime example of the aforementioned problems.
Projections vary for the future, but a rapid and dramatic increase in acidification is probable if we do not limit greenhouse gas emissions.
Overall, ocean acidification is a well-defined problem that will negatively affect global warming, the marine ecosystem, and thus livelihoods and food supplies.
This would worsen the already severe problems of starvation around the globe, and create instability in international relations as well.
There is still no clear financial estimate how much loss will occur due to this phenomenon, the data mentioned below are just approximations and not necessarily the total cost of ocean acidification, and even these numbers are alarming.
The change in pH has devastating effects on many marine lifeforms, especially those with calcification processes, since the carbonic acid dissolves their shells.
However, many more species are susceptible to changes in pH, and this will lead to a catastrophic collapse of the oceans’ biosphere.
Synergistic effects of climate-related variables suggest future physiological impairment in a top oceanic predator.
Dwindling populations of sea animals combined with serious overfishing, many species would go extinct.
Besides direct biological effects, ocean acidification will lead to a decrease in the deposition of carbonate sediments, and the dissolution of existing ones.51 This will cause a rise in ocean alkalinity (the quantitative capacity of an aqueous solution to neutralize an acid), meaning that the CO2 absorption factor of the oceans will decrease dramatically, which in turn will increase global warming even more.
Another problem concerns the effect the disappearing coral reefs will have on land.
Environmental economist Luke Brander stated that coral reef tourism was valued at US$ 11. billion.
The shoreline protection value of reefs was estimated at United States $9 billion a year, and reef-supported fisheries at 30 billion.
To gain a better understanding, scientists try to grasp the socioeconomic consequences of ocean acidification, and for ease of understanding try to form an economic value representing the loss from ocean acidification.52 More alarming is that mostly developing countries, which are already vulnerable, sometimes monocultural in production of food and largely reliant on fisheries, or on tourism as a form of income, will suffer the most, and the added problems of global warming such as sea level rise.
This creates a great deal of political inequality and conflict in internal and international relations.
Biotic and Human Vulnerability to Projected Changes in Ocean Biogeochemistry over the 21st Century.
Present and Future Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycle.
Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry Scoping Workshop on Ocean Acidification Research, 2007.
Assessing the potential longterm increase of oceanic fossil fuel CO2 uptake due to CO2-calcification feedback.
Some scientists go as far as to state that oceanography was not even recognized and a serious discipline until the last few years.53 Also, it is stated that the ocean environment was separate from human sciences, and no multidisciplinary approach was applied, its history was not studied with the same scrutiny as other spheres.
With this crucial element lacking, it is no surprise that human activities’ effects on oceans are not studied thoroughly.
Historically the emphasis was almost always on land, and later, during the Cold War, in space.
Everybody heard of the Space Race, but the closest thing to an Ocean Race was in the 17th century.
It is no surprise that so far more than five hundred people have been to space versus less than 10 in the deep ocean.
The oceans still hold many secrets and potential, from natural resources to biological discoveries.
When environmental historians organized a session on the history of ocean science in 2010, the audience consisted of one person.
Oceanographers only have a professional entity, the Oceanography Society, and only since 1988.1454 Even more troubling is that among oceanographers there are clearly divided fields of chemistry, biology, geology, etc.
Overall we can see that the relative freshness of oceanography, the division between its branches and the lack of interest in the oceans make it difficult to cooperate.
Fortunately, awareness has been raised through scientists, policy makers and NGOs in recent years.
With dwindling natural resources on the ground, there is a growing incentive to extract from the deep oceans, which besides posing new challenges to the environment, also raises the importance of all ocean-related issues.
Universally the world’s waters are regulated by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
It regulates matters of business, environment, and the management of marine natural resources.55 1453 N Oreskes.
The main problem with it is that it only vaguely covers environmental problems, in very broad terms, and only territorially.
Drafted in 1982, 33 years ago, its contents have not been changed much; the world, however, did change.
Although the wide acceptance of the convention in itself is a positive aspect of international relations, it is its drawback as well, since amending it would change the fragile status of customary international law, and it seems almost impossible to come to an agreement.
The original convention mentions pollution, however there are multiple aspects that render its statements ineffective.
This shows that this is clearly a regulation for traditional sources of pollution, such as chemicals, radiation or oil.
Even in those times this was illogical, since due to ocean currents much of the pollution can cause spillover effects, and this is not covered.
This is no surprise however, if we connect this to the fact that oceanography was in a pioneering phase, and scientific models of the relations between ocean currents and the atmosphere were only starting to take shape in the 1970s .1456 At the time there was simply no recognized, established relation of interconnection between the systems.
The problem is that this type of pollution is not bound to territories, and this renders the UNCLOS regulation ineffective.
Of course one can argue that the Sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas (translated as “use your property so that the property of others is not damaged.”) principle may apply here as part of international customary law, since the famous Trail Smelter Case.
The crucial point however, is that for something to become custom, both objective and subjective elements must be present.
It is clear that subjective element of state practice does not corroborate this theory.
It is clearly visible that its main purpose is to regulate international claims on waters, to allow for exploitation of natural resources governed by law and to create a framework for interstate relations on the seas and oceans.
Much of its contents are focused on this, defining zones such as the Exclusive Economic Zone, and environmental issues are phrased in a loose tone such as “states shall adopt States shall adopt laws and regulations to prevent, reduce and control pollution”1457.
Also most of the debates on revising it are based on territorial and natural resource issues.
There is much disputed territory in the Arctic for example, where multiple countries have competing claims over land.
Another example is the South China Sea, where China, Japan and even South Korea have various conflicting claims.
So far it seems that the focus of the international community on oceans or of the UNCLOS is on exploitation, however recent developments of global warming and the worsening developments both on land and sea may raise the importance of other issues than territorial disputes.
The source of the problem has its similarities with other environmental problems , but it has unique characteristics as well.
The main problem is what I call the blind spot of international relations in this matter.
Since the source of the problem (CO2 emissions) is land-based, and the effects are ocean-based, there is a gap between the regulations, mindset and vision regarding the problem, because the connection is not made by many.
The first step to solving/managing it is to see clearly the connections and the circumstances.
One culture or group may not see things the way the other one does, even if 1457 United Nations.
One good example for this is the following story from anthropologist John Wilson, who was screening a film in Africa in a little village.
The film was about sanitation and health related issues, how to dispose of waste, etc.
John Wilson was surprised, since he did not remember seeing a chicken in the film at all; however, after a careful examination frame-by-frame, he found that for a brief moment in of the corners of the picture there was indeed a chicken.58 This shows that people’s understanding of things is very different from ours.
Because of this, information needs to be passed on in a manner that is clear and straightforward.
We all know some people still deny or marginalize global warming and its effects, which is the same kind of blindness then the aforementioned anecdote.
First of all, awareness needs to be raised inside and outside of the scientific community.
Then landbased actors need to adopt to the emerging problem by incorporating it into action and finally legislation on all possible levels.
These need to be altered or interpreted in a way that it includes ocean acidification in a direct way.
Since the UNCLOS has an enforcement/dispute mechanism, it could be effective in reaching a positive outcome.
To limit ocean acidification, an acidity threshold should be introduced, similar to a temperature one.
This would ensure an objective criterion for protecting the marine environment.59 Furthermore, the UNCLOS should shift focus from territorial disputes to environmental issues, even if currently GHG pollution is only implied by its clauses.
Currently it does not acknowledge that the oceans act as a carbon sink, saving the world from further warming.
This is especially dangerous, since targets for GHG emissions often do not take this into account, and if the oceans’ uptake decreases due to high levels of CO2, the atmospheric concertation will increase.
It allows for a reduction of GHG emissions in general, and theoretically allows CO2 emissions to increase as long as other gases are decreasing.
This would ensure that the carbon cycle remains in check and that the atmospheric reduction is in parallel with oceanic reduction.
Otherwise carbon leakage may occur, offsetting atmospheric gains at the expense of the marine environment.
Unfortunately, the text of the COP21 final document only mentions oceans once, and makes no remark about ocean acidification or the marine environment as an equally important biosphere.
This is somewhat a paradox, since a whole day of the COP21 was dedicated to the oceans, and the final document of the day by the International Working Group on Oceans and Climate expressed great concern.
The lack of focus on the marine environment is also supported by big data analysis.
The research examined the roundtable discussions of the UNFCCC between 1995 and 2013.
It shows that discussions are centered around five main macro-themes none of which include the oceans.
Although the oceans are carbon sinks, they are not taken into account by the UNFCCC discussions.
As for the frequency of keywords, oceans’ is 17, water’s 20, amongst the least frequent terms.
In comparison, emission has the highest frequency with 990.1461 1460 United Nations.
Principles that are connected to the subject, such as common but differentiated responsibility, polluters pay principle and loss and damage schemes should be adjusted to include the marine environment as well.
Furthermore, affected regions should be connected with monitoring agencies, to get an accurate picture of the situation, and economic, social and environmental impacts should all be summarized and then shared with policymakers and countries that may not be directly or as much affected by the changes.
The economic incentive should be highlighted as well, since it is less costly to stop events now than later.
This means for example that investing in renewable energy is beneficial because it reduces CO2 emissions and it is getting cheaper every year.
Since some species are more affected by ocean acidification than others, regional and specific protections must be created.
This of course demands research on marine animals and then cooperation between based on the research.
Currently only 1% of oceans are under protection.63 This needs to change in order to combat the effects of global warming.
Unfortunately, there is simply no other way to fight ocean acidification than to reduce CO2 emissions and battle the already 1462 EDF Energy Exchange.
Plans to use geoengineering tools have all failed.64 Geoengineering altogether has been abandoned by United States scientists claiming that it was “not ready for deployment”, 1465leaving us with little doubt on what the course of action should be.
Conclusion Overall we can see that factors that hinder the solution of ocean acidification come from multiple sources.
The history of environmental protection, the development of oceanography, the technical advancements in science, the global stabilization of international relations, the awareness raised on ocean acidification, the economic incentives to act all contribute towards the goal of dealing with this issue.
The relative rapid buildup of forces in environmental protection, renewable energy and sustainable development all give us hope that a solution may be possible.
Even the blind spot seems to disappear slowly as more and more stakeholders connect the dots, which is crucial for success.
Awareness of the problem is still not satisfactory, and there is no real sign that any of the future resolutions on climate change will specifically incorporate ocean acidification as one the most important issues (e.g.
Not to mention that time is against us, since global warming may already be irreversible.66 Steps to combat and reduce its effects can be taken however, and it is a duty of every government and citizen to do everything in its power to support this effort, even against all odds.
Mary H Durfee, Professor of Michigan Tech for helping me organize thoughts and setting a path to this research topic.
On the Influence of Carbonic Acid in the Air upon the Temperature of the Ground.
Climate change threatens irreversible and dangerous impacts, but options exist to limit its effects.
Greenland Ice Evidence of Hemispheric Lead Pollution Two Millennia Ago by Greek and Roman Civilizations.
Inter-Governmental Conference on the Convention on the Dumping of Wastes at Sea.
Lepisto, C Iron Fertilization Experiment Proves Geo-engineering Unpredictable.
Mora, C Biotic and Human Vulnerability to Projected Changes in Ocean Biogeochemistry over the 21st Century.
Anthropogenic ocean acidification over the twenty first century and its impact on calcifying organisms.
Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
László BÉKÉSI Ferenc DÁVID : The Hungarian Intelligence and Counter Intelligence Structure in the Cold War era Roman KOZIEL : The Rise of National Communism in Poland and Czechoslovakia 1945–1956.
A Case Study of the Yugoslav Involvement in the Angolan War for Independence 1961-1975.
