Key concept  Signifcance The C uban Missile C risis was the direct outcome o Soviet eelings that the USA had nuclear superiority and eared the USA would overthrow the C uban regime unless there was a sufcient deterrent.
Causes In 1 95 9, Fidel C astro came to power in C uba, launching an initially undefned revolution.
It was evident that he was seeking to replace the rampant corruption o the C uban government and economic dependence on the USA, but beyond that he was deliberately vague as to his exact ideological programme.
Like Nasser, C astro sought to exploit the east-west rivalry and to advance his cause domestically by railing against United States imperialism.
E isenhower was inuriated by the success o C astro and his decision to nationalize American industries.
Thus, the decision was made to accept Soviet oil at belowmarket prices.
The United States A responded by reusing to refne the oil, so the C uban government responded by nationalizing all Americanowned refneries.
Nationalization o other oreignowned entities quickly ollowed, mostly aecting the United States business interests that had dominated C uba since its independence.
Eisenhower authorized the training o anti-C astro exiles to attempt to overthrow the C uban regime and Kennedy inherited this plan when he took ofce.
C uban exiles were being trained to overthrow the regime o Fidel C astro.
Kennedys decisionmaking led to a oreign policy debacle that had urther-reaching consequences than anyone could have imagined.
He promised C uban exiles in the USA that he would take every opportunity to combat communism in the region and restore C uba as a democracy.
Kennedy was ambivalent about the C entral Intelligence Agency -directed plan that had been created by Eisenhower and D ulles.
According to the plan, the exiles would launch an amphibious invasion o C uba that would lead to an uprising on the island as it was assumed that many C ubans rejected C astros rule.
The USA would recognize this government and assist it in stabilizing the country and overthrowing C astro.
The plan relied on stealth, a bit o luck and the support o the C uban population.
The exiles had been planning the invasion or over a year, and it is estimated that the United States government spent close to $5 million on the project.
However, intelligence gathered by the C IA revealed that, despite the propaganda levelled against the C astro regime, most C ubans would not support an armed insurrection.
The exiles were largely hated enemies o the C ubans who remained and it was oolhardy to expect them to support the return o those who had exploited the previous system.
He promised to be hard on communism and to support the exiles yet the plan was highly fawed.
A State Department memo argued or the cancellation o the invasion on legal grounds stating that such an action would violate United States commitments to the Organization o American States.
This government will do everything it possibly can  I think it can meet its responsibilities, to make sure that there are no Americans involved in any actions inside C uba  The basic issue in C uba is not one between the United States and C uba.
It was a disaster; at the last moment, Kennedy decided that the USA would not provide air support to the invading orce, leaving them vulnerable to the C uban air orce, and the exiles lacked supplies.
United States involvement was not covert and thus the administration was guilty not only o violating international law, but also o ailing in its attempted coup.
Castro, or his part, claimed the success o his revolution over the United States operation.
But Castro was also shaken by the attempt and went so ar as to request assistance rom the Soviets in the deence o C uba.
This, in turn, led to the C uban Missile C risis and to the decision to install nuclear weapons in C uba.
Plus, the S oviets wanted to help extend the revolution that began in C uba into the rest o Latin America and the C aribbean, and to ensure the continuation o C astros regime.
Throughout the summer, United States intelligence operatives in C uba reported increased S oviet activity in C uba and the location o S oviet material in C uba, but they were largely ignored by Washington.
However, in O ctober, an American U2 spy plane fying over C uba photographed sites that were easily identied as ballistic missile sites and the President was notied.
For nearly a week Kennedy deliberated with his advisors on possible courses o action beore making any concrete decisions.
O n 2 2 O ctober, Kennedy gave a televised address to the American public inorming them o the installations and announced that a quarantine was placed on C uba and that any violation o the quarantine would be seen as a hostile action that would orce the United States A to retaliate; on the ollowing day the O AS approved the quarantine.
This reied the policy o brinkmanship in an instant, and the ideas o massive retaliation and mutual assured destruction became potential realities.
At the same time, the Soviets dispatched a ship heading to C uba; the United States A would consider this an act o war.
S ubsequent negotiations and compromises, however, resulted in Khrushchev ordering the ship to turn around, and the crisis was averted.
For his part, Kennedy promised that the United States A would not try another invasion on C uba; it was also secretly agreed to dismantle and remove its nuclear weapons in Turkey.
In the uture, C uba would become a centre or revolutionary and guerrilla activity in the region and around the globe.
This did not end United States activities in C uba; the USA continued its boycott on C uban goods, not allowing trade or travel with C uba.
Additionally, it kept its embassy closed although there were unocial American advisors in C uba.
O n the one hand, the Missile C risis refects the implementation o the policy o brinksmanship.
O n the other, it refects the determination o Kennedy and Khrushchev to avoid nuclear conrontation.
In C uba the notion o peaceul coexistence trumped brinksmanship, and war was averted.
The superpowers, with the concept o mutual assured destruction rmly entrenched, ound that nuclear deterrence was ar stronger than the idea o nuclear war.
C onventional warare and proxy wars remained the methods by which the C old War was ought.
C U B An m i SS i lE CRi S i S  The distance of United States cities from Cuba, highlighting the potential striking distance of Soviet medium-range intercontinental ballistic missiles placed in Cuba  they could hit all but Seattle Source skills In their own words: Kennedy and Khrushchev The 1 930s taught us a clear lesson: aggressive conduct, if allowed to go unchecked and unchallenged ultimately leads to war.
