But as the whoops and shrieks got louder, the alarmed state troopers finally called Kennedy's Secret Service agents, Joe Paolella and Larry Newman, to ask if some coyotes were bothering the president.
But no word from the Secret Service agents if Bingo's ""Silent Night, Holy Night"" played in the background during this Yuletide celebration. if { document.write; googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); } Mere months earlier, dozens of Cuban exiles were infiltrating Cuba and bringing out eyewitness reports of what remains the biggest military threat to the United States since 1812.
After the Missile Crisis ""resolution,"" the United States Coast Guard and even the British navy shielded Castro from exile attacks.
After the ""resolution,"" some of the very Cuban freedom-fighters who had smuggled out the very secret of the Soviet missiles found themselves stranded in a Cuba swarming with 47,000 Soviet troops.
Dozens of these young heroes huddled in mangrove swamps along Cuba's coast, dodging Communist patrols and waiting for their scheduled ""exfiltration"" by motorboats back to the U.S.Their wait was vain.
Their mission accomplished, their evidence to the Knights of Camelot about weapons of mass destruction 90 miles away and hosted by the most pathologically anti-American regime in history delivered , these heroes promptly fell through the cracks of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal.
Let's be careful not to let any of these Cuban refugees upset the deal"" were President Kennedy's words to his attorney general brother on the night of October 28, 1962.
So the scheduled boat runs to the Cuban coast to carry the freedom-fighters were canceled.
Suddenly these recue runs were impediments to Camelot's delicate diplomacy, you see.
So Castro's and Che's firing squads rubbed their hands together and got busy.Eighteen months after the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, two months after his deal with Khrushchev , a guilt-stricken JFK ransomed the surviving Bay of Pigs freedom-fighters back from Castro's dungeons.
I am here today not to be honored -but to pay honor,"" intoned the United States president.
But two months earlier, this same Leader of the Free World had made a different pledge to Khrushchev, insuring anything but a Cuba Libre -promising, in fact, that Havana would remain Communist, as enforced by United States arms.And the history of the subsequent fifty years has shown which pledge the United States has honored.
The pledge to the Butcher of Budapest to preserve Castroite Stalinism has proven sacrosanct.
