Most signiﬁcant is her conclusion that Soviet commanders were led by complex and challenging tactical circumstances, including unreliable communications and malfunctioning equipment, which might have prompted them to contemplate a resort to tactical nuclear weapons on more than one occasion.
Almost as disturbing is the revelation that United States forces were not aware of this particular threat.
This research reveals how a chain of inadvertent developments at sea could have precipitated global nuclear war, underlining the extreme danger of the crisis.
International Crisis, nuclear weapons, decision-making, Soviet Foreign Policy, Cold War The most extensively studied crisis of the twentieth century – the Cuban missile crisis – continues to present scholars with new puzzles and revelations.
The naval aspect of the crisis, particularly the story of how the actual deployment of the Soviet forces to Cuba was implemented, has until recently remained one of its least researched subjects.
There have been some noteworthy exceptions, such as the detailed account presented in the book Operation ANADYR by Anatoly Gribkov and William Smith.
However, the deployment of Soviet submarines to Cuba deserves special attention from scholars of the Cuban missile crisis and Cold War crises in general.
Those elements are the limited nature of information on which actors have to rely in making their decisions under pressure quickly, perceptions of the opponent’s actions as more threatening and coordinated than one’s own, reliability of the chain of command and the impact on decisionmakers of the presence of nuclear weapons and possible implications of their actions for an escalation of a nuclear conﬂict.
This paper will draw on available evidence from Russian and American sources, to give an overview of the submarine operations during the CMC and to try to provide answers to the following questions.
US intelligence had suspected that it might have been protection of the Soviet transport ships or an effort to establish a Soviet naval base in one of the Cuban ports.
We have learned from the revelations of the Soviet submarine veterans, and from documents declassiﬁed in Russia, that unbeknown to the Americans, the Soviet submarines had been ﬁtted with nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
The debate over whether local Soviet ground commanders had been given discretionary authority to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States invasion of Cuba originated with Anatoly Gribkov’s controversial statement to that effect in the tripartite Havana Conference on the Cuban missile crisis in 1992.
There is now a debate over the circumstances under which the submarine commanders could have used their own tactical nuclear weapons and, most importantly, whether the torpedoes could have been used without authorization from Moscow in conditions where contact with the center was impossible.
Finally, another vital question – one that has broad implications for the study of crises in international relations – is whether the presence of nuclear weapons on the submarines increased the danger of US–Soviet nuclear conﬂict.
If submarine commanders could have used these torpedoes at their own discretion, one could argue that such an option added a major aspect of unpredictability to the crisis.
Moreover, the nuclear torpedoes could arguably have contributed to the level of danger indirectly, through the possibility of accidental, or unintentional, inadvertent use.
This study must begin with the disclaimer that on the Russian side, most documents on this subject remain classiﬁed in military and naval archives.
Very important Soviet documentary sources from the Presdential Archive of the Russian Federation (including the appendices to this chapter) became available to scholars as a result of the late General Dmitry Volkogonov’s donation of his personal archive materials to the United States Library of Congress, and as a result of a special declassiﬁcation undertaken by the Russian Presidential Archive in April 2002.
The author has relied on these sources and on memoirs, secondary publications, personal interviews and the minutes of a 40th Anniversary Conference on the CMC, held in Havana in 2002.
On the US side, this study draws on the documents obtained from United States naval archives by William Burr of the National Security Archive, and the electronic brieﬁng book prepared by Thomas Blanton and William Burr.
The Neverending Story Until recently, it was not widely known that the Soviet submarines that went to Cuba were equipped with one nuclear-tipped torpedo each.
Another signiﬁcant contribution was Peter Huchthausen’s book October Fury, which for the ﬁrst time brought together the recollections of American and Russian participants in the confrontation on the high seas.
The account of the Soviet submarines’ voyage and the efforts of United States ASW forces’ efforts to discover them and force them to the surface became front-page news.
The document presumed creation of a new ﬂeet group, which would be based in Cuban ports.
In other words, the Soviet government envisioned creating a new naval base on Cuba with a substantial Soviet presence.
Upon arrival of the squadrons in Cuba, they would be incorporated into the Group of Soviet Forces.
They would ‘constitute a squadron of submarines composed of a division of missile submarines and a brigade of torpedo submarines. . . . he passage of the detachment will be done in full combat readiness . . . submarines will be required to leave October 7.11 Arrival in Cuba was scheduled for 9 November; the passage was expected to take up to 32 days.
The brigade consisted of four diesel-electric Foxtrot-class submarines, armed with 22 torpedoes each, one of which had a nuclear warhead – totaling 88 torpedoes, among them four with nuclear warheads.
The submarine B-75 had 22 torpedoes with a range of 11 km, two of which had nuclear warheads.
According to the captain, Nikolai Nantenkov, this was the ﬁrst case in his experience when the ammunition included nuclear warheads.
The boat had left port in the second half of September, and was able to get to the destination undetected by closely following the three-mile boundary of United States territorial waters.
After its arrival at its destination – the Navetrenny Straits , through which the Soviet ships were supposed to approach Cuba, the submarine stayed in the vicinity of the Soviet transports area, and was quickly recalled when the quarantine was announced.
On 22 October the B-75 was detected by NATO antisubmarine forces while refueling near the Azores.
Another submarine, the Zulu-class B-88, was dispatched on the mission in the Paciﬁc.
On 28 October, it left its base at the Kamchatka peninsula with orders to sail to Pearl Harbor and attack that United States base if the crisis in Cuba had escalated into a US–Soviet war.
Commanded by Captain Konstantin Kireev, the B-88 arrived near Pearl Harbor on 10 November and patrolled the area until 14 November, when it received orders to return to base.
The orders were rescinded that same day, a sign that Moscow believed that the crisis was not over.
After the announcement of the quarantine, the 69th submarine brigade, which was on its way to the port of Mariel, received unexpected instructions from Moscow to reverse its direction, and to patrol positions in the Saragasso Sea.
Commander of the Brigade Vitalii Agafonov traveled on board the B-4, and Chief of Staff Vasilii Arkhipov traveled on the B-59.
The four Foxtrot submarines sent to Cuba were among the ﬁrst – if not the very ﬁrst – in their class to carry nuclear torpedoes as part of their ammunition.
One of these boats, B-130, took part in naval exercises in October 1961, in which Captain Shumkov was for the ﬁrst time given orders to test a nuclear torpedo launch from a submerged position.
The tests were successful, and the boat’s commander became one of very few submarine captains, who had experience in using this type of weapon.
We can only speculate why the Soviet government decided to equip the Foxtrot diesel submarines with nuclear torpedoes.
Most likely, this decision was made some time after the signiﬁcant reduction in the number of naval forces to be sent to Cuba.
The Soviet Navy at the time did not have a sufﬁcient number of nuclear missile submarines ready to be sent on this assignment, and consequently a decision was made to equip the Foxtrots with the warheads.
According to the four captains, the orders to take nuclear warheads were a complete surprise for them.
The ‘special weapons’, as they were called, were loaded on the boats approximately a week before departure in an atmosphere of strict secrecy.
Each nuclear torpedo had a special ofﬁcer assigned to it, who stayed with it throughout the journey, and even slept next to it.
He was in charge of maintaining the torpedo, and had one set of keys, which were necessary to load it.
He was also the one responsible for assembling the torpedo for combat use if such an order had been received from Moscow.
It might even have been, as several authors have pointed out, that Khrushchev himself was not fully aware that the submarines en route to Cuba were diesel rather than nuclear-powered.
According to Alexander Mozgovoi, ‘Nikita Sergeevich, as well as many non-naval generals and marshals at the helm of the Armed Forces naively believed that they possessed a whole ﬂeet of nuclear missile boats’.17 Another puzzle regarding the Cuban submarine mission concerns the manner in which the nuclear torpedoes would have been used.
According to the commanders, no speciﬁc instructions were given about the use of the nuclear torpedoes.
Rassokha spoke to the crews of the four submarines, and briefed them on their mission and the use of weapons.
The only instructions concerning nuclear weapons that the captains remember receiving were given in that brieﬁng.
The only person who talked to us about those weapons was ViceAdmiral Rassokha.
If you have to come to the surface, and they shoot at you, and you get a hole in your hull.
When the packets were opened, the orders read that the boats were to go to Cuba and dock at Mariel.
The weapons on the boats were to be in a state of full combat readiness.
Conventional weapons could be used on the orders of the CommanderinChief of the USSR Naval Forces, and the nuclear weapons could be used only on special orders from the Defense Minister.
Most people would agree that Ketov’s version is more controversial, although none of the surviving veterans has challenged it yet.
The secrecy of the mission made the conditions of transit even more challenging because the crewmen were unable to ventilate the boat sufﬁciently during short trips to the surface, which were necessary to charge the accumulator batteries.
The orders to move at a speed of 9–10 nautical miles and to abide by the secrecy regulations were beyond the capabilities of the diesel submarines.
Therefore, the captains had to use all their skill to make it possible to catch up during the nighttime, and when there was no observation in order to get to the target position in the scheduled time.
While a more detailed personal account of the difﬁcult passage to Cuba can be found in Ryurik Ketov’s piece in this volume, the only available contemporary Russian document from the submarine trip itself has been found in the writings of the Assistant to Captain Dubivko on B-59, Captain Third Rank Anatoly Andreeev.
For the last four days, they didn’t even let us come up to the periscope depth.
The regeneration of air works poorly, the carbon dioxide content in rising, and the electric power reserves are dropping.
In these conditions, the crewmen were supposed to carry out their normal functions, operate the boat and periodically surface for communication sessions with Moscow.
On board each boat was a special radio intercept team, which was in charge of communications with Moscow and conducted interception and decoding of United States radio transmissions.
The head of such a ‘special unit’ on the B-59, Vadim Orlov, recalled that initially his men were greeted with suspicion and even open hostility by the captain and the crew because they were perceived as outsiders or KGB representatives.
Additionally, they had to load substantial quantities of equipment on the boat, which already was packed to the limit with provisions and ammunition for a long trip.
The worst fear of a submarine captain, according to the testimony of all four captains, was to be discovered and brought to the surface by an enemy ship.
Not only was a discovery seen as utter humiliation, but even more importantly, it was a violation of their orders, which could bring severe consequences upon their return to the Soviet Union.
The situation was made worse by the fact that Moscow did not inform the captains about the developing situation, only giving them a general outline of the crisis and mostly reports on harvesting in the Soviet Union.
In interviews and in memoirs, all the Soviet captains recalled their state of extreme tension and confusion in a situation where the war above could have begun any time while they were trying to evade their pursuers in the submerged position, with no communication with the outside world.
The captains also anticipated that in the situation where the nuclear exchange either became inevitable or had already begun, Moscow would want them to use their special weapons ﬁrst, as they were instructed before departure.
According to Dubivko, ‘The success of being the ﬁrst to use our weapons depended on the timely reception of the signal to start combat operations.
Only the B-4 submarine commanded by Ryurik Ketov (tentatively identiﬁed as C-21) with Brigade Commander Captain Agafonov on board was not detected.
All the Soviet commanders strongly disagree with the term ‘forced to surface’, commonly used in the United States to describe how the Soviet submarines were discovered.
They insist that their submarines had to come to the surface not because they were forced, but because of failing equipment or the need to charge the batteries.
With respect to malfunctioning equipment, the B-130 was the least lucky of the four.
Out of its four diesel engines, three stopped functioning by the time the boat was ordered to take position in the Sargasso Sea.
The captain radioed Moscow several times to receive permission to come to the surface to try to repair the engines.
On 25 October orders came to rise to periscope depth for a continuous communications session.
No additional information was supplied, and the commander was expecting the worst.
And the radio space became completely dead’.28 In anticipation of impending hostilities, the actions of the US ASW forces were perceived as threatening by Shumkov’s crew.
He recalls that United States ships were acting as if they were preparing to ram his boat, and present it later as an accident.
Constant explosions of depth charges created an atmosphere in which Shumkov was wondering whether the situation ﬁtted the scenario described by Rassokha, ‘if they slap you on the right cheek . . .’.29 According to Shumkov, one of the depth charges landed a direct hit on the hull, and its explosion damaged the depth steering wheel.
For a moment, the commander actually thought that his boat was under a United States attack.
In his book, October Fury, Peter Huchthausen describes an episode when Shumkov telephoned the security ofﬁcer guarding the ‘special’ torpedo, and instructed him to ﬂood the torpedo tube without orders from Moscow.
According to Huchthausen, Shumkov did not intend to ﬁre the torpedo, but wanted to create an impression that he was ready to do so, just in case the security ofﬁcer had to report it later in Moscow.
After the surfacing, the submarine stated its number as ‘945’ and stated that it needed no assistance.
Immediately after coming to the surface, the crew of B-130 began trying to repair their diesel engines, but soon discovered that they could be repaired only in port.
A special tugboat, Pamir, was dispatched to transport the B-130 back to Murmansk.
Captain Anatoly Dubivko’s submarine, B-36, was the ﬁrst boat to enter the Caicos Straits, when they received the transmission from Moscow to reverse course and take position in the Sargasso Sea.
The position of the B-36 was determined to be in the vicinity of B-130.
In his recollections, Dubivko explains various tricks he had to employ to evade the United States forces and at the same time to be able to surface to charge batteries and to be available for communications sessions from Moscow, which were not always reliable.
The United States ships, aware of the fact that the Soviet submarine would have to come to the surface, were sitting in water with engines turned off and no lights, in the hope that the Soviet submarine would not notice them while surfacing.
In one such attempt to surface, Dubivko was convinced that his boat was attacked by a real torpedo from Charles Cecil.
When the submarine submerged to the depths of 25 to 30 meters, the noise, which was moving in the direction of the stern, has disappeared.
The second source of noise, at the depth of our submergence of 35 to 40 meters, rolled over the deck-cabin and passed above us.
They all were sending reports to the central headquarters of the submarine.
This is where our misconception regarding the location of ‘B-130’ submarine played a trick on us.
Because the main headquarters of the Navy always issued the positions close to ours for that submarine, and in our view, at that point it was supposed to be on the side where it could be discovered, I concluded that the ﬁrst noise which passed toward the stern was precisely from submarine ‘B-130’, and that the anti-submarine ship was tracking her.
Dubivko at that moment did not realize that the B-130 had already come to the surface and been discovered by the United States forces.
Upon learning that, he became convinced that the source of the ﬁrst noise must have been a torpedo.
After returning to Murmansk, he asked the experts analyzing the data from the boat recorders whether such a noise was consistent with a torpedo that had barely missed his submarine.
After charging its accumulators, the captain executed a maneuver, which allowed him to confuse the pursuers by directing his acoustic signal on the same frequency as that employed by the pursuing ships, and to quickly submerge with a change of course.
The boat was not spotted again by the United States ASW forces and was able to return to Murmansk, despite its failing equipment.
Arguably the most tense encounter between the Soviet and United States navies occurred when the group consisting of the carrier Randolph and destroyers Bache , Beale , Cony , Eaton and Murray were pursuing and forcing to the surface the Soviet submarine commanded by Captain Second Rank Vitali Savitsky with the 69th brigade chief of staff Captain Vasili Arkhipov on board.
The effort to surface the B-59 was made just hours after the U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba, as President Kennedy was intensifying his threats to invade Cuba, and as the Soviet KGB and diplomatic sources in Cuba were reporting on an imminent and unavoidable invasion.
The Beale attempts to signal a Soviet submarine B-59 using practice depth charges and sonar. 5:29 pm.
Beale, Cony and others force B-59 to surface – its batteries running low.
It is surrounded by United States ships and illuminated with bright light.
October 29 – B-59 submerges without warning and escapes the ASW forces.
The same events looked very different from a submerged submarine unable to charge its batteries and unable to get a communication session with Moscow for over two days to ﬁnd out whether the hostilities had already begun.
The record of developments on the B59 is based on the recollections of Vadim Orlov, head of the special radio intercept team on the submarine.
According to Orlov, the conditions on the boat had been steadily deteriorating to the point where ‘people were dropping like dominoes’ and the temperature in the coldest section reached 45 degrees Celsius.
The situation was especially tense because the crew was aware of the developments in the Cuban missile crisis from the radio intercept, but in the two days before 27 October was unable to come to periscope depth to use the antenna.
The last news they had from the world above them led them to anticipate that hostilities between the United States and the Soviet Union could begin at any moment, or had even already begun.
In this atmosphere the explosions of the PDCs were interpreted as a possible attack on the submarine and prompted an emotional outburst from Captain Savitski.
The Americans hit us with something stronger than the grenades – apparently with a practice depth bomb.
After this attack, the totally exhausted Savitsky, who in addition to everything was not able to establish connection with the General Staff, got furious.
He summoned the ofﬁcer who was assigned to the nuclear torpedo, and ordered him to assemble it to battle readiness.
But we did not ﬁre the nuclear torpedo – Savitsky was able to rein in his wrath.
After consulting with Second Captain Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov and his deputy political ofﬁcer Ivan Semenovich Maslennikov, he made the decision to come to the surface.
This story of a near-use of a nuclear torpedo by a Soviet submarine commander remains very controversial in Russia.
Unfortunately, both Savitsky and Arkhipov are deceased and cannot conﬁrm or deny it.
However, Vasilii Arkhipov’s widow recently went on record, saying that her husband mentioned the story of how they almost ﬁred a nuclear torpedo at an American destroyer during the Cuban missile crisis.
Importantly, however, it appears that no action was taken during those emotional minutes, other than the commander’s outburst described above.
The captain guarding the torpedo did not receive the orders to ﬂood it or otherwise manipulate the weapon to prepare it for possible use.
The last submarine of the 69th brigade, the B-4 under the command of Ryurik Ketov, was the luckiest of the four.
It was the only one of the submarines not discovered and brought to the surface by the United States ASW forces, even though it was detected and had Julie and Jezebel sonobuoys dropped on it.
When the Soviet submarines returned to Murmansk, the commanders were subjected to a series of interrogations by the Soviet Navy command, and later by the Collegium of the USSR Ministry of Defense in Moscow.
The perception of the authorities was that the captains failed in their mission and violated their orders.
The initial expectation was that the captains of the ‘Cuban’ submarines would be punished for their inability to keep their mission secret and for allowing the United States Navy to force them to the surface.
At the present time, documents reﬂecting the analysis of the submarines’ mission by the Soviet military authorities remain classiﬁed, and therefore the only insight available is from the testimony of the participants, which does provide ample grounds to conclude that the top Soviet military leadership was under the impression that the missile submarines sent to Cuba were Golf – class , as it was initially intended in the decision of 24 May.
In addition, at least some ofﬁcers in the Soviet military command thought that it would have been better if the submarines used their weapons rather than allow the United States forces to force them to the surface.
The ﬁrst debrieﬁng of the captains took place on the day after they returned to port.
According to Dubivko, ‘the work of the Commission on analyzing the actions of the submarines in extraordinary conditions, according to the established at that time practice, was aimed exclusively at uncovering violations of orders, documents, or instructions by the commander or by the personnel’.42 The commanders were especially criticized for violating the conditions of secrecy by surfacing.
All the captains described the subsequent session of the Defense Ministry Collegium in Moscow as especially acrimonious.
Each of them and Chief of Staff Vasili Arkhipov were asked to present oral reports to the Defense Minister.
Malinovsky was ill, and Marshal Grechko received their reports at the Collegium of the Defense Ministry.
During the break, Marshal Bagramyan approached me and suggested that I should give special attention to the issues of communications.
Marshal Grechko refused to listen to my report on the problems and difﬁculties of the trip.
He was unable to understand why a submarine would have to charge its battery every night, and why it would have to be in the RDP or stationary mode to do that.
The only thing he understood was that we violated the secrecy requirements, were discovered by Americans, and that for some time we stayed in close contact with them.
Alexander Mozgovoi presents a detailed account of that Collegium meeting in his book, based on his interviews with the participants.
He also cites an episode when Marshal Grechko, upon learning that it was the diesel submarines that went to Cuba, removed his glasses and hit them against the table in fury, breaking them into small pieces, and abruptly leaving the room after that.
US Efforts to Locate the Soviet Submarines and Bring Them to the Surface On the United States side, the EXCOMM was aware that the Soviet Union might have sent its submarines to Cuba as part of the deployment.
At ﬁrst, the US decision-makers were not sure if those were nuclear-powered submarines, nor if they carried missiles.
However, once the submarines were identiﬁed as Foxtrots, it was assumed that they carried no nuclear weapons, since nuclear-tipped torpedoes were not part of normal ammunition for that type of submarine.
President Kennedy was briefed on the intelligence that the Soviet submarines were on their way to the Caribbean on 23 October.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy was especially concerned about the boats and the possibility that one of them would have to be stopped if it tried to cross the quarantine line.
He ordered a maximum ASW effort to track and surface the submarines, but at the same time emphasized that maximum caution must be exercised.
For his part, Defense Secretary Robert MacNamara was anxious about signaling the Soviet submarines to come to the surface.
He wanted to make sure the submarines understood the signals as they were intended to be, and not as a provocation or even worse, an attack.
On 24 October he instructed the navy commanders to develop a special system of signaling, which he immediately approved.
Upon receiving this signal, the submarine should come to the surface on an easterly course.
The notice contained an assurance that all signaling devices were harmless.
The EXCOMM transcripts reveal how much attention was given to the proper signaling of the submarines, and that the policymakers realized the dangers of a possible attack on a submarine if it refused to surface or interfered with the quarantine.
The transcript shows that Kennedy personally was very concerned about what the chain of events could lead to.
Alexis Johnson noted, however, that although the identiﬁcation procedures were sent to Moscow, the United States did not receive an acknowledgment of the receipt.
The moments when MacNamara described how the submarines would be signaled by the practice depth charges, according to Robert Kennedy, ‘were the time of greatest worry for the President.
His hand went up to his face and covered his mouth and he closed his ﬁst.
What the plan is, Dean , is to send antisubmarine helicopters out to harass the submarine.
And the plan, therefore, is to put pressure on the submarine, move it out of the area by that pressure, by the pressure of potential destruction, and then make the intercept.
It would be appropriate to ask if the Soviet captains actually received the signaling instructions.
In their books, both Joseph Bouchard and Peter Huchthausen assume that the commanders must have known about the signaling procedures and were familiar with the way PDCs sounded.
Submerged Soviet submarines essentially ignored the sonar and explosive charge signals.
There were no reported instances of a Soviet submarine immediately surfacing upon hearing the signals.
Soviet submarines surfaced because they needed to replenish air and batteries, or because they had some kind of mechanical problem.
Moreover, in each case, the explosions of PDCs were perceived not as a signal but as a hostile action.
Each of the commanders and Vadim Orlov remarked in their recollections about how the hull ampliﬁed the sound and how the boat shook with each explosion.
Each captain attributed at least some damage to his submarine from those explosions, and Dubivko even claimed that he was attacked by an actual torpedo.
Had they known that the PDCs were simply signaling devices, it is unlikely that the captains would have associated them with the possibility that the war had already started above the water while they were sitting under it without communications with Moscow.
As was discussed above, another concern of the Soviet submarine commanders was that a United States ship might try to ram them and present it as an accident.
We have grounds to believe that the United States would most likely have made a nuclear counter-response.
Recent evidence indicates that United States ships had nuclear depth charges on board, while non-nuclear components for more depth charges were stored at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Even such limited initial nuclear exchange, especially if it had taken place in the tense circumstance of the evening of 27 October could have potentially led to an escalation of conﬂict, especially aggravated by the effect of shock due to the fact that the US command was unaware of the presence of nuclear torpedoes on the Soviet submarines.
Conclusions Analyzing all the available evidence from the Russian and United States archives, as well as the eyewitness accounts, one has to state from the outset that at this time, all the conclusions that can be drawn will be of a preliminary character.
Even with the recent revelations about the journey of the Soviet submarines equipped with nuclear torpedoes, most of the evidence, which would allow one to speak more conﬁdently about the submarine story, remains classiﬁed in the Russian archives.
What we now know is only the tip of the iceberg that is slowly beginning to emerge.
However, we now know that the submarines were sent to Cuba as part of an overall deployment of forces of Operation ‘Anadyr’ with the mission to establish a Soviet naval base at Mariel, Cuba.
The submarines were equipped with nuclear torpedoes as part of a general plan of creating a nuclear base on Cuba, but were not issued battle orders because their mission was to serve as the spearhead of the future naval base, and therefore they had to arrive and dock at Mariel.
Another submarine, B-75, which also carried nuclear torpedoes, was assigned a different task – to escort and protect the Soviet transport ship Alexandrovsk, also carrying ‘special’ equipment.
This submarine had more speciﬁc battle orders on the use of its weapons, if the transport were boarded or attacked.
However, for all the submarines – the Foxtrots of the 69th brigade, and the B-75 Zulu, the orders on using nuclear-tipped torpedoes were the same – they could only be used by order from Moscow.
Although physically the captains could arm and launch the nuclear-tipped torpedo, the procedure of the actual launching was quite complex and required three keys to be initiated.
According to all available evidence, no nuclear torpedo was actually assembled to battle readiness, although the tense situation on B-59 resulted in a probable effort to arm the torpedo.
The fact that the presence of the nuclear torpedoes remained secret greatly raised the probability of an incident, as the United States Navy carried out its efforts to force the exhausted Soviet commanders to bring their malfunctioning ships to the surface, or in MacNamara’s words, to ‘harass’ the submarines.
To the captains of the ‘harassed’ submarines, who were unaware of the signaling procedures, the situation above might have looked as if the war had already started, which might have moved them to ‘use or lose’ their most prized weapons.
On the other hand, if a launch occurred, whether intentionally or accidentally, and the United States ships were hit with an unexpected nuclear torpedo, the probability that the United States Navy would perceive the launch as intentional would have been very high and might have prompted the United States side to use the nuclear depth charges available to them, thus starting a chain of inadvertent developments, which could have led to catastrophic consequences.
The conference was the latest in a series of critical oral history meetings on the Cuban missile crisis and generated worldwide headlines by gathering US, Russian and Cuban veterans of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis for two days of discussions in Havana.
Volkogonov Collection, Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Reel 17, Container 26.
Khrushchev personally We report the plan for the passage of naval ships per the ‘‘Anadyr’ ’’ operation.
The passage of the detachment of naval ships to Cuba will be done in full combat readiness.
The time for the passage will be up to 32 days, of which 2–3 will be for conducting an exercise.
In the ﬁrst stage of the crossing the formations of submarines and surface ships are to proceed separately, in groups.
The squadron of submarines with tenders and the transport with the special cargo will leave from Kola Gulf on 7 October and proceed to the exercise area through the passage between Iceland and the Faeroe Islands.
For concealment the submarines will submerged by day but surfaced at night with an average daily speed of 7–8 miles an hour.
The cruiser Sverdlov will leave Baltiysk on 20 October for the North Sea where it will be joined by the destroyers which will leave the Kola Gulf on 19 October.
These vessels will then pass through the English Channel toward the Azores where they will join the cruiser M Kutuzov and the missile ships which will leave Sevastopol’ on 20 October.
From the Azores the entire squadron of surface ships shall proceed to the exercise area with a speed of 16 miles an hour.
Both groups shall make the passage independently with a speed of 8– 10 miles and hour along the same routes as the surface ships, but without visiting the exercise area. their departure for the sea will be done by the Main Staff of the Navy.
When they put to sea the commander of the detachment of combat ships and his staff will take command of the entire detachment.
The commander of the detachment shall personally receive instructions and all orders about the route of the passage, the organization of the exercise, the possibility of using weapons, and information about the situation.
Having arrived in Cuba the entire detachment will become part of the Group of Forces under the command of Cde.
The ‘‘Anadyr’ ’’ measures are being done according to the approved plan.
The plan to transport troops has been accelerated the loading shall be done by October and the arrival will conclude by 3–5 November.
The R-14 missile regiments will load in the period 2-20 October and will ﬁnish buildup in Cuba by 5 November.
In view of the fact that at the present time sending surface ships of the Fleet with the men would attract the attention of the entire world and get not in the favor of the Soviet Union it seems necessary not to send the surface ships to Cuba for now.
To transport 68 units of special ammunition from R-14 24 and 44 for the FKR-1 , assign the transport vsk, with loading at Severomorsk.
The transport Aleksandrovsk is to be armed with two 37mm automatic weapons.
To escort the transport in the sea crossing designate a second ship which will apparently be going.
Out of considerations of secrecy the nuclear submarine shall travel to Cuba directly transport in the most sectors.
