U4 -wi.ii.ju.n, ji.d lo irit* Oltico ol Mattj'jomeni joo iluJ jtM o ,p, torrn App/unJ UMtl No 0/04 01 ad 1.
PERFORMING ORGANISATION REPORT NUMBER United States Army Command and General Staff College ATTN; ATZL-SWD-GD Ft.
SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF REPORT Presidential Decision-Making Kennedy Administration 18.
STER OF MILITARY ART AND SCIENCE by MANUEL E FALCON, LCDR, USN B.S., United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, 1981 Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 1993 I Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
This study investigates the methods by which President John F Kennedy arrived at decisions to deploy the military in the conduct of foreign policy.
It can be convincingly argued that President John F Kennedy's ascendancy to the White House was due in large part to his ardent belief in the containment of Communism and anti-Soviet rhetoric.
President Truman provided what 2 would be the definitive role of American foreign policy for years to come.
Eisenhower viewed covert operations as a convenient means by which to disguise failures and capitalize on successes.
President Kennedy would very closely adopt both Eisenhower's concept of the domino theory to justify his own aggressive campaign against communist expansion, and also Eisenhower's propensity for covert operations.
President Kennedy clearly recognized the deterrent value of maintaining balanced military capabilities.
The foundation was being laid for critical decisions which would be made a few short monthsnto Kennedy's Presidency. 6 within days of assuming the White House, President Kennedy's newly appointed Defense Secretary, Robert S McNamara, admitted in a Pentagon press conference that no ""missile gap"" existed with the Soviet Union.
His credibility already shaken, Kennedy was now facing constituents to whom he had pledged during his campaign to he tough on Castro.While campaigning, Kennedy went so far as to proclaim that some sort of operation should be undertaken to cause the removal of Castro.
He did so unaware that Eisenhower had initiated the planning for just such an operation.Kennedy believed he had no choice.
In late March 1962, the Kennedy doctrine suggested that although it was not the policy of the United States to strike first, ""Khrushchev must not be certain that, where its vital interests are threatened, the United States will never strike first.
The net result of Kennedy's ""flexible response"" strategy was to make the military an attractive option in most situations In contrast to his belief in the use of military power, Kennedy's perception of the military as an organization when he entered the White House was one of contempt.
This feeling was shaped by both his association with the ""New Frontiersman,"" and his own military experience during World War II, The ""New Frontier"" was a phrase coined by Kennedy during his nomination acceptance speech which came to define the legion of advisors he brought with him to Washington.
Based on General Taylor's work with the Cuba Study Group, coupled with the fact he had authored a book.
The Uncertain Trumpet , which outlined what the General considered inadequacies with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Kennedy offered Taylor a position in his administration.
His role would be to serve as an advisor or military matters but with no command authority.This position allowed a military man into Kennedy's inner circle of trusted advisors, but did nothing to solidify the President's relationship with the remainder of the military hierarchy, or further define their roles.
On 17 March 1960, Eisenhower authorized the Director of the CIA, Allen W Dulles, to implement a program to create, train, and equip a guerrilla force to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro.
Eisenhower was particularly fond of the first part of the program; indicating a desire to find a ""Cuban leader living in exile"" who could direct the activities of the paramilitary forces, and eventually ""form a government that the United States could recognize.The decision to use the CIA as the lead agency in addressing potential foreign policy initiatives was in keeping with the administration's propensity toward low cost, covert diplomatic efforts.
He had 22 been a key contributor to the CIA's successful 1954 coup in Guatemala/^ and had been in charge of the program that resulted in the production of the famous U-2 photographicreconnaissance spy plane.Armed with these credentials, the Cuba ""program"" gained instant credibility among Eisenhower advisors.
The official estimate was that the entire operation would be functional in six to eight months.Further fueling the plan's momentum were members of the National Security Council who were becoming increasingly outspoken in their desire to see the Castro government replaced.
One individual who was particularly interested in the success of the plan was the 1960 Republican Presidential candidate, and then-Vice President, Richard M Nixon.With the CIA given such a free reign and broad mandate, the planning and execution of what was to become the Bay of Pigs was in full swing.
When Nixon called for a ""quarantine"" of Cuba, Kennedy countered that Nixon's proposal was ""too little, too late,"" and (perhaps oblivious that such a plan existed) called for direct intervention in Cuba.
In a comment that was to prove prophetic, Nixon further stated, that backing the ""freedom fighters"" would have the United States ""condemned in the United Nations,"" and would amount to ""an open invitation for Mr Khrushchev... to come into Latin America.The ninety 25 miles comment, and Nixon's seemingly timid response captured the imagination of the voters.
Kennedy concluded that, ""if elected, he would do something about it, not just stand still.Kennedy was seemingly convincing himself that Cuba required immediate action upon his inauguration.
He proposed no new initiatives, but worked to maintain as many options open as possible so as not to tie the hands of the incoming president.He developed a somewhat indifferent attitude toward the invasion option of the CIA plan,^^ and assured President-elect Kennedy that he had no wish of “turning over the government in the midst of a developing emergency.Additionally, President Eisenhower was getting a mixed endorsement of the plan from the military.
This well-publi 2 ed event added to the already growing public demand for action which Kennedy helped create during his campaign for the presidencyIn private, Eisenhower directed Bissell and the CIA to increase the size of the refugee force and step up preparations.
Under the energetic CIA leadership 27 of Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell the plan had taken on ""impressive proportions,"" and seemed to have developed its ""own self-contained dynamics.Not only had Kennedy inherited the ""Cuba problem,"" he had a covert army at his disposal should he choose to employ it.
To reestablish confidence in his administration after the false ""missile gap"" was revealed, the new 29 President felt the need for rapid action.
To do nothing would be a sign of weakness, and could potentially ham his credibility abroad.
President Kennedy presided over his first meeting on the plan in the White House.
The report further stated that due to the complex nature of the operation, ""an independent evaluation of the combat effectiveness of the invasion forces and detailed analysis of logistics plans should be made by a team of army r sic 1 , naval r sic 1 and Air Force officers.To maintain 31 secrecy, Kennedy denied the JCS an opportunity to staff the project further.
The effect, Dulles pointed out, would be to discredit the United States, dishearten Castro opponents, and eventually ""produce pro-Castro revolutions all around the Caribbean.
Deniability was particularly important to Kennedy for he wanted to dispose of Castro without expending any political capital, particularly overseas.
He wanted a plan that would bring the two into better balance CIA planners provided three alternative landing sites.
The greatest dissenters were Arkansas Senator J William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and special assistant Schlesinger, both of whom provided the President with unsolicited written memoranda outlining their objections to the plan.
Military Role The universal consensus points to generally three causes of failure at the Bay of Pigs; faulty CIA planning; President Kennedy's poor decisions before and during the operation; and the limited role of the military in the planning and execution of the invasion.
They argued that their role in the operation was a supporting one, charged solely with critiquing the CIA plan and providing limited assistance in training and logistic support.
Dennison's anger was not abated when Bissell could not provide answers to the Admiral's queries about the Navy's responsibilities to protect the Guantanamo naval base or about the evacuation of United States citizens from the Cuban island.
At this point, however, Dennison knew more about the operation than did the Chief of Naval Operations Owing to the extreme secrecy surrounding the evolving plan, these concerns never surfaced in the White House.
On 28 January 1961, during a National Security Council meeting, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were officially introc^uced to the CIA operation.
This was a joint exercise which integrated forces under the Commander of the North American Air Defense and added them to the defense and surveillance of the south Florida coast.To avoid the perception of a military buildup all this activity was conducted under the guise of training and none of these assets were specifically targeted for use in the Bay of Pigs operation.
The squadron sailed from Norfolk, Virginia, under the cover of participating in anti-submarine warfare exercises scheduled in the Gulf of Mexico 3-18 April The Bay of Pigs operation quickly turned into the fiasco for which it is renowned.
Nevertheless, all indications are that the military made all preparations to make the plan work.
Admiral Dennison did what he could to ensure assets were in place to support the invasion.
And well, I did all—made all kinds 48 of preparations without consulting anybody because I could foresee that...this thing was going to be a debacle and we'd better be prepared to do almost anything.Enroute to the Caribbean the Essex airwing, not yet certain what their mission would be, conducted intensive air-to-air and ground support training in preparation for any eventuality.
All that the present administration did was to take out of it those elements of strength essential to its success.
Others, such as Kennedy Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen, believed that the key to the President's decision was that Kennedy thought he was approving a plan that in the end was different than the plan the CIA and JCS perceived would be executed.
To do nothing would have been counter to his campaign themes of providing youthful, vigorous and 50 proactive leadership in a world in which the United States was the only counter to Soviet Conmiunist expansion.
By allowing his concern for politics, of which his image was a critical element, take precedence over military and diplomatic considerations.
President Kennedy made a clearly disastrous decision which would bias his foreign policy decision-making and use of the military for the remainder of his Presidency.
The staff reorganization that produced the decision-making apparatus that would serve him during the missile crisis was guietly being set in motion.
Despite attempts at political damage control and an obvious desire to put the Bay of Pigs behind him.
President Kennedy was besieged by stinging critiques of his performance and a demand for action.
In response to Kennedy's concerns about the Soviets and Berlin, Nixon replied; “Khrushchev will prod and probe in several places at once.
Nixon professed that an invasion of Cuba could be justified under the guise of protecting American citizens in that country.
After the Summit, Kennedy clearly believed Khrushchev had gotten uhe best of him.
Helms was told ""that getting rid of Castro was the top priority in the United States government.
It consisted of at least thirty-three different schemes that were targeted principally at the Cuban economy.It included a host of activities that in the end only served to harm the Cuban population, and give Castro and the Soviets further cause to suspect that an American invasion of Cuba was not beyond the realm of possibility.
Increasingly, the President's seemingly genuine desire to eliminate any vestige of communism from the western hemisphere, and his increasing personal animosity toward 58 Castro, demanded continued efforts to effect his overthrow.
As the November mid-terra elections were approaching in 1962, Cuba once again occupied the public debate.
In August, Indiana Republican Senator Homer E Capehart stated, ""It is high time that the American people demand that President Kennedy quit 'examining the situation' and start protecting the interests of the United States.In response to increased Soviet troop buildup in Cuba, Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, went so far as to urge a United States invasion of Cuba.
He most clearly felt betrayed by the CIA, the Joint Chiefs, and to some degree, the State Department.
Henceforth, President Kennedy was determined to have a firmer grasp on his administration's foreign policy.He would do so by further cightening his inner circle of advisors.
Sorensen wrote that Kennedy sought military advisors whose thinking was in line with his own.
The principal participants included VicePresident Johnson, Secretary of Defense NcNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Kennedy, CIA Director John H McCone, Undersecretary of State George W Ball, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L Gilpatric, Ambassador-atlarge Llewellyn E Thompson, Special Counsel Sorensen, National Security Advisor Bundy and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor.
On 19 October, at General Taylor's suggestion, the President invited the Joint Chiefs to a meeting to hear their views.This meeting did little except make the Chiefs feel better.
He wrote; The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons, and now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you; we'd be doing nothing more than giving them a little of their own medicine.
Premier Khrushchev was undeniably agitated by the American missiles in Turkey and the earlier revelation of the false missile gap.
From 19 April to 11 May 1962, the United States military conducted Operation Quick Kick off the southeastern coast of the United States.
The Soviets presumed the United States was exercising a war plan for the invasion of Cuba.
The announcement very nearly coincided with the military's Operation Quick Kick exercise--CINCLANT's contingency plan against Cuba.
In one extreme case, Kennedy actually forbade General Taylor from briefing Admiral Dennison and his staff (the CINCLANT staff which would have been responsible for executing the eventual military option) on the results of the EXCOMM meetings for fear that the seriousness of the impending confrontation would be leaked to the public.
To refute some suggestions that Kennedy communicated directly with ships at sea.
Flag Plot Watch Officer Captain John H Carmichael commented later, ""I know of no incident when civilian authorities gave orders directly to afloat forces.
Acknowledging that the President's direct intervention may have offended some of his military colleagues.
The JCS had begun developing contingency plans for Cuba as early as 1959 when Castxo came to power.
They further stated that the “elimination of the Castro regime,"" would require an invasion by American forces.President Kennedy made it clear he preferred a more moderate response.
This was only one of three cases ever in which global American military forces have been placed in DEFCOii 3 or higher.
Vice Admiral John T Hayward, commander of a carrier task force during the crisis, went so far as to proclaim of the outcome, ""It was a defeat, and a cheap success for uhe Soviets.
Despite being severely hamstrung, the Navy did what it could to make the blockade work.
The military's first clash with the President was over the issue of the distance from Cuba in which Soviet ships would be intercepted.
President Kennedy routinely subordinated military considerations for diplomatic and political ones.
For the most part, each of the aforementioned studies regard the use of the military only in the periphery of decision-making considerations.
Kennedy Personality President Kennedy was undoubtedly one of the most charismatic Presidents of the twentieth century.
The ensuing Vienna Summit, in which Kennedy acknowledged that Khrushchev had bested him, further fueled the rivalry.
Kennedy felt betrayed after having supported Castro as a welcomed alternative to the Batista dictatorship, only to see him become increasingly radical in his leadership of Cuba and, eventually, come under the sphere of Soviet influence.
The Unified Commander, Admiral Dennison, responded that he could not execute the order ""unless you want me to undeploy.
As Theodore Sorensen described of Kennedy, ""Far more than most politicians, he not only could objectively measure his own performance but also cared deeply about how that performance would be 98 measured by future historians as well as contemporary voters.In the same vein, Kennedy was extremely sensitive to media criticism.
Considered the first television-age President, it was widely acknowledged that Kennedy was exceptionally adept at using the inedia to cast him in the best possible light.
While recognizing the lofty ideals with which Americans viewed their place in the world, his decisions never strayed far from the political realities of how those decisions would play at home. \n individual does not rise to the highest office in the land without supren.^ confidence in his own judgment.
President Kennedy recognized that demands could be made of the Soviet Empire, and Communism could be contained, without resorting to nuclear war.
President Kennedy very closely articulated what is the modern day, textbook definition of the role the military performs as an element of national power.
The iminediate result was his undertaking of the Bay of Pigs invasion, which, in essence, produced a double-edged sword.
