Republicans nominated Vice President Richard M Nixon One of most active vice presidents in United States history Traveled throughout the world as a ""troubleshooter"" in various capacities. -Defended United States capitalism and democracy in his Moscow ""kitchen debate"" with Khrushchev 2.
May 1961, Freedom Riders organized by CORE (Congress of Racial Equality) Rode interstate buses to verify segregation wasn’t happening.
Police commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used cattle prods and ordered police dogs on demonstrators and used fire hoses on children as world watched in horror. ii.
Khrushchev delivered new ultimatum on Berlin; saw U.S. weakness in Bay of Pigs USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin.
USSR announced increase in defense; Kennedy asked for a $3.2 billion increase as well.
Also rejected a United States invasion of Cuba (many in cabinet & military favored this) Unbeknownst to Kennedy, Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba could have destroyed invading American army. ii.
Assassination of JFK A November 22, 1963, Kennedy assassinated in Dallas while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies -Lyndon Johnson became president B Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin arrested shortly thereafter -Oswald killed a few days later by Jack Ruby, a mafia member C Warren Commission, ordered by Johnson, report stated that Oswald was the lone assassin. -""Magic bullet theory"" stated that one single bullet went through Kennedy’s back, out his neck, and inflicted several wounds to Texas governor Connolly.
President Lyndon B Johnson and the Election of 1964 A Pledged to continue Kennedy’s policies 1.
Rammed Kennedy’s stalled Civil Rights and tax cut bills through Congress. -Johnson one of few southern Democrats in favor of civil rights.
Began his ""War on Poverty"" by pushing bills through Congress costing billions.
Democrats nominated LBJ on the platform of ""The Great Society"" Sweeping set of New Deal-type economic and welfare measures aimed to transform America.
Public sentiment aroused by Michael Harrington’s The Other America which showed 20% of United States population and over 40% of blacks lived in poverty.
Republicans nominated Barry Goldwater, senator from Arizona Attacked federal income tax, Social Security System, the TVA, civil rights legislation, nuclear test ban treaty, and the Great Society.
Considered by many today as the ""father of the modern conservatism"" -Reagan’s platform in 1980 very similar to Goldwater’s in 1964.
Suggested United States field commanders be given discretionary authority to use tactical nuclear weapons. ii.
Democratic president and Congress now had a mandate for an unprecedented passage of legislation in the next four years.
Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1966 -Congress allocated $1. billion to redevelop isolated mountain Areas 3.
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 -Over $1 billion given to elementary and secondary education.
Head Start prepared educationally disadvantaged children for elementary school.
Supported by millions of Americans being pushed to poverty by skyrocketing medical costs.
Immigration now based on first-come first-serve basis. -Immigrants with families already in United States had precedence.
Immigration on things such as skills and political asylum. -Artists, scientists and political refugees given preference.
Act more than doubled number of immigrants coming in each year, mostly from Asia and Latin America.
National Endowment for the Arts and Humanities aimed to promote culture in United States (e.g. music, art, educational programs and documentaries) 2.
Public Broadcasting System created G Water Quality Act -Federal gov’t could set clean water standards for states to force industry to clean up the nation’s lakes and rivers.
Provisions Forbade segregation in hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, and sporting arenas that did business in interstate commerce. -Equal Employment Opportunity Commission created to enforce the law.
Relieved individuals of responsibility for bringing discrimination complaints to court themselves; federal government now responsible.
After 2 months of beatings, arrests, and one murder, civil rights leaders in Selma announced a climactic protest march from Selma to Montgomery.
In response, March 15, Johnson promised on TV to send a bill to Congress that would extend voting rights to African Americans in the Deep South.
If local registrars would not enroll African Americans, the president could send federal examiners who would. -This gave teeth to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 Result, 740,00 blacks registered to vote within three years.
Southerners now began courting African American votes and businesses. iv.
For first time since Reconstruction, African Americans migrated into the South.
Bakke case, 1978 Supreme Court ruled that Allan Bakke, a white medical student, was unfairly turned down to medical school because of an admissions program that favored minorities.
Court declared preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group based on ethnic or racial identity alone. -Only if the minority applicant was equally qualified could race be used as a factor.
Jesse Jackson became a leading advocate in the 1970s and 1980s for the continuing of affirmative action and the furthering of civil rights.
Court ordered school districts to bus children from all-minority neighborhoods in the center cities to achieve integration of schools.
Years between 1954 and 1968 seen as ""2nd Reconstruction"" -Equality before the law largely achieved.
Blacks still continued to experience poverty and discrimination in the nation’s inner-cities B Black Separatism 1.
Inspired by ideas of Marcus Garvey (leader during ""Harlem Renaissance"") who had advocated a back-to-Africa movement Nation of Islam most notable and well-organized 2.
Advocated use of weapons for self-defense believing nonviolence encouraged white violence ii.
Many in the white community were alarmed His views softened after his pilgrimage to Mecca; he soon left Nation of Islam Feb., 1965, assassinated by three members of Nation of Islam.
Malcolm X’s ideas became foundation for the Black Power movement later in the decade.
Carmichael later became a leader of the Black Panthers, based in Oakland, and founded by urban revolutionaries Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
Revolutionary social movement to organize African American men in northern and western cities to fight for liberation. -In effect, became a para-military organization to protect blacks from white violence D Racial violence 1.
Poverty, unemployment, & racial discrimination common in major inner-cities. -Empty promise of racial equality in the North ignited rage in many African American communities 2.
Approval and encouragement of violence both by white terrorists and by black protest groups led to violence Blacks felt powerless in a society dominated by whites.
Shot while standing on a balcony with friends in Memphis. -King working to increase wages for Memphis trash collectors.
Rise of the ""New Left""and Counterculture A Impact of baby boom generation 1. 1950 -1 million went to college; 1960 -4 million 2.
Student protest movement only a minority of student population B New Left 1.
Students for a Democratic Society , headed by Tom Hayden called for ""participatory democracy"" in universities.
Berkeley started sit-ins in 1964 to protest prohibition of political canvassing on campus.
Criticized the impersonal bureaucracy of American society. -Police broke up a sit-in in December and protests spread to other campuses 5.
Timothy Leary, Theodore Roszak -Charles Reich: The Greening of America iv. ""flower children"" Most unable to establish sustaining lifestyle.
Woodstock, August, 1969 -Featured Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Santana. -Unrestrained drug use and sex By early 1970s, counterculture was shrinking as a result of either its excesses or its members re-entering the mainstream.
The Warren Court A Chief Justice Earl Warren appointed to the Supreme Court by Eisenhower in 1953.
His Court considered one of the two creative periods in US history -John Marshall is considered to be the first of the great creative periods.
Warren’s court stressed personal rights , placing them in a preferred constitutional position.
Required states redraw their voting districts for the United States Congress according to population so that each district had roughly the same number of people.
Birth control pill and antibiotics encourage freer sexual practices beginning in early 1960s; promiscuity increased among younger Americans 2.
B Eleanor Roosevelt’s Commission on the Status of Women highlighted inequalities women faced, endorsed improvements in education, equal employment, child care, and governmental opportunities for women.
Feminine Mystique considered a classic of women’s protest literature. -Criticized plight of women with domestic duties (cult of domesticity) who also had to work full-time employment at jobs that paid women less than men.
With other feminists founded the National Organization for Women in 1966.
Argued for changes in divorce laws to make settlements more fair to women Sought legalization of abortion 1967, began advocating and Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution extending the same guarantees contained in the 14th Amendment for racial and religious minorities.
Passed in Congress in 1972 but failed by early 1980s to get required 38 states necessary for ratification. ii.
Failed to pass as movement limited to middle class women and prolife groups argued against it.
Roe Wade -Legalized abortion in 1973. -Hitherto states had the right to determine legality of abortion.
Several corporations forced to provide back wages to female employees who had not received equal pay for equal work. -Also had to abolish hiring and promotion practices that discriminated against women 4.
Since 1970s a number of Mexican-Americans elected to prominent political positions.
C Gay rights movement emerged later using civil rights laws to win discrimination cases.
President Lyndon Johnson’s legacy A No president had shown more compassion for the poor, the ill educated, and minorities.
B No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights.
C ""Great Society"" programs heavily criticized by conservatives in subsequent years.
Most programs extremely costly and eventually required increased taxes to fund them.
Dubbed Great Society as ""social engineering"" that could not be solved simply by allocating billions of dollars.
Background A Vietnam War spread across 5 presidencies and spanned 25 years.
Direct U.S involvement from 1964-1973 B France lost control of Vietnam after the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 1.
Geneva Conference, 1954 -Agreement reached to divide country into north and south along the 17th parallel until a 1956 unifying election.
Ho Chi Minh accepted based on assurance that Vietnam-wide elections would occur within two years.
Domino Theory – determined Eisenhower’s policies in Southeast Asia in the 1950s and continued into the 1960s If one country in Indochina fell to communism, other surrounding countries would also fall, one right after the other, like dominoes Pertained to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Burma C Vietnam’s Civil War 1.
Nationalist and fiercely anti-communist Ngo was an aloof and aristocratic Catholic autocrat ruled over a nation of poor Buddhist peasants.
United States supported him; was afraid of Ho Chi Minh winning the election. ii.
South Vietnam in disarray from war and colonial rule Eisenhower promised economic and military aid to Ngo’s regime in return for social reforms. -Reforms extremely slow; most money went to the military Southeast Asia Treaty Organization created by U.S. in order to prop up Ngo’s regime; Britain & France included Designed to be a ""NATO"" in Southeast Asia. -Only the Philippines, Thailand & Pakistan signed on ii.
Vietcong were communist insurgents in the South supported by Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh in the North.
Topple pro-American gov’t from power NLF assassinated 2,000 gov’t officials during 1960.
Kennedy had to choose between abandoning Ngo or deepening United States involvement.
Fall of Ngo Dinh Diem A Buddhist monk set himself on fire to protest Ngo’s regime ; photos changed world opinion overnight.
The question of whether or not Kennedy would have pulled out of Vietnam still remains unanswered today.
Dean Rusk, Sec. of State: Major proponent of domino theory Robert McNamara, Sec. of Defense: In effect, the architect of United States escalation policy in Vietnam 2.
Johnson rejected any settlement in Vietnam not guaranteeing a non-communist gov’t.
Early Aug.64, Johnson announced North Vietnamese torpedo boats had attacked two United States destroyers on international waters off the coast of North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin. -""Attacks were unprovoked"" Congress almost unanimously passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
Years later, it became known that United States ships were helping S Vietnamese commandos raid N Vietnamese islands and that the attacks on United States ships were not ""unprovoked"" Johnson ordered a ""limited"" retaliatory air raid against North Vietnamese air bases, stating he sought no ""wider war"" -LBJ used this episode effectively during 1964 presidential campaign.
He sought to protect his Great Society programs by keeping the war’s decision-making secretive. ii.
Escalation As situation unraveled, initial objective in South Vietnam stabilization was no longer viable.
United States military demanded more bombing & escalation -Key cabinet officials advised escalation; Ike also iii.
Operation Rolling Thunder United States response to Pleiku LBJ ordered the 1st bombing of N Vietnam which went nonstop for 3 years.
Also targeted the ""Ho Chi Minh Trial,"" network of trails along which soldiers and supplies flowed from N Vietnam through Cambodia and Laos into South Vietnam. iii.
Fighting the Vietnam War A United States forces in Vietnam led by General William C Westmoreland B Air War 1.
Vietcong dug 30,000 miles of tunnels to ship supplies and escape bombing.
Agent Orange used as a defoliant to kill jungle vegetation -Many United States soldiers exposed and later developed cancer.
Search & destroy missions against guerrilla tactics was common Westmoreland constantly demanded more troops Just finding the enemy was difficult “The guerrilla wins if he does not lose, the conventional army loses if it does not win”; by definition, United States was losing.
Westmoreland & other officials had been claiming the war’s end was ""coming into view"" 2.
SDS became more militant, used violence & turned to Marxism for its ideology.
New Left lost political influence after it abandoned its original commitment to democracy and non-violence.
Draft perhaps the biggest cause for protest Small campus ""teach-ins"" in 1965 escalated to enormous public protests.
Poor were twice as likely to be drafted than the middle class who used college deferments Thousands of draft dodgers fled to Canada; others burned their draft cards 5.
It seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience in Vietnam is to end in a stalemate.
Editorials in Newsweek, Time, and Wall Street called for negotiated settlement.
Body counts of total enemy kills had been used to show the U.S. was killing far more Vietcong and Vietminh. -Body counts did not account for guerrilla war; McNamara defended them since United States was fighting a war of attrition.
Held widely viewed televised hearings in 1966-67 during which prominent commentators aired their largely antiwar views.
Public came to feel it had been lied to about the causes and ""winnability"" of the war. -Increase in antiwar ""doves"" resulted E Hawks and Doves argued over United States role 1.
An ultra-conservative organization that sought to combat what was perceived to be communist infiltration into American life.
Argued South Vietnam’s gov’t not democratic, opposed largescale bombings, chemical weapons, and killing of civilians.
Rejected the domino theory pointing out increased losses of American lives and the economic cost of the war.
Most Americans were neither hawks nor doves but disturbed by the war and protests.
Tet Offensive changed public opinion dramatically -Hawks decreased from 62% to 22% from Jan 1968 to March 1968; Doves from 22% to 42% F Democratic party challengers for 1968 nomination 1.
Johnson’s popularity dropped from 48% to 36% -McNamara’s departure rocked Johnson’s confidence of his political support.
Eugene McCarthy, liberal from Minnesota, ran an antiwar campaign in New Hampshire and nearly got 1/2 the vote -Inspired Robert Kennedy to run for president as well.
Robert Kennedy assassinated after winning California primary. -Assassin was a Palestinian named Sirhan Sirhan Assured Vice President Hubert Humphrey of the nomination. -Riot occurred in Democratic convention in Chicago between police and anti-war activists; the nation and the world watched as the riot was televised HistorySage.com APUSH Lecture Notes Page 24 Unit 15.1: 1960s 2.
Republicans nominated Richard M Nixon Nixon’s “Southern Strategy” Spiro Agnew was vice presidential running mate, aimed to appeal to Southern voters. ii.
Agnew tough on African Americans and dissidents in his state of Maryland.
Nixon committed to continuing war until enemy settled for ""honorable peace."" -Similar to Humphrey’s position 3.
Nixon a minority president with no clear mandate -Owed his victory to the divisions caused by the war and protests against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting.
Nixon and Vietnam A 1969, Nixon publicly claimed he had secret plan for ending the war -He didn’t; it continued 4 more years; cost 1000s of United States lives.
Beginning in Dec.69 the new draft method for men between ages 18 and 25.
Nixon called for gradual withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam 2.
Asians and others would now have to fight own wars without support of significant numbers of United States ground troops.
Large-scale protests continued Doves wanted an immediate withdrawal that was complete, unconditional, and irreversible.
Calley convicted of murder in his court martial & sentenced to life in prison. iii.
Calley claimed to follow direct order; sentence later lowered to 10 years iv.
Public outraged and hundreds of thousands protested By October 1969, 2 million people across the United States protested Nixon’s policies.
November 3, Nixon televised his appeal to the great ""silent majority,"" who presumably supported the war.
Aimed largely at middle class Americans who sought law and order; Nixon denounced doves and protesters One of most important political speeches of late 20th century. -Symbolized the rise of a conservative backlash against liberalism and the acrimonious divisions that resulted Politically divisive as Nixon and Agnew verbally attacked the protestors and media for not supporting gov’t policies E Negotiations 1.
Talks had begun in 1968 between US-supported Thieu gov’t and the North Vietnam-supported Vietcong.
United States troops withdraw; coalition gov’t including Vietcong should replace Thieu 2.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger began secret negotiations with North Vietnam F Cambodia 1.
April 1970, Nixon announced on TV he was sending troops into Cambodia to clear out communists who ignored Cambodian neutrality and disrupt Ho Chi Minh Trail -Invasion would be limited to 60 days.
New wave or protests over Cambodia Kent State incident Students at Kent State protested; burned the ROTC building ii.
National Guard fired into crowd killing 4 (innocent bystanders) &wounding 11.
Jackson State, May 1970 One week after Kent State, rioting in downtown Jackson prompted National Guard to be called out. ii. dead, 12 wounded; both dead were innocent bystanders.
Several hundred colleges closed down by student strikes; moderates joined radicals.
Revealed that the government had misled the Congress and the public regarding its intentions in Vietnam during the mid-1960s.
White House tried to block publication; -Supreme court overruled Nixon.
Ending the War A South Vietnam gov’t proved unable to defeat the communists B United States withdrew from Cambodia in early 1972 C Spring 1972, North Vietnam equipped with foreign tanks burst through the DMZ separating the two Vietnams.
North Vietnam dropped demand that a coalition gov’t replace Thieu in the South.
Draft agreement included a cease-fire, return of American POW’s, and United States withdrawal from Vietnam.
With election of 1972 approaching, Nixon wanted a settlement. -Kissinger announced ""peace is at hand"" 5.
Hanoi and Haiphong Dec., Nixon ordered intense bombing of North Vietnam’s major cities with the most massive bombing of the war Aimed to force N Vietnam back to the negotiating table E Paris Accords 1.
March 29, 1973, the last American combat troops left South Vietnam F Fall of South Vietnam to communists occurred in April 1975 1.
Not until1995 did United States formally recognize Vietnam (President Clinton) G Costs of the War 1. 58,000 dead Americans, 300,000 wounded; MIA -2,583 2.
A large percentage of Americans came to distrust their government H 1973, Nixon abolished the draft and established an all-volunteer army.
Evaluate the success of United States Cold War policies between 1945 and 1975 in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America.
