Most of those who study public international law do so out of a belief that international law can make the world a ""better"" place.
While there is seldom any question that it is to the advantage of a state to comply with the more ""mundane"" dimensions of international law such as the regulation of international postal or telecommunications services, it is much less obvious that it is in the best interests of a state to take international law seriously at a time of heightened danger to national security.
Through comparing the role that international law played in United States decision-making during the Crisis to the assumptions regarding the role of international law as found in the literature on the Crisis, this paper finds that international law was important to United States decisionmaking in ways much more subtle than can be understood from the perspective of the dominant paradigms pertaining to the impact of international law on foreign policy.
International lawyers attempting to demonstrate that governments should always comply with international law have referred to the importance of precedent and reciprocity,1 of reputation,2 and of legitimacy,3 but have as yet offered no fully convincing antidote to realism which assumes that power, rather than international law, is what needs to be of ultimate concern to national decision-makers.
This paper demonstrates that the question of how to show that it is in the best interests of a state to act in accordance with international law even when that does not appear to be the case is ultimately not answerable because it incorporates an ontology of international law that has meaning only within positivist legal discourse.
A theorisation of international law as ideology will be presented which can account better than existing approaches for the relationship of international law to foreign policy decision-making and from which practical suggestions can be drawn as to how international law can best be reconciled with considerations of national security.
The Existing Literature US reconnaissance photography first provided evidence of the Soviet deployment of medium range ballistic missiles in Cuba on 16 October 1962.
President Kennedy, Vice-President Lyndon Johnson; Dean Rusk, Secretary of State; George Ball, Under Secretary of State; Llewellyn Thompson, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union; Aldai Stevenson, US representative to the UN; Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defence; Theodore Sorensen, Kennedy's personal assistant; McGeorge Bundy, National Security Adviser; Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury; and Robert Kennedy, President Kennedy's brother and Attorney General.
Elizabeth Kohn has suggested that Excomm was important mosdy for its role in reinforcing and validating decisions reached by President Kennedy outside Excomm.
She notes that military planning for a blockade had begun as early as October 1, 1962, well before the Excomm had been convened.
Widely regarded as one of the most serious incidents of the Cold War,7 the CMC has given rise to a vast literature,8 both during the Cold War and as part of the ""new Cold War historiography"" that emerged in the post Cold War decade.
A considerable amount of the writing on the CMC has focused on United States crisis decision-making.
While most of the literature on the Crisis has not had as its objective furthering theoretical understanding of the role played by international law in foreign policy decision-making, each empirical study is nevertheless underpinned by certain assumptions regarding the political utility of international law.
Re-assessing the validity of the empirical literature by comparing the place it accords international law against the historical record, as can be found in the transcription of tapes of US decision-making,10 is thus also a way of reassessing the validity of alternative theoretical approaches to the relationship of international law to foreign policy.
Copies of the memorandum were sent to President Kennedy and Secretary of State, Dean Rusk.
Despite planning and decisions made pre-Excomm, examination of this body's decision making during the actual crisis period when real evidence for the deployment of Russian missiles to Cuba was found serves as an important primary source on internal debates involving international law and national security issues.
The deal to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba involved a quid pro quo by which the Americans would remove their missiles from Turkey.
The Turkey missiles had been deployed under Eisenhower as part of a NATO protection promise.
Those claiming the legal validity of the quarantine have emphasised that the quarantine was a new legal development for the nuclear age and a legitimate use of force as broadly construed; some have considered it a legitimate act of self-defence.
Those disputing its legality have generally maintained that there is no such thing as a ""quarantine"" in international law and that what die United States referred to as a ""quarantine"" was really a belligerent blockade and hence an illegitimate use of force that contravened the freedom of the high seas; diese writers do not consider the threat to the United States to have been significant enough to warrant invoking a claim of self defence.
The literature assessing the legality of the quarantine does not try to explain the relationship of international law to state behaviour but focuses on assessing United States actions in terms of a legalillegal categorisation of behaviour.
This reflects the outlook of legal positivism, which, assuming that international law does have a positive role to play in world affairs and that decision-makers should decide in accordance widi international law, specifically excludes political considerations from its analysis.
Some international lawyers have sought to go beyond a positivist analysis of the United States actions and have consciously adopted a ""functionalist"" approach to investigate the contribution of international law to the resolution of the Crisis.
This literature can be situated within a broader functionalist literature on international law.
The best known and most sophisticated of the functionalist literature is that by the New Haven School.
In die best-known of diese works, Abram Chayes referred to law as having been a constraint on action, and a basis of justification or legitimation for action, as well as having provided organisational structures, procedures and forums.
He suggested that it was because Article 2 of the UN Charter prohibits the use of force diat United States decision-makers rejected an air strike or invasion option for the ""lesser"" measure of quarantine.
Although the functionalist literature on die Crisis has explicitly addressed die question of the political role played by international law, it has not rejected the positivist tradition as evidenced by its acceptance of the possibility of an objective determination of the legality of state action.
In ascertaining whedier international law had served as a constraint on action, for example, Chayes reasoned, diat ""f die conduct complies ..., there is at least a prima facie argument that the norm operated in its intended sense.
The Continuing Relevance of the Legal Adviser and International Law, 2 Chinese JIL , 424.
Some ""revisionists"" interpret the crisis as irresponsible, that Kennedy risked war for domestic political gain, and that the good outcome was just luck.
Other writers have referred to international law but done so in such a way as to down-play its influence.
Allison, for example, suggested that the blockade was euphemistically called a ""quarantine"" in order to circumvent the ""niceties"" of international law.
According to James Nathan, Cuba epitomized the decline of international law in the face of threats to the national interest.
No matter whether international law is not mentioned, or whether it is referred to in order to be dismissed as an important ingredient of United States policy or the Crisis outcome, this body of literature reflects a realist understanding of the relationship of international law to the behaviour of states.
Realism, which has been the dominant paradigm in the study of International Relations since World War Two, regards power as the ultimate determinant of foreign policy and political outcomes.
This study was re-published in 1999 with several updates, taking into account the criticisms of the book over the last 25 years, and in light of the greater availability of primary documents.
The three basic models in the original study remain albeit with further elaboration, clarification, and re-evaluation in light of criticisms.
Realist authors on the CMC have assumed that the task for US decision-makers was primarily that of determining how best to pursue the American national interest.
At its most extreme, realism deems international law irrelevant; a state should comply only where the behaviour required of the state by international law corresponds with what would in any case be in the power interests of the state.
The findings of such an analysis can be expected to reflect not only on the empirical literature of United States decision-making and crisis manoeuvring but on the utility of the theoretical perspectives on the relationship between international law and foreign policy which underpin these existing accounts.
It appears that, there having been a number of reports of short-range missile deployment in Cuba, President Kennedy was in mid August 1962 considering warning the USSR against installing long-range missiles.
In preparation for doing so he sought legal advice as to whether the United States could, as a matter of international law, take action to prevent long-range missiles from being installed in Cuba.
A memo by Norbert Schlei, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel , emphasised that ""[international law relating to the use of force centres about the polar concepts of aggression and self-defense"".31 The use of force as an act of aggression is categorically illegal.
A state may, though, in certain circumstances, use force in self-defence.
Where resort is made to self-defence as justification for action, the action used must be proportional to the threat.
Legality under International Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union, in Chayes, Ibid., 108.
Schlei stressed that the level of threat would need to be much less strong were self-defence to be collective rather than unilateral.
Both the UN and OAS Charters embodied provisions for collective security.
Action proposed in the Security Council was subject to veto by any one of the five permanent members so Schlei advocated justification of the US position via the Organ of Consultation in the Organization of American States in a manner commensurate with the UN Charter.
Copies of the memorandum were passed to various people in the government, including Dean Rusk, Secretary of State and later to be a member of Excomm.
No option was dismissed during the early stages of deliberation although diplomatic consultation was regarded as least desirable.
Rusk emphasized that the United States needed to appear to be strong in the face of this challenge.
Were the United States to be seen to be ignoring or down playing the threat the Soviet hand would be free to intervene in other parts of Latin America and weaken the inter-American alliance as well as jeopardise odner international interests and the general strength of the Western Hemisphere.
Excomm members initially favoured an air strike although there were differences of opinion as to whether it should be broad or limited.
If there were to be an air strike Kennedy favoured a direct strike rather than what he considered to be the more hazardous option of a broad strike.
Legality under International Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union, in Chayes, Ibid, at 108.
Article 51 permits collective self-defence only in the event of an armed attack.
It was around this time that evidence for t h e deployment of medium-range ballistic missiles had been uncovered a n d displayed.
President Kennedy did not seem keen on an invasion because United States allies might perceive it as resulting from ""... a fixation Untied States and not a serious military threat."".39 A blockade was also considered, but while this might stop more missiles coming into Cuba it would not eliminate, nor give the Soviet Union any incentive to remove, those already in place.
Reference was made to die law pertaining to blockades although understanding appears to have been very cloudy at this stage.
Dean Rusk also favoured a blockade; he believed that it could be announced by a ""straight declaration of war"" which would bring ""certain legal advantages"" .42 Llewellyn Thompson, recendy returned United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, also favoured the blockade option.
By Friday 19 October 1962 Excomm members were thus choosing between air strikes and a blockade.
In strategic terms, air strikes could neutralise the chance of danger to die United States of missiles being used but most Excomm members favoured a blockade, despite the possibility of it being disliked by some the risk of retaliation by Cuba and Russia.
While not infallible it was the most secure legal position of the alternative actions available.
A blockade was regarded as an act of war under customary international law.
Members of Excomm wanted the United States to board but did not wish to instigate an act of war; they were eager to use, and to be seen to be using, minimum force.
The defensive quarantine, a hybrid of the two blockade types, was designed to permit the United States to take action without it being characterised as an act of war.
It is unclear as to exactly when President Kennedy began to favour the quarantine over the air strike option, but the clarification of the law regarding a blockade does appear to have helped crystallise a solution.
The defensive quarantine was to be justified to the USSR and the broader world community as a new legal development for the nuclear age.
Given that nuclear brinkmanship had not historically been the concern of international law, new legal developments were necessary to fill the gap.
And so, despite reservations as to how strong it would appear in the eyes of the ""free world"" and domestic constituency as well as reservations on the part of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and some Pentagon officials as to its strategic value,52 Excomm members came gradually to the consensus view that the quarantine action would be used as the first option.
While this argument was not explicitly detailed in the transcripts or the Editors additions it was this legal justification that was presented to the Excomm and to the world.
Articles 6 of the Rio Treaty provided for collective action against aggression that is not armed attack.
Article 3 of the Rio Treaty provides for collection action in the case of armed attack.
Legality under International Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union, in Chayes, above5, at 110.
United States officials did not seek to prevent the matter being discussed in the UN Security Council and instead, as will be seen, sought to ensure that the forum was used to full advantage to argue their case.
More ships from the Soviet Union were nonetheless still heading to Cuba.
That night the United States Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, asked U Thant to send a private message of concern to Khrushchev, requesting him to hold his ships away from Cuban waters while efforts were made to reach a negotiated outcome.
US decision-makers did not want the case brought to the UN by the Soviet Union since this might give the impression that the United States was the aggressor.
The United States went on to introduce a resolution based on article 40 calling ""for immediate dismantling and withdrawal from Cuba of all missiles and other offensive weapons and the dispatch to Cuba of a United Nations observer corps to assure and report on so Keith Eubank, The Missile Crisis in Cuba , 65.
This condemned American action, calling for an end to the quarantine measures and to ""interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of Cuba"".67 Stevenson addressed the Council and accused the Soviet Union of creating a threat to international peace and security by secredy installing weapons in Cuba.
On 26 October, one day after what was a heated debate in the Security Council, the quarantine threat was tested for the first time as more ships headed to the quarantine line.
United States personnel boarded the ship Marucla, which was found to contain various cargo but no missiles, and was subsequently allowed to proceed to Cuba.
The seriousness of United States intentions to enforce die quarantine had been demonstrated.
The following day a second letter arrived from Khrushchev which was markedly less conciliatory than the first, demanding as quid pro quo for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba the removal of American missiles from Turkey.
Since the Joint Chiefs of Staff were pressing for a strike and invasion within 48 hours, Kennedy convened a smaller group of the Excomm to discuss in more detail the issue of the missile swap, an idea that had earlier been raised in Excomm but which had not been explored in much detail.
Thompson hypothesised that the changed tone of the second letter represented the pressure of those inside the Soviet Government pressing on Khrushchev for a more forceful tone.
Dobrynin's account seems to back this hypothesis, noting that Khrushchev anticipated an American air strike on missile sites in Cuba and was fearful of complicating any setdement by insisting that the United States remove Jupiter missiles in Cuba.
It was only after pressure from Presidium members that Khrushchev sent the second, more demanding letter, calling for the removal of United States missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy's letter to Khrushchev on 27 October made no mention of the missile swap and only pledged not to invade Cuba on the condition that the missiles in Cuba be dismanded and rendered inoperable under a scheme of UN observation and supervision.
In addition, this group audiorised Robert Kennedy to tell Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the US, that the missiles in Turkey would be removed but required that the deal would be kept secret so that it would appear as if they were being removed for factors other than those related to die Cuban crisis.
The next day Dobrynin informed Robert Kennedy of Khrushchev's intention to accept the deal for the missile swap and the dismantling of rocket bases in Cuba under international control.
On Sunday 28 October the ship Grozny, en route to the interception area, stopped.
Khrushchev issued a message announcing that die Soviet government would dismande and remove its missiles from Cuba and was willing to assist the acting SecretaryGeneral and representatives of the Soviet Union, die United States and the Cuban Republic in the dismantling and surveillance of the missiles.
This smaller group consisted of Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy, George Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Llewellyn Thompson, Theodore Sorensen, and McGeorge Bundy.
Letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev, October 27 1962, The Kennedy Tapes, at 603604.
In the event the private deal was rejected President Kennedy had resolved to make a public overture in favour of such a trade to resolve the crisis.
It should be noted that while the dangerous period of the crisis had ended there were several months of negotiation regarding the details for UN supervision, the schedule for removing the missiles etc that had to be worked out.
This phase simply worked out the details (albeit in a long and drawn out process) of the accepted agreement, which concluded the period of tensions that had gripped much of the world for 13 days.
Perhaps most clear, is the inadequacy of the realist assumption that international law did not have a role to play in US decision-making or implementation.
An examination of the historical evidence has revealed that what can broadly be classified as realist writers are missing an important consideration in virtually ignoring international law; decision-makers did take legal factors into consideration alongside questions of realpolitik and public opinion.
Excomm members were not prepared to do anything that was categorically illegal but were prepared to take a strategically less decisive action for which some relatively plausible legal justification could be found.
The legality or otherwise of the quarantine does not appear to have been a decisive factor in the outcome of the Crisis, as evidenced by the very fact that opinions on the question have differed.
Positivists assume that states should comply with international law and yet even the term ""compliance"" is of tangential relevance to a scenario in which the United States invented its own legal term by which to describe its chosen course of action.
The United States used international law as part of its approach to the Crisis and yet was able to achieve its policy objective of having the USSR remove the missiles despite its fairly spurious legal position.
Functionalist writing has usefully taken us beyond the positivist-realist, politics-law, divide to illustrate the inter-relationship between international law and politics and appears to be correct in its view that international law played a constructive role in the outcome of the Crisis.
And yet, in not eschewing positivism, functionalism cannot explain how it is that international law can be used strategically by a state.
Functionalists still assume a division into legal or illegal behaviour and in this scenario were looking at the overall resolution of the crisis rather than at the capacity of the United States to achieve its policy goal of having the USSR remove the missiles from Cuba.
What has been highlighted by an examination of the historical evidence is that the question with which advocates of international law have long been grappling—that of how to demonstrate that a state should act in accordance with international law even when the national interest is under threat—may not in fact be the most appropriate question to ask.
This suggests the need to reconcile theoretically power and international law so as to provide a basis on which to account better for the role that international law does, at least sometimes, play in the formulation and implementation of foreign policy.
This would accord with one of the conclusions of John Lewis Gaddis who, when ""rethinking Cold War history"", concluded that ""old Cold War history"" had not sufficiendy appreciated the diversification of power during the Cold War.
Reconciling international law with power requires rethinking the ontology of international law integral to legal positivism.
The image of international law conveyed by existing theoretical approaches did not hold up when measured against the case study in question.
Realists, positivists and functionalists assume a body of law that can dictate appropriate foreign policy.
But an examination of the historical record has demonstrated that international law did not of itself provide the ""solution"" to die United States foreign policy dilemma of how to respond to the deployment of missiles on Cuba, a solution with which the United States could either comply or not.
Indeed, it was not even preordained as to which rules and principles of international law were to be of most relevance to the decision, and, as evidenced by the subsequent body of positivist analysis, die chosen policy course was neither unequivocally legal, nor illegal.
The indeterminacy of international law rhetoric, illustrated in the CMC by the unresolved difference of opinion as to the legality of the quarantine, is something that has been stressed by the ""critical"" movement in international legal dieory.
More recent than most of the literature on the Crisis, the writings of critical theorists of international law can be understood in terms of their having pointed to a discrepancy between the image of international law integral to positivist legal discourse and political reality.
And yet, despite their political awareness, critical theorists have not explained the significance—in political terms—of the discrepancy.
International Law as Ideology In acknowledging the need to perceive of United States Cold War power in multidimensional terms, Gaddis did not go so far as to suggest that international law be taken into consideration in our understanding of the nature of power but suggested that the USSR was weaker than its rival superpower in terms of economic, ideological, cultural, and moral power.
His reference to ideology as a form of power does, however, accord with a theoretical approach to the relationship of international law to world politics which posits that there is an ""ideology of international law"" integral to the international political order.
A theorisation of international law as ideology is able to reconcile power and international law by building on the fundamental assertion of ideology theorists that there is an ideology, in the sense of a particular principle or small group of inter-related principles, integral to every structure of socio-political power.
It is not that these principles are ""wrong"" or ""bad"" as is sometimes implied by die term ""ideology"", but rather diat none is wholly true.
Concerning the diird principle above, it was not clear-cut as to whether the quarantine was legal or illegal.
It is hypothesised that the discrepancy between the image of international law as conveyed by the ideology of international law, and ""reality"" provides a guide as to how the system of international law plays an integral role in world politics.
An ideology upholds a structure of power relations so long as the component principles of the ideology are, in turn, upheld by members of that power structure.
It is therefore a requirement of members of die system of world politics that they uphold the constituent principles of the ideology of international law by assuming the verity of the principles when engaging in discourse with each other.
A state will, for example, virtually always present its own position as legal and that of another state widi which it is in conflict, as not legal.
This reinforces the assumption diat international law can clearly distinguish between legal and illegal behaviour as well as the principle that a state must comply with its international law obligations.
The trick is that it is easier to uphold the ideology in explaining some actions dian others.
In diose areas where the law is clear and/or appears readily to support one's desired course of actions it is relatively easy.
But where the law is not so clear or where it is clear but does not support one's desired actions it may be more difficult.
Even here, however, a state may be able to justify a course of action in terms that uphold the ideology.
There may, for example, be alternative principles, rules, and norms on which a legal adviser This usage of the term ""ideology"" is distinct from that which suggests that an idea that constitutes an ideology is necessarily ""false"" or evil, an assumption found particularly in the writing of those ideology theorists influenced by Marx.
An ideology is upheld weakly where the difference between the ideology and reality can be readily recognised through, for example, actions of a state that contradict its rhetoric.
A theorisation of international law as ideology thus moves us beyond the ""all or nothing"" approaches of realism and positivism; it accepts the interrelationship between international law and politics as has been acknowledged by functionalist authors and endeavours to explain the political significance of the discrepancy between the image and reality of international law that has been identified by critical theorists.
A theorisation of international law as ideology locates the source of the power of international law in a small set of ideas about the nature of international law.
Beyond the basic obligation on member states to uphold the ideology, states may use the ideology of international law as a source of power that they can draw on to further their political objectives; it would be expected that, in a dispute, states would compete to uphold the ideology most strongly.
International law as ideology and United States policy-making and implementation during the CMC Situated as it is within a ""post-positivist"" paradigm, a theorisation of international law as ideology cannot be ""proven';86 ultimately it can only be assessed according to whether or not it offers a better explanation of phenomena and events than do other theoretical approaches.
According to a theorisation of international law as ideology, a state is able to use international law to its political advantage because a small set of ideas about international law—which has been referred to as an ideology—is a source of power in world politics.
We would thus expect the United States to have taken international law into consideration during the process of policy formation.
As we have seen, Excomm members did, in fact, attempt to reconcile international law with other policy considerations.
In canvassing five possible means by which to have the USSR remove the existing missiles, Excomm members took account of the likely perceptions of its allies and of the USSR, as well as the degree of military risk associated with each, and considerations of legal advantage.
While a functionalist might point to the fact that international law is taken into consideration during the process of policy formation, and a positivist believes that, even if it is not, it should be; a theorisation of international law goes further to point to the distinction between compliance and upholding the ideology of international law.
The role of international law in the Excomm deliberations was not one of working out how to act legally or to comply best with international law.
This is particularly important to our understanding of the relationship between international law and foreign policy for it may be possible to uphold the ideology more strongly than one's rivals despite being in the ""weaker"" legal position and vice versa.
A theorisation of international law as ideology would suggest that, during the resolution of a crisis, each side would do well to seek to draw more strongly than its rival on the power of the ideology of international law, while at the same time recognising the discrepancy between the component principles of the ideology and reality and using that to its advantage.
In order to assume the possibility of distinguishing between legal and illegal behaviour a state will seek to establish a binary distinction between its own actions and those of the other state.
This was problematic for the United States during the CMC since, as Abram Chayes has acknowledged, the dilemma faced by the United States was that the Soviet action in deploying the missiles ""wasn 't illegal "" 87 Hence the United States never overtly accused the Soviet Union of illegal action.
Rather, the United States stressed the legality of its own actions under the Rio Treaty and contrasted them with the Soviet actions that threatened the ""peace and security"" of the hemisphere.
The United States thereby implied the illegality of Soviet actions, assuming a dichotomy between legality and illegality.
Soviet statements, at least initially, claimed that the ""actual blockade of Cuba by the United States""88 was illegal.
Khrushchev referred to the actions of the United States government as ""piratical"" in other correspondence as well.
Several statements of die USSR did, however, suggest a discrepancy between the ideology and reality.
Referring to the assertion of die United States that die missiles in Cuba were ""offensive"" weapons, for example, Khrushchev maintained that the missiles were of a defensive nature.
But, radier dian draw more strongly dian die United States on the ideology of international law, Khrushchev went on to argue against the possibility of categorically distinguishing offensive from defensive capability.
This is all the more surprising given that Khrushchev understood that Soviet actions in Cuba had ""no less grounds"" than die US weapons in Turkey.
In trying to counter United States accusations in the Security Council debate, Zorin failed to present an affirmative defense of the Soviet position either by pointing to its own legality or to the illegality of United States action.
Rather dian draw on the ideology of international law more strongly than die US, he chose to question the authenticity of United States photographic evidence.
In doing so Zorin suggested a discrepancy between the ideology the USSR had appealed to in the defense of its position on other occasions, and the stark reality present in the Security Council chamber which seemed to contradict such arguments.
Similarly, in his first letter to Kennedy, Khrushchev claimed that the United States was ""attempting to legislate in questions of international law"".96 The idea that it might be possible Thant, 26 October 1962, UN Press Release SG/1357.
The Soviet statements can thus be regarded as upholding less strongly than the US the ideology of international law by suggesting a potential discrepancy between the image and reality of international law.
A theorisation of international law as ideology hypothesises that it will be in the interests of the state if it not only upholds the ideology as strongly as possible but also recognises the discrepancy between the ideology and reality and uses that to its advantage.
In this case, existing international law did not obviously support the sort of action coming to be favoured by Excomm.
US legal officers thus recognised that, despite the image of international law as stable and in existence ahead of policy choices, international law necessarily evolves in tandem with political processes.
They therefore formulated ""quarantine"" as a new term of international law97 and drew on it to strengthen the purported legality of the United States position.
Once the term ""defensive quarantine"" had been introduced into the deliberations, the United States was in a position to engage in rhetoric which assumed the obligation to comply with international law while acting in a manner quite close to that apparently dictated by the requirements of international law.
There was thus no obvious discrepancy between the assumptions on which United States actions were to be based and reality.
When speaking publicly Kennedy did not suggest that the new term was something that the United States had just made up but, to the extent that the United States recognized the quarantine as a new term, justified it by reference to another principle in the ideology, that of the universality of international law.
The quarantine was explained as being a necessary development for the nuclear age.
The United States thus gave no indication of not believing in the principles that constitute the ideology.
The USSR, on the other hand, protested the new term as ""made up"" thereby, somewhat ironically, demonstrating the discrepancy between the ideology and reality.
The fact that Khrushchev went on to use the term ""quarantine"" in his correspondence with Kennedy,100 demonstrated acceptance and hence added legitimacy to the United States actions.
In reality of course, those charged with the responsibility of implementing the quarantine knew very well that the maneuver they were undertaking was that of the traditional naval blockade.
See comments by Admiral George W Anderson, Jr., in Eubank, above60, at 66.
The United States was able to set up a situation such that, if the USSR did not act as the United States wanted it to—to remove the missiles—the United States could in turn act in its policy interests—with military force—while continuing to uphold the ideology more strongly than the USSR.101 The strategy also allowed the United States to present its actions as a reasonable, proportionate response which left open to Khrushchev the option of negotiating an end to the crisis.
Skilful use of legal rhetoric was thus not a factor separate from US military power in the resolution of the Crisis, but an integral component of its crisis strategy.
The United States had taken the legal initiative, presenting an argument which upheld the ideology and which placed the USSR on the defensive in terms of the rhetoric of international law.
Where the USSR tried to point to United States tactics it came close to indicating the discrepancy between the image of international law and political reality, thereby making a much weaker reference to the ideology.
International law does not necessarily prescribe a binary choice of action to national decision-makers but a theorisation of international law as ideology suggests that a state may well benefit from referring to its own actions or those of a state with which it is in dispute as if international law does do so.
In the case of the CMC it was not going to be easy for United States legal advisers and decision-makers to set up the requisite binary distinction because the USSR had not done anything that was unequivocally ""illegal"" in establishing a missile base in Cuba.
US legal advisers and Excomm members were nevertheless able to describe Letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy, 24 October, The Kennedy Tapes, at 390.
It is unclear whether the next United States move would have been a military response, or whether other strategies on a scale of escalating behaviour leading up to military responses would have been employed.
Excomm debates indicate that, should the first round threat of quarantine action fail, action could be stepped up to embargoes on petrol, oils, and lubricants, before launching air strikes at a later time.
See comments by President Kennedy, Monday, 22 October, 8pm Cabinet room meeting, The Kennedy Tapes, at 257.
Whatever the reality of the next response, the effectiveness of this strategy relied on the perception of threatened military forcepresented as consistent with the ideology of international law—that might eventuate should the Russians fail to move towards removal of missiles from Cuba.
The skill with which US legal advisers facilitated die United States reconciling its political and strategic interests widi die desirability of upholding as strongly as possible die ideology of international law may well have been an important ingredient in die United States success.
The Role of the Judiciary, 1; Mireille Delmas-Marty, Present-day China and the Rule of Law: Progress and Resistance, 11.
Chimni, Third World Approaches to International Law and Individual Responsibility in Internal Conflicts, 77.
Its Historical Genesis and Influence on Contemporary International Law, 105; John Shijian Mo, Settlement of Trade Disputes between Mainland China and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan within the WTO, 145; Erie Jaivorski, ""Military Necessity"" and ""Civilian Immunity"": Where is the Balance?, 175.
Amin M Husain, Who Is the Legitimate Representative of the Palestinian People?, 207; Roda Mushkat, Potential Impacts of China's WTO Accession on its Approach to the Trade-Environment Balancing Act, 227; Chun-Hung Un, International Influences and the Transformation of the Telecommunication Regulations in Taiwan, 267.
Jergensen, Spotlight on the Work of the Internationa] Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in 2002, 365.
HUANG Jin & DU Huanfang, Private International Law in the Chinese Judicial Practice in 2001, 387.
A Critical Appraisal under International Standards of Internal Movement and Residence, 519.
LING Yan, The Work of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 2002, 655.
