WELCH The actions of the Soviet Union, Cuba, and the United States in October 1962 brought those nations to the verge of military conflict.
What was not known then, and is not fully recognized today, was how close the world came to the brink of nuclear disaster.
The missile crisis was a dramatic demonstration of human fallibility, of the degree to which political and military leaders are so often captives of misinformation, misjudgment, miscalculation.
In our daily lives, mistakes are costly, but we try to learn from them.
In conventional war, mistakes cost lives, sometimes thousands of lives.
But if mistakes were to affect decisions relating to nuclear forces, they will result in the destruction of nations.
The authors wish to acknowledge the helpful comments of Peter Feaver, Nancy Gallagher, Thomas Graham, Richard Ned Lebow, Scott Sagan, and Melissa Williams, as well as the generous support of the Rockefeller Foundation.
There is a broad and deep consensus among policymakers in most capitals of the world that resisting the spread of nuclear weapons is a goal worthy of considerable time, effort, and money.
While a few states are actively seeking a nuclear capability of their own, none advocates as a matter of policy a general diffusion of nuclear technology and weaponry around the globe.
The essence of these arguments is that when adversaries have reliable and survivable nuclear arsenals large enough to establish a condition of mutual assured destruction, they would be deterred from initiating wars against each other.
At first glance, the history of the nuclear age seems to bear out this logic.
John Lewis Gaddis notes that not a single crisis in SovietAmerican relations since the end of the Second W orId War led to war between the superpowers; he strongly suggests that nuclear deterrence is responsible for this remarkable fact.
These include Iran, 1946; Greece, 1947; Berlin and Czechoslovakia, 1948; Korea, 1950; the East Berlin riots, 1953; the Hungarian uprising, 1956; Berlin again, 1958-59; the V-2 incident, 1960; Berlin again, 1961; the Cuban missile crisis, 1962; Czechoslovakia again, 1968; the Yom Kippur War, 1973; Afghanistan, 1979; Poland, 1981; and the Korean airliner incident, 1983.
Elements of Stabilit.¥ in the Postwar International System,"" International Security 10, no. (spring 1986): 121.
What proliferation pessimists cannot do is point to historical examples of nuclear wars to demonstrate that their concerns are well-founded.
In this paper we seek to provide historical justification for the proliferation pessimists' case.
Relatively few critics have challenged the optimists purely at the theoretical level or on methodological grounds.
Criticisms of rational deterrence theory that challenge its axioms, assumptions, inferences, hypotheses, and ""tests"" serve only to buttress the pessimists' case.
We do not consider these abstract theoretical issues directly in this paper; we are persuaded, however, by the analysis of Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, who conclude that ""assumptions as the rational decision maker, perfect information, and a politically neutral environment are idealizations that lack any empirical referent.
Scholars of the Cuban missile crisis have benefited enormously in the past few years from the declassification ofs. documents and the opportunities for dialogue with Soviets which began with Mikhail Gorbachev'spolicy of glasnost.
In our own research program we have made use of a method we call ""critical oral history,"" in which scholars and policymakers engage each other (and the new docu814 SECURITY STUDIES 4, no . 4 fact that a wide variety of considerations may conspire to defeat the optimists' confidence in a single encounter should cause us considerable alarm, for it suggests that the amelioration, or even the elimination, of anyone of the pessimists' concerns (or any small number of them) in real world cases cannot provide an adequate measure of safety against nuclear danger.
Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev were not willing to place their faith in nuclear deterrence and did not attempt to practice it in order to force a favorable resolution to the crisis.
We suggest that the Cuban missile crisis represents a ""critical case"" for proliferation optimists, and that if the pessimists have the better of the argument here, their contentions are all the more compelling with respect to other cases.
We suggest that the perils pessimists identify generally are not foreseeable, avoidable, or susceptible to technical fixes, and that the primarily lesson of the Cuban missile crisis for new and aspiring nuclear states, therefore, is that nuclear weapons jeopard9 ize, rather than enhance, their national security.
We begin by outlining the major arguments suggesting that proliferation optimism is unfounded.
We then use recent analyses of the Cuban missile crisis to illustrate each of these arguments.
Finally, we discuss some of the implications of our discussion for new and aspiring nuclear states. mental in a series of conferences.
Political leaders, senior military officers , and academics in Third World states that possess or are seeking nuclear capabilities often point to the Cuban missile crisis as an example of successful deterrence and a demonstration of the value of possessing nuclear weapons.
We aim to show that this is an inaccurate and dangerous interpretation of the event.
Under certain circumstances, they acknowledge, proliferation could intensify conflict or endanger peace and security.l0 In particular, optimists acknowledge that for nuclear proliferation to have beneficial effects, the spread of nuclear weapons must be managed so as to avoid provoking preventive wars by potential proliferants' adversaries; proliferants must acquire invulnerable second-strike nuclear forces; they must adopt late-use doctrines; and their arsenals must be secure from accidental or unauthorized use.
In order for nuclear weapons to have the desired deterrent effect, leaders must value the survival of their nations or regimes above all else, and must make decisions on the basis of the prospective costs and benefits of the op12 tions available to them.
There is considerable ambiguity in the scholarly literature on whether ""rational"" deterrence theory assumes substantive rationality, procedural rationality, and/or instrumental rationality.
These are logically independent notions, although the latter two may be correlated empirically.
There are many reasons to doubt that the transition to a world of stable deterrent relationships is likely to be smooth and peaceful.
It is highly unlikely, for example, that two adversaries will acquire nuclear capabilities on the same timetable; and under certain circumstances this might generate powerful incentives for a state facing a rising nuclear 14 challenger to wage preventive war.
We also do not address directly arguments which suggest that emerging nuclear states are unlikely to acquire safe, robust, and invulnerable nuclear arsenals owing to constraints on their expertise and financial resources.
These are serious concerns, but there are grounds to worry about the safety and robustness of nuclear arsenals even in countries not thus constrained.
Indeed, the Cuban missile crisis illustrates the weaknesses of the proliferation optimists' position.
In October 1962 the relevant actors did not face significant resource constraints and possessed what at the time were state-of-the-art nuclear arsenals.
We briefly survey each of these arguments before turning to the Cuban missile crisis for illustrations of each.
THE ESCALATORY PROCLMTIES OF GOVERNMENTAL UNITS Typically, proliferation optimists abstract away from the inner workings of states and governments and treat them as unitary rational actors for the purpose of explaining and predicting their behavior.
According to Bruce Blair, the Soviet Union contemplated a preventive war against the People's Republic of China in 1969 remarkably, despite the fact that Cliina had nuclear weapons at the time.
While proliferation optimists regard such topics as largely epiphenomenal and 1 uninteresting, organizational pathologies and dilemmas can lead states to behave in ways not predicted by rational deterrence theory.
When we ""look under the hood"" and examine the organizational determinants of state action, things look much less tidy and predictable than the optimists assume.
Organizational critiques of proliferation optimism make four crucial points.
First, military and civilian leaders often have different interests, preferences, risk propensities, and attitudes toward the use of force.
Military leaders are not necessarily more willing than civilian leaders to use force in pursuit of the state's foreign policy objectives indeed, there is evidence to suggest that on balance they are less inclined than civilians to use force, although they are inclined to use higher levels of force once a decision to use force has been made.
IS There are reasons to believe, however, that soldiers and politicians see the world and ap15.
Second, civilian and military leaders must attempt to satisfy a number of competing values and manage a number of important trade-offs.
Exactly how they do so will affect the nature and the degree of nuclear danger in any given circumstance.
Organizational variables, therefore, may influence the relative likelihood of accidental or inadvertent wars on the one hand, and deliberate escalation on the other.
Third, complex systems such as military organizations are vulnerable to a variety of failures and breakdowns notwithstanding elaborate efforts to build in redundancies and fail-safe mechanisms, and to inculcate an ethos of reliability and safety in military personnel.
Like most of the other members of the junta, his education had been narrowly technical, his professional experiences entirely within his own branch of the service, and his political horizon limited to Latin America.
The junta as a body was poorly equipped to understand the differences between the political systems of Argentina and Britain or to 'put itself in the position of its adversary in order to see the world through his eyes.
Arguably, countries with unstable civil-military relations may be expected to have nuclear arsenals rather more accident-prone than others because of professional military preferences for readiness over safety.
Nuclear accidents are particulary dangerous in times of an acute international crisis, when opposing forces may be tightly coupled and when accidents could lead to serious misjudgments about adversaries' actions and intentions.
Moreover, the dangers of such accidents may rise abruptly in a crisis because of the premium on rru'1'rtary rea diness ness im sueh a context.
Finally, the complexity of modern military organizations makes it unlikely that leaders will even be aware of let alone control the behavior of all of the units and individuals under their nominal authority.
This may encourage blind adherence to routines, or lead to the breakdown of routines either of which can jeopardize successful crisis management.
Organizational complexity constitutes a constraint on rational action because it generates ""noise"" and results in behavior of which national leaders may be unaware, which they cannot control, and which they do not intend.
LIMITATIONS OF HUMAN PERCEPTION AND COGNITION Psychologists have identified a number of factors that make it difficult for national leaders to gauge threats accurately, to determine when deterrent policies will be appropriate and when they will be counterproductive, to communicate deterrent threats clearly, to interpret deterrent threats and the actions of adversaries correctly, and to calculate costs and benefits in the manner required by rational deterrence theory.
Significant reductions in the dangers associated with the handling of nuclear weapons and the design of nuclear weapons and procedures may depend lieavily upon organizational learning over time.
New proliferants, of course, will have little or no opportunity to learn from experience in the short run.
There are reasons to fear that they can conspire to defeat deterrence even in what proliferation optimists would regard as stable deterrent relationships.
Psychologists call ""cold"" cognitive errors of this kind ""unmotivated biases,"" and most people exhibit them much of the time.
Misperceptions and misjudgments may also reflect motivated biases that is, errors triggered by decisional dilemmas that generate psychological stress.
Psychologists have paid careful attention to the performance of decisionmakers under stress, generally finding that while moderate levels of stress may enhance performance in the short run, prolonged or intense stress signifi27 cantly magnifies errors.
More recently, psychologists and economists have begun to explore the effects of motivation on decision making.
For example, people motivated by a concern for justice as they perceive it exhibit a variety of behaviors that appear pathological from a rational-actor perspective.
In particular, actors motivated by a sense of justice value goods that they conceive as entitlements more highly than their strategic or economic worth warrants.
They also accept poor gambles to restore the balance between their perceived entitlements and their assets; they exhibit insensitivity to new information and value trade-offs, and are less amenable to negotiation and persuasion through the application of carrots and sticks; they are more likely to exhibit cognitive errors because of the affective potency of the justice motive and its simplifying effect on cognitive structures; and they are less willing to compromise in finding 3o solutions to disputes.
Actors motivated by the perceived demands of justice are accordingly more difficult to deter.
Finally, the assumptions of rational deterrence theory have been undermined by psychological experiments demonstrating that people routinely violate the necessary assumptions of rational choice.
The justice motive may be especially salient in territorial conflicts, a fact that should cause particular alarm in view of the many territorial disputes between recent and likely future proliferants.
Diehl and Goertz demonstrate that conflicts involving transfers of home territory are significantly more violent than conflicts involving transfers of other territories, a finding rendered intelligible by the observation that leaders conceive ""home"" territory in terms of entitlements.
Changes in value, rather than final assets, are criti32 cal to peoples' calculations.
Prospect theory renders intelligible behavior such as people's willingness to take poor gambles to avoid losses, and escalating commitments to losing courses of action, neither of which is rational in a classical sense.
Nevertheless, there are certain situations in which even a fully rational decisionmaker would challenge a commitment in the face of a clear and credible deterrent threat.
Proliferation optimists generally dismiss or are insensitive to this possibility.
Deterrence can fail to dissuade a rational challenger in three different ways.
First, strategically-clever rational challengers may ""design around"" a deterrent threat, confront deterrers with faits accomplis, and 33 take bold gambles if they believe they can control the risks.
Second, a challenge may be rational in a situation where a challenger has no ac32.
In all three ways, a challenge to a deterrent threat may have a higher subjective expected utility than alternative courses of action.
EVIDENCE FOR PROLIFERATION PESSIMISM FROM THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS T H E CUBAN missile crisis provides ample evidence for the proliferation pessimists' concerns.
In this section we discuss some of the more dramatic illustrations of the organizational, psychological, and situational pressures that made crisis management so precarious in 1962.
THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION WERE NOT UNITARY DECISIONMAKERS Scott Sagan has recently documented a number of very serious mishaps and breakdowns in American alert procedures, safety mechanisms, and 35 nuclear operations during the Cuban missile crisis.
While this particular missile did not carry a nuclear warhead, the air force had mated 34.
Had the Soviets detected the launch and been aware of the status of most of the American missiles at Vandenberg, they might easily have misinterpreted the launch as part of a nuclear attack.
Soviet MiG fighters scrambled to intercept it; American F102s from Eielson AFB in Alaska scrambled to escort it back to base.
Because of the heightened u .s. military alert, the Alaskan F-102s were carrying live nuclear anti-aircraft missiles.
In the event of a dogfight, American planes might have detonated nuclear weapons in or near Soviet airspace.
Fortunately, the Soviet MiGS failed to reach thez, • Just before 9:00 A.M. on Sunday 28 October minutes before Soviet chairman Nikita Khrushchev announced his willingness to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba American radar operators at Moorestown, N.J., erroneously reported a missile launch from Cuba.
The error was the result of a training tape mistakenly feeding into the Moorestown monitors.
While none of these events led directly to fatal missteps, Sagan discusses in detail how each of them might have done so under plausible circumstances.
They clearly demonstrate that military organizations are vulnerable to failures and breakdowns notwithstanding elaborate technical and organizational-cultural safeguards.
They further demonstrate how the complexity of modern military organizations frustrates civilian oversight and control.
Since the American and Soviet armed forces in 1962 were among the most advanced technologically in their day; since both consciously made efforts to ensure the safety and reliability of their arsenals and the integrity of their chains of command; and since both were effectively unconstrained by shortages of funds or expertise, Sagan's discussion should give pause to prospective nuclear states who are unlikely to be so favored.
While information on the American side of the crisis is most plentiful, new information suggests that all parties exhibited potentially catastrophic tendencies and behaviors on these dimensions.
MILITARY PROCLIVITIES Military and civilian leaders often have different interests, preferences, risk propensities, and attitudes toward the use offorce.
Professional militaries display strong proclivities toward behaviors that lead to deterrence failures.
Hawks favored a more aggressive response to the Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba, including issuing ultimata and resorting to force in the event of noncompliance.
Doves favored a more cautious and less confrontational policy, including, if necessary, negotiations and reciprocal concessions.
His military advisors, however in particular, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor, Air Force Chief General Curtis LeMay, and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson were all hawks.
There were tremendous political and military pressures to do something.
Max Taylor, who was one of the wisest, most intelligent military men ever to serve, called himself a ""double hawk"" at the time, but he was a dove among the military people.
After Khrushchev had agreed to remove the missiles, President Kennedy invited the Chiefs to the White House so that he could thank them for their support during the crisis, and there was one hell of a scene.
We ought to just go in there today and knock 'em off!,,37 Khrushchev also recalled coming under tremendous pressure from his military to take a tougher line during the crisis.
In particular, his military advisors strongly opposed withdrawing the missiles.
Khrushchev recalls that when he asked them whether they could guarantee that a refusal to withdraw the missiles would not result in global nuclear war, 36.
So I said to myself, 'To hell with these maniacs,.,,38 Recently, the spirit of Khrushchev's recollection was confirmed by Gen.
Anatoly I Gribkov, the mastermind of Operation Anadyr, the code-name of the secret deployment to Cuba.
Gribkov said that the Soviet General Staff regarded Khrushchev as ""an ignorant peasant"" who lacked the capacity for clear-headed strategic thinking.
Gribkov claims that the Soviet military in Cuba, fearing that Khrushchev did not understand strategic and operational imperatives, and concerned that he would buckle under American pressure, deliberately interpreted their command authority liberally, and did their best to avoid 39 giving Khrushchev opportunities to interfere in operational matters.
Soviet military leaders in Cuba preferred informing Khrushchev of actions they had taken to requesting his permission to take them, and when this was not possible, attempted to manipulate him into authorizing their preferred courses of action by skewing their presentation of alternatives.
These efforts were (from the perspective of the Soviet commanders in Cuba) partially successful.
They did not succeed in securing Khrushchev's permission to fire at will ons. reconnaissance planes; but they did succeed in securing Khrushchev's retroactive approval of their decision at the climax of the crisis to disperse Soviet nuclear weapons from their central storage facility near Havana in or40 der to reduce their vulnerability to American attack.
The dispersal was therefore a provocative act that Khrushchev might well have forbidden had he been more fully briefed (or better advised) on its costs and benefits.
The Soviet military's unwillingness to bend under American pressure is instructive and important.
It is interesting to note that at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the United States enjoyed a massive strategic 38.
Remarks at the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C., 5 April 1994, and in personal conversations with the authors.
Anatoly Dokuchaev, ""100-dnevnyi yadernyi kruiz ,"" Krasnaya zoezda , 6 November 1992, 2.
Moreover, both the United States and the Soviet Union were aware at least of the rough numerical imbalance.
Yet both American and Soviet military leaders felt confident in 42 taking a hard line.
It is easy to imagine that the confrontation would have escalated quickly had military leaders been making the decisions in the two nations' capitals as they would be in the capitals of many new nuclear states, either de facto or de jure.
It is clear that American and Soviet military leaders in the Cuban missile crisis regarded military logic as more salient than diplomatic, moral, or domestic political concerns.
This stands in stark contrast to 43 many civilian leaders, especially Kennedy and Khrushchev.
The crisis amply supports Betts's finding that military leaders prefer to err on the side of employing too much force rather than too little if hostilities 44 erupt.
Tactical Air Command, for example, resisted the idea of a small ""surgical"" air strike to knock out Soviet missiles in Cuba, advo45 cating instead a much bigger air strike with a larger target set.
Similarly, in planning for the invasion of Cuba,s. military leaders requested permission to equip invasion forces with tactical nuclear weapons, in case the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons of their own 46 in Cuba.
American military leaders believed {hat their advantages in numbers of deliverable strategic nuclear weapons were a decisive factor, and that the Soviets would be forced to back down.
While information on Soviet military thinking is sparse, Soviet military leaders in 1962 may have believed that their relatively small nuclear arsenal perhaps coupled with their conventional might in Europe was adequate to deter an American attack against Cuba, and therefore that they did not have to back down.
Such differences in belief could lead two nuclear states whose arsenals are not precisely numerically equal to underestimate each other's confidence, leading directly to deterrence failure.
S. military leaders' preference for military action over non-military options in the Cuban missile crisis contradicts Betts's general finding that military leaders are less likely than civilians to favor the use of force.
American military contingencies further illustrate the danger that incremental planning will heighten escalatory pressures.
Generals T aylor and Walter C Sweeney, commander-in-chief of Tactical Air Command, both insisted that an initial air strike against Cuba would have to be followed by further strikes, and, inevitably, an invasion.
The invasion plan itself carefully mapped out a prolonged and intensive air and ground campaign that would have resulted in hundreds of thou49 sands of casualties on all sides.
American military leaders, therefore via their strong advocacy of an initial air strike were willing to commit themselves to an escalatory process that would have resulted in direct combat between American and Soviet forces on a major scale.
This is a good example of the extent to which incremental planning desensitizes military leaders to the long-term consequences of their actions.
One Soviet action in particular the unauthorized shooting down of an American u-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba at the height of the crisis on 27 October provides a sobering illustration of a circumstance in which purely military considerations drove local commanders to act against standing orders from Moscow.
Central Intelligence Agency History Staff, 1992),208; ""Supplement 7 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 27 October 1962,"" in ibid., 325.
It now appears that Soviet FROG tactical rockets in Cuba were equipped with nuclear weapons.
Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink; Blight, Allyn, and Welch, ""Kramer vs.
Perhaps the best-known case of this tension on the American side was the confrontation between McNamara and Chief of Naval Operations Adm.
George Anderson over interception procedures on the quarantine line, As McNamara recounts it, Anderson deeply resented McNamara's hyper-caution and his meddling in naval procedures, and did not appreciate that the quarantine was a diplomatic signal rather than a military action.
Early in the crisis, the United States Air Force sought permission to respond to such attacks as a matter of course.
Military commanders in most new and aspiring nuclear states are likely to have much greater operational autonomy.
MANAGING TRADE-OFFS Civilian and military leaders must attempt to satisfy a number ofcompeting values and manage a number of important trade-o./fi; how they do so will largely determine the nature and the degree of nuclear danger in any given circumstance.
There are inherent tensions between readiness and the safety of nuclear weapons; between central control and invulnerability to decapitation; and, in some circumstances, between secrecy on the one hand, and safety, accountability, and oversight on the other.
Scott Sagan provides ample evidence of the first trade-off in American operations during the Cuban missile crisis, and discusses the associated dangers in great detail.
While there is much less information available on Soviet alert procedures during the crisis, at least one Soviet General Staff officer has recently made the claim that the Strategic Rocket Forces received an order in the middle of the crisis to go to maximum combat readiness, which apparently called for mating nuclear warheads to strategic missiles.
First, such an emergency alert action might be picked up and perceived by u .s. intelligence as evidence that 'the USSR was preparing to initiate general war', which would have significantly increased pressures for a preemptives. attack.
Second, such actions would have significantly increased the risk of a nuclear accident at the missile site. ""54 closely guarding that authority for himself, or for the secretary of defense if he were unavailable.
Soviet authorities may well have intended the alert to preserve Soviet retaliatory capability in case of an American first strike.
Pliyev's concern on 26 October when he ordered Soviet warheads in Cuba out of their central storage facility and closer to their delivery vehicles.
Soviet nuclear forces at the time did not have permissive action links mechanical or electronic devices to prevent unauthorized use of the weapons.f"" Therefore, dispersing the nuclear warheads increased the danger of unauthorized use even as it reduced the danger to the arsenal from an American attack.
The Cuban missile crisis provides ample evidence of the trade-off between secrecy on the one hand, and safety, accountability, and oversight on the other.
The secrecy surrounding the Soviet attempt to sneak nuclear weapons into Cuba resulted in a number of serious mistakes and miscalculations.
ORGANIZATIONAL COMPLEXITY The complexity ofmodern military organizations militates against the possibility that civilian or military leaders can monitor and control the behavior of all of the units and individuals under their nominal authority.
This can result in significant misunderstandings between different branches of the government, or between leaders and subordinates, permitting blind adherence to routines to pose serious threats to successfulcrisis management.
It is clear that President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev were unaware of, and did not control, all the potentially relevant actions of 55.
In addition, in certain cases branches of their military establishments failed to communicate and coordinate with each other, posing serious hazards to crisis management.
Organizational complexity may mean that information and directives from the top do not reach all their intended targets (perhaps most strikingly illustrated in the Cuban missile crisis by the failure of Soviet troops to camouflage the missiles in Cuba); that important information in the system never reaches the top; that peripheral activities escape oversight altogether; or that branches of government fail to communicate effectively because of differences in classification, terminology, or background knowledge.
The stray v-2 incident of 27 October provides a telling example of how organizational complexity can hinder crisis management.
The plane was on a routine mission that simply escaped high-level scrutiny.
Almost certainly American leaders would have canceled the mission had they known about it.
It is interesting to note that they did not do so, in view of the fact that an almost identical incident occurred just two month sear1rer.
Are they there or not?,,62 While the CIA had not located warheads in Cuba, it continued to report increasing numbers of Soviet missiles as 58.
In this particular case, no one seems to have thought to give the word in the first place.
Many of them believed that if the missiles were operational, the risks of a launch from Cuba, either during or after an American air strike, would have been unacceptably high.
The term had a technical meaning in the intelligence community, and the CIA was using the term correctly in its briefs.
The fact that different organizations speak different languages constrained decision making in this instance.
The CIA, in fact, did have information to suggest that warheads were in transit, aboard the freighter Poltava, but never communicated this important information 65 to the ExComm.
The sheer size and complexity of thes. and Soviet military forces suggest that new proliferants provided they have smaller governments and military forces should not be as constrained by organizational complexity as were the superpowers in 1962.
The degree to which organizational complexity constitutes a threat to stable deterrence in a new nuclear relationship, however, will be a complex function of size, communications and monitoring capabilities, bureaucratic structure, factionalism, domestic politics, and other factors not dependent on size.
The fact that new nuclear nations may have smaller and simpler armed forces than did the superpowers in 1962 thus may not, in many cases, bring immunity from organizational mishaps.
It now appears that some nuclear warheads had already reached Cuba, although the CIA did not realize this at the time.
Breakdowns or failures to communicate can extend very far from the centers of decision making, Two episodes involving American allies during the crisis illustrate the point.
The causes of these breakdowns are complex, and information currently available on them is incomplete.
Thus, one does not know whether to blame a communications failure , ambiguous or ill-conceived standard operating procedures, insubordination, overly-tight transnational contacts between allied military forces, or some combination of these for such egregious departures from the norm of central control.
The closer one looks ats. and Soviet decision making in October 1962, the less unitary the two states appear.
Leaders on both sides experienced grave difficulties gauging threats accurately; correctly discriminating between situations that called for deterrence (as opposed to reassurance, or mixe . d strategies); . ) 67 commurucatmg• • cIearIy; and interpreting the statements and actions of the adversary correctly.
Nor did they calculate the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action in the manner required by rational deterrence theory.
These are extremely demanding cognitive tasks, and Kennedy, Khrushchev, and their advisors performed within the normal range on all of them.
The implications of this for new nuclear states are deeply disturbing.Y Tracing the causes of cognitive errors to specific psychological phenomena and processes is difficult, because such inferences have extremely high information requirements and the available record is limited.
Consequently, we are unable to infer with confidence thats. or Soviet decisionmakers exhibited particular cognitive biases or errors in particular instances.
Nevertheless, written and oral testimony, coupled with the available documentation, enables us to identify with confidence several clear examples of misperceptions and misjudgments.
Expanding and Refining the Spiral and Deterrence Models,"" World Politics 44, no.
In our view, the groupthink"" hypothesis is not well enough specified to be useful analytically, and any deviations from ideal rationality displayed by President Kennedy and his advisors may as easily be understood through oilier lenses as through the dubious lens of groupthink.
Let us begin by noting that the Cuban missile crisis provides not only a variety of examples of misperceptions and misjudgments; it was itself the product of misperceptions and misjudgments.
Feeling threatened, Cuba stepped up its revolutionary efforts in Latin America, and began to turn toward the Soviet Union for support, which in turn reinforced American perceptions that Cuba represented a hemispheric threat, and led to further efforts to isolate Castro.
Thus Cuba and the United States each viewed its own actions as defensive and warranted by the seemingly offensive actions of the other.
Cuba's courtship of the Soviet Union and its public embrace of Marxism-Leninism generated strong fears in Washington that Castro would turn Cuba into a Soviet military outpost in the Western Hemisphere.
Of particular concern was the possibility that the Soviet Union would deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Consequently, the United States visibly flexed its muscles in the region in order to demonstrate to Castro his vulnerability to American military might, and in this way to deter any significant Soviet military presence.
It was, however, precisely the misperception of these essentially defensive American measures as signals of offensive intent that provoked Cuban and Soviet concern, leading ultimately to the vett; deployment of nuclear missiles that the United States sought to deter.
Khrushchev made a number of other serious errors in judgment in the period leading up to the crisis.
He appears to have been confident that the Soviets could deploy the missiles secretly; he failed to appreciate the uproar the deployment would cause in the United States, and thus the difficult position in which it would place President Kennedy; he incorrectly judged that if the United States prematurely discovered the deployment, he and Kennedy would work out a quiet diplomatic 70.
We explore this dynamic in detail in Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, passim.
It seems plausible, for example, that Khrushchev projected his own concerns, and his own perspective, onto President Kennedy (as did Kennedy onto Khrushchev), leading him to overestimate the transparency of his motives.
As tensions began to rise in August and September of 1962, Khrushchev began to exhibit classic symptoms of defensive avoidance and motivated misperceptions and misjudgments.
As Kennedy came under increasing pressure from Congress and the media to do something about Soviet military shipments to Cuba, and as prominent Americans such as Sen.
Kenneth Keating began to claim that the Soviets were deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba, and to call for military countermeasures, a Cuban delegation traveled to Moscow to propose that Moscow and Havana go public with the deployment.
In this way, the Cubans believed they might seize the diplomatic initiative by emphasizing the legality of the deployment, forestalling an adverse American reaction.
Khrushchev abruptly dismissed their concerns, declaring confidently that the secret deployment would succeed, and rromising to 7 send the Baltic Fleet if the United States caused trouble.
The United States sent increasingly blunt signals that any deployment of nuclear missiles would be unacceptable; but Khrushchev, wrongly judging that the United States would accommodate itself to the deployment, clung to the belief that the deployment would succeed without triggering a 72.
This was an assurance which the Cubans instantly recognized as ludicrous.
He therefore passed up several op~ortuni­ 74 ties to reassess the course of action to which he was committed.
President Kennedy and his advisors were likewise insensitive to Khrushchev's motives and concerns.
The fact that Berlin was in the forefront of the minds of many ExComm members may account for their erroneous judgment that the deployment was somehow intended to give Khrushchev leverage on the Berlin issue.
The ExComm may have been correct to infer that Khrushchev's motivations were at least partly strategic; but they entirely overlooked the possibility that the deployment might have been intended to forestall an American invasion of Cuba.
Knowing that they did not intend to invade Cuba, perhaps it was difficult for them to imagine that Khrush78 chev might conclude that they did.
It is worth noting that the most significant of Kennedy's deterrent threats came too late, coinciding with the arrival of Soviet SS-4 mis siles in Cuban ports.
There is no indication in any of the available records that the Kennedy Administration realized that it might have attempted to practice deterrence too late.
They concluded, following the Bay of Pigs episode in April 1961, that a full-scales. invasion of the island was inevitable, and, as 1962 wore on, that it was imminent.
The weight of evidence and testimony, however, suggests that Kennedy and his closest advisors did not desire to invade Cuba, and only seriously entertained the possibility after the discovery of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba in mid-October 1962.
While thes. military build-up in the Caribbean, and its covert action campaign against the Castro regime, certainly kept an invasion alive as a possible option, 80 Castro was wrong to assume that it was inevitable.
There is room for debate as to why Castro accepted the Soviet offer to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba Castro insists he did so as a favor to the Soviets; we 81 are inclined to think his motives were rather more selfish but it is at least ironic that the very moves Castro made to shore up his military position against an illusory threat gave life to that very same threat.
When President Kennedy announced his intention to impose a naval quarantine of Cuba on 22 October he triggered powerful moral reactions in both Moscow and Havana.
The fact that Khrushchev saw the deployment of missiles to Cuba as legal and reciprocal (that is, analogous to American deployments on the Soviet periphery) therefore not only contributed to the failure of deterrence, it also complicated crisis management.
Even with the benefit of hindsight, it is difficult for American analysts to appreciate the deterrent motivations of the Soviet deployment.
Thus Paul Huth and Bruce Russ ett do not even count the deployment as an attempt at extended deterrence in the data set they created to explore the effectiveness of such attempts.
Hershberg's argument is contradicted in the strongest possible terms by surviving members of the Kennedy administration (Blight and Welch, On the Brink, passim.
As we have argued elsewhere, the thirty-six hour delay between Kennedy's announcement of the quarantine and its imposition appears to have been crucial in allowing 82 Khrushchev's outrage to subside.
Castro fully shared Khrushchev's 83 moral outrage; but his outrage did not subside.
In short, moral outrage rendered them incapable of cost/benefit calculation.
The American noninvasion pledge was conditional upon UN inspection of the Soviet missile sites in Cuba; the agreement to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey may also have included the withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Italy.
Soviet intelligence and Khrushchev's advisors--erroneously concluded that Kennedy intended to announce the beginning of military action against Cuba during this speech, and this assessment, combined with other dire warnings (including warnings 88 from Castro), convinced Khrushchev to bring the crisis to an end.
It is fortunate indeed that Kennedy's and Khrushchev's misperceptions led them to overestimate each other's resolve rather than to underestimate it; there is no reason to believe that this is a general tendency.
Even decisionmakers immune to misperceptions would make serious errors on the basis of inaccurate or incomplete information.
Recent investigations of the Cuban missile crisis strongly suggest that the Kennedy administration was unaware of crucial details about the Soviet military deployment to Cuba.
Specifically, American intelligence at the time of the crisis dramatically underestimated the number of Soviet troops on the island;89 failed to detect the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba;90 and was completely unaware of Soviet standing 86.
There is even reason to believe that the letter that arrived first had been drafted second.
American estimates of the strength of Soviet forces in Cuba ranged from 4,500 to 16,000 over the course of October and November, 1962, whereas the total number of Soviet military personnel deyloyed to Cuba now appears to have been closer to 44,000, of which approximately hal were combat troops.
Moreover, there are reasons to believe that, for at least some period of time, Khrushchev had invested the Soviet commander in Cuba with the authority to initiate the use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion.
American analysts and officials considered it unlikely that the Soviets would have deployed tactical as well as strategic nuclear weapons to Cuba, and therefore did not intend to equip American forces with tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an invasion of Cuba.
There seems little doubt that if American forces had invaded Cuba, they would have been met with tactical nuclear fire, requiring a nuclear response of some kind and courting escalation to general nuclear war.
The history of the Cuban missile crisis permits us to belabor these points by multiplying illustrations further.
We believe, however, that this sample adequately demonstrates a variety of important misperceptions and misjudgments.
Whatever their causes, they are antithetical to the requirements of rational deterrence theory.
The recent reawakening of scholarly interest in the missile crisis has demonstrated how pervasive these mistakes were.
A popular early 1970s docudrama on the crisis, called ""The Missiles of October,"" emphasized the steely gamesmanship required of Kennedy and his advisors to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Now that scholars have gained access to declassified u .s. documents, and to Soviet and Cuban sources, a comparable film made today might justifiably be called ""The Misperceptions of October,"" emphasizing the extraordinary number of mistaken inferences that produced this most dangerous cold war crisis, and that nearly caused it to explode.
In the event of an American invasion of Cuba, it is likely that Pliyev's communications with Moscow would have been severed.
Having already dispersed the nuclear warheads to reduce their vulnerability; having no prospect of successful defense without employing tactical nuclear weapons; and having once been invested with predelegated authority to use nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion, Soviet commanders in Cuba probably would not have hesitated to use the weapons available to them.
As Robert McNamara later put it, the key players in the drama were ""captives of misinformation, misjudgment, miscalculation.,,94 It now appears more plausible then ever that nuclear war really could have been the inadvertent result of a series of mistaken perceptions, judgments, and decisions.
We noted above that there are circumstances under which even a fully rational decisionmaker would challenge a commitment in the face of a clear and credible deterrent threat, and that proliferation optimists dismiss, or are insensitive to"", this possibility.
Specifically, strategically sophisticated rational challengers may design around a deterrent threat, attempt to confront deterrers with faits accomplis, and take bold gambles if they believe they can control the risks.
A challenge may also be rational in a situation where a challenger has no acceptable options, or if he or she expects inaction to lead to disaster, even though the chances of success are slim.
Finally, a challenge will be rational in the face of a deterrent threat where a challenger does not value survival or security above other goods such as honor, glory, revenge, or martyrdom-that may be attained only via the challenge.
A strong case can be made that at least one important actor in the episode Castro would not have been deterred from launching a nuclear attack against the United States had he possessed nuclear weapons of his own in 1962, notwithstanding the United States's massive nuclear superiority and the certainty that American nuclear forces could have devastated his country.
We believe Castro's calculations and behavior during the crisis are especially instructive for evaluating the arguments of proliferation optimists and proliferation pessimists, because it is not difficult to imagine that leaders of other countries might be similarly situated geopolitically, and that they would have similar attitudes, beliefs, and preferences.
Saddam Hussein's Iraq; Hafez Assad's Syria; and Moammar Qaddafi's Libya, to name but a few .95 During the missile crisis, Castro exhibited behavior that seems at first glance difficult to understand through the lens of rationality.
He adopted a posture of defiance from the first moment he received word that President Kennedy had discovered Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Castro was delighted with Khrushchev's first communication to him following Kennedy's announcement of the blockade of Cuba a letter expressing a clear and firm determination to resist the ""piratical, per96 fidious, aggressive"" actions of the United States.
Castro concluded that the superpowers had adopted irreconcilable positions that would inevitably lead to a war, beginning in Cuba, and resulting in the destruction of his country.
Instead of working to avoid a fatal confrontation, however, Castro took supreme comfort in the role he believed a martyred Cuba was about to play in the destruction of the United States.
On the evening of Friday, 26 October, Castro arrived at ""the bunker,"" as the Cubans then called the Soviet embassy, and, with the assistance of the Soviet ambassador, drafted a message to Moscow intended to bolster Khrushchev's resolve, because he feared that the Soviet leader was beginning to weaken and waver.
When the message arrived in Moscow the following morning, Khrushchev interpreted it as a call for a preemptive nuclear strike an action Khrushchev knew would be suicidal both for Cuba and for the Soviet Union.
Clearly, Castro did not ask Khrushchev for a preemptive strike in the strict sense.
Instead, he asked Khrushchev to launch his nuclear arsenal after thes. invasion of Cuba had begun in effect, to make Cuba a martyr for the cause of socialism.
Now, we started from the assumption that if there was an invasion of Cuba, nuclear war would erupt.
If the invasion took place in the situation that had been created, nuclear war would have been the result.
In any case, we were resigned to our fate.0 Castro's resignation, however, was typically of the most active and provocative kind.
At a time when the slightest incident could spark a military confrontation, Castro instructed his anti-aircraft forces to open fire on low-flying American reconnaissance planes.
When he received word of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal on 28 October, he re99.
By October 1962 Castro appears to have become convinced of thes. unrelenting hostility and its determination to destroy him.
Given his understanding of the available options, and whether or not he valued survival above all else, he believed that he faced a stark choice between annihilation with dignity, and annihilation with ignominy.
Moreover, his grounds for holding this belief were, we believe, not unreasonable under the circumstances, given the information on the basis of which he was operating.
Annihilation with dignity required refusing to bend to American demands, and willingly accepting nuclear conflict.
Castro ""rationally"" would have chosen nuclear war to surrender, notwithstanding the high likelihood that the United States and the Soviet Union faced mutual assured destruction.1 While Castro may have preferred survival above all else and merely did not foresee any possibility of it, an alternative interpretation would be that his highest values were honor, glory, Cuban dignity, or revolutionary principles.
If he were operating on the basis of such values, then he may not have been susceptible to coercive threats or actions by his archenemy, the United States.
While there is room for debate about Castro's preferences,102 there can be little doubt about the preferences of at least one of his closest associates.
Ernesto "" C h en Guevara, in October 1962 the third-ranking member of the Cuban leadership, provides a rather chilling example.
Compare the contrary interpretation in die foreword by Jorge Dominguez, ibid., xii-xiii.
Verde Olivo, 10 October 1968; quoted in Carla Anne Robbins, The Cuban Threat ,47.
Moreover, it is possible to argue that the wealth of illustrations purporting to demonstrate how organizational, psychological and situational factors conspired to bring the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 merely serve instead to demonstrate the robustness of mutual deterrence and its resilience to perturbations of that kind.
First, proliferation optimists cannot explain why the Cuban missile crisis happened in the first place.
Under MAD, rational Soviet leaders should not have challenged an important American commitment.
Any attempt to argue that the deployment was required in order to buttress mutual deterrence owing to the Soviet Union's acknowledged nuclear inferiority t 04 directly contradicts the proliferation ofctimists' claim that very few nuclear weapons are required to deter.
The Soviet Union did indeed have a few strategic nuclear weapons, and the Kennedy administration believed that the Soviet Union had a second-strike nuclear capability.
The Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba constituted a failure of deterrence that should not have happened if proliferation optimists are correct about the determinants and processes of state behavior.
Second, the world was fortunate in 1962 that only two of the three central figures in the drama Kennedy and Khrushchev commanded nuclear forces.
These two exhibited a horror of nuclear war, a suspicion of military advice, a growing sensitivity to the possibility that the confrontation could spin out of control, and Iraq during the 1991 Persian Gulf war if Iraqi SCUD missiles landing in Israel had carried chemical warheads.
Certainly, Cuban leaders such as Fidel Castro and Che Guevara showed no such reticence about military operations or even any trace of horror at the prospect of nuclear war.
Third, organizational and psychological errors during the Cuban missile crisis generally did not cascade, or interact synergistically, in such a way as to generate escalatory pressures.
Serious breakdowns of systems, routines, and procedures and errors in perception, judgment, and inference for the most part represented isolated events.
It is easy to imagine, for example, that technical mishaps could have combined with misperceptions and/or personnel breakdowns in such a way as to lead to disas107 t er.
Fourth, and finally, it seems worth mentioning the obvious fact that if the United States and the Soviet Union had not had nuclear weapons in 1962, there would have been no nuclear crisis.
Indeed, the existence of nuclear weapons was very much a cause of the crisis, in a variety of ways.
Correcting the Soviets' numerical inferiority in strategic nuclear weapons may have been one of Khrushchev's reasons for deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba.
American nuclear deployments on the Soviet periphery caused him great indignation, and spurred his desire to reciprocate with a nuclear deployment on the American periphery.
Without nuclear weapons, Khrushchev might never even have thought to deploy Soviet forces to Cuba, exposed and vulnerable as they would be to American conventional might.
One way for states to avoid such intensely dangerous confrontations is to foreswear the kinds of arms that trigger them and render them so dangerous.
In October 1962, so-called rational deterrence did not prevent the Cuban missile crisis, and had little or nothing to do with its management and resolution.
The world was fortunate that John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev so quickly learned the lessons of their folly in October 1962, appreciated the tenuous control they exerted over the massive organizations they nominally commanded, and prudently 106.
While some of their advisors advocated aggressively practicing deterrence or compellence during the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev were unwilling to do so.
Finding themselves unexpectedly on the brink of a nuclear confrontation, they prudently refused to put their faith in nuclear weapons to solve a problem nuclear weapons had largely created.
The various factors that brought the world to the nuclear brink in 1962 and that so greatly complicated crisis management may be expected to be present in other contexts.
Due appreciation for organizational hazards and the dangers of misperceptions and misjudgments should incline new and aspiring nuclear states to be suspicious of the view that nuclear weapons will enhance their national security.
Far from solving acute security dilemmas, nuclear weapons may only make them more severe.
Nevertheless, it would be naive to expect all states to renounce their nuclear arsenals, or to expect those determined to acquire nuclear weapons (for symbolic reasons, or out of a misplaced faith in nuclear deterrence) to terminate their nuclear programs.
The rest of the world therefore must decide how to deal with such states.
Practically speaking, organizational and technical dangers are partly tractable.
Certain dangers may be reduced if new proliferants make strenuous efforts to enhance the safety and reliability of their arsenals, of their nuclear operations, and of their personnel.
Yet he further insists that, ""for organizational reasons, such cooperative efforts are not likely to succeed.',108 Psychological dangers are far less tracta108.
The ways in which human beings make sense of the world around them are mysterious and difficult to manipulate.
There are circumstances under which nuclear arsenals may exist at lower levels of danger.
In some cases, it may be feasible for the international community as a whole (for example, through the International Atomic Energy Agency ), or for third parties, to provide expertise, advice, and equipment to improve the safety and reliability of nuclear systems.
Measures such as these, over time, may in certain circumstances help reduce the tensions and mistrust between two or more countries that led them to seek nuclear arsenals in the first place.
Where new proliferants are amenable to such policies and practices, the world community as a whole has a strong incentive to play a supporting role.
However, not all states will be willing to cooperate in safe proliferation programs (no doubt partly out of suspicion that these programs would undermine their nuclear capability), and may deploy unsafe or unstable arsenals.
These states pose the most severe challenges to counterproliferation policies as, for example, in the recent cases of the Iraqi and North Korean nuclear programs.
In extreme cases, the world community may be justified in taking drastic measures to reduce or eliminate the danger.
Coping with a world of proliferating nuclear weapons is a daunting task, in part because we have so little experience upon which to draw for insight and guidance.
Only a few states currently possess nuclear arsenals, and only a subset of those have come close to contemplating having to use them.
It is worth noting that the United States deliberately shared PAL information with Britain, France, and the USSR apparently to good effect.
While ""non-weaponized"" deterrents may reduce some elements of nuclear danger, they may increase uncertainty and have the unfortunate effect of disinclining leaders to confront nuclear issues until they are in the midst of a serious crisis.
While we believe the Cuban missile crisis provides a number of important realworld correctives to this tendency, we do not claim that the crisis is fully understood, nor that it is the only event of the nuclear age upon which we might draw for insight into nuclear danger and guidance for coping with nuclear proliferation.
An important part of nonproliferation and counterproliferation policy, therefore, must be greater support for studies that hold out some hope of illuminating such palpable real-world problems through the exploration of real-world experiences.
In the meantime, however, we should pay careful attention to the experiences of those who have actually had to contemplate the possibility of nuclear war, and who have borne the responsibility for making decisions that affect its likelihood.
This small group of men and women in positions of high political office are the only ones who have had the opportunity to test the propositions of proliferation optimists in the laboratory of real-world decision making.
They alone have the experiences that would enable them to make judgments about whether nuclear weapons contribute to, or detract from, national security.
Some, like Robert McNamara, are profoundly pessimistic, and believe that a full appreciation of October 1962 points clearly in the direction of nuclear abolitionism.
Surely this must lead to the conclusion that, insofar as achievable, we should seek to return to a non-nuclear world.0 McNamara's experience of the missile crisis inclines him toward strong antiproliferation measures, coupled with deep cuts in great power nuclear arsenals, leading eventually to a nuclear-free world.
As with the five holders of larger arsenals, so for India, Pakistan, and Israel there is good sense in moderation as well as openness.
All these wanted the bomb for deeply defensive reasons to deter or repel a possible mortal assault on their own land.
There may be differences of opinion in other capitals on the gravity of the threat faced by these countries, but what their neighbors should understand is that for each of the three, in its own way, the bomb is a defensive weapon.
Openness about their defensive reasons for possessing nuclear arms can be helpful in limiting fearful responses of others.
It can hardly have escaped his attention that he and his colleagues did not so engage either the Soviets or the Cubans in the period leading up to the missile crisis.
At least as instructive as the experiences of former American policymakers are the experiences of the Cubans in 1962 the people most often left out of the analysis of the Cuban missile crisis.
If so, then the leaders of these or other new or aspiring nuclear states should take little comfort in the outcome of the near miss of October 1962.
