PrintBy Max Holland and Tara Marie Egan Writing in August 2007 about the major candidates’ credentials, Washington Post columnist Anne Applebaum concluded that it’s questionable whether foreign policy experience is essential for anyone aspiring to the presidency.
In word, deed, and appearance, he had been completely loyal, airing all of his private differences over policy with the president alone, and dutifully following the president’s lead in any group larger than the two of them.
Hardened Washington columnists, some of whom had known Johnson for decades, were keenly aware of the indignities and humiliations he suffered as vice president.
Johnson may have been sticking to his “general policy of never speaking unless the president asked ,” and behaving as he thought a vice president should—which was to agree in public with whatever the president decided, or at least mimic his leanings.
In two months’ time, when The Saturday Evening Post would publish an “exclusive” account of the missile crisis—one that was widely viewed as the administration’s preferred version—LBJ would not be mentioned in the article at all, the only regular member of the ExComm to be so slighted.
LBJ also recognized, undoubtedly, that Adlai Stevenson had been unfairly and maliciously depicted as advocating a “Munich,” when his only sin was that he had dared to be the first adviser to suggest a missile swap.
Alsop’s remark sparked outrage in Johnson, whereas if he had been privy to the truth, the column might have been received with a shrug, or a caustic remark about Alsop’s ignorance.
That’s a question for you to decide, and you decide on your own judgment, and you decide without emotion, and you decide without fear.
But in the conversation with Humphrey, Johnson revealed that he was still hoping against hope for some slight movement on Hanoi’s part, anything that might give him a pretext to extend the peace offensive.
Beginning on January 28, Fulbright had initiated a series of hearings, some of which would be televised “gavel-to-gavel” over the three national networks.
All we ask you to do is just proudly—if you want to—walk into a meeting hall with us, and to reason, and talk, and be prepared to give and take, and we’ll try to do the same thing.
But more knowledge would have indisputably served him better than what he was allowed to know.
Max Holland is the editor of Washington Decoded, and Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant.
On October 15, McCone had been proven right and everyone else wrong; but more importantly, since the missiles were still discovered before they were operational , it gave the administration precious time to collect itself.
The ‘Photo Gap’ that Delayed Discovery of Missiles in Cuba,” Studies in Intelligence, Vol.
Dallek suggested in his LBJ biography that since Johnson’s first impulse was to launch an attack against the sites rather than impose a blockade, that his confidence in his own judgment was subsequently undermined.
The article was thought to reflect the administration’s preferred account because Bartlett was JFK’s personal friend, dating back to the 1950s, and Alsop was known for having top sources of information.
By the late 1960s, the “eyeball-to-eyeball” mythology had burgeoned to a point where even Theodore Sorensen, one of the chief myth-makers, began to have reservations about its impact.
No doubt LBJ was referring to news reports about Goldwater’s October 9 luncheon address in Los Angeles.
The only other administration official who knew about the Cordier ploy was Secretary of State Rusk.
Arguably, JFK would have been willing to accept something like the Laos settlement if it was offered.
It's hard to understand why LBJ wouldn't have tried to work for something like that in Viet Nam.
The Missile Crisis analogy seems inapt precisely because it involved a threat of total nuclear war.
One could argue that fighting in Viet Nam was necessary precisely to prevent situations like Cuba from arising.
