For thirteen days in October of 1962, the two most powerful nations in the world at that time were staring each other down ""eyeball to eyeball"" in one of the most dangerous crises the world has ever seen.
On October 14th, 1962, American U2 planes caught sight of Soviet missile sites being built in Cuba.
For the next thirteen days, the world held its breath as President J.F Kennedy and his advisers deliberated on how to react to Premier Mikhail Khrushchev's actions, and decided on blockading Cuba in order to prevent missiles from reaching their intended destinations.
It was and is the nearest the world has ever come to nuclear war, having the possibility of multiple sides employing the use of nuclear weaponry.
The building of missile sites in Cuba levelled the field between the two superpowers, as the United States was compelled to deal with the Soviets with a greater degree of caution and wariness as they recognized the capability of the Soviets to attack their own soil.
This meant that the Soviets were in a position to negotiate in terms of arms control because of their elevated status due to the Crisis.
However, the United States was still clearly ahead of the Soviets in weapons in terms of quantity, so after the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba by the Soviets, the missile gap again prevailed, with Khrushchev's main ambition of closing the missile gap failing.
The crisis was brought to a head on October 27th, 1962, where the beginning of a nuclear war seemed entirely possible.
Kennedy had raised the United States military's Defensive Condition status to DEFCON 3 on October 22nd.
On the 27th, an American U-2 plane over Western Alaska accidentally flew in Soviet airspace, causing Soviet MiG fighters to attempt to intercept the spy plane, which left the airspace in time to avoid a conflict.
He believed the Soviets would interpret the U-2 plane as a recon mission precluding a nuclear first-strike, and act accordingly.
Kennedy's advisors believed the shooting to be an act of planned escalation of the situation of the Soviets; it was not known the the command to shoot was given by a Soviet commander in Cuba rather than Moscow.
Kennedy's advisers pressured him to attack and invade Cuba ""no later than Monday, the 29th"", however Kennedy chose to wait for further hostile action on the part of the Soviets.
Had Kennedy not chosen to wait out the situation, the Cold War would indeed have turned into a ""hot war"", a nuclear one.
The situation was further intensified by the Chiefs of Staff and their respective commands and their statuses; for the first time in history, the United States had raised their Strategic Air Command forces to the Defensive Condition DEFCON 2 on October 24th , meaning they were at a heightened state of alert poised to strike targets within the Soviet Union.
