As in the past five years and in accordance with the spirit and content of this law, Americans across the Nation will conduct various activities aimed at making this Sixth Observance of Captive Nations Week the most impressive and instructive one yet.
The Johnson proclamation is not substantially different from the one released by Pres< dent Kennedy last year, and in one respect it is even weaker.
President Kennedy 1 s proclamation at least specified the time -honored American principle of national self -deter mination for all the captive nations, including the dozen in the Soviet Union.
Moreover, the current proclamation repeats a serious error of omission found in the previous Kennedy declaration.
Evidently for the purpose of accommodating M good"" Communists as against ""bad"" ones, no mention is made of Communism as a tool of ideologic deception and, as in the earlier Eisenhower proclamations, the ultimate and determining reality of Soviet Russian imperio -colonialism is completely overlooked.
It is no secret that since 1959, when Khrushchev furiously denounced Congress 1 action, certain elements in the Department of State have attempted in a variety of ways to play down the resolution and, indeed, the whole captive nations issue.
Down to the present, * they have succeeded in influencing our Chief Executives to issue relatively weak proclamations that bear only a general similarity to the resolution.
In large measure they have also been responsible for the late timing of the successive proclamations which gives inadequate encouragement to our citizens in preparing for the observances.
He is the author of the Captive Nations Week Resolution which was passed by Congress in 1959.
This resolution provides that the third week of July be set aside each year to remind the world of the nations y held in bondage by^Russian imperialism.
At the beginning of each year, the National Captive Nations Committee in Washington turns to the White House for an early presidential proclamation, and every year the grand stall is methodically initiated.
However, such as it is, the record has been broken by the Johnson Proclamation., It was issued three weeks in advance of the Week.
The proclamation was released at 4m. on a Saturday when . few or no reporters are regularly about* the White House.
Our appeasing policy of sile nce was proJPgrl y served,, Why the Captive Nations are de -emphasized.
These facts are intertwined with the Government's policy of silence regarding the captive nations.
One obvious explanation is the Administration's dominant political desire not to irritate Khrushchev with any recital of truths that would keep our citizens and the world mindful of the fate of the long list of captive nations.
In the spirit of ""peaceful coexistence, "" while the Russian dictator freely speaks out in Egypt against "" United States imperialism"" and ""bourgeois nationalism"" and in Scandinavia attempts to justify the enslavement of the non-Russian Baltic nations, our officials remain mute about the captive nations for fear the Khrushchev would be disturbed by the patent truth.
Heard often and long enough without refutation, the Russian fables will be believed by millions all over the world.
Another reason offered for the de -emphasis on Captive Nations Week is the need for improving relations and reducing tensions with the Soviet Union.
Some in our Government would like to oblige the Soviet Russian imperio -colonialists on this score.
Khrushchev has already found outspoken supporters for this unilateral psycho -political disarmament in our -countny.For example, George F Kennan, who enjoys a brilliant reputation for success through successive error, severely criticizes the Captive Nations Week Resolution in his recent book On Dealing with the Communist World.
He makes the observation that the resolution ""has freed no captive nations, nor is it likely to do so.
By its very nature, a resolution is an ideological commitment that necessitates action and implementation; and this requires not only reason but also will.
In our protracted failure to garner the necessary .will to defeat Moscow in the Cold War, we have, now arrived at the irrational position of believing that world tensions will evaporate the less we. say or do about the captive nations.
In fact, many in our Governmen have begun to indulge in the self -hypnotism of imputing nationalism to Communist re♦ ."" 3 i gimes in Europe and Asia with the wishful hppe of weaning them away from colonialist Moscow.
What's more, there is a marked strain of naivete in this selfhypnotic position, namely that the Gomulkas, Kadarsy and Gheorghiu-Dejs are foolish enough not to be aware of this basic reality of ultimate dependence on Moscow.
Regardless of how long their leashes may be, the survival of their regimes depends on the Russian imperium.
This won't be the first time we have contributed heavily to the preservation and growth of the Soviet Russian Empire to our own national detriment.
Fortunately, in all sections of our country Americans are dedicated to the ideals of the resolution passed by Congress in 1959.
They seek its implementation and firmly oppose the policy of silence, accommodation, and illusory interdependence with the Soviet Russian Empire.
The captive nations movement has grown so that the majority of our States formally proclaim the Week and every major city holds an annual observance.
In Congress, support for the resolution's implementation steadily increases.
Still, many of our citizens are unfamiliar with the long list of captive nations.
It is a misconcepti on to thi nk that the only captive nations are in_C_entral -Europe ^Actually, the majority of them are in the Soviet Union and Asia.
It is this valid image of the Soviet Union, as a prison house of captive nations, that horrifies Khrushchev, On the psycho-political front in the Cold War, we could with relatively little effort demolish Soviet Russian propaganda by concentrating on the captive non-Russian nations in the USSR and exposing to the world the Soviet Russian imperialism and colonialism that alone hold that artificial state together.
EDITORIAL STAFF NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE STRATEGY STAFF Editor-in-Chief John M Fisher Loyd Wright Karl Baarslag.
Anthony T Bouscaren Intelligence Editor Major General Garrison B Coverdale, USA USA Anthony Harrigan Economics Editor Dr.
Gerhart Niemeyer ^ Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Admiral Felix B Stump, USN Dr.
T L Shen ^ National Editor William Gill Dr Edward Teller Duane Thorin . Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr.
Ernest Loebbecke Senior Vice President * Kenneth M Piper Henry Duque Hughston M; McBain o5 Vice President Stephen L Donchess Wade Fetzer, Jr.
It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security served except that permission is granted for reproduction in whole for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions.
Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and members. forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices.
Additional copies available at 25(1 each postpaid for non-members and 10^ each postpaid for meml>ers.
JONES . crt NOT RECORDgBl MRSJ^METCALF , IISS G ANDY \ 1 ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN If UNCLASSIFIED 1 ,7 ENCLOFTJtlB -g DIRECTOR , J JUL 2 7 1964 Q -CLEARANCE vs CONVERGENCE In an era dominated by the twin follies of accommodation and convergence, serious questions are being raised about the nation's internal security programs* These questions have far-reaching implications, not only for Government, but for private industry as well.
But schizo-like, the United States insists on riding both horns of the dilemma.
Thus, on the one hand our disarmament negotiators place child-like faith in the word of Nikita Khrushchev by waiving inspection rights on a nuclear test ban, the orbiting of nuclear weapons, and the production of enriched plutonium and uranium.
On the other hand, we continue to profess a deep and abiding suspicion regarding the minions Khrushchev assigns to ferret out our armament secrets.
TS5Brre~db servers tfelieve^tliat an article published in the May issue of THE BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS points unmistak ably in that direction.
The article was written by Harold P Green, a Washington attorney with rather impressive credentials in the field of security.
While with the Atomic Energy Commisx sion's legal division from 1950-54 Mr Green handled a number of security cases and drew up the statement of charges in the most famous of them all -the Oppenheimer Case.
Subsequently, he was counsel for the Senate Subcommittee on Government Reorganization and in 1955 authored the measure which led to the creation of the Commission on Government Security.
Since then he has specialized in defending persons accused of being security risks and, he says, has yet to lose one of these cases.
Using statistical data on the history of the AEC's Q-Clearance program, Mr Green contends in his article that; ""The overall attitude of security officials has changed , ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING THE NATION'S SECURITY perceptibly.
Six years ago, most would have described their basic mission as keeping subversives and security risks out of sensitive positions.
But Mr Green claims that ""a person with substantially derogatory information in his background has a much greater chance of obtaining an AEC Q-Clearance than a 'secret' clearance from almost any other government agency.
AEC security program -has acquired a-greater degree of sophistication, understanding, compassion, and courage.
T1 In a recent interview, Mr Green told me that he had not intended to single out the AEC in his article, although changes he said were made by the BULLETIN'S editors after he approved the proofs, certainly had that effect.
However, from his point of view ""there are no blacks and whites in security cases, only varying shades of gray.
Fy ou can tell from a person's past behavior whether he is apt to indulge in espionage.
Waters, Director, of the AEC's Division of Security, and Robert E Tharp, Assistant Director of Personnel Security, we found I that they definitely do not subscribe to Harold Green's thesis.
All of us recognize that Communism is an even greater threat today than it was in the past and we are just as much concerned about Communist affiliations today as we were in 1955.
If the government has indeed let down its security guard, the ramifications in private industry are obvious.
Many times that many are, of course, employed by industry on classified work for the Department of Defense and other agencies.
Traditionally, industry has relied heavily on government security officers.
Access to secret or top-secret data cannot be granted unless the government first provides clearance.
Yet even then if derogatory information is turned up on an applicant or employee the case must be turned over to the government.
Still, much of the day-to-day implementation of security measures falls to industry and ""under DOD regulations the private contractor is held responsible ""for safeguarding all classified information under his control.
It is difficult for me to think of any more foolish economy. ..."" 4 Obviously, in the field of internal security the government should set both the standards and the pace.
But today, according to one top-notch security executive with a major aero-space firm, ""it is particularly difficult to get a clearance denied, or once granted, to get it revoked.
Robert Morris Edgar Ansel Mowrer International Law & Dr stefan p ossony Dr.
Gerhart Niemeyer Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Jd™™ 1 ^""j fStum PUSN {Ret ) OrT L Shen National Editor William Gill Dr E d ward Teller Duane Thorin Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr.
Kenneth M Piper Henry Duque Hughston M McBain Vice President Stephen L Donchess yVade Fetzer, Jr.
Annual subscripor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are tion rate $12.
Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and meml>ers. forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices.
Additional copies available at 25tf each postpaid for non -members and I0<t each postpaid for meml>ers.
The older Negro organizations, The Urban League and The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, were well aware of the early threats to infiltrate their ranks and were able to oust the Communists and dissuade others in their groups who thought they could M work with"" the Communists.
In observing picket line demonstrations at the Board of Education and at the / site of temporary classroom construction, several local Communists were identified.
One of the most active was Charles McCord, identified at one time as head of 42nd Ward Communist Club and a long time associate of CP vice chairman, Claude Lightfoot.
Another was Eugene Felcirtian, a writer and one time Daily Worker e ditor.
Lightfoot, himself/ later took part in a demonstration ""for food and jobs"" on January 31, 1964 at the offices or the Illinois Public Aid Commission in Chicago.
Ehrlich was back again try ing to lead a ""hunger -rharch"" on Governor Otto Kerner's Chicago office on May.i4th:' ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS THE NATION'S SECURITY -A 2 Cleveland In Cleveland, racial tensions have centered around schools.
Tension reached a peak in February when a white minister was accidentally killed during a demonstration at a school construction site.
According to a Cleveland Press story on April 25, one name on the list was that of Eric J Reinthaler.
The article identified Reinthaler as a co-chairman of CORE's Cleveland finance committee and the police say he played a ""major role 1 ' in demonstrations at the School Board.
On July 19, 1962 he was released from the Federal Prison at Milan, Michigan where he had served 15 months for violation of the noncommunist affidavit section of the Taft-Hartley Act.
Louis area, civil rights demonstrators have engaged in sit-ins directed against several downtown banks, claiming racially biased hiring practices.
The demonstrations have been conducted by CORE but a non-member of CORE, William S Massingale, attracted the attention of Denny Walsh, a St.
Louis Globe -Democrat staff writer; Massingale was active in sit-ins at the St.
The rent strikes have been organized by the Community Council for Housing, a local group headed by Jesse Gray.
On February 3, 1960 Jesse Gray was called to testify before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
Gray wa^ arrested^on June 30, 1964 by police in Chicago during a demonstration of ACT, a new militant giroup.
San Francisco , ' \ The most spectacular demonstration of Communist efforts to infiltrate the civil rights movement has occurred in one of the world's most spectacular cities, San Francisco.
The number of arrests testify to the fact that the demonstrations we re neither peaceful nor law abiding.
Rosanne Forest was among the people arrested on March 11 at the Cadillac showroom demonstration.
These included Mark Comfort, son-in-law of Robert Black, an Oakland, California printer ""identified in 1953 testimony as a CP member; Carl Granich, son or Worker c olumnist, ^Mike Gold; Nora Lapin, daughter of the late Adam Lapin, once a Daily Worker correspondent; and Bettina Aptheker, daughter ofV Eplitical Affairs editor Herbert Aptheker.
The founding convention of the new Communist youth group was hastily transferred there from Chicago and its sponsors announced that the keynote speaker was to be Rev.
Among those who issued the call to the convention were Tracy Sims and Michael Myerson of the ""Ad Hoc Committee to End Discrimination"", the group which organized the San Francisco racial demonstrations.
Also listed in the youth group's press release were Robert Baum, idenJiftgias^a^ha^^ chairman of the Bridgeport CORE chapter, Edward Reftwich, a ""CORE activist"" in Bridgeport and Michael Sheidrick, a ""CORE activist"" from Paterson, New Jersey.
A C, P Yellow Springs, Ohio The quiet village of Yellow Springs, just east of Dayton is fairly typical of the small Midwestern college town.
It is the site of Antioch College, an institution which has frequently become embroiled in controversy.
On March 14, 1964 several hundred students from Antioch and other nearby colleges engaged in a mass picketing protest aimed at a local barber who had refused to cut Negroes 1 hair.
The students rocked and nearly overturned the car of a doctor trying to gfet through. i # The crowd, a&eady in violation of an injunction against mass picketing, defied police requests to disperse and, fire hoses proved ineffective.
Finally, after repeated warnings, the local police, reinforced by sheriff's deputies and officers from neighboring towns, 4fc had to resort to tear gas.
Red-eyed but still defiant, the crowd returned and finally hac^^ to be moved by a police skirmish line with nightsticks held at chest level.
On the following Monday, most of the stud&rfts were released to the Deans of their respective colleges but several ringleaders were required to post bond.
At the same time, some opponents of the civil rights movement have denounced it with the sweeping charge that it is all a Communist plot.
Both attitudes are equi-distant from reality and represent a refusal to face up squarely to difficult problems.
Both attitudes s erve the Communist cause by' inhibiting reasonable discussion of the entire question, permitting the Communists to continue their present efforts and intensifying emotional attitudes capable of producing the bitter harvest most desired by the Communists disorder, lawlessness and violence.
James D Atkinson Intelligence Editor Major General Garrison B, Coverdale, USA Economics Editor Dr.
Lev E Dobriansky Foreign Editor Frank J Johnson Internal Security Editor Lee R Pennington International Law & Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN National Editor William Gill Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr.
Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington OFFICERS President John M Fisher Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper Vice President Stephen L Donchess Vice President John G Sevcik Vice President Russell E White Secretary-Treasurer Cyri) W Hooper NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE Loyd Wright Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, USA General Mark Clark Admirat Ben Moreell, USN Dr.
Edward Teller Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN General Albert C Wedemeyer, USA SENIOR Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin Charles S Craigmile Robert Donner Henry Duque Wade Fetzer, Jr.
Robert W Galvin Fred M Gillies STRATEGY STAFF Karl Baarslag "" ' * ~ Dr.
Snen Duane Thorin Stanley J Tracy ADVISORY BOARD Clifford F Hood Wayne A Johnston William H Kendall.
Worton, USMC Howard I Young \ The American Security Council Washington Report is published four times monthly by the American \ Security Council.
It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions.
Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and meml>ers.
Additional copies available at 25^ each postpaid for non-members and 10^ each postpaid for members.
All rights reserved except that permission is granted for reproduction in whole or in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices.
It was good of you to make these copies avail* a&le to us and they Join me is thanking you lor your thoughtfaiaess.
Mr Callahan... m Mr Gale.— Mr Rosen:.— Mr Suilivan.JS Tavel Trotter „ Tels.
OFFICERS President JOHN M FISHER American Security Council Senior Vice President KENNETH M PIPER Motorola, Inc.
STEFAN T POSSONY International Law and Space Editor ASC Washington Report REAR ADMIRAL CHESTER C WARD, USN This has been prepared on a non-partisan basis.
The National Strategy Committee devoted its main attention to developing affirmative recommendations for the consideration of government and of our members.
Thus, ^since^ thisstudy will be_a~ prime reference point in our next studies, we are most interested in any suggestions you may have for improvement of this study.
V Captioned book forwarded Assistant to the Director Belmont ;8/5/64 by John M Fisher, PresidentpA®£g|^^ Letter acknowledgedjby Director 8/12/64.
Sets out guidelines for strategy-bringing together liberal, moderate, and conservative thinking.
Recommends that we use tougher approach in dealing with communists; that U S. wage counterwar, measure for measure, and change our ""defensive"" position; that we work to effect internal transformation within Soviet State, that we demonstrate will to win, mount psychological and % economic offensive, improve relations with NATO^nations, reappraise neutralism, adolt new Latin American policy to defeat communism, and maintain superior military posture.
Study also recommends updating internal security programs in accordance w; recommendations in 1957 of Commission on Government Security established by Congress.
ASC financed and operated by private industry as national research and information center on subversive activities.
ASC indicates readiness to identify its members publicly as formers with Bureau.
BOOK REVIEW: ""GUIDELINES FOR COLD WAR VICTORY"" BY NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE OF AMERICAN SECURITY COUNCIL CENTRAL RESEARCH MATTER DETAILS: Captioned book was forwarded to Assistant to the Director Belmont on 8/5/64 by John M Fisher, President, American Security Council.
Its purpose is to bring together the best thinking (liberal, moderate, and conservative) that will enable this country to win the cold war.
In encouraging Soviet moderation and eventual change of heart, we adopt a fallacious policy of moderation and conciliation.
The study indicates our foreign policy frees no one and actually results in less rather than more freedom throughout the world.
In the meantime, we must demonstrate the will to win and mount psychological and economic offensives.
It is essential we improve our relations with the NATO nations; reappraise neutralism, which is incompatible with victory; formulate a new policy which will defeat communism in Latin America; and, maintain a superior military posture.
On 6/8/62 John M Fisher, President of ASC, wrote to the Director and requested he participate in this study.
His services were satisfactory and he is on the Special Correspondents 1 List.
American Security Council The files disclose ASC is an organization financed and operated by private industry as a national research and information center on subversive activities for its members.
Past inquiries have indicated that sonie people believe ASC is closely related to the Bureau.
This is probably attributable to the organization 1 steadiness to identify its members as being formerly associated with the Bureau.
For instance, in the extensive lists of participants in this study, among the ""experts"" on the Strategy Staff are four former agents of the Bureau and one former Assistant Director.
References to Director and FBI All references to the Director and the FBJ are favorable.
The study begins with a quotation from Mr Hoover's address to the Brotherhood of the Washington Hebrew Congregation on 12/4/63.
WORTON, USMC Retired Presidenl American Library of Information HOWARD I ""YOUNG, President American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company OFFICERS , President \ JOHN M FISHER American Security Council !, Senior Vice President KENNETH M PIPER Motorola, Inc.
The Nafck Strategy Committee devoted' its main attention to developonfg affirmative recommendations for the consideration of government and of our members.
The American Security Council is organized as the means through which its member companies and institutions 'work together and cooperate with the government.
Also, if you'd like, we'd be pleased to send you a working draft of our next study ""The Role of Business in the Cold War"" when it. i& ready for review and crittcis; John M<fj Fisher President ^ il ft.
WORTON, USMC Retired President American Library of Information HOWARD I YOUNG, President American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company President JOHN M FISHER American Security Council Senior Vice President KENNETH M PIPER Motorola, Inc.
The National Strategy Committee devoted its main attention to developing afo officers firmative recommendations for the consideration of government u and of our members.
O a The American Security Council is organized as the means throu^t which its member companies and institutions work together and {ji cooperate with the government.
Thus, since this study will be a|j prime reference point in our next studies, we are -most-in-terestedin any suggestions you may have for improvement of this study.
Robert W Galvin'Chicago NA 5-6000 John M Fisher Chicago AN 3-2784 FOR RELEASE: Wednesday, A.M., August 12, 1964 , TOP-LEVEL CIVILIAN COMMITTEE URGES ADOPTION OF STRATEGY FOR VICTORY IN THE COLD WAR CHICAGO -The top-level civilian National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council today recommended the adoption of a victory strategy in the Cold War.
John M Fisher, President of the American Security Council, described the study as M a synthesis of the best liberal, moderate and conservative thinking-on~ht>w""w 7 e^^ — — — ^ ""Guidelines"" was two years in preparation.
It was drafted by the 28 national figures on the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council in cooperation with representative colleges, universities and organizations.
The chairman of the Committee is Robert Galvin, Chairman of the Board of Motorola, Inc. , and the co-chairman is Loyd Wright, former president of the American Bar Association who headed the Commission on Governmore ALL INFORMATJON'CONTAINEi ment Security established by Congress in 1955.
Never before have so many opinionmaking groups participated in the development of national strategy recommendations.
Robert W Galvin, Chairman of the ASC's National Strategy Committee, said that the central conclusion of the study was that, ""Unless the United States adopts an affirmative Cold War policy, it will continue to lose the Cold War in the same way a football team would lose if it were prohibited from crossing the 50 -yard* line.
If any one of the elements of this formula equals zero, the total power of a nation equals zero.
The National Strategy Committee finds this national goal ""utterly irreconcilable"" with the Communist goal of total victory through the overthrow of all non -Communist societies and institutions.
In place of the present policies which encourage the Communists in their drive for world rule, the United States must develop a strategy of victory which will provide real inducements to the Communists to call off the Cold War.
Rather, we aim at a true reconciliation and peace between free.pe.oples.
Our national power should be applied peacefully and effectively by utilizing the centuries -old principle of declaration of contraband.
Itisrecommended -that-t-he-President apply this principle by declaring the entire Western Hemisphere to be a peace zone , with all Communist war material, including fuel, declared to be contraband.
We must be willing, and give concrete evidence of our willingness, to extend our own war of liberation into the enemy camp.
The cheapest and quickest way to win the war in South Vietnam is to begin with one or more of the privileged sanctuaries like North Vietnam and Communist -held parts of Laos.
If these countries were cut off as a base of supply and sanctuary for the Viet Cong, both the-military situation and the all -important psychological atmosphere in South Vietnam would be transformed.
We have no offensive psychological action policy to match that of the Communists.
A psychological offensive offers us the best chance to win the Cold War without nuclear conflict.
Those who live under the miseries of Communism, who know it first hand, are the most fertile target for psychological warfare.
A massive effort directed at these people is the best way to bring maximum internal pressure on the Communist regimes.
This effort should embody a full-scale ideological offensive to open the closed Soviet society, a program to place major stress on Soviet imperio -colonialism, and a special program to rally democratic forces in Eastern Europe into an effective opposition against their Soviet rulers.
The latter program should not, however, incite these people to outright revolt unless and until there is solid basis to believe that such revolts would succeed.
Other major recommendations appear in the enclosed summary of ''Guidelines"", ) Mr Galvin stressed that ""the individuals, organizations and institutions who officially cooperated in this study do not necessarily agree with all specific recommendations He emphasized that the recommendations were the sole responsibility of the National Strategy Committee.
However, he said that ""the central thrust of this study fairly represents the consensus viewpoint of these participants more The 28 -member National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council is made up of 18 present or former heads of ASC member companies and 10 men who have played important roles in the nation's history.
The latter 10 men include the Chief United States strategist in World War II, a former Commander-in-Chief, Pacific, a former Chief of Staff to General Douglas MacArthur, the ""father of the 'H 1 bomb"", the Commander of jthe World War II_allied. invasion. of Italy, andjsupast presi-, dent of the American Bar Association who served as chairman of the Commission on Government Security.
Douglas MacArthur Bennett Archambault Chairman of the Board, Stewart -Warner Corporation Lloyd L, Austin Chairman of the Board, Security First National Bank General Mark W Clark President, The Citadel Charles S Craigmile Chairman of the Board, Belden Manufacturing Co.
President, Illinois Central Railroad William H Kendall President, Louisville & Nashville Railroad Co.
Ernest J Loebbecke President, Title Insurance & Trust Company Hughs ton M McBain Ret.
A, B, McKee, Jr President, Forest Lumber Company Imperial Valley Lumber Company Admiral Ben Moreell Former Chairman of the Board, Jones 6c Laughlin Steel Company Dr.
They include the American Legion, American Farm Bureau Federation, American Society for Industrial Security, International House, Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, Association of American Railroads, Association of Industrial Advertisers, International Association of Chiefs of Police, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, many other national organizations and a number of local and regional civic and business groups.
Charles Malik, former president of the United Nations General Assembly; Mrs.
Senator William F Knowland of California; author more 9 Russell Kirk; Benjamin Gitlow, former member of the Praesidium of the Communist Internationa; Dr.
Stanley K Hornbeck, former director of the State Department's Office of Far Eastern Affairs; and Dr.
Emilio Nunez Portuondo, former chairman of the United Nations Security Council.
Army -Intelligence Corps andnow-administratwe ^director of the ASC; Dr.
Mr Fisher stated that the American Security Council is a non-profit, non-partisan association operated by 3500 businesses and private institutions to meet their Cold War responsibilities.
August 12, 1964 The Free World and the Communist Bloc are locked in a final war to determine whether the world will live under dictatorship or under freedom.
If we lose this war the lights of freedom will go out all over the world, possibly not to be relighted for centuries.
Standing between America and its goal is the Communist empire* s drive for world dominion.
The Communist goal, restated again and again is. the overthrow of all nonCommunist societies and institutions.
Yet, although the Communists have clearly declared war on us, America has failed to decide that it, too, seeks victory in the present conflict.
Instead, for nearly two decades the United States has patiently pursued the policy of containment.
Nonetheless, the United States is today softening its policy of containment and shifting to the far more conciliatory strategy of interdependence.
The basic assumption in the strategy of interdependence is that by helping the Soviet Union overcome its economic difficulties, by seeking areas of common action, and by working toward a ""convergence"" of values and purposes, we can gradually bring about the fundamental alteration of Soviet purpose which containment alone failed to do.
The idea of convergence is based on the belief that as the United States becomes more socialistic and the Soviet Union adopts more Western methods, there will soon be no differences between the two systems and, therefore, no reason for conflict.
They totally ignore the fact that every act of moderation or compromise, every retreat or concession on our part, has led not to reciprocity on the part of the Communists, but to new pressure; not to a relaxation of tension, but to a new crisis; not toward peace, but toward war.
The new strategy of interdependence has already been the basis for the no-inspection Nuclear Test Bah Treaty, the credit sale of wheat to Russia, the recent moves to develop even more trade with Communist nations, and the M unilateral -interlocking arms control"" reduction of enriched uranium and plutonium production.
The net effect of policy of conciliation and accommodation is to affirm the Soviet leadership in its view that world Communism and its own hegemony are practical goals which do not involve undue risk, goals that they can now hope to achieve through increased aggression and subversion.
Thus, instead of preserving peace, our present strategies immeasurably increase the danger of nuclear war.
A policy of conciliation and accommodation can never be effective , in dealing with a dictator -aggre s sor, History shows that this can be no more effective in dealing with Khrushchev than it was in dealing with Hitler.
Is a defensive policy, with all this implies strategically and psychologically.
It abandons the initiative to the Communists and SUMMARY --4 allows them to choose the field of battle.
It weakens the belief of ""fence-sitters"" in our ultimate victory and dismays some of our most loyal friends It saps our will to make sacrifices, raises false hopes and encourages national complacency.
The belief that the United States will never take the offensive assures the Reds that they can pursue their objective without risk to themselves.
They have the world to win and nothing to lose by continuing to wage the Cold War against us, their passive adversary.
Our military, economic, industrial and technological capabilities exceed those of any country on the face of the globe.
While the United States has the military capacity to win a hot war, no aggressor will dare start a hot war.
Thus, it is urgent that we win the Cold War befor the Communists achieve a technological breakthrough which may reverse this balance of power.
Unless the United States adopts an affirmative Cold War policy, it will continue to lose the Cold War in the same way that a football team would lose if it were prohibited from crossing the 50-yard line.
SUMMARY --5 Against the Communist strategy of aggression, there can and must be a strategy not merely to deter aggression but to transform aggressors into peaceful governments.
In place of the present policies which encourage the Soviets in their drive for world rule, the United States must develop a strategy of victory which will provide real inducements , to the Communists to call off the Cold War.
We do not advocate a conquest by the United States of the peoples of the Communist Bloc, Rather, we aim at a true reconciliation and peace between free peoples.
Such a reconciliation will not be possible until there is a basic change in the nature of their government-until their government stops trying to conquer the rest of the world.
Once a national objective of victory is adopted, it is imperative that we demonstrate that we have the national will to accomplish this objective.
A quarantine should be instituted to keep more contraband from being moved into or between the countries of the Western Hemisphere.
It must be made clear to the Asian Communists that the U S. will not allow them to limit so-called ""wars of liberation"" SUMMARY -7 to our side of the line.
If these countries were cut off as a base of supply arid sanctuary for the Viet Cong, both the military situation and the all -important psychological atmosphere in South Vietnam would be transformed, 3.
They war against us continuously; we do not war against them, A psychological offensive offers us the best chance to win the Cold War without nuclear conflict.
This effort should embody a full-scale ideological offensive to open the closed Soviet society, a program to place major stress on Soviet imperio-colonialism, and a special program to rally democratic forces in Eastern Europe into an effective opposition SUMMARY — 8 against their Soviet rulers.
In place of trade deals which strengthen the economies of Communist countries, we recommend a limited trade embargo against them.
This does not mean that all trade with the Soviet Bloc should necessarily be stopped.
But it should be severely curtailed in those products which the Communists need most to continue the Cold War.
This would include not only military equipment, but all articles which increase the industrial potential of the Soviet Union.
Economic aid programs must be coordinated with America's objective of victory in the Cold War.
Priority should be given to deserving allies and nations, making a sensible effort to build freedom, but we must cut off aid to all countries which are hostile or are aiding or abetting Communist expansion. i The U S. should gradually terminate economic aid as we have practiced it since the end of World War II and restore the mechanics of international investment, including the confidence factors that are necessary to increase the investment flow.
To restore the confidence of our NATO allies and build a SUMMARY --9 permanent and satisfactory unity in the Western.alliance , the combined European NATO nations should be treated as a full partner rather than as a satellite.
The combined European NATO nations should be granted possession and control of nuclear weapons for joint defense against air, missile and ground attack, and for deterrent and retaliatory purposes.
It is precisely this change in strategy which must be considered the first step toward a constructive evolution of the Soviet regime.
The Alliance for Progress, of itself, is not enough to combat the spread of Communism in Latin America.
We are not opposed to an intelligent economic aid program for our neighbors to the south.
But the U S. must recognize that the real cause of Communism is Communists --not poverty per se.
America must do all it can to encourage and strengthen its friends among the intellectual, political and military groups in Latin America.
Communist organizations in these countries who have struggled alone against the public ignorance and apathy on which Communist padres count to make their objective possible.
The U S. must make maximum use of the United Nations as an effective Cold War forum.
At the same time, we must face up to the reality that the UN itself is not capable of blocking Communist ambitions.
The UN can serve admirably as a world forum in which the U S. and other nations can properly pre sent their case.
But we must learn to make better use of the UN to expand the cause of freedom--and not permit it to restrict American actions aimed at halting the continuing threats to freedom.
The U S. should never subcontract to the UN its decisionmaking responsibilities—as it has done so often in the past.
The result of this subcontracting has been the loss of the initiative in world affairs to America 1 s enemies who never permit the UN to act as an inhibiting factor in their policy.
The avoidance of war requires that the United States maintain over -all military superiority,"" rather than the acceptance of any kind of ""parity"" which can only be ephemeral and inherently unstable.
No aggressor will dare start a ""hot"" war against the United State s so long as the United States has the capability of winning any hot war.
In addition, the U S. must promptly develop a military capacity in space and a follow-on manned bomber to preserve the Strategic Air Command as a mixed bomber-missile force.
So long as the Communist continue to seek world domination, disarmament is unthinkable.
The Communists attempt to equate disarmament with peace, but they actually see it as a short cut to total Communist victory.
Until we appreciate the fact that disarmament is impossible unless the Communists give up their design for world conquest, mankind's most fervent hope will remain the grand illusion.
Worse yet, disarmament will not lead to peace, but only to the ultimate disaster of a choice between surrender and war.
WlsLoach * 1 Mr Belmont 1 Mr Sullivan 1 Section tickler 1 Mr Garner 1 Mr Keating f^-yj VEvans Gale _ Rosen Sullivai Tavel Trotter Tele.
Mr* Fisher is a former Special Agent who EOD 8-4-47, and resigned 2-13-53* in GS-12.
Our relations have been cordial with him, h^wjsacerjjra claiming that it is receTTOif suggestions or advice from the.
Bureau, [Therefore, the attached acknowledgment over the Director's signature has been purposely made brief.
DOM/mlk, 8-12-64 Mr Fisher also sent copies of this book to the Director and to Mr Tolson.
Accordingly, it is felt that Mr Fisher should receive one letter of acknowledgement over the Director's signature incorporating the receipt of the 3 books.
September 23,^ 1964.|j|^^ Tdvt "" I have just learned from Mr DeWitt Copp that he has been hired as manager of the Washington office of the American Security Council.
Copp is an individual with whomj I was acquainted in high school and who, until recently, has taught history in a private school in Connecticut and done free-lance writing on the side.
The Bureau assisted him in a book which he has written on communist activities at the United Natioris by supplying him with certain public source data.
The American Security Council is an anticommunist organization subscribed to by numerous industrial firms and which maintains a central reference library of information on communism and communists in Chicago.
Copp stated that his primary job to begin with is organizing and writing scripts for a radio program to be sponsored by the American Security Council consisting of 5-minute taped interviews with prominent individuals concerning topics dealing primarily with communism.
Copp stated that Senator Dodd would conduct a few of the interviews but that most of them would be handled by Judd.
Copp stated that the initial program is to appear on jSeptember 28 and he gave me a copy of a recording of the first program.
I any sending this to the Domestic Intelligence Division separately. i , f Copp also furnished me a copy of a book entitled ""Peace and Freedom \fU Through Cold War Victory"" with the subtitle ""Guidelines for Cold War Victory"" ; published by the American Security Council Press.
I am also furnishing this separately * to the Domestic Intelligence Division.
The above -captioned recording which was personally handed to Mr Tavel By Mr DeWitt Copp, manager of the Washington office of the American Security Council, was received in the Domestic Intelligence Division on 10/19/64 and reviewed by the Central Research Unit.
Peace and Freedom Through Cold War Victory, "" also presented by Mr Copp, was previously reviewed by the Central Research Unit in a memorandum from Smith to Sullivan dated 8/12/64.
Judd, a physician and member of the 78th to 87th Congresses, was nominated for President at the 1964 Republican National Convention.
The first of frequent guests to appear in this series is former President Eisenhower.
It is a five -day -a-week, 3 1/4 minute program designed to fit into a five minute time segment with local commercials.
Review The enclosed record, which includes three programs, begins with an introduction by Dr.
Judd who states that the purpose of the series is to give listeners a better understanding of complex current events and provide background essential to such an understanciing.
Judd says the venture is intended to be nonpartisan and will include leaders and experts in all important areas of international affairs.
On the first program former President Eisenhowers statesmanlike remarks concern the contrast between freedom and communism.
He points out how communists use deceitful tactics and states that to defeat communism we must use truth and rely on our spiritual values.
He wishes the venture success and remarks that it will help keep the ""lights of freedom burning brightly.
This report, based on data secured from Cuban refugee groups, alleges that the Soviets have never pulled out of Cuba.
They have concealed submarine bases and have built underground silos for missiles.
REVIEW OF ""THE WASHINGTON REPORT"" AUDITION RECORDING, PRESENTED BY THE Santa Tomas.
Judd states that, although the report is discounted in official circles, America must take a hard look at the situation in Cuba.
The third program consists of Senator Dodd's presentation of a plan to shorten the war in Vietnam.
In order to cut off the communist supply line, he advocates hit 'and run raids on the northern coast of Vietnam; the destruction of bridges, dams, and generators; and, the severance of the supply route running from neighboring Laos to North Vietnam.
American Security Council The files disclose the American Security Council is an organization financed and operated by private industry as a national research and information center on subversive activities for its members.
It sponsors Fidelifax, Inc. , a nationwide personnel investigating organization with offices in 32 cities, each of which is allegedly headed by a former Bureau agent.
Past inquiries have indicated that some people believe the American Security Council is closely related to the Bureau.
This is probably attributable to the organization's readiness to identify its members as being formerly associated with the Bureau.
Observation Based on the pilot program, it would appear that this series will utilize politicians to advocate that the United States carry out a more aggressive international policy against communism.
The letter of December 17th from your Administrative Assistant has been received.
While i would like to be of assistance, the FBI being an investigative agency of the Federal Government neither makes evaluations nor draws conclusions as to the character or integrity of any organization, publication or individual.
Information contained in the files of the FBI must be maintained as confidential in accordance with regulations^ the Department of Justice.
In view of this, I am sure you will understand why I cannot answer your specific inquiry.
American Strategy have not been the subjects of investigations by this Bureau.
Information developed is made available foi§ a fee to members bf cOmp|^ijgg and other organizations or individuals deemed t*> be qualified by the.
M / jrj.-j NOTE continued page 2. m mi ft* f TELETYPE UNIT i Honorable Daniel Ken Inouye ^ s Institute for American Strategy operates in a similar manner and is also contrdled by a former Agent named John Fisher.
We have had contacts and dealings with these Bfa^anizatfons in the past but more recently we have been circumspect concerning requests for literature and speech requests.
Senator Daniel Ken Inouye is a Senator from Hawa ii and a person with whom we have had cordial relations in the nast,l _ b6 b7C The Senator 1 s wife and friends were taken on a special tour 2 ^DANIEL tf.
RALPH M M/WA , ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT Mr Tolson___ Mr Belmont Mr Callahan Mr Conrad Mr Felt.
It is a fascinating age in which we live, because a titanic world struggle is in progress, the outcome of which will have a deci_ sive effect on the destiny of mankind for perhaps many centuries to come.
Since; World' War II, America has played the major single role, for good or ill, in determining 'the direction of world history.
Every other nation, friend or foe, must give major weight to our probable reaction before shaping its own policies.
America is the arbiter of the world; war or peace, closed or open societies, misery or prosperity all depend in largest measure on the action, or lack of it, by the United States.
The responsibility of the American people to others, to themselves, and to future generations, is an exceedingly heavy one.
The United States panicked and helped to destroy the kind of stable government for which it now so desperately pleads.
At the beginning of 1965, it may well be too late to avoid a total disaster.
The substance of real democracy is presently impossible in Vietnam, but the United States has been stubbornly insisting on its facade at the cost of progressively alienating those elements in Vietnam who must, after all, do the actual fighting against the Communists.
The danger of total dependence on United States support is again revealed; it is only against our friends and allies that we dare to employ pressure; never against our enemies.
Disharmony between the United States and South Vietnamese is at a new peak.
As to the Chinese and North Vietnamese instigators and supporters of the Viet Cong rebellion, repeated United States warnings to ""leave their neighbors alone 11 have had ANALY.SIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING THE NATION'S SECURITY 2 no effect.
In retaliation there have been some limited, clandestine operations against the North, and more may have been decided upon following General Taylor 1 s November visit to Washington.
But the United States is clearly unable to bring itself to put real teeth into its warnings.
This is what the Chinese mean when they call us M paper tigers, M We have the power but we dare not use it.
It was argued that going to war would not help Czechoslovakia which would be overrun by the Germans in any case.
There was great reluctance to risk the horror of war so long as there was any chance that Hitler could still be appeased.
Today, evidently, American public opinion is also against a major confrontation with China in Asia.
It is only simple justice to Chamberlain and Daladier to say that these arguments against war in 1938 were highly persuasive.
There was also another argument in favor of peace in 1938 that does not exist today.
Britain and France were only then beginning their rearmament programs which had been^iercely o pposed by the pacifists of the day.
Some leaders felt, perhaps mistakenly, that time was essential in — — — order to overcome German air superiority.
Perhaps the year gained at Munich did, in fact, help in the Battle of Britain in 1940.
This is debatable, but what is fact is that war did come and no argument can be made today that the military situation visa-vis China will be more favorable in the future than it is today.
Senior American policy makers, at least, do not seem to be infected by the false logic of such advocates; of retreat as ; De Gaulle or Walter Lippmann; nor do they appear to share the illusions and naivete of the modern American pacifists.
Most are grimly aware of the consequences of a ""negotiated"" settlement or of American withdrawal.
Probably those who can be objective now recognize the mistake in destroying Diem.
However, the modern counterparts of the arguments which lead to Munich are no less compelling, and the pressures on the President against acceptance, of a confrontation in Asia are enormous.
In particular, American foreign policy has gone much too far down the fatal road of obeisance to ""world opinion"" to flout it now.
America would be savagely denounced at home and abroad if it publicly attacked North Vietnam or China, Our European allies are opposed.
While possible/ miracles seldom happen, so the outlook must be for the loss of Vietnam.
The apparent failure of Russia and China to even begin to compromise their differences after Khrushchev's ouster was due in part to Chou En-lai's totally uncompromising stand when he was in Moscow.
This can only be ascribed to the complete confidence of ^theChine se--that^ vail.
No doubt they are counting heavily on a victory in Vietnam to prove their point that violence pays off.
This will give a huge new impetus to revolutionary war throughout Africa, Asia, and perhaps again in Latin America.
This is one of the reasons why those sincere Americans and others who are bringing such heavy pressure on the Administration to abandon Vietnam because they believe this is the road to peace would do well to rethink their positions.
The futility of the Munich settlement as the way to ""peace in our time"" needs no retelling.
Similarly, defeat in Southeast Asia will encourage and strengthen Communist China the most sinister force for war and evil now existing on the world stage.
Even those who trust most in the genuineness of the ""detente"" with Soviet Russia should recognize that any Chinese triumph, anywhere, works against the permanency of that detente because it exposes Soviet ""moderation"" to ridicule.
If the Soviets still hold to their basic world goals and aspire to world leadership, they are certainly driven to compete more aggressively with Red China in achieving successes for world revolution, however., cautious they might like to be, ~Dete~rioration~in^Afrfca~ ^ ~ ~ — ~^ — ^ — ""~ ; — We are now experiencing this in Africa where Russia is hastening to give increased aid to militant, anti-Western elements.
Egyptian President Nasser's violent verbal attack on the United States of December 23, during which he openly boasted of giving aid to the Congo rebels, shows how little we have achieved in ten years of trying to buy his friendship.
Like small dogs who bark and nip at a big dog because they are convinced he will not bite back, Nasser, Ben Bella, and others are taking their cure from the success of China to pursue their own imperialistic intrigues.
And the tigers are multiplying. -4 Some Successes The recent year has seen notable Communist defeats in Brazil, the Chilean elections, and most recently in British Guinea where Cheddi Jagan has been force d^to step down from power.
But it would be wishful thinking to regard these gains as anything more than temporary.
Castro remains in power in Cuba and if defeat is not somehow still avoided in Vietnam, this shattering event will reverberate no less in Latin America than elsewhere in the world.
The Need for Honesty Unfortunately, emotional factors introduced into the recent United States Presidential election and the need for Administration self -justification precluded a serious dis~~ cussion of Ameriean-foreign-policy by-either side.
President Kennedy, when he assumed office in 1961, did not mince words in describing the dangers that faced us in that period perhaps because he did not then have to take responsibility for the policies of the past.
If President Johnson made a similarly frank appraisal, he could shape American public opinion to support him in more affirmative action.
Lev E Dobriansky National Editor William Gill Foreign Editor Frank J Johnson Research Director William K Lambie, Jr.
News Editor Edgar Ansel Mowrer Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr.
Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Associate Editor Michael J Ward Robert W Galvin t -Chairman„ Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, USA Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin General Mark Clark Charles S Craigmile Henry Duque Wade Fetzer, Jr.
Worton, USMC Howard I Young OFFICERS President John M Fisher Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper Vice President Stephen L Donchess Vice President John G Sevcik Vice President Russell E White Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper The American Security Council Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press.
It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security STRATEGY STAFF Dr.
Shen Duane Thorin Stanley J Tracy (or the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions.
The article deals generally with the intensity of Soviet efforts to gain our secrets and points out that the United Nations has been a boon to these spying activities.
Copp indicated that he has a short deadline, inasmuch as the article is to go to press on Thursday, 2-11-65.
X,, the surface , reelected by both the %ards and deeds 6% the new X X ""X ■ administration, a § l e|iu1ne and continuing thaw can be expected in East-WestXl ations . ~'% ytr ^^^ * . f . . , , J&e low the surface there are a number of barometers through whose ebb and flow the real meaning of ""peaceful coexistence* 1 must be judged if we are to keep an accurate and objective outlook on thecold war.
ALL INFORMATION CONTMNE January, 1965 DATE J2MIBYJ^^ For nearly a quarter of a century, the United States has been the number one target of Soviet -intelligence efforts.
Exposures over the years by the FBI of Soviet agents J*8££ft§&s^^ bmw have given some indication of the degree of success these effort$,4u-v^-4tad.
They are efforts that have gone on unabat^ed and unaffected by diplomatic freezes and thaws, this is because the avowed purpose of the Communist movement is to destroy us.
And ENCLOSURE lO@ ^AS^AJP^ f f > $ ""peacfeful coexistence"" is not a change of heart 1n this intent but a change 1n technique* The purpose of Soviet Espionage is to serve the intent, regardless of the technique.
During January, 1965, evidence of this fact was made known by three separate cases — two here and one in England* On January ^Boris V Karpovich* the Soviet Embassy's infprmation Counselor in Washington, was exp ellee s f r^ -4^e-^rS^. on grinrmfr--^^ ♦ "" alleg^g that he conspired over a period of y&crs to pass military secrets t%\the Soviet Union was Air Forcf^Veteran Robert Glenn Thompson.
The^^I maintained that T^ifmpson had been recruited into Soviet intelligence ^^rations Jrf^rlin in 1957 and that he did its bidding until 1 963* Kjg^ovich, in dealing with Thompson, had worked in tandem withal low So#fe|^agent Fedor Kudtfs^in.
One of the two was reputed to be the chief of Soviet espionage in Great Britain using as h*s cover the official position of First Secretary to the Soviet Embassy \ SI V""' -3\ The third case* which became known three days later on January 18, concerned our expulsion of Kazimir Mizior, an employee in the Military Attache f s of f ice of the Polt^tv Embassy.
Howe ver, e v i de n ce~ -of ^'a>&Hconr e s pi o n ag eappa rat which -has been operating for o^^year in the* Mexican border ' town of Mexi cal v indicates that the Re<rXhi nese are intent' in tying to penetrate the United States too.. fovff^htell igence naturally uses its four sources of cover according to the particular assignment, and so it cannot be said that more agents are congregated in any one agency than the other.
However, there is little doubt that the United Nations has been a boon to Soviet-bloc spying activities.
Since lgsO^^^^PTTTNT Soviet-bloc off icials ami de yenifei^^ serving their delegations or employed a^. international civil servants in the Secretariat, have* * j|I je^Teclared ""pers on a^nol^ w$^-iff that number since 9 I960.
This bears out the Soviet use of dependents for espionage. ^wmtf^^ United Nations after hpin^Vbeen only a year j,n grade.
He received it over X NX the head #f others >m the deparlihent far better qualified for promj^on and who had s&p^ed far longer in grade.
Secretary General U Thant contracted to establish a training sfehool in Moscow for prospective Soviet translators and interpreters in the Secretariat.
The cost to be contributed by the United Nations for two years of operation was $200,000.
The school is called the Moscow Pedagogical Institute for Foreign Languages, and 'id date it has graduated 31 translators and 10 interpreters.
The United Nations budget estimates for 1965 call for the continuance of the school at the same price.
Another source of cover for espionage is the Amtorg Trading Corporation* It has the distinction of bt^ng the Soviets 1 oldest official cover in the IKS** having beeto set up in 1924.
On the night of October 29, 1963, FBI agents arrested John W, Butenko, an American engineer, and Ivan A, Ivanov, a chauffer for Amtorg.
On December p> 1964, both Butenko and Ivanov were found guilty by a Federal Court of conspiring to spy for the Soviet Union.
Ivanov of course held a much higher rank than a chauffer 1n Soviet Intelligence.
Colonel ATeksander A, Kudyartsev, who had formerly served as Soviet agent in Western Europe.
In this regard, it is recognized Ajimil w ^ ^t that at least one s and possibly two, Soviet agents accompany all visiting groups from Russia^ Aside from the aforementioned four sources of official cover, Soviet Intelligence has made a growing use of the so-called deep cover espionage agent.
These are highly skilled professionals usually operating under assumed names and using false identity documents.
Colonel Rudolph Abel is a good example of such an agent » having conducted espionage operations under several aliases until he was apprehended in 1957.
Swedish Colonel Stig Wennerstrom could also be considered in this same category.
In bis 15 year career as a spy, five of which he spent in the U.S., Wennerstrom cloaked his damaging activities behind his official capacity as a Swedish Air Attache.
There is no doubt that at this time there are in this country a goodly number of expert deep cover Soviet agents secretly plying their trade.
Scope of the Operation All Soviet Intelligence efforts against the United States and the West are directed through two operating arms.
But neither of these arms, utilizing the cover available to them in the United States 9 could fulfill their missions with any real degree of success if they could not find Americans willing to work for them.
Here too the public record indicates how well they have succeeded* Over the years, United States citizens from all walks of life and for a multitude of reasons « ranging from ideology to fear of blackmail have been thenmajor contributing factors in carrying out the objectives of Soviet espionage.
These objectives are virtually unlimited and could be said to include anything about anything, concerning everything in the United States.
Because we are a free society, an enormous amount of material is available to the Soviets for the asfcing.
But the basic clandestine targets are focused on the acquiring of military secret^and the penetration of the United States government; In the latter regard, top priority is given to the development of sources within key agencies such as the Department of State.
TlMba^Jtoji^^ guard against such penetration woujMt do well to beapifn mind that Soviet Intelligence has made goodAise of the sexua^/evi ates who are considered by the FBI to be/security risks. such Individuals fra vi taijp -Xmiir^sm^O^^t, . in...ens 1 11 ve government jobs is illustrated by the fact^hat between 1960 ant^l963, 85 permanently assigned dismissed for ^e as oris t of i n foreign Service assignments.
The FBI will quietly mark Its minor fluctuations and act accordingly in the very big and professional business of espionage.
It can be said that we in turn in 1965 will spy against the Communists with the same degree of professional application and scope.
Reference is made to the Director and the FBI throughout the publication.
Thus, on the surface, re( fleeted by both the words and deeds of the West, a genuine and continuing thaw can be expected on the Western side of the Cold War.
But there are a number of barometers and through their readings the real mean■~i ing of ""peaceful co-existence"" must be judged.
One of these barometers measures * the magnitude and scope of Soviet espionage directed against us.
For nearly a quarter of a century the United States has been the number one target of Soviet intelligence efforts.
Arrests of Soviet agents over the years by the I FBI have given some indication of the intensity of Soviet efforts despite changes in lthe East-West political climate.
The purpose ^of Soviet intelligence, is .tQ_s,eryej;he. intent regardl ess of the technique.
During January, 1965, evidence of this fact was made known by three separate cases -two here and one in England.
One of the two was reportedly the chief of Soviet espionage in Great Britain, using the official position of First Secretary in the Soviet embassy in London as his cover.
On January 18, the United States announced the expulsion of Kazimir Mizior;. an employee of the military attache's office in the Polish embassy.
The charge was that he had , ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS A F ^FtI NxFI E N A T I O N ' S S E C U R I T Y engaged in acts ""incompatible with accepted norms of official conduct"", a move said to be in retaliation for the Poles having accused and expelled Colonel George F Carey, Jr., United States Air attache in Warsaw.
There are four primary sources of cover for the activities of Soviet bloc espionage agents in the United States -their embassies, the United Nations, commercial enterprises such as the Amtorg Trading Corporation, and cultural and other exchange groups such as the Moiseyev Folk Dancers.
The problems presented by Chinese Communist espionage in this country differ from those posed by Soviet bloc espionage because of the very fact that we do not have diplomatic relations with Red China, and it is not a member of the United Nations.
However, evidence of a Chicom espionage apparatus, which has been operating for over a year in the Mexican bordertown of Mexicali, indicates that the Red Chinese are intent on trying to penetrate the United States , too.
Soviet Intelligence naturally uses its four sources of cover according to the particular assignment, and so it cannot be said that more agents are congregated in any one agency than the other.
However, there is little doubt that the Soviets have used the United Nations to bolster their spying activities.
Soviet bloc officials and dependents, serving their delegations or employed as international civil servants in the Secretariat, have been declared ""persona non grata"", expelled from the U S. , dismissed or had their accreditation to the United Nations terminated for reasons of their intelligence activities.
At that time, Secretary General U Thant contracted to establish a training school in Moscow for prospective Soviet translators and interpreters in the Secretariat.
The cost to be contributed by the U N. for two years of operation was $200, 000.
The school is called the Moscow Pedagogical Institute for Foreign Languages, and to date it has graduated 31 translators and 10 interpreters.
Another source of cover for espionage is the Amtorg Trading Corporation.
It i has the distinction of being the Soviets' oldest official cover in the United States , having !, been s_etjjp _in_1924.
On the night of October 29, 1963, FBI agents arrested John W Butenko, an American engineer, and Ivan A Ivanov, a chauffeur for AmtorgT Arrested with them were three Soviet U N. personnel.
On December 2, 1964, both Butenko and Ivanov were found guilty by a Federal Court of conspiring to spy for the Soviet Union.
Ivanov, of course, held a much higher rank than a chauffeur in Soviet Intelligence.
Colonel Aleksander A Kudyartsev, who had formerly served as a Soviet agent in Western Europe.
In this regard, it is recognized that at least one, and possibly two, Soviet agents accompany all visiting cultural groups from Russia.
Aside from the aforementioned four sources of official cover, Soviet Intelligence has made continued and growing use of the so-called deep cover espionage agent.
These are highly skilled professionals usually operating under assumed names and iusing false identity documents.
Colonel Rudolph Abel is a good example of such an ^gent— haA4ng-GonduGte4^ apprehended in 1957.
In his 15 year career as a spy, five of which he spent in the United States , Wennerstrom cloaked his damaging activities behind his official capacity as a Swedish Air Attache.
All Soviet Intelligence efforts against the United States and the West are directed through two operating arms.
Here, too, the public record indicates how well they have succeeded. 4 Over the years, United States citizens from all walks of life and for a multitude of reasons ranging from ideology to fear of blackmail have been the major contributing factors in carrying out the objectives of Soviet espionage.
These objectives are virtually unlimited and could be said to include everything about anything in the United States.
Because we are a free society, an enormous amount of material is available to the Soviets for the asking.
But the basic clandestine; targets are military secrets and the penetration of the United States government.
In the latter regard, top priority is given to. the development of sources within key agencies such as the Department of State.or the National Security Agency.
During 1965, while diplomatic efforts go forward to make ""peaceful co-existence 11 the fair-weather symbol of international relations, the barometer of Soviet espionage can be expected to remain unchanging.
The FBI will quietly mark its minor fluctuations and act accordingly in the very big and prpfe^ipnal>usiness„pl espionage.
It can be said that, in turn in 1965, our Intelligence Agencies will spy against the Communists with the same degree of professional application but with a far smaller budget.
But we spy to guard against surprise attack, while the Soviets spy toward the day they will mount the attack.
Associate Editor Michael J Ward OFFICERS President John M Fisher Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper Vice President Stephen L Donchess Vice President John G Sevcik Vice President Russell E White Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper The American Security Council Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press.
NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE Robert W Galvin, Chairman Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, USA Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin General Mark Clark Charles S Craigmile Henry Duque Wade Fetzer, Jr.
All rights reserved except that permission is granted for reproduction in whole . ot in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices.
McBain No photographers No press Chicago Club does not permit Dinner at 7 PM Cocktails at 6 M To be held at the Chicago Club ALL INFORMATION CONTAINER/ HEREIN IZ UNCLASSIFIED X // * DATE7/wiTBY c/ffJ&ieJP tc ENCLOSURE EDITOR Df.
After the WASHINGTON REPORT was on eight weeks, queries were sent to station managers.
WBRC Birmingham, Ala.:20 pm KFRB Fairbanks, Alaska 6:55 pm KCUB Tucson, Ariz.:10 pm KFl Los Angeles, Calif.:55 pm WGBS Miami, Fla.:30 pm WllN Atlanta, Ga.:31 pm KGU Honolulu, Hawaii 12:50 & 6:20 WWL New Orleans, La.:10 pm WEZE Boston, Mass.:30 am WLOL St.
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINER WGBS First Federai Savings and Loan UCDCifU IQJIIMJM AOOi t ^ ' / WGAW Stanley's Jewelers ""™ W 4^ A , WLOL Twin Cities Federal Savings and LoJiMsEn.
Z^ fc / Q^BYy fp lfffg CJ$£f~ KVOD Albuquerque Gravel Products ' f ffffn —*"" w WREO Cobbledick Buick, Oldsmobile Dealer and Independent Insurance Agents KVET Watson Florist WFNC Dairy, Savings & Loan and Drug Store WTKM American Legion KACE Bourns, Inc.
J — * * April 12, 1965 P Tolson Belmont Mohr DeLoach „ Casper Callahan _ Conrad Felt Gale Rosen Sullivan Tavel Trotter Tsle.
While I am Indeed honored 0 be considered fpr this award and would m* v**y much to attend the Dinner, arior commitments prevent me from being la the Chicago tree m that date.
Jones to DeLoach memo dated 4-9-65, captioned, n Tenth Anniversary rAmeri can Security Co ;uneil Dinner, Chicago, Illinois, Request For -Director to AccqpTtMsfsu^mg fflH^n^TAward.
TENTH ANNIVERSARY, AMERICAN SECURITY COUNCIL DINNER, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS REQUEST FOR DIRECTOR TO ACCEPT OUTSTANDING CITIZEN'S AWARD Migpaee R Pennington, former Bureau Inspector, has contacted your office to advise that the^Cmerican Securitv^Council will hold its Tenth Anniversary Dinner at Chicago on 4-2*8-65, and the organization wishes to give an outstanding citizen's award to Mr Hoover for his service to the Nation.
Pennington said this is the first year these awards have been given and at the dinner one will be presented to a distinguished citizen for each of the ten years the Council has been in existence.
In addition, one award will be given this year to an outstanding business citizen.
He described the award as a five inch pillar' of lucite with a black base.
The dinner, which is black tie, will;be held at 7 , April 28th, in the Chicago Club, and no photographers or press will-be present.
Pennington said the outstanding business award for this year will be given to Mr Patrick J Frawley, Chairman, Schick Razor Company.
Walter H Judd; Mr Boyd^Wright; Robert W Galvin; General Charles C Haffner, Jr.
Information developed is made available for a fee to member companies and other organizations qualified to receive this information.
PATRICK J FRAWLEY, head of Schick and Chairman of the Technicolor Corporation, Culver City, C|lifprm professional aiMfio&firiJSESst, Fred Schwarfc^ in his activities^, and has 9 alio served as ^ Chairman oft^CalMornia School of Anticommunism.
Jones to DeLoaeh RE:* TENTH ANNIVERS l Msmo AMERICAN SECURITY CO«IL DINNER in merchandising after World Warn.
The Director thanked Frawley, in letter of 4-11-62, for the Technicolor filming of the Directors Valley Forge speech.
ROBERT W GALVINa Chairman of Motorola, Inc. , Chicago, is an admirer of the Director.
DR> WALTER H JUDD ^former Congressman from Minnesota, who was defeated in his bid for re-election in 1962, was critical of the FBI in November, 1964, in connection with our handling of the Walter Jenkins investigation.
He criticized the Director for sending flowers to Walter Jenkins and indicated the FBI had been compromised by perverts in its own ranks.
Prior to these slanderous statements by Judd, we had enjoyed cordial relations with him.
It should be noted that there is an indication that Judd will be in Germany at the time of the ASC Award Dinner and will not be able to attend.
HUGHSTON M, MCBAIN, 63-year-old retired Chairman of Marshall Field and Company, Chicago, met the Director briefly in April, 1953, and in 1958 the Director personally autographed a copy of ""Masters of Deceit"" to him.
GENERAL ROBERT E WOOD , 85-year-old Director, Sears Roebuck, Chicago, headed the American First Committee in 1941 and was an outspoken critic of United States foreign policy.
During World War n, the War Department reportedly had information indicating a remote connection between Wood and several alleged Nazi sympathizers.
In 1958, Wood wrote the Director criticizing ""Masters of Deceit, "" because it complimented Jewish organizations in the fight against communism, a stand with which he did not agree.
LOYD WRIGHT , well-known Los Angeles lawyer, who is former President of the American Bar Association, has been friendly to the Bureau and we have had cordial relations with him.
It is believed the Director would not desire to take time from his busy schedule to attend the ASC Dinner for the acceptance of this award.
TENTH ANNIVERSARY, AMERICAN SECURITY COUNCIL DINNER RECOMMENDATION: That the attached letter be sent to Mr Pennington advising that prior commitments preclude the Director from attending this affair.
WORTON, USMC Retired President American Library of Information HOWARD I YOUNG, Hon.
Chairman American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company OFFICERS President JOHN M FISHER American Security Council Senior Vice President KENNETH M PIPER Motorola, Inc.
DATE Lee Pennington has forwarded your Mi INFORMATION CONTAINS 1 HEREIN ISfUNCLASSIflLp pril 12, 19*5 letter to me.
We deeply regret that prior commitments prevent your attending our April 28 awards dinner in Chicago.
Eight or nine of the other award winners will be present with other national figures as their guests.
S am profoundly gr ward presented me % for the Outstanding ouncil. and H is i privilege to accept it eft behalf of my asseeiste* in the FBI efforte made possible this recognition. the generous comments in |o» letter concerning my career with the £ $1 are very reasswrtog and, through you, I wish to express my sincere to the members of your organization for selecting me for this honor, the Award is handaomely executed, and I can Stare you it wUI he gives * $>toce 0* honor in my off tee.
The American Security Council had asked thg^rectSt to attend its 10th anniversary dinner in Chicago on 4/28/65 to acceptahi&Jaward; however, it was necessary for the Director to decline in view p^ior^ommitmtnt.
Thgawa^d itself is a 5-inch pillar of plexiglass enclosing a gold globe surmounted by an eagle.
The plexiglass is mounted on a black base which carries an inscription ""In Recognition of Outstanding Leadership-In Cold War Education.
Your splendid career in the service of our country is deserving of the fullest respect and gratitude of all Americans and we, in this small way, want to express the sincere appreciation of all those connected with the American Security Council.
Moreover, one of the purposes of the highly secret meetings of Latin American leaders in Havana last November was to IT; give added impetus to more militant Communist activity in the hemisphere "" g . q B Castro's DGI is divided into three units, the largest of which masterminds the train£ ing, financing and promoting of subversion, and guerrilla warfare in Central and South J American countries.
Though the CIA report spelled out in detail the degree of the DGPs f activities in these areas, it made no mention of its efforts in the United States.
One is by fishing boat to Puerto Rico, and then by illegally entering the United States with falsified documents.
Congressman William Cramer, Republican of Florida, in testifying before the Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security as far back as two years ago said that "" in excess of one thousand people have come through this route into the United States as Puerto Rican^citizens with falsified passports.
There they seized a secret cache of weapons and explosives which included delayed action incendiary bombs.
They also arrested three Castro agents and Roberto Santiesteban Casanova, a newly arrived attache with the Cuban Mission at the United Nations Two other members of the Cuban Mission, Jose Gomez Abad and his wife, Elsa, were named as fellow conspirators.
M Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, said the plan was ""aimed at the heart of the internal security of the United States of America.
In doing so, they also nipped in the bud a sabotage plan to destroy major buildings in Matamoros.
Since 1962, there have been several allied cases, one taking place in October, 1964, in which a bomb was exploded in the Everglades Hotel in Miami injuring a number of Cuban exiles attending a meeting.
Some /months later, a Cuban -terrorist threat to bomb the Roney Plaza Hotel in Miami intimidated the management into cancelling a meeting of this same exile organization.
This threat came on the same day the bomb plot to blow up the Washington Monument, the Statue of Liberty and the Liberty Bell was discovered.
On the surface, this latter episode appeared to be the wild act of a quartet of misguided idiots.
But there is sound reason to believe that wild as the attempt was, the four would-be saboteurs were acting under DGI instructions.
Leader of the bomb plot, Robert S Collier, had traveled illegally to Cuba in the summer of 1964.
Upon his return, he formed with a number of fellow Cuban travelers a pro -Castro, pro -Peking group which called itself the Black Liberation Front.
In December, 1964, a United Nations party was given by the Cuban delegation in honor of its visiting guerrilla expert, Ernesto Che Guevara.
At this party, Collier was introduced to Michelle Duclos, a member of an extremist separatist organization in Quebec.
That only one of them met with any real degree of success speaks well for the FBI and our law enforcement agencies.
However, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, pointed out in testimony before the House Subcommittee on Appropriations last year that the efforts of the Castro regime to infiltrate intelligence agents into the United States ""show that we must maintain a broad coverage in this area of our operations. n How broad a coverage can be glimpsed by these additional incidents.
Just as Puerto Rico has served as an important way-station for Castro agents to enter the U S. , it has also served as a transit point for still another sort of smugglingthat of narcotic drugs.
In December, 1964, three Castro agents were arrested at Miami Airport one of them a Cuban, Mario Carabeo Nerey.
Treasury officials in Puerto Rico said Carabeo Nerey was engaged in drug traffic.
Aside from the obvious harmful effects addiction to these drugs creates, the major purpose behind the smuggling of narcotics into the United States by Castro agents is to raise money to finance an insurrection in Puerto Rico.
Castro's DGI is working in concert with Puerto Rican Communists and militant splinter factions of the Puerto Rican independence movement, accelerating their attacks against the social and governmental structure of the island.
Since 1961, a number of Castro-supplied arms caches have been uncovered.
Castro agents have infiltrated both exile and student groups, their purpose being to stimulate the 'kind ""of rioting which~wbulcl require aFrffed "" intervention.
Should this happen, the cry for independence, which 97 percent of the Puerto Rican electorate rejected in the November, 1964 elections, would take on a more critical meaning.
This is so because the strategy of the movement is tied directly to the November 20, 1964 vote of the United Nations Committee on antiColonialism.
The Committee voted 17-6, in direct violation of a 1953 General Assembly ruling, to place the demand for Puerto Rican independence on the United Nations agenda.
This act played directly into the hands of Castro's DGI and Puerto Rican extremists -two of whom are presently members of the Cuban U N. mission.
We cannot attest to the accuracy of the figures nor can we say how many of that number are under the orders of the Cuban Directorate of Intelligence.
Although we do not have Castro -trained guerrillas operating in our country as a number of the Latin American countries presently do, we can say that intelligence, and law enforcement agencies here and in Puerto Rico take the efforts of the DGI most seriously.
Of course, the publicly -known cq,ses outlined in this report can only give an indication of what is afoot.
Hoary historians such as Toynbee may look down upon the world and view it from the vantage point of centuries.
Unfortunately, we who have to live in the world from day to day and face its reality cannot afford cute analogies of mice and elephants with regard to Castro and ourselves.-— — — . — JnJEart II of Castro 1 s Subversion in the United States we will show how Castro's American supporters, using the techniques of agitation and propaganda; by forming front groups; by infiltrating the Civil Rights movement, and by attacking our foreign policy are winning important victories in what can best be termed the psychological hot war.
Stefan T Possony Law & Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Associate Editor Michael, J Ward OFFICERS President John M Fisher Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper Vice President Stephen L Donchess Vice President John G Sevcik Vice President Russell E White Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper The American Security Council Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press.
Additional copies available at 25£ each postpaid for non-members and lOg each postpaid for members.
Fred M Gillies Clifford F Hood Wayne A Johnston Karl Baarslag Bryton Barron Dr.
TMs article commented onthe activities of certain Cuban agents in ' tlie Unitei States and stated ""These five incidents fall under the heading af tsrror tactics.
This form has been prepared in order that portions of a copyWftyJe original memorandum may be clipped, mounted, and placed in appropriate BurMu case or subject matter files.
The objective is to establish such a base on college campuses and to build a bridge that will link the left wing intelligentsia found there with the revolutionary groups now organizing In some urban areas of the nation.
The decision to build from within colleges and universities arises from the fact that some educational institutions have become a privileged sanctuary for those who condemn the values of our society even the values of education itself.
Those who tried out their revolutionary tactics at Berkeley are hopeful of using the same methods at other educational in;;. stitutions.
In short, if the campus anarchists have their way, college administrators will have to share power with militant student groups.
This means that the United States would have -a situation analogous in some . respects with Latin universities which are traditional centers of political strife and revolutionary activity.
The answer depends upon whether the United States public is informed and aroused regarding what is taking place.
J Disturbing evidence exists that indicates the weakness of universities when faced by revolutionaries on the campus.
Demonstrators from Communist -aligned groups, including Youth Against War and Fascism, the Progressive Labor.
But appeasement of //rioters, nihilists and anarcho -Communists on the campus is no more successful 11 than appeasement of Communists overseas.
If the revolutionaries are not defeat // ed on the campuses, they will control the nation's colleges and universities within * a few years.
Some of the revolutionary leaders are CP members, to be sure, as FBI Director J Edgar Hoover has reported.
However, in the 1960*8 the international Communist movement does not fully depend on MarxistLeninists.
Communism today is operating on a ""front"" basis, taking advantage of a loose coalition of groups opposed to capitalist society.
In the Eastern Congo, for instance, the rebel units that sought to topple the Tshombe government were far from being models of classic Communism.
Some were influenced by Moscow, others by Peking, and still others by the Algerian regime.
Nevertheless, they work ed side -by -side in an effort to shatter a government friendly to the West.
The methods used in the Congo also are being used in the United States.
The factions that blocked the NROTC ceremony at Columbia did the same job that a single, mono lithic Communist organization might have accomplished.
Today, the anarcho -Communist coalition is far more candid than the Communist movement was in the 1930 l The student revolt leaders are openly peddling their anarchist and defeatist philosophy.
Obviously, a country is in danger when militant groups believe that they are above the law.
If anarchism is to be nullified,' its influence will have to be eliminated at the college and university level.
This means that administrators will have to insist that the one kind of freedom which properly belongs to an educational institution is the freedom to learn.
The anarcho -Communist alliance intends to mo ve out fr on* those campuses . where it is free to operate.
Prosecutions ""... under this act are rare, but the time is at hand when the Department of Justice should take action.
It would be a mistake for Americans to dismiss the campus anarchists as a new species of crank.
Anyone familiar with Russian history knows, that the Communists reap what the nihilists and anarchists sow.
These latter had prepared the ground in Russia by destroying public values and introducing lawlessness, agitation and terror.
It was on this foundation that the disciplined Bolsheviks were able to build their regime of totalitarian control.
The rioters of the 1960's cannot be dismissed as being in the same class as the goldfish swallowers or other pranksters of the 1920's and 1930's.
The underlying philosophy of the anarcho -Communist coalition bears a resemblance to the philosophy enunciated by the Chinese Communists.
Many of the campus strategists of the revolutionary coalition in this country have a hard-line outlook and, like the ChiComs, they seek the psychological stimulation of various key groups to more militant action.
In this connection, one of their prime objectives seems to be to build an axis from campus centers to the depressed areas of our great urban complexes.
This summer undoubtedly will find many of the campus revolutionaries at work in extreme leftist groups in the nation 1 s big cities.
A number of organizations already have been created for giving support to those who take part in riots.
The chairman of this committee has been convicted of criminal contempt for refusing to testify before the grand jury investigating the Harlem riots.
In South Viet Nam, the Communist Viet Cong specialize in development of what they call ""combat hamlets"" -local centers of resistance to regular govern4 merit administration.
The aim is to neutralize the local police and to force them to abandon attempts to maintain lawful authority in an urban area.
Indeed the plan in the United States seems to be to create in the big cities a network of interlocking political action groups staffed by revolutionaries trained on our college campuses.
The end in view is the substitution of a new, synthetic, anarcho -Communist political authority for the legitimate authority of city and state.
Observers with vision and understanding of Communist methods in other countries grasp the overall trend of this development -the step-by-step establishment of a Communist state within a state inside this nation.
It is to this end that the revolutionaries seek initial power bases on the campuses and from these to build a bridge to the urban centers.
Lev E Dobriansky USA National Editor William Gill Bennett Archambault Foreign Editor Frank J Johnson Lloyd L Austin Research Director ...r William K Lambie, Jr.
General Mark Clark News Editor Edgar Ansel Mowrer Charles S Craigmile Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington Henry Duque Strategy and Military Affairs Editor.
Law & Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Patrick J Frawley, Jr.
Kenneth M Piper Karl Baarslag Vice President Stephen L Donchess Bryton Barron Vice President John G Sevcik Dr.
Anthony T Bouscaren Vice President Russell E White Anthony Harrigan Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper Dr.
Anthony Kubek The American Security Council Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press.
Additional copies available at 25(f each postpaid for non -members and lOg each postpaid for members.
All rights reserved except tfiat permission is granted for reproduction in whole or in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices.
Chairman American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company OFFICERS President JOHN M FISHER American Security Council Senior Vice President t KENNETH M PIPER ) Motorola, Inc.
As one prerequisite for this kind of cooperation, neither the program nor the American Security Council has ever reported on or taken positions on domestic political issues.
You may hear their program on WMA.L, the Washington Evening Star station, at 8:00 FM Monday through Friday.
Judd would be most grateful for your comments and suggestions on their program.
Respectfully yours, John M Fisher President a SEP 2 1965 r """"66 SEP 7 % ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN ISWUSSIFIEO W AMERICAN mm COUNCIL m, WASHINGTON REPORT Co-editor Senator Thomas J Dodd, Democrat Editor Dr.
President Lyndon B Johnson December 11, 1964 message to National Governors' Conference School on Cold War Education General Dwight D Eisenhower identified the need and set the standards for the American Security Council Washington Report in his message to the American people on the inaugural broadcast of the program.
His statement has become the official policy guide for this news series.
WE MUST FIRST I believe there is an overpowering need for a regular ^ and sustained study of this subject through a series of programs such as this.
It is vital that the American people understand the nature of this struggle-that they grasp the magnitude of the threat posed by Communism to our free society-that they come to know their adversary in all his many and devious guises.
Of course, America is resolved to remain so strong morally, economically, and militarily as to overwhelm any Communist threat or any attempt to use force against us.
As a ' common practice they resort to deceit, lies, false accusations and character assassination.
As a free world leader, our nation cannot act like criminal Communists.
Instead, to combat their insidious and dangerous tactics, we must first be alert and informed, and then we must use truth incessantly and vigorously as our mightiest weapon to defeat them.
AMERICA 'S SECRET WEAPON Beyond this, I feel we have a secret weapon in America which no scientific technology in any totaliBE ALERT AND INFORMED."" tarian country could ever hope to produce.
I am speaking now of our spiritual values; of our deep and abiding faith in the individual created free and equal with all others, and in his ability to rise to any recognized challenge that may confront us.
The difficulty is that today we are faced with an adversary who obscures that challenge — an enemy who seeks to bury us by confusing Americans, by tempting us to lose faith in ourselves, by dividing us against ourselves in our own house, as well as by creating dissension between us and our allies.
I think the difficulties we are faced with in this protracted conflict spring largely from the fact that many Americans have never fully understood the tragic harvest of human suffering Communism has reaped around the world, and the methods it uses to undermine and weaken our free society.
No nation has ever been more merciful than America toward its enemies, or more generous to the poor and downtrodden of the world.
Nowhere in history has there been anything to compare with the generosity and compassion the American people have for decades shown to friend and foe alike.
We are not out to conquer any country or take over anyone else's country.
But in the fight against Communism it can at times prove to by General D wight D Eisenhower be a weakness.
Americans assume that all other people will be just as fair and honest in their dealings with us as we are with them.
But the Communists have a completely different set of values— they respect nothing but strength.
I know that on these Washington Report programs you and your guest experts will accurately explain these processes to the American public.
You will keep them abreast of Communism's efforts to spread itself day-by-day over the whole earth.
You will help our people understand what they are faced with in this most fateful of all wars.
And I know that to support the growth and strength of freedom you will make sound proposals based on solid fact, not on wishful thinking.
The only real obstacle standing today between Communism and world dictatorship is a strong United States, determined to use its strength in freedom's cause.
If we should lose this struggle, the lights of freedom will go out all over the world, to be relighted no one knows when.
Every American has a responsibility to see that this doesn't happen, and I welcome every responsible effort, like these broadcasts, that can* help our citizens better to understand their responsibilities in this vital matter.
Your work will help keep the lights of freedom burning brightly. ill WASHINGTON REPOR The Washington Report is a daily news program devoted exclusively to Cold War developments.
This specialized reporting is particularly needed now when the Communist Bloc has stepped-up its psychological offensive on a number of fronts.
The program provides in-depth reporting in a factual, moderate, easy-to-understand style, This five-minute news feature is broadcast five days a week.
It is available free on an exclusive basis to one station in each market.
CO-ED/TORS Sharing the microphone as co-editors and commentators are Dr.
Despite differences in domestic political philosophy, these two outstanding men are united as implacable foes of Communism.
Drawing on their wide experience and knowledge, they cover briefly, but in depth, the meaning behind current Cold War events.
Judd and Senator Dodd are backed by an outstanding research and editorial staff both in Washington and at the American Security Council's research center in Chicago which has the largest private library on national security and Communism in this country.
Since its beginning in September 1964, the American' Security Council Washington /\V \ ' Report of the Air has 'received the highest of recognition from the broadcasting indus-J ' , < ' , try.
For example, a recent guest was Juanita Castro, the sister of Cuba's dictator, who fled that island to join exile groups working to overturn the tryanny of Communism.
First-hand reactions to the fighting in Viet Nam were recorded by Senator Dodd during a recent fact-finding mission to the Far East.
Other guests have been such news-makers as top Democratic and Republican senators and congressmen, the Dalai Lama, and Dato Ong, Ambassador from Malaysia.
DISTRIBUTION The programs are distributed to stations on records in advance of each week's schedule.
The program content is 3V4 minutes long so that it may be locally sponsored as a five-minute program.
Or, it may be inserted within longer news programs for added dimension and showmanship.
The Washington Report radio series is made possible by a special public service grant from the Schick Stainless Steel Blade Division of the Schick Safety Razor Company.
Under this grant, the American Security Council Press plans to make the programs available until at least September 1966.
Arthur L Robertson, General Manager KFML & KFML-FM, Denver, Colorado 'Washington Report ' has proven to be a most interesting and provocative program.
Morton J Victorson, Sales Manager WCHS , Charleston, West Virginia ""The Washington Report was immediately sold out and, since we broadcast the program 4 times daily at 4 different newscasts, we reaped abundantly.
Michael G Davis, Manager KBGN-AM & FM, Caldwell, Idaho ""Washington Report is a stimulating program which every news conscious American interested in our Country as well as current World problems should hear.
Jay Perry, General Manager KFQD , Anchorage, Alaska ""The program has been well received in Louisiana and we are happy to learn it will be continued.
Spencer E Danes, Program Manager WGBS , Miami, Florida WASHINGTON REPORT STAFF Assisting co-editors Dr.
Judd and Senator Dodd JOHN M FISHER Editor-in-Chief Mr Fisher is President and Chief Executive Officer of the American Security Council.
He is also President of the Institute for American Strategy and President of the American Research Foundation, He has served as the consultant to the Chairman of the Committee on Cold War Education of the National Governors Conference, member of the Civil Defense Advisory Council for Illinois; a World War il combat pilot; a special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
His research experience includes organizing and heading a national research organization with 32 branch offices.
He was Director of the Psychological Warfare course conducted for the armed forces by the Georgetown Graduate School.
He has been a consultant to the Psychological Strategy Board, the Operations Research Office, the Department of the Navy and other government agencies.
Betrayal at the U.N., Communist-Nazi Relations in World War Two, and Communist Exiles— Marx to Present Day.
As a prizewinning radio and television writer, he has also written over 1,000 radio programs and has 40film and TV credits for dramatic shows, including documentaries for the United States Air Force and Army.
He is a frequent contributor to the ASC Washington Report and serves as its Managing Editor.
He has received tribute in Congress, the Freedoms Foundation award and many other honors.
WILLIAM J GILL National Editor Award-winning free-lance journalist William Gill has over 18 years' experience in news reporting, including assignments for Time, Life, Fortune, National Geographic and The Saturday Evening Post.
He is National Editor of the ASC Washington Report and a recognized expert in the fields of international security and disarmament.
Research Director Mr Lambie heads the American Security Council's Library and Research Center.
Mr Lambie is a former special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In the four years he has been Research Director, the American Security Council's research staff has handled more than 60,000 research requests from ASC. member companies, the press and government agencies plus con. ducting research for the ASC Washington Report and other ASC publications.
JOHN F LEWIS Associate Editor Washington Producer John Lewis began his career as a newsman 22 years ago with the Associated Press covering government and politics.
Subsequently an editor and publisher of several weekly newspapers, he later entered broadcasting as an analyst of political and economic affairs, He became Radio-TV News Director for one of the nation's leading stations and also served as communications media consultant to the American Farm Bureau Federation, For many years he was an independent producer of educational and public affairs programs for both radio and television.
A Pulitzer Prize winner Mr Mowrer was the Chicago Daily News chief foreign correspondent for twenty years.
He predicted in 1922 that Mussolini meant war; in 1933 that Hitler meant war and in 1936 that the Japanese meant war.
He watched the first skirmishes of the Spanish Civil War and covered Europe, China, North Africa and the Middle East.
He has written ten books in the field of political science, the most recent of which is An End to Make Believe.
Internal Security Editor Mr Pennington is Chief of the Washington Bureau of the American Security Council.
He has also served as Director of the National Americanism Commission of the American Legion.
With his extensive background in national security matters and his long service in Washington, Mr Pennington plays a key role in gathering facts for the ASC's Washington Report.
STEFAN T POSSONY Military Affairs Editor A leading political and military scientist, Dr.
Si i While 1 indeed would like to be of service to you, as you may know, It is contrary to my long-standing policy to comment on literature or programs not prepared by personnel of this Bureau.
Therefore, X am certain you will understand why we cannot comment as you have suggested.
I have, however, been emphasizing to those citizens who communicate with me that the problems facing many of our communities are those which should be met by legally constituted authorities with the steadfast cooperation of every loyal citizen.
We must unite as a people, we must understand our basic American heritage under law, and we must face the issues confronting us with deliberation, quiet courage, and knowledge. i loover.
Mr Conrad Mr Felt Mr Gale Mr Rosen Mr Sullivan _ Mr, Tavel Mr Trotter _ Tele.
For this reason, responsible Americans must put aside domestic political considerations and cooperate on national security matters.
As one prerequisite for this kind of cooperation, neither the program nor the America^ Security Council has ever reported on or taken positions on domestic political issues.
You may hear their program on WMAL, the Washington Evening Star station, at 8:00 PM Monday through Friday.
In response to your inquiry, this Bureau has never investigated the American Security Council.
Bufiles reflect the American Security Council is an organization financed and operated by private industry as a national research and information center on subversive activities for the use of its members.
Data developed is furnished to individuals and organizations deemed appropriate to receive such information for a fee.
Correspondent communicated with the Director to inquire if the age of a letter written in pencil could be scientifically determined.
During 1958 Frank spoke before the Grandview Terrace Association in Clearwater, Florida.
The substance of his re marks was furnished the Bureau by one ~| of that city, and the Bureau is aware of comments made by Frank ridiculing the Government and the Bureau.
In view of this, the above reply on black letterhead stationery appears appropriate, and correspondent is not being addressed as honorable.
Cal i f ornia As businessmen, we foave both supported different organizations fighting Communism.
These fine organizations have tried hard, hut the Communists are not deterred by the efforts of these small groups.
We need at least onie antiCommunist organization bjtg enough to get results.
This can be done easily if we all su$#6rt the same association „-„^oneLjwhich^h On this basis v/e ask you to join us in the^eriga^^ It was organized by business as the reasonable and responsible way to fill this need.
With over 3500 member companies it is already the largest organization of its type.
Its radio program ~ featuring top Republican Walter H Judd and top Democratic Senator Thomas J Dodd — is already the largest daily radio program in the country.
With respect to your inquiry, the FBI has never investigated this group.
I thought you might like to know, however, that we have enjoyed favorable relations with it Enclosed is the literature you forwarded.
He met the Director on 1-3-65 and discussed various points of interest about communism.
Mr Frawley is known personally to Assistant to the Director fteLioachi * The American Security Council has not been investigated by the Bureau.
It is selfdescribed as an organization financed and operated by priVate;:industry as a National Research and Information Center on subversive activities.
They have publicly announced that there are several former Special Agents of the FBI within their organization.
March 14, 1966 ; 1 Mr, DeLoach 1 Mr Rosen 1 Mr Malley 1 Mr Walters 1 Mr Frankenfield SSNATOR TOM DODD ALLEGATIONS OF IRREGULARITIES ft} | IftirnpyATiOW Mwr/i^^ APPEARING IN THE PEARSON COLUMN urnAir fl / IV W l f ^Fl/J' Lee Pennington stopped by to advise Bureau till Tom Dodd is a co-chairman of a daily radio broadcast over WJVE\L which he and former Congressman Judd,^a former doctor -missionary, sponsor.
Securit y Cj^inciL as a public service educational program, which is financed by Schick Razor Company, dealing with current relations, primarily foreign relations 0 , The American Security Council is particularly concerned with this program in view of the recent articles which have appeared in the Washington Merry Go Round; namely, Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson's column.
Penningt on states that he has learned that and both of whom formerly were employed by Tom Dodd, have been fired because of their relations with one another.
It is alleged that Senator Dodd put locks on his doors after he fired Boyd.
It appears that Dave Martin has furnished certain information to Dewitt Copp concerning the alleged theft of material from Dodd's office.
American Security Council is greatly concernedo They feel that this publicity will reflect unfavorably on the program.
I ■ — ''Especially disgusting is the villainous demagogy of the imperialistic chieftains of the United States.
Each year they organize the so-called Captive Nations Week, hypocritically pretending to be defenders of nations that have escaped from their yoke.
These international gendarmes, stranglers of freedom and independence, would like again to enslave the free nations of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
These are the words of Mikhail Suslov in reference to the 1965 Captive Nations Week observance, uttered on July 17, 1965 in Lithuania with reference to all captive nations.
He has weathered all political storms in the Soviet Union and he has served in the highest echelon under Stalin, Malenkov and Khrushchev and now serves under Brezhnev and Kosygin.
In short, Suslov has been the chief thinker and ideologist under successive totalitarian regimes in colonialist Moscow.
He knows the psycho -political significance of Captive Nations Week, even if some of our leaders and many of our citizens have given it scant attention.
He merely voiced again . the^fear^and concern of Moscow, -which-Khrush.chev-first enunciate d-in J 9 5. on the occasion of Vice President Richard Nixon's trip to Russia.
Mr Nixon, in his book Six Crises , stated, ""The Captive Nations Resolution was the major Soviet irritant i throughout my tour.
Here are two selected ones which were generally J overlooked outside the Soviet bloc.
If\£)<^~ ""They are beating the drums again across the sea, filling columns in CORDE newspapers and delivering long hypocritical speeches.
Dr # Lev E Dobriansky is the man who conceived the idea of Captive Nations Week.
Skilled in timing their propaganda, the Russians seized upon the 1965 Week as an occasion for sentencing Gerald Brooke, a 28 year old British teacher to five years of hard labor for propagating anti-Soviet literature.
From the very start, Captive Nations Week has been a thorn in the side of Communist psycho -political strategy toward us and the industrial West.
A cardinal objective of Moscow's deceptive policy of ""peaceful coexistence"" has been to establish our politico -moral acceptance of the Soviet Empire.
The Soviet Russians and their collaborators insist that if we really want to coexist peacefully, we must forget about any captive nations.
Moscow and its associated Communist regimes even demand that in order to achieve a real lessening of tensions thus giving them a necessary breather for their consolidation efforts we must show our good faith by forgetting the whole history of Soviet Russian imperiocolonialism and Communist conquests since 1918.
By stressing the very essen1 tials that Moscow and the Red Syndicate would have us forget, both the law and the ] annual Week stand as a major obstacle to the Red psycho -political design.
Morej over, _the two are a source of grave apprehension to the cold warriors of Moscow \ and other Communist capitals because they persistently point to one of the Soviets 1 1 most exposed areas of vulnerability.
Its observance clearly > outlines the perfidy, deception, and long-run dangers of Moscow T s ""peaceful coexistence"" strategy.
Repeated often enough without adequate challenge, all these blatant untruths will doubtless poison the minds of millions.
S R, , as well as the oppression of all the . captive peoples-by their totalitarian governments,are reachingmore^and-mor-eAmericans.
Although the White House unfortunately has played down the Week in recent years, our Governors, Mayors and citizens have broadened the annual observance.
By 1965, half of our States issued official proclamations, and practically every major city did likewise.
Senate have become members of the National Captive Nations Committee, which guides the annual observance.
Local Captive Nations committees have sprung up in every section of the country.
The Week is now observed overseas in the Republic of China, West Germany, Turkey, Sweden and Australia.
This year, the third week of July marks the eighth annual observance of Captive Nations Week.
During this week Americans will again raise their voices to honor the enslaved half of the world.
They will emphasize again the things that must be done if the long list of captive nations from Cuba to Hungary to Ukraine to North Vietnam is not to be extended and if our sins of omission today are not to result in unnecessary sacrifices of American life and treasure tomorrow.
Building Bridges of Understanding -__One_of _the, chief them e S-_.of J;he_ 1 9 6 6 Week isJheJiuilto ing with the captive nations the people themselves, rather than with the illegitimate regimes that hold them in bondage and politico -economic slavery.
The bridge of understanding can only be one link in the mutual struggle for freedom their freedom regained and ours preserved.
To believe that by arriving at ""understandings"" with the Communist rulers we shall be furthering the freedom of the captive nations is not only an illusion but also an affront to common political sense.
On the contrary, a little exercise of logic itself would demonstrate that the power center of the Red Empire is the Soviet Union and all other parts, even including Red China, depend for. their ultimate survival upon this center.
The crucial fact is that our people are not being told the full truth about people of the captive nations and their plight in the totalitarian Red states.
Unpardonable ignorance, a morally irresponsible indifference, and restraining fears are frequently the ingredients of omission that in the long run exact a disproportionate cost.
On May 26, 1966, President Johnson unequivocally stated, ""The United States cannot condone the perpetuation of racial or political injustice anywhere in the world.
Those of us who have been active in Captive Nations Week have opposed measures which tend to perpetuate the control of Communist regimes over the Captive Nations.
R Consular Treaty and proposals to admit Red China to the United Nations The 1966 Captive Nations Week is an appropriate time to stress our support of positive measures concentrating on the freedom of the captive nations.
Among them, we might include the support of public and private ""Freedom Academies"", creation of a special Congressional Committee on the Captive Nations and the focusing of world attention on Sino-Soviet imperio-colonialism.
We will further the cause of world freedom by never forgetting all the Captive Nations those in the Soviet Union, in Central Europe, in Asia and Cuba.
Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman Wayne A Johnston International Politics Editor Dr.
James D Atkinson Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, William H Kendall Economics Editor Dr.
National Editor William Gill Bennett Archambault Admiral Ben Moreell, USN Research Director William K Lambie, Jr.
Robert Morris Associate Editor, Radio Producer John F Lewis General Mark Clark Or.
Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Law & Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Patrick J Frawley, Jr.
Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies ate scription rate $12.00.
Additional copies available at 25^ each postpaid for non-members and forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices. lOtf each postpaid for members.
JTMJStr aMgy of the TricontinentaL Conference^ We must give the Communists credit, for one thing: they think big.
Even though they had suffered a major defeat in Indonesia, and even though their chances for victory in Viet Nam were fading rapidly, the Communists nevertheless went ahead with the creation of the Afro -Asian-Latin American Peoples 1 Solidarity Organization a permanent mechanism whose principal mission is to incite, support and coordinate simul-. taneous ""wars of national liberation"" on three continents.
Furthermore, they established, it in Havana, Cuba, directly under the nose of the United States.
This step was taken during the first two weeks of January of this year.
But the work of the permanent bodies established by the Conference goes on quietly and in deadly earnest.
Also located in Havana, the Secretariat is the full-time general headquarters for the control and coordination of violence and terror throughout the underdeveloped areas of three continents.
It is composed of a Secretary General (Captain Osmany Cienfuegoes, the present Cuban minister of Construction) and twelve secretaries, four from each continent.
The Secretariat is to supervise the Committee on Assistance'and Aid to Movements for National Liberation and Struggle Against Colonialism and Neocolonialism, which has as its mission ""to promote, increase, and coordinate effecti ve solidaritywith national liberation movements.
Colombia, ^Readers were alerted to the importance of this Communist-sponsored Conferenpe v in WR 66-2 of January 17, 1966.
A / "" ; 54 AUG 2 2 1986 p Crr DEVEL ANALYSIS OPMENTS AFFECTING THE NATION'S SECURIT t 2 t Venezuela, Peru, Guatemala, Panama, and Ecuador appear to be in the forefront for Communist exploitation.
This body; is made up of 27 Latin American and Caribbean ""delegations"" to the Tricontinental Conference.
Brazil, Cuba, Colombia, Guyana, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Comment of the Experts The continuing threat posed by these developments has prompted two independent groups of technical experts on counter-intelligence and subversion to issue renewed warnings in the form of special reports.
One of these is the Latin American body known as the Special Consultative Committee on Security.
If we do not convince ourselves that we are at war and that therefore we are combatants, we shall succumb.
Furthermore, they should be convinced that one cannot be complacent toward Communism nor fail to make every possible effort to cope with the threat posed by its unceasing revolutionary war, inasmuch as only in this way will democracy truly defend .• • ■ itself.
Here the geographic importance of Cuba, as the ""secure base"" or ""rear area"" from which subversive operations are launched into all parts of Latin America, assumes a special significance.
Reiterating a conclusion published in its December 11, 1964 report, the OAS Special Consultative Committee states that ""so long as the regime prevailing in Cuba persists, the immediate Communist threat to the Americas will continue.
Arriving in Cuba just ~ prior to the meeting were two experienced Spanish Communist guerrilla experts, General Enrique Lister and Colonel Alberto Bayo.
These two professionals established the first of the steadily growing complex of guerrilla training camps in Cuba.
Among the first of these was the one under the command of Colonel Bayo at the Boca Ciega School in the resort town of Tarara, not far to the east of Havana.
There in mid-1960, the initial group of 19 young Latin American students began their rigorous training program.
Meanwhile, General Lister was building an extensive network of guerrilla warfare schools in Min^s del Frio, Oriente Province.
By early 1963, the number of these camps had reached 10; by 1 T 966, there was a total of 43, all actively engaged in turning out young, tough, thoroughly indoctrinated Communist cadre for ""aational liberation wars.
These facts underline the steady growth of a permanent command and control structure for tricontinental armed uprisings, backed up by an expanding training base which is producing increasing numbers of professional Communist cadre to lead the announced * campaign of ""simultaneous wars.
Peace Force deployments in the Dominican Republic, -the Soviet Union still considers its subversive basie in Cuba worth the pride of a subsidy of over a million dollars a day.
President Johnson has stated that the United States intends to continue the Alliance for Progress economic assistance programs (which come to approximately $1 billion annually) on into the next decade.
The magnitude of these commitments underlines the fact that both sides know that they are playing for high stakes and for keeps.
James D Atkinson Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, William H Kendall Economics Editor.
Edgar Ansel Mowrer Charles S Craigmile ' ^ Admiral Felix B Stump, USN Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington Henry Duque * Dr.
Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are scription rate $12:00.
GALE ■ The Risk In March of this year, the State Department issued a four-page warning to American citi zens planning to visit the Soviet Union during the coming tourist season.
There have been indications of Soviet interest in exchanging imprisoned American tourists for Soviet citizens convicted of espionage in the United States.
A year prior to this most recent warning, the State Department had issued a similar document built on the same three premises — strained relations, exchange of arrested citizens and espionage.
In 1963, Professor Frederick C Barghoorn of Yale, taking part in the Cultural Exchange Program, was framed by the Soviets on espionage charges.
In 1964, Peter Landerman, a tourist, was sentenced to three years in a labor camp following a traffic accident in which a Russian was killed.
In 1965, there was the Newcomb Mott case which ended in JVI&t's unexplained death while in Soviet hands.
Shortly thereafter, ex-army Lieutenants Craddock M Gilmour, Jr. and Buel Ray Wortham, Jr. were arrested at the Soviet-Finnish border.
They were charged with exchanging money on the black market and stealing a souvenir while tourists in the Soviet Union.
Wortham recently claimed he and his friend Gilmour had been framed by the KGB, The LOPMENTS AFFECTING WW s MAY 31 1967 THE NATION T Y J2 Soviet Committee on State Security, and, as in the Mott case, the purpose of the exercise was to exchange them for convicted Soviet spy Igor A Ivanov.
Since Ivanov's conviction in December, 1964, he has been free on $100,000 bail pending the appeal of his 20year sentence.
He is the only Soviet citizen in the United States so charged and his KGB superiors are anxious to bring him home.
Finally, in November, 1966, there was the Soviet-Czech kidnapping of American citizen Vladimir Kazan-Komarek.
In all of these cases, with the exception of Newcomb Mott, the arrested individuals came home again safely after having suffered varying degrees of economic blackmail, hardship and mental torture.
They are unreported cases because those detained were held only briefly.
In most instances the victim was totally innocent of any wrong doing or had mistakenly broken a Soviet regulation.
Last year, despite the State Department's warning, which came as a direct result of the vicious death of Newcomb Mott, it is estimated that at least 24,000 Americans visited the Soviet Union.
One might argue that of all the American tourists who have visited the Soviet Union since 1963, only an infinitesimal number have run afoul of the KGB in either a minor or a major way and that recent Senate ratification of the Consular Treaty will offer a greater measure of protection to the traveler in the future.
Such vulnerability has nothing to do with Soviet legality, nor does ratification of the Consular Treaty protect the victim from reaping any harsh effect of Kremlin policy.
Further, all Intourist guides who squire American tourists around Soviet cities are KGBconnected.
All are required to report to their superiors on the statements and behavior of their United States charges.
The Sponsors One organization in the forefront of encouraging United States travel to the Soviet Union is. the Citizen Exchange Corps.
It was formerly known as Peace Hostage Exchange Foundation, Inc., the name and original idea being taken from the medieval practice of exchanging hostages between countries in order to insure peace.
It hopes to do better this year on the same basis, each tour lasting three weeks.
The founders of CEC set as goals a vast expansion of citizen exchanges between Communist and non-Communist nations with first emphasis on the most critical areas legally open to American citizens.
However, according to United States Immigration authorities the total number of Soviet citizens who have visited the United States in the past five years, outside of those who came as performers under the Cultural Exchange program, was 1,509.
Of this number, most were able to come because American dollars paid the way.
Those students who elect to go will receive six semester credits toward their undergraduate degree.
But beneath the surface, there is no misunderstanding on the part of the Soviet Central Committee and the Politburo.
The Russian people obey Kremlin policy; they question it at their peril.
All the fun and games of people-to-people meetings cannot change that single fact.
As for ""peaceful coexistence,"" it is the Kremlin policy of the day and while it-may mean .the roadto detente, to some, in. _ the United States, it is to the Communists a well defined tactic on the road to Marxian paradise.
The Real Cost One reason the Soviet Union is anxious to stimulate tourism and thus ""valuta"" is because it is supplying, at the cost of nearly a billion dollars a year, about 80 percent of the weaponry now being used by the North Vietnamese.
Now four SAM mobile units with Cuban crews are operating in North Vietnam.
Also, in December a 10,000-ton Russian ship left that same port carrying mortars, light artillery, medium tanks, rifles, arid ammunition to Hanoi.
In short, American tourism to the Soviet Union, last year and this, bears an additional cost to the nation.
It helps to pay the price to kill our servicemen fighting Communist aggression in Vietnam.
Schoech, USN rw wlch:«^« bnr fta „ i fl d Dflnninnlnn Charles S Crafgmile General Bernard A Schriever, USAF S^^^i^SmW FHitnr Hr ^fln t Pnccnnu Admiral Robert L Dennison, USN Major General Dale 0.
Worton, USMC President John M Fisher Clifford F Hood Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS Vice President Stephen L Donchess Karl Baarslag Rev.
Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are tion rate $12.00.
Additional copies available at 25* each postpaid for non-members and forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices, tch postpaid for members.
By use of instant transmittal memorandum, all necessary recording and indexing will be accomplished.
ASC member company executiyes Re: Megatonnage Gap Please share this vitally important study and the enclosed news release with your local editor.
The House Armed Se rvices Committee w ill ma ke a concurren t release of their Committee print of this study.
The American Security Council today released a study in which 18 of the nation f s top experts on national defense assert that the Soviet Union Their report, ""The Changing Strategic Military Balance -r United States A, vs.
United States S.R,, "". was prepared with the assistance of the Library of Congress at the. request of the Armed Services Committee of the United States House of Representatives.
Bernard A Schriever, USAF , recently retired Commander, United States Air Force Systems Command, is chairman of the special subcommittee of the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council, which prepared the study.
The report, based on analysis of hundreds of unclassified sources ar^d consultation with other experts, finds that ""the United States has exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence, "" whpreas the Soviet.
Union ""is driving hard toward a goal of overwhelming superiority in the decisive field of nuclear weaponry.
United States delivery capability is estimated to range between 6,000 megatons and 15,000 megatons, whereas the estimated high for the Soviet delivery capability is 50,000 megatons, and the projection of the established Soviet range-curve indicates a low figure for the Soviets of approximately 30,000 megatons.
The subcommittee, after exhaustive analysis of the arguments, voices a warning thatHDyu placm^ missiles, and the remaining manned bomber force, the United States places itself in the dangerous position of having only one option left if it is faced with a Soviet ultimatum to surrender.
It must either fire its offensive nuclear weapons or give up its sovereignty.
An ABM would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he is confronted with such a fateful decision, and it might stay the hand of an enemy at a critical moment in history.
Paul D Adams, USA , former Commander in Chief, United States Strike Command; Adm.
Robert L Dennison, USN , former Commander in Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet; Gen.
Thomas S Power, USAF , former Commander, Strategic Air Command, and Dr.
Ben Moreell, CEC, USN , former Chief of Civil Engineers, United States Navy; Vice Adm.
Dale O Smith, USA , former member of planning staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff; Adm.
Chester C Ward, USN , retired Judge Advocate General, United States Navy; Gen.
To insure availability of the full range of public source material, Chairman Rivers asked the Library of Congress to assist in this study.
This assistance was provided by the Aerospace Technology Division of the Library of Congress.
We gratefully acknowledge this help which included reviewing a great volume of material for pertinent references, compiling the results of this review, and providing office space and other facilities for American Security Council staff personnel.
It is fully realized that in using unclassified sources of information only, much of the data used could be inaccurate.
However, the same can be said for the most carefully gathered secret intelligence.
Opportunities for factual verification of intelligence information concerning the U.S.S.R. do not come very often, Informational ""raw material"" must be evaluated and interpreted before it becomes functionally meaningful The element of human judgment is predominant in these processes and a wide range of fallibility inevitably results.
Some of the figures used so freely in classified quantifications fail to receive a unanimous vote by the principal intelligence officers involved, but a decision must be made and so the majority prevails.
One must ever keep in mind that a belief by a majority that something is so does not make it a fact, and factual verification is often difficult, if not impossible.
Thus the Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba came as a complete surprise to official Washington despite the massive preparations which had extended over several months.
Similarly, there are current differences within the Department of Defense as to whether the primary purpose of the great Soviet TALLINN defense system is to defend against bombers or against missiles/ This study is based on analysis and evaluation of hundreds of unclassified sources published from January 1960 through April 1967.
The types of sources used ranged from military, nuclear-strategic, and scientific books, treatises, journals and limited-distribution studies, trade and technical journals and magazines, and publications of general and popular circulation, news magazines and newspapers.
Some of the more productive sources for strategic balance specifics included testimony before Congressional Committees by Secretary of Defense McNamara and other Department of Defense officials, The Military Balance by London's Institute for Strategic Studies, Jane's All Tk World's Aircraft, Jane's Fighting Ships, Technobty Week, Air Force Magazine/Space Digest, Aviation Week and Space Technology.
Certain of the articles reviewed were ""landmarks"" or ""breakthroughs"" in their contribution to the unclassified literature bearing upon the strategic military balance.
We believe that sources such as those noted are responsible although it should be understood that their resources do not compare with those available to the United States intelligence community, We do believe that the ""ball park"" figures from these unclassified sources are adequate to support thoughtful evaluation, and that they will indicate trends and strategic postures which could not otherwise be revealed.
In reporting specifics which have come from a variety of sources, we have listed the source or sources most readily available to the general public.
For purposes of this study, strategic weapon systems are considered to be forces designed to carry out long-range strategic missions and to carry the main burden of battle in a general nuclear war.
In this study we have used the same ground rules throughout for comparison of weapon systems.
We have compared like kinds of weapons,e., ICBMs with ICBMs, IRBMs/MRBMs with their like, strategic bombers with strategic bombers, and submarine-launched missiles with submarine-launched missiles.
Not only are numbers compared, but also the yield of the nuclear warheads.
Those with access to classified information may readily make the necessary data substitutions should this be desired.
In assessing the strategic military balance we have considered both the number and yield of each strategic weapon system.
After all, weapons-yield as expressed in megatonnage is the measure of firepower in the nuclear age.
In this connection, it should be noted that in our classification of strategic weapon systems we have paralleled the scholarly Institute for Strategic Studies classification system.
Yet, the BADGERs have intercontinental range with inflight refueling and are so classified by the Russians.
The BADGER is comparable to the phased-out B-47, which was previously included in the strategic forces by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
These IRBMs are supposed to be countered by the United States submarine-launched IRBMs , but when comparing opposing forces, the OSD groups the POLARIS missiles with ICBMs.
Both the BADGERs and the IRBMs in Western Russia are classified as ""strategic"" by the Institute for Strategic Studies.
It would be short-sighted, however, not to take into account the intentions of the Soviet leaders, for certainly it takes more than weapons to start a war.
Posture Statement of Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara before a Joint Session of the Senate Armed Services Committee and the Senate Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations on the 1968-72 Defense Program and 1968 Defense Budget, January 23, 1967, 41.
The intentions of one side certainly influence the intentions of the other, not to mention the strategic stance each side takes with its weaponry.
This criterion of intentions, or strategic objectives, has seemed to weigh heavily in the design of America's strategic military posture.
For this reason, the strategic objectives of both sides are examined in the following section.
It should be emphasized that the purpose of this study is limited to a factual assessment and interpretation of the strategic military balance without arguing for, or against, the overall policies which have brought each side to its present strategic military posture, signed/ General Bernard A Schriever, USAF , Chairman General Paul D Adams, USA Lt General Edward M Almond, USA Prof.
James D, Atkinson Admiral Robert L Dennison, USN Vice Admiral Elton Watters Grenfell, USN General Curtis E Le May, USAF Admiral Ben Moreell, CEC, USN Prof.
Worton, USMC as special subcommittee of the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Trends in the Strategic Military Balance 8 9 I SOVIET UNION VERSUS UNITED STATES STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Trends in the Strategic Military Balance The basic frame of reference for comparing the strategic strength of the Soviet Union and the United States is an examination of their national objectives, both military and political, It is not our task here , to explore Soviet political objectives in extenso, although it must be kept , in mind that these cannot be separated from the U.S.S.R/s military, goals.
For a half-century, Soviet leaders have time and again repeated that Communism's ultimate objective is world domination, But many in the Free World simply refuse to believe that the Soviet leaders mean what they say.
In the realm of strategic military weapons, the United States has, in recent years, demonstrated much the same inclination to disbelieve or to discount Soviet achievements and advances, This is particularly so with respect to the new ballistic missile defenses of the Soviet Union and to Soviet boasts of an orbital bomb capability.
Yet, the available evidence indicates that the Soviet Union has a goal of strategic superiority designed to win a nuclear war rather than merely deter one.
Once in a war-winning posture, the U.S.SJR. would be ideally situated to practice nuclear blackmail and would not even have to fight a nuclear war.
Some strategic analysts assert that this is the ultimate goal of the Soviet Union, and that it depends upon a defense against nuclear retaliation.
The United States has exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence.
The United States strategy of mutual deterrence is said to increase ""stability"" and reduce international tensions.
Hence, American officials are striving to convince Soviet leaders that a race to build anti-ballistic missile systems would be pointless.
During all of that time, Soviet leaders, both political and military, have continuously repeated declarations that Communism's ultimate objective is world domination.
Our own experience and current research fully confirms that the Communist objective is still that of world conquest.
Nowhere are its advance battalions more active than in our own Western Hemisphere, where agents . trained by the Kremlin continue to burrow deeply into countries of the Caribbean and Central and South America, Their deadly objective is to undermine legitimate governments, foment revolution and create a Soviet Union of Latin American Republics.
J Edgar Hoover, Address to Brotherhood of the Washington Hebrew Congregation, December 4, 1963.
Their dispute with the leadership of Communist China is not over the ultimate objective but how it is to be achieved and who is to control the world-wide Communist movement.
He expressed his belief that they had not abandoned their goal of world domination.
The main thrust of the authoritative book, Military Strategy, edited by Marshal Sokolovsky, was toward achieving superiority.
In a discussion of strategic missile forces, attainment of qualitative and quantitative superiority was set as one of the ""most important problems in 6.
Robert S McNamara, Secretary of Defense, Statement before Joint Session of Senate Armed Services Committee and the Senate Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, January 1964, 4.
It was further pointed out that establishing superiority over the enemy in modern weaponry was the material prerequisite for victory, 9 Recently-deceased Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Malinovsky made a clear-cut statement concerning strategic superiority.
Soviet science, it continued, has created weapons new in principle ""secretly nurtured in scientific research bureaus and construction collectives,"" Additional evidence of the Soviet drive to attain strategic superiority is supplied by a January 1967 statement of the late Defense Minister 9.
Vigilantly Stand Guard Over the Peace, U.S.S.R., Ministry of Defense, 1962.
He hinted at Soviet expansion of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles emplacements and at a burgeoning Anti-Ballistic Missile program.
All this pre-supposes an extremely violent and dynamic character of the conflict, high maneuverability of combat operations, the absence of continuous fronts and well-marked boundaries between front and rear, the appearance of possibilities for striking sudden blows of great force, both against the troops and the homelands of the warring nations, In connection with this, very great attention is devoted to the initial period of the war,"" 14 In other words, if general war comes, the Soviets will try for a knockout nuclear first strike in the initial period of the war.
Official Communist policy statements, however, emphasize their intention of winning world domination without a general nuclear war.
But we communists want to win this struggle with the least losses, and there is no doubt whatsoever that we shall win.
However, we can draw little comfort from such statements because, as shown hereinafter, the principal Soviet military thrust has been to develop a massive and superior capability for nuclear war.
Much of it borders on the sensational, and the divergence of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and of the Secretary of Defense is stated and explained far more frankly and specifically than in previous official testimony.
The focus of much of the most significant testimony is on the strategic effects of the Soviet deployment of anti missile defense systems, whether and when the U, S should deploy such a system, and the level of total U S. strategic power required to maintain sufficient security on the U S. side of the strategic balance.
The Secretary of Defense left no doubt that the military strategy of the United States is based on the concept of deterrence through a second strike in retaliation against a Soviet first strike.
To deter deliberate nuclear attack upon the United States and its allies by maintaining, continuously, a highly reliable ability to inflict an unacceptable degree of damage upon any single aggressor, or combination of aggressors, at any time during the course of a strategic nuclear exchange, even after absorbing a surprise first strike.
Hearings before the Senate Committee on Armed Services and the Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, on SMS, Military Authorizations, Defense Appropriations, 1968, January 25-February 2, 1967.
Included in the printed Hearing at the front of the report is Secretary McNamara's prepared statement on Military Poste and the 1968-72 Defense Program, which was released to the public on January 23, 1967.
Both the prepared statement and the actual testimony of the witness have been subject to deletions stated to be for purposes of national security.
We're approaching an era when it will become increasingly improbable that either side could destroy a sufficiently large portion of the other's strategic nuclear force, either by surprise or otherwise, to preclude a devastating retaliatory load.
This may result in future betterment . , "" 18 1967 was the year mentioned by McNamara as the most likely beginning of the new era.
They are building missiles very fast You see, we have leveled out our missile forces.
Our plans are that 5 years from now we will have just as many missiles as we have right now.
They have known that They have known that for a couple of years, and they keep on building.
For this purpose we will examine hereinafter such key areas as development of space weapons, production of nuclear materials, strategic military budgets, attitude toward research and development and the changing strategic military balance.
On November 8, 1965, both TASS and hvestiya described it as an orbital missile.
Subsequently, the Department of State announced that it had asked Moscow whether, in the light of the Soviet display of an orbital 19.
Senate Hearings, January 25, 26, 27, 30, 31 and February 1 and 2, 1967, p, 876, 20.
The Soviet answer was that the agreement did not bar development of such weapons.
Harold Brown, then Director of Defense Research and Engineering, now Secretary of the Air Force, was asked how much money was being spent on studies of orbital bombardment vehicles.
So that I would be surprised if more than a couple of hundred thousand dollars in fiscal 1964 is being spent on this, and certainly no more than that is planned for 1965.
First, it is not a very good idea — Second, there is now a U N. resolution which we subscribe to and the Soviets have subscribed to, not to put bombs in orbit.
Again, no provision for inspection was included in the treaty, The only known effective ways to assure the world that none of the nuclear-rocket powers are orbiting nuclear weapons are to inspect space rockets before launch, or to rendezvous with the orbiting rockets and 22, United Press International dispatch dated Washington, November 19, 1965.
Weapons in orbit could become a matter of grave consequence, particularly when utilized in conjunction with other strategic systems.
President Johnson announced in January 1964, the partial shutdown of American plants producing weapons-grade nuclear materials.
On January 24, 1967, it was reported that the fifth such plant was deactivated.
The Atomic Energy Commission reported in November 1965, that there is ""no evidence"" that the Soviet Union had carried out nuclear materials cutbacks announced on April 26, 1964.
Hearings before the Committee on foreign Relations, United States Senate on the Treaty on Outer Space, March 7, 13 and April 12, 1967, 84.
By 1960, the Soviet Union had expanded its list of uses for nuclear materials to include bombs, civilian uses, surface ships, submarines and missiles, Up to then, the gross requirements of both countries, by function, grew in parallel, with the United States slightly ahead because of its presumed lead in overall nuclear development.
Beginning in 1961, the United States' testing program was notably less active than the Soviet Union's, The Soviet Union broke the undeclared moratorium in September 1961, with a massive series which was impressive in many ways, one of them in the amount of weaponsgrade nuclear material expended, It was in this test series which extended from September 1961 into early 1962 that the Soviet Union was rumored to display an unusual interest in the anti-ballistic missile.
That interest was sustained over the years and Secretary of Defense McNamara announced in December 1966, that the Soviet Union was deploying an operational ABM system.
Soviet ABM teste in 1961 and 1962 provided the knowledge which has permitted the U.S.S.R. to rush ahead with its ABM development and outstrip the United States.
The atmospheric nuclear test ban has denied the United States the opportunity of ever catching up.
Anti-ballistic missiles, in order to be effective against many attacking ICBMs, must be widely deployed The U.S.S.R.'s TALLINN system covers a vast area.
Although remarkable advances in anti-ballistic missile accuracy are claimed, it must still be assumed that, as in the air defense weapon systems, many defending weapons must be launched against each incoming warhead in order to achieve a high probability of destruction.
In this respect, it would seem that the ABM's task will be similar to that of conventional anti-aircraft, setting up a radioactive 27.
It can be assumed, therefore, that the Soviet Union has foreseen, at least since 1961, this tremendous requirement for weapons-grade nuclear material to counter American ICBMs.
In this connection it would also appear that the United States had rejected the idea of producing an extensive ABM system as long ago as January 1964, when President Johnson announced cut-backs in manufacture of fissionable materials.
Strategic Military Budgets The increases of the U.S.S.R.'s military budget for 1967 to 14.5billion rubles, up 1.1-billion rubles or 8. percent over the 1966 figure, is another reflection of the Soviet drive for military superiority when it is analyzed.
From such evidence it is estimated that Soviet military spending in 1967 may approach 20-billion rubles, or 30 percent above the announced figure. . , While the Russians have a much larger standing army, the United States spends a lot more to pay, clothe and equip each of its soldiers.
And Soviet tanks, a basic item of ground equipment, are hard to price accurately since they are made with heavily-subsidized coal and steel.
Using Mr Beecher's estimates, the Soviet strategic military budget is the equivalent of $33 W -billion to $40-billion a year.
Even at the official exchange rate, the Soviet strategic budget would be $14,7-billion.
In his January 23, 1967 Posture Statement, Secretary McNamara ■ reported that the total United States 1967 military budget would be $68-billion.
The budget for strategic forces was $7.1-billion or 14 percent of the total military budget.
General John P McConnelF Chief of Staff Air Force It should be more widely understood that science and technology provide the vital impulse in the Soviet society.
The Soviet leadership views each new level of technology, each new medium for politid or military operations, as offering opportunities for furthering its objectives.
Unanticipated technological breakthroughs may be realized for leapfrogging America's means of deterrence.
Thus, the Soviets are aggressively moving forward on the frontiers of strategic weapon techSpace is one of the first arenas of major public interest in which Soviet industry, technology, and science gained— in fact, not in words -a leading international position, This is so despite the not inconsiderable United States achievements in space.
In the public mind, apparent technological advantage in space has been readily translated into an image of military advantage.
One of the primary strengths of Soviet research and development and production programs' is the use of scientific planning with cybernetics, This new technique is noted throughout U.8AR weapons prograins.
An analysis of overall Soviet power must now take into account the integrated cybernetic systems optimized for Soviet military and national security purposes.
Defense Department policy toward advanced research has been perceptively and most cogently stated and explained by a scientist who is in a commanding position to know the actual facts.
Harold Agnew declared that there appears to be a new concept of the balance of power.
Yet more and more today, we see decisions being made which have as their long range objective equality between the U S. and other powers rather than superiority of the U S. over other powers/ * * * "" 'The apparent drift in national policy on the concept of balance of power and stability is resulting in a stifling of innovation, We find ourselves being authorized ttTbuild or to consider only those systems which respond to a clearly defined threat.
He said this contrasted with the position of some U S. committees, such as the one on arms control headed by Jerome Wiesner and Roswell Gilpatric, that the U S. should not innovate new weapons because this would be destabilizing.
S * ""One of the greatest faults of U S, policy makers, Agnew declared, 'is that they seem not to understand that technology will never be stagnant.
Edward C Welsh (acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics Space Council) pointed out, 'If we had required a clear-cut prior mission, we would probably have developed no airplanes, no spacecraft, or, in fact, no wheel/ "" Both Dr, Agnew and Mr Baldwin have done an outstanding job of explaining why the strategic military balance is changing.
The Changing Strategic Military Balance To analyze the present strategic military balance, the following sections of this study compare the numbers of delivery vehicles and the total megatonnage delivery capabilities of the various strategic weapon systems.
In addition, the figure on page 31 and the table on page 32 also show the general trend in total megatonnage delivery capability , from 1962 to 1971 as delineated by the range of estimates derived from unclassified sources.
The preponderance of evidence points to the conclusion that the Soviet Union is succeeding in its massive drive toward strategic military superiority and that the United States is cooperating in this effort by slowing down its side of the arms race.
In 1962, the United States had a total megatonnage delivery capability ranging between 25,000 megatons and 50,000 megatons.
The corresponding figures for the Soviet Union ranged between 6,000 megatons and 12,000 megatons.
The year 1967 falls in a crossover period with the U.S.S.R. estimates ranging between 16,000 and 37,000 megatons, to equal or exceed the U S, estimated range of between 8,000 and 29,000 megatons.
It should be noted that the ""nuclear capable"" U S, aircraft carriers are not included in the strategic balance either here or by Secretary McNamara.
For 1971, it appears that a massive megatonnage gap will have developed.
U S. delivery capability is estimated to range between 6,000 megatons and 15,000 megatons, whereas the estimated high for the Soviet delivery capability is 50,000 megatons, and the projection of the established Soviet range-curve indicates a low figure for the Soviets of approximately 30,000 megatons.
On the basis of this projection, the U S. and the U.S&R. will have reversed their roles in a ten-year period.
Since the U S. is committed to a second strike-policy, we should count only those U S. strategic weapons which would remain after a Soviet first strike.
There is no solid basis for estimating the remaining U S. strategic weapons because the U S. has not tested very high-yield warheads and therefore does not know the weapons effect of Soviet super-yield weapons of 50 megatons and over.
Some of the remaining U S. missiles would be destroyed by the Soviet anti-ballistic missile defense.
This important factor was not included in the above figures because of the lack of adequate unclassified data on the numbers and yield of Soviet ABMs.
Unclassified sources for the Soviet missile count appear to be based on the number of operational missile sites without consideration of refire capability.
Thus, the actual Soviet missile count may be substantially larger than the i 5.
Many of the unclassified estimates as to Soviet strategic weapons yield are low because the sources have not given the Soviets credit for their great improvement in warhead yield/ weight ratio in their 1961 nuclear tests.
Behind-the-iron-curtain unclassified sources report that the strategic military balance has changed in their favor, For example, in a comprehensive article analyzing the strategic military equation which he based on unclassified sources, Lt.
They have at their disposal everything necessary for taming the imperialist aggressors.
There is still time to regain superiority but time is on the side of the one which uses it.
Because of long lead times for weapon development and production, however, the decision to do so must be made in the year 1967.
Hadley's study is based upon the findings of a Summer Study Seminar held in Dedham, Mass., in 1960 under the auspices of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Twentieth Century Fund.
The participants included physicists, psychologists, lawyers, economists, mathematicians, political scientists and weapons specialists.
Among those who took part were Donald T Brennan, Hans A Bethe, Morton H Halperin, Herman Kahn, Thomas C Schelling, Louis B Sohn, Leo Szilard, Victor F Weisskopf and Jerome B Wiesner.
U.S.S.R. curve constructed on basis of above fell within projections of curve from 1962 TOTALS 2,175 1,979 ' 14,956 MT 5,894 MT tnrougn mi.
The ""highs"" and lows"" listed above are, respectively, the bases for the upper and lower edges of the U S. and U.S.S.R. curves representing trends of total megatonnage delivery capability-all strategic weapons systems-depicted in the graph on the preceding page.
Representative sources from which these estimates are derived are listed and excerpted, infra.
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SOURCES DIRECTLY RELATING TO BALANCE OF STRATEGIC WEAPONS IN TIME PERIODS 1962, 1967, 1971 The ""Range of Estimates From Unclassified Sources, Trends of Total Megatonnage Delivery Capability — All Strategic Weapon Systems — "" as depicted in the graph, supra, was based upon analysis and evaluation of hundreds of unclassified sources published during the entire time period of 1960 through April 1967.
Sources studied included military and scientific books, treatises, journals and limited distribution studies.
Also employed were trade and technical journals, news magazines, newspapers and publications of general and popular circulation.
To provide a ready reference for spot-checks and parameter confirmation, however, a summary is presented here of extracts from certain of those unclassified sources which relate directly to the initial, median, and terminal years covered by the graph which depicts the trend of the strategic balance in the decade from 1962-1971.
The selection includes sources documenting the derivation of the ""highs"" and ""lows"" of deliverable megatonnage presented in the table which directly follows the Strategic Balance Graph, referred to above.
Thus the sources summarized support the upper and lower edges of the U S. and U.S.S.R. curves representing trends of total megatonnage delivery capability.
They include also, however, samplings from sources which fall within the areas delineated by the edges of the respective curves, providing thereby the basis for an appraisal as to the existence or absence of a consensus.
The selection of sources for summarization emphasized publications more likely to be generally available to segments of the public not likely to have convenient access to scientific, technological, or strategic libraries.
News & World Report, February 20, 1967 under title ""The Danger is Very Grave""— Russia's fir/ramlff Arms Thwat.
Our plans are that five years from now we will have just about as many missiles as we have right now.
This ""retrofit"" program is to be spread over a period of years on a schedule tied to the regular overhaul cycle.
If 7 were converted .at a time, and the process required 2 years for each group of 7, some 12 years would be required, and the deployable force would be proportionately reduced for that period.
Although the United States has more weapons, the U.S.S.R. has heavier warheads.
Effects of high-yield explosions on our ICBM systems are largely unknown because of the inability to make atmospheric tests.
USSR force continues to grow, Mr McNamara has said he believes Soviets continue to increase ICBM deployment.
INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC MISSILES The 1,000th American MINUTEMAN intercontinental ballistic missile will be deployed in a site that has just been activated near Malmstrom Air Force Base, Montana.
This site will contain 50 new MINUTEMAN II missiles, a considerable improvement over MINUTEMAN I, which comprise the remaining MINUTEMAN force.
Warheads of MINUTEMAN I are reputed by unclassified sources to yield one megaton.
MINUTEMAN II may have somewhat higher yield, or a trade-off with penetration aids.
The United States has also deployed 54 TITAN II missiles with a warhead yield of over 5 megatons.
The total yield of the United States ICBM force is estimated at 1,650 megatons, while Soviet missiles can yield at least 4,000 megatons.
However, these unclassified estimates are probably low for Soviet missiles.
Murphy, a long-established expert in the area of nuclear weapons, His article was published in Life, February 16, 1962, and its accuracy has never been challenged.
By comparison, the warhead of our largest rocket, the TITAN, weighs nearly half as much as the lowest estimate for the Soviet warhead while its yield is probably less than 1/10 as high,"" Thus it would appear that since 1961, the Soviets have had a 5-to-l advantage over the IL S in yield/weight ratio in contrast to their pre1961 inferiority.
It seems reasonable to assume that this improved capability has by now been used in upgrading missile warhead yield.
Some American planners believe that the numerically larger American force is superior on the premise that a one megaton warhead is powerful enough to destroy any city and accurate enough to take out a hardened Soviet launching site.
They also believe that most Soviet 'launching sites are ""soft"" and extremely vulnerable to a MINUTEMAN warhead, However, the softness or hardness of Soviet launching sites has little relevance unless America strikes first, something present U S, policy would never permit.
There is questionable value in destroying a Soviet ICBM site which has already expended its first missiles unless the site has a reload capability.
It is argued that for logical deterrence, which is the U S. strategy, the city-busting potential of the MINUTEMAN force, backed with a few heavy TITAN II missiles, appears to be adequate at the present time.
Even if numbers were to be considered as more important than power, Secretary McNamara in his January 23, 1967 Posture Statement estimated that in a future nuclear war about half of our missiles would be knocked out if the Soviets strike first.
Even if our remaining ICBMs were to function perfectly, it is difficult to estimate how many might be destroyed by Soviet anti-ballistic missile defense.
The high yield of Soviet ICBMs leads one to question the invulnerability of our own hardened ICBM sites.
None of the American sites has been tested against such great explosive power as the Soviets, demonstrated in their 1961-62 nuclear tests, although various smallerscale tests have been conducted.
The Department of Defense is confident that scaling up of the smaller underground explosions can lead to accurate prediction of the effects of massive multi-megaton explosions.
They assert that when an explosion is scaled up beyond a factor of ten, entirely new effects can be expected.
It is conceivable, therefore, that the electro-magnetic pulse or some unexpected effect of a high-yield Soviet warhead might knock out an entire MINUTEMAN complex regardless of the hardening and shielding attempted, Many scientists express concern that very high-yield explosions may cause a total communications blackout and thus prevent the transmission of a presidential order to retaliate.
Under the restrictions of the atmospheric Test Ban Treaty, the United States can only guess at what unique effects might occur when very high-yield weapons are exploded.
Considering the above, Soviet missiles might well be able to deal a first-strike knockout blow to our hardened ICBMs— if not today, some time in the future as the Kremlin leaders continue to upgrade their force in quality and numbers.
Should the Soviet Union be convinced of this capability and should it have determined a way to nullify the United States POLARIS missiles , the U.S.S.R. would be in a position to exercise nuclear blackmail.
In such an eventuality, only an anti-ballistic missile defense or surrender could save American lives.
Some questions have even been raised concerning the credibility of a strategic deterrence based solely on ""second-strike"" retaliation.
If the 70 million survivors prefer to remain as survivors, they might forego a retaliatory strike, so as not to invite a Soviet mop-up attack by their follow-on bombers and missiles from sites with refire capability.
The people whom they would kill had no say in their government's decision to strike.
We are confident that the remaining Americans would retaliate, but the key question is whether the Soviets believe this.
Soviets have missiles deployed in western U.S.S.R., threatening NATO cities and military installations.
This is a stategic deployment and must be considered in context with ICBM balance and SLBM balance.
Also, many Soviet MRBM/ICBMs are mobile and will be difficult to target.
The latter was the st^n ^ 19 5 5 "" 8 m ° bi,e Versi0n ' which indic «^ tne bov,et Union continues to upgrade IRBM/MRBMs.
These missiles became operational just before the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
Secretary of Defense McNamara has announced that we have 7,000 tactical nuclear weapons in Western £rope47 many of them no doubt capable of being carried by fighter-bombers but most of them tactical weapons which wouia be used only in the event the Soviets attacked with ground forces. ' strike""^ h^t™ P ° W r n0 intenti0n of launchfa g a first strike, fighter-bombers can be considered reaction weapons.
PERSHING cannot reach into the Soviet Union from European bases, no matter how close it is placed to the Iron Curtain.
Europe's confidence in the United States' pledge to defend it against Soviet nuclear attack has understandably been shaken by our failure to maintain a counter-force to the Soviet IRBMs.
After the U S. removed its THOR and JUPITER missiles, there followed the long, abortive give-and-take debate about providing NATO with sea-based intermediate range ballistic missiles.
But many NATO powers believe that the United States is no longer certain it would use its POLARIS missile and ICBMs if the Soviet Union launched its IRBM/MRBMs against Europe.
The pull-out of THORs and JUPITERs, the failure of discussions on the multilateral nuclear force to bear fruit, the quibbling by American officials in NATO discussions of strategic nuclear retaliation have combined to raise doubts, (first in France, and more recently, in Germany) about the reliability of the American deterrent against Soviet attack in Europe.
Soviet military writers and Soviet publications have indicated repeatedly that Moscow policymakers consider Western Europe to be the Soviet Union's hostage because of the intermediate and mediumrange ballistic missiles poised in western Russia.
For this reason, in weighing the strategic balance, one must consider Russian IRBM/ MRBMs as strategic weapons in the same context with United States POLARIS and ICBMs.
As Red China moves into a position where it has an intermediaterange or medium-range ballistic missile capability of its own, Peking may similarly view Japan, Korea, Formosa, Southeast Asia, the Philippines, Indonesia, Pakistan and India, as its hostages.
If these nations find themselves virtually defenseless against Peking's nuclear forces, they will inevitably drift— or be driven— into Communist China's power orbit.
Thus, the sacrifices of American men-at-arms in Korea and Vietnam may ultimately prove to havejbeen made for naught.
It has been reported that the United States has moved three POLARIS submarines to the Western Pacific area.
Presumably this is intended to counter the present Chinese Communist nuclear threat.
However, this raises the interesting question as to whether Red China and the other Asian Communist countries consider the POLARIS submarines a real threat.
In two wars in Asia since the United States obtained nuclear weapons, they have not been used.
Indeed, American policymakers have made it abundantly clear that the U S. would never use nuclear weapons against Communist aggressors in Asia.
Although this policy might change if Red China develops a serious nuclear threat of its own, the United States' credibility with its Asian allies, at least so far as our will to use strategic weapons is concerned, has already been seriously damaged, It is perhaps crucial to the future of the Free World in Asia that the Communist powers respect U S. nuclear strength in the Pacific.
For the time being, however, it is obvious that Soviet IRBM/ MRBMs constitute the greater threat to the Free World's security and, particularly, the security of Western Europe.
Our NATO allies need positive reassurance that the United States still firmly intends to provide them with a nuclear umbrella against a possible Soviet attack.
NATO has already been severely hurt, if not crippled, by the withdrawal of France from the military alliance.
And there is strong evidence that President DeGaulle took this drastic step, at least in part, because of France's withering confidence in the credibility of our nuclear deterrent.
Certainly, DeGaulle was not unmindful of the Soviet missiles aimed at his country when he ordered NATO forces from French soil.
ABM capability in 1962, Long | suspected by unofficial sources, the existence of a Soviet ABM System fn was confirmed by Secretary of Defense McNamara in November 1966.
The extent of this system and its capabilities are unknown although Mr f\ McNamara asserts that offensive penetration aids would nullify it.
OS USA USSR NIKE-X Under developGRIFFON— first displayed in Moscow in November ment since 1965, 1963.
Sample source: William E Howard and James Barr, Sample sources; Jane's All the World's Aircraft, 1965Spacecraft and Missiks of the World~M6.
ANTI-BALLISTIC MISSILES Although both the United States Army and Air Force began studies for missile defense as early as 1955, the Office of the Secretary of Defense did not authorize the NIKE-ZEUS program before 1957.4® Preliminary tests on Kwajalein Island of Army's NIKE-ZEUS system against ATLAS ICBMs launched from the mainland proved successful in 1962.
Thus NIKE -ZEUS was not put into production even though the Soviet Union did not have penetration aids at that stage.
In other words, ZEUS would have been effective for a limited time until the U.S.S.R. had developed penetration aids but OSD believed a short effectiveness period would be impractical.
It was conceived that lighter decoys would fall behind or burn up in the atmosphere and a new Multifunction Array Radar system would be able to discriminate and handle many targets simultaneously.
By 1966, the reports were corroborated when Secretary of Defense McNamara announced on November 10, 1966, that the United States had ""considerable evidence"" that the Soviet Union had indeed deployed at least a limited ABM system.
Let loose by ultra-high energy nuclear explosions, pulsed X-rays cause ""violent reactions within materials"" that can destroy or neutralize attacking nuclear warheads.
According to the publication, Technology Week, the shielding materials currently used to protect U S. warheads would fail to offset the X-ray effect"" The policy of the United States, at this writing, is to defer deployment of an ABM system pending an appeal to Moscow by Ambassador Llewellyn E Thompson for an agreement on a mutual moratorium on ABM deployment.
There is disagreement in the intelligence community over the extent and effectiveness of the Soviet ABM system.
But there is no disagreement over the fact that the Russians have something and the United States has nothing.
Even if deployment is finally ordered, the Administration in Washington is talking about a limited system costing from $4-to-$5-billion over a period of four or five years.
This system would be specifically designed to defend against missiles aimed at the American long-range offensive system and would probably have little effect on saving lives.
Arguments Pro and Con Some of the central arguments concerning the deployment of an anti-ballistic missile system are: 1.
Against ABM A principal argument used by the Office of Secretary of Defense against a U S. commitment to production and deployment of an ABM system is summed up in an ancient military rule,e., that the best defense is a good offense.
The OSD contends that offensive systems are cheaper and more effective in modern warfare than countervailing defensive systems.
ABMs cannot defend everywhere because of the prohibitive cost and the terrible destructive capability of nuclear warheads but ICBMs can be targeted anywhere.
Thus, the Secretary of Defense argues, the U S, should devote its efforts and resources to improving offensive systems to deter potential enemies from attacking.
The only deterrent value in our offensive weapons is the credibility an enemy places in our will to use them in defense, not merely of the United States, but of our Allies and our global interests generally.
There is a serious question, which probably cannot be answered; unless and until, the Soviets conclude they are ready for an all-out attack or a final face-down, as to whether U S. credibility has not already been seriously undermined by America's adherence to a ""second-strike"" policy.
Despite our total strategic reliance on offensive weapons, the ""second-strike"" policy casts United States military posture in a fundamentally defensive mold.
In the absence of an ABM, and with our offensive weapons restricted to a wholly defensive role, the danger of a general nuclear war is greatly increased.
In short, the argument that the best defense is a good offense is not' applicable here because the U S. has elected to take the defense, We have given the Soviet Union the first strike in the event of nuclear war.
Against ABM The expense of the ABM is prohibitive, and at the very least, would place a tremendous strain upon the U S. economy, For ABM Stretched over a ten-year period, the $40-billion which OSD now estimates is required for a comprehensive ABM system would be only $4-billion per year and could be readily bome by the American economy.
Our total defense budget in 1967 will top $75-billion with supplemental requests for the Vietnam War and the economy has still proved viable, Vietnam costs alone came to more than $25-billion in 1966 and the stakes there do not begin to compare with the stakes in an intercontinental nuclear war which would kill tens of millions of our people.
Secretary McNamara has estimated that even a $20-billion expenditure for deployment of NIKE-X, supplemented by a fallout shelter program, would save 704o-90 million American lives and hundreds of billions of dollars in property, It should be noted, however, that OSD's $40-billion figure represents the ""maximum feasible protection"" in a total defensive system that includes $5-billion for a fallout shelter program and a $15-billion for beefing up the aging air defense system.
It is argued that there is no point in guarding against one kind of attack if another kind of attack can get through.
If $20-billion over a period of ten years can protect 70-to-90 million lives, then the ""insurance"" cost for each year per individual protected would amount to $67 per year, or about $5 per month.
Should one choose the $40-billion figure, even $10 per month seems cheap insurance for such protection.
It must also be noted here what several recent offensive weapons systems have cost.
ICBM system: $20-billion; POLARIS system: $ll,8-billion; B-52 system: $8-billion.
Against ABM An American commitment to build an ABM would accelerate the arms race, thereby reducing our security.
For ABM The Soviets have already opted for acceleration, not only with their current deployment of an extensive ABM system but by increasing their ICBM force, and in the development and deployment of many other military components, including a nuclear submarine strike force capable of delivering missiles on American cities.
In this connection, it is interesting to note that on January 15, 1966, Charles M Herzfeld, Director of Advanced Research Projects Agency in the DOD, told a European Study Commission conference in London that the United States argument against deployment of ABMs, (i.e., that it would accelerate the arms race) was ""put to the Russians at least three Pugwash Conferences ago.
Every Soviet arms development which is not at least matched by a U S. effort reduces our nation's security.
Since we have made it abundantly clear that the U, S will maintain a second-strike policy, there is no need for the present Soviet buildup — unless they intend to use their new strategic weapons for nuclear blackmail or a first strike.
Against ABM U S, deployment of an ABM would be a provocative measure which would heighten world tensions.
For ABM It should by now be clearly understood that an ABM is a purely defensive system, particularly in the hands of a nation which religiously adheres to a second-strike posture.
However, if a nation was indeed preparing for all-out war, it would naturally place a high priority on an effective ABM so that it could protect itself after delivering a first strike.
But, coupled with an offensive buildup such as the Soviet Union is now pushing, it could indeed increase world tensions, whereas a U; S ABM effort would now tend to stabilize the strategic balance and ultimately reduce tensions.
During his February 1967 visit to Great Britain, Soviet Premier Kosygin openly defended the U.S.SJTs action in deploying an ABM on the grounds that a country has the right to provide for its own defense.
If this argument were used by the United States, a non-aggressive nation, the logic of this view would be difficult to dispute.
Used by a leader -of a nation firmly committed to world domination, it certainly appears provocative.
Although an effective defense system strengthens any military posture by protecting the base from which offensive forays can be made, defensive systems that cannot threaten a potential enemy will not provoke an attack unless the adversary already has designs for conquest.
Throughout history, defensive works and fortifications have tended to stabilize the political environment because they lend a sense of security to those behind the fortifications which makes it less demanding for them to destroy their enemies.
As Soviet Major General Nikolai Talenski puts it, ""only the side which intends to use its means of attack for aggressive purposes can wish to slow down the creation and improvement of anti-ballistic defense systems.
An ABM would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he were confronted with such a fateful decision, and it might well stay the hand of an enemy at a critical moment in history.
Against ABM An ABM would be of little use without a concurrent fallout shelter program, which would also greatly burden the economy and frighten the American public.
However, -to provide a really effective fallout shelter program the DOD previously esti61.
As for the argument that an accelerated shelter program would frighten the public, it would seem that Americans would be far better off knowing the facts if ultimately their lives could be forfeited through ignorance and lack of preparation.
For many years, the U.S.S.R. has required every Soviet citizen over 18 years of age to take intensive courses in Civil Defense.
In 1966, General Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, testified before the House Appropriations Committee that the Joint Chiefs favored both an ABM and a fallout shelter program.
General Wheeler believed that a low-key approach, coupled with intelligent public education, would overcome the fears that might be associated with a shelter program.
Against ABM We are not certain how far the U.S.S.R. has gone with its own ABM, which may only be intended as a defense against Communist China.
ABM deployment is known to be along its northwestern borders, anchored on the Baltic city of Tallinn.
This is in the path of the known route most American ICBMs would take in a retaliatory attack on the Soviet Union— not in the path of any present or likely future strike from China.
If so, America had better look to its own defenses and build an ABM system to intercept a possible attack from China.
As to the extent of Soviet ABM deployment, the USSR ""had progressed well beyond the deployment of ABMs around a major city or several cities; it had developed a comprehensive, advanced and expensive system.
Even more important, the Soviet system is evidently not a 'point' defense system, but an 'area' defense system.
On April 23, 1966 United Press International reported from Budapest that Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky claimed the U.S.S.R. had already ""introduced"" a defense system capable of intercepting whole squadrons of attacking bombers and knocking out incoming missiles.
SLM Capability A move to the sea is in progress for the Soviet Union's rocket forces as a part of the U.S.SJR.'s determination to gain domination in hydrospace, precisely as it seeks supremacy in aerospace.
From an examination of Jane's Fighting Ships 1966-1967 it is clear that the U.S.S.R. plans to use submarines as launching platforms tor a substantial portion of its missile arsenal.
Armament consists of three ballistic missile tubes for missiles with a reported range of 600to-3,000 miles.
Navy's attack submarine force is in generally better overall shape than the U.S.SH.'s, as nearly anyone this side of Moscow can figure.
Yet the intentions of the Soviet Union are clear £>r«« PncJ'rS l6ad "" submarine technology; to threaten the POLARIS-POSEIDON strategic deterrent; to interdict both our comw^'w ^ naVal P ° Wer by itS submarine force should "" come to This journal also pointed out, that while what the U S. knows about the Soviets nuclear submarines ""is very sparse,"" it is possible to project certain characteristics from knowledge of submarine technology.
In appraising the Soviet seaborne missile threat, the overall Soviet effort at sea should be taken into consideration.
Paralleling the Soviet rocket effort of the 1950's and 1960's has been an enormous oceanographic program.
To conduct successful submarine missile attacks, Soviet, naval commanders require detailed information of the sea bottom in critical areas.
Indeed, it long has been believed, and frequently reported, that the Soviets have marked the sea bottom in certain places as possible firing points.
While the under-ice operations of certain American submarines, notably the SKATE, have received widespread attention, it should be appreciated that the Soviets have been studying Arctic navigation for decades.
One danger is that Soviet submarines, intent on making missile attacks against the North American continent, would enter Hudson's Bay which would enable them to make a deep penetration of the continental land mass.
Any appraisal of the Soviet submarine missile threat should not downgrade the menace because of the limited range of the U.S.S.R/s submarine-launched missiles.
On the west, the Soviet Union can only be approached through narrow or arctic waters.
Thus it is necessary that U S. missiles have a greater stand-off capability, whereas the Soviets, could be expected to employ their missiles in a first strike, and could deploy their submarines close to the shores of the United States, It should be borne in mind that the military applications of hydrospace are only beginning to be made.
Even as 'satellites in space offer a potential for military action, the seabed offers opportunities for launching platforms of the future.
The advanced nations currently are developing deep submergence technology which will enable men to live and work at great depths.
This will lead, initially, to undersea mining and oil drilling beyond the continental shelf-on submerged lands which have no sovereign claims at present.
It also will lead, one can be sure, to the development of missile-firing bases on the seabed.
The United States needs to look ahead, both in terms of submarine technology and the law of the sea, to undersea defense zones from which Soviet submarine forces would be excluded.
Armament may include more sophisticated missiles and torpedoes; the 'bomber' types may operate with drone escorts.
This is all the more true in that, at this time—as The Institute for Strategic Studies has noted-missile-bearing submarines have an increasingly important role in Soviet strategy.
Many Russian submarines and surface ships, it should be noted, carry air-breathing missiles with a range of about 30Q-to-500 miles.
The United States, of course, is precluded from destroying Soviet submarines in peacetime.
During the Cuban missile crisis we were made aware of Soviet submarines cruising near United States shores.
If they had been firing missiles, their mode of attack would probably have been to surface at night, fire their missiles, and quickly submerge.
In a peacetime environment they would not have been subject to attack until they had taken the act of war by firing their missiles.
We can take little comfort in the fact that Soviet SLMs are of shorter range than our POLARIS missiles.
Ours must be long-ranged to reach Russian targets, while Soviet vessels can approach well within range of the principal coastal cities of the United States.
Seven of the 41 boats will be assigned to the Pacific, according to latest reports, and the rest will be on duty in the Atlantic and Mediterranean.
Thirteen submarines are equipped with the A-2 missiles, and the remainder with the A-3 missiles.
The latter is a rocket with a range of 2,500 miles, and will have superior accuracy.
With only 22 POLARIS submarines actually on station at any one time, the United States which has, after all, a four-ocean defense responsibility can hardly be said to have a fully adequate at-sea missile force.
A reasonable number of POSEIDON submarines on station in the Indian Ocean would, for example, not only enhance U, S deterrence of a nuclear war but would create an additional heavy burden to the Soviet ASW effort and might force them to withdraw ASW units now deployed in the Atlantic and Pacific and thus move them further away from U S. shores.
ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE FORCES Even as advocates of aerospace preparedness insist on prompt deployment of an American ABM defense and development of a military capability in space, so do students of seapower emphasize the need for swiftly augmenting U S. anti-submarine, warfare forces to deal with the growing Soviet undersea threat.
In the decade since that statement was made, the Soviet Union has embarked on massive programs aimed at upgrading all aspects of its sea power.
These programs have massive merchant ship construction, full utilization of fisheries vessels, combination of the former separated Black Sea, Baltic and Northern fleets into a single high seas fleet, establishment of a powerful task force in the Mediterranean, and—most significantly — the crash drive for a missile-firing nuclear submarine force.
Not only has the Soviet Union pushed ahead with missile submarines, but it has developed nuclear attack submarines for anti-submarine warfare purposes.
Typical of these new boats is the ""N"" class sub— LENINSKY KOMSOMOL 270.
This is a fast nuclearpowered fleet submarine designed as a hunter-killer.
It is armed with 21-inch torpedoes which are launched through six bow tubes.
Such craft undoubtedly would be emplpyed against American missile-firing submarines, if the latter could be detected.
Dealing with the danger of Soviet submarines has long been a highpriority concern of the United States.
To this end, the U S. in the 1950's stepped up its oceanographic research and refined the techniques of searching for submarines by helicopter-lifted sonar and by airborne sensors.
Navy also emphasized development of stand-off weapons as well as detection devices.
The ASROC anti-submarine rocket is now in general use, and gives surface ships a nuclear punch— if the enemy submarine can be located.
However, its effectiveness today lies in the fact that it uses a non-nuclear MARK 46 torpedo, which has been shown to be effective against submarine targets.
Other advanced detection devices and weapons include the SQS-26 Sonar and a Variable Depth Sonar, plus new torpedoes and drone helicopters.
Destroyers are specifically configured for ASW, and the Navy continues to build special anti-submarine escort ships.
The devices available for detection of conventional diesel boats include sonobuoys dropped from carrier-based aircraft and magnetic anomaly detectors.
But ASW commanders generally admit that these devices are, at present, grossly inadequate against fast, deep-diving, nuclear-powered submarines, In rough weather, the ""nukes"" are well able to run away from surface attackers.
Airborne detection systems now in operation cannot pinpoint a nuclear submarine.
It is now agreed, therefore, that the most effective means of dealing with Soviet nuclear submarines is another submarine, though the U S. has a valuable aid in fixed long-range submarine detection systems in the Atlantic.
Seventy of these boats are of basic World War II design, with improvements, They provide excellent submerged listening platforms, but cannot deal with nuclear subs on a competitive basis.
Even more significant, however, is the fact that the projected 64 SSN force would be thin indeed in view of the multitude of Soviet missile-carrying surface ships and the large and growing Soviet merchant fleet ships all of which would constitute targets in the event of war.
And these would necessarily be targets for a submarine force operating in Sovietcontrolled waters where our submarines would be able to operate only in a war situation.
This force is meager, especially in view of the need to divide the force between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
The SKIPJACK class boats are the fastest in the world, with an estimated top speed of close to 40 knots; but these and other attack boats are few in number.
New passive sensors which can observe radiation in all portions of the electromagnetic spectrum may, in the future, enable reconnaissance satellites to ""see"" submarines operating at current depths.
The deep submergence of submarine forces is desirable because of the problems it raises in the enemy's ASW effort.
With the need for true deep-diving submarine forces will come a parallel need for missile weapons capable of being fired from the depths.
Navy has pioneered SUBROC, a nuclear rocket for use against sub-surface targets.
But naval commanders would like to see SUBROC equipped with an airburst-nuclear warhead.
Bomb load of each type is noted in tons of conventional bombs normally carried by that type of bomber.
The total tonnage is that which all strategic bombers in the national inventory could carry at one time.
Converted to nuclear yield, the figure would be higher by a factor of 1,000,000 or more.
E STRATEGIC BOMBERS -^^ -v** ■111 The Soviet Bomber Force The Soviet Union has the numerically largest strategic bomber force in the world today.
This is because the U.S.S.R. has retained its airrefuelable medium bombers while the United States has scrapped a large force of over 1,000 B-47's.
Operational since 1955, the BADGER is a twin-turbojet subsonic medium bomber similar to the former United States B-47 and equipped for in-flight refueling.
The BADGERs are expected to be replaced by the BLINDER which has supersonic capability and a bomb load capacity of 12,000 pounds.
The BLINDER was operational in 1962 and carries a KITCHEN air-to-surface missile.
Operational since 1956, this four-engine turbojet bomber is comparable to our long-range B-52.
This is a huge four-engine turboprop bomber with a range of 7,800 miles.
Its commercial version, the TU-114, is the largest aircraft in the world.
Major Arthur J Ruppert, USAF, ""The Soviet Long-Range Bomber Force,"" a thesis submitted to the Air Command and Staff College, June 1965, Space/ Aeronautics, November 1966, 63.
Despite pronouncements of Soviet officials that the bomber is obsolete, it appears that bombers still play a major role in Soviet strategic planning, Marshal of the Soviet Union, V D, Sokolvsky has written that the long-range bomber force would ""deliver blows"" after a first strike by Soviet ICBMs.
Air-to-surface missiles would be used first in the attack, launched from a point beyond the range of anti-aircraft fire.
The requirements for an Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft continues to be advanced by the United States Air Force to provide strategic flexibility and optimum options for deterrence or retaliation.
First, it is thought vulnerable to surprise missile attack when sitting on an airbase.
In order to use it at all; it must be launched before the enemy missile strikes.
Second it is believed that the bomber is subject to less positive control than are missiles and may attack without authority through accident or madness of its crew.
These two philosophical objections to bombers by modern defense strategists have probably affected the objectivity of cost-effectiveness studies.
Some point out that strip and air alerts will reduce vulnerability probably to the degree available for hardened sites or POLARIS missiles, and that the ""accident"" or ""madness"" arguments, if 73.
This is being cut down with advances in hypersonic flight and could be made comparable to ICBMs with SKYBOLT-type, standoff missiles, With a long-range standoff missile, the AMSA would become as invulnerable an IRBM launcher as the POLARIS submarines.
Experience over North Vietnam has indicated that SAM missiles have been highly over-rated in past cost-effectiveness studies.
Against low-flying aircraft using evasive tactics and others countermeasures, SAM-2 missiles have had less than a 6 percent effectiveness, SAM3 missiles now guarding Russia, but not yet in North Vietnam, may be more effective.
The AMSA's broader operational flexibility will provide a spectrum of strategic options, It can attack on an infinite number of unpredictable flight patterns, high and low, thus making enemy air defense extremely costly.
It would outflank any Soviet anti-ballistic missile system and penetrate where missiles might be stopped.
Over friendly territory, aircraft are the least vulnerable of any strategic vehicle and can only be attacked by long-range interceptors which do not now appear in the Soviet inventory.
AMSA would provide a reaction to crisis, short of an actual nuclear attack AMSA can be launched on alert and recalled; ICBMs must proceed to the target once they have been launched or be destroyed in flight.
AMSA thus provides a strong psychological tour de force in crisis management.
AMSA can deliver nuclear weapons with greater discrimination and more last minute corrections than can ICBMs thus reducing the probability of unnecessary population destruction and permitting tighter, more effective crisis management.
AMSA can carry exotic sensors and collect invaluable reconnaissance information for relaying to command posts.
The best of these sensors is the human eye backed by human intelligence and utilizing electronic and optical aids.
The manned strategic vehicle is protected at all times by the infinite capabilities of human judgment which can perceive and react instantly to unprogrammed enemy deceptions or other unforseeable events where a spot decision may mean the success of the mission.
The • acknowledged value of a man-in-space program for overcoming mechanical malfunctions is illustrative of the validity of maintaining human control over strategic weapon systems.
With the continued thinning-out of continental radar systems and air defense aircraft, the United States is being exposed to attack by Russian airbreather weapon systems as a follow-on to a first-strike missile attack.
The only Improved Manned Interceptors under development, but not scheduled for procurement, are F-12's built around a larger SR-71 airframe, 75 Present flying and radar equipment is becoming obsolete and is wearing out.
The Soviet Union, on the other hand, is modernizing its strategic bomber force with supersonic, medium-range BLINDERs and continues to deploy an extensive air defense system.
It is reasonable that they be considered in this strategic category as were the United States' B-47's before their phase-out.
It might be noted that perhaps all the BADGERs do not carry bombs and that some would be used for in-flight refueling.
This would reduce the overall bomb payload capability of the total force.
But it still leaves the BADGER as a formidable force to be reckoned with and one that certainly should not be arbitrarily removed from the strategic balance.
The explosive power carried by the respective bomber forces is a more accurate measure of their respective strengths.
On the basis of bomb loadings measured by weight of bombs carried, the United States has nearly a 2-to-l advantage with 22,980 tons for the U S. and 12,100 tons for the U.S.S.R, However, the Soviet advantage in yield/weight ratio for nuclear bombs would give them parity in delivery capacity as measured in megatonnage.
Soviet leaders have publicly noted that the United Nations Resolution against space weapons does not deny the development of such weapons and the Soviets have frequently boasted of their capability to employ orbital nuclear weapons, the Scrag, specifically.
Nonetheless, the United States has not developed a military capability in space though the Gemini series clearly shows it could do so.
NONE SCRAG Shown in Moscow 1965 Capable of delivering a 30 MT warhead from fractional orbital or orbital trajectory.
The United States has conscientiously avoided the development of i space weapons and has been the leader in resolutions and agreements to ban weapons of mass destruction in space.
It is generally held that Sources* j ICBMs which enter space on a ballistic curve are not SpaCe mm The Military Bate «M*7, ISS, 1966, 2. but rather that orbital weapons alone apply to the Military rL, November 1966, 106.
The United States, to date, has spent some $30-billion on its space effort.
This does not include any space weapons systems or even their development.
NASA's ultimate goal is to land men on the moon rather than to exploit the region near earth for military purposes.
The DOD's position is that there is ""no requirement"" to put military men in spaced In fact, the United States halted its promising DYNASOAR development in December 1963.
The military Manned Orbital Laboratory will not be launched before 1968.
American military satellites are for reconnaissance, for missile-launch warning, for communications, for precise navigation, and for weather reconnaissance.
Thus, as far as United States satellites are concerned, they are all defensive; none are offensive, 92 76, Associated Press dispatch dated Washington, December 17, 1965.
Both TASS and hw&yffl. described it substantially as an ""orbital missile warheads can deliver their surprise blow on the first or any other orbit around the earth,"" This weapon has since been code-named SCRAG, Stress was laid on the capability of the new weapon ""delivering its blow unexpectedly/'^ The May 1965 issue of Ogonocm contained an article describing the perfection of an orbital missile capable of carrying a 100megaton warhead.
DYNA-SOAR, and if true, points the Soviet Union far ahead in the military man-in' space program.
First, delivery time for weapons in orbit, assuming the weapon is over the intended target area, is much less.
A large number of orbiting spacecraft might bring on a war that home-based ICBMs would not.
Many officials also point out that the orbiting weapon is at a disadvantage because it must be near the target area to be a faster-firing weapon 78.
United Press International dispatches, dateline Moscow, November 8, 1965 and November 11, 1965.
So an orbital weapon might be half way around the world or 45 minutes plus deorbiting time from its target when ordered to fire.
An ICBM, on the other hand, although it may take longer to travel (32 minutes to strike a target 10,000 Km. away) is always the same distance away and hence more predictable.
Those who counsel against development of an orbital bomb by the United States also say it is less accurate than ICBMs.
This is illustrated by the de-orbiting of astronauts in their re-entry capsules.
It should be pointed out that the accuracy of de-orbiting American astronauts has been increasing in each of the GEMINI flights and can be expected to continue to improve.
Little has been stated publicly about the accuracy of de-orbiting Soviet launches, but it is generally conceded that the Soviet Union has a sophistication comparable to that of the United States.
A nuclear bomb of high enough yield, detonated in space while still in orbit over a target area, could be a devastating prelude to an ICBM attack.
A possible effect of such a very high-yield weapon exploded in space would be the searing of a large area of the earth beneath.
There can be little doubt that its boosters have the capacity to orbit a bomb of this size or even larger.
The Soviet BIG BROTHER booster demonstrated its ability in 1965 to put a 13. ton payload in orbit.
The heaviest object orbited by the United States was a 21,000 pound satellite launched by a TITAN III-C rocket.
It has been publicly acknowledged that the space tests by the United States from Johnston Island in 1957 and 1958 blacked out most communications in the Pacific for an hour or more,8 4 Thus, if the Soviet Union chose to use orbital nuclear weapons in conjunction with a first strike with ICBMs, the orbital weapons could 83.
William E Howard and James Barr, Spacecraft and Missiles of the World' 1966, , 41. 94 95 well cripple the United States ""second-strike"" capacity by disrupting communications necessary to retaliate, or by other phenomena such as heat, blast and various electromagnetic effects.
If the Soviet Union is developing the option of orbital nuclear attack, it is unlikely that launching of orbital weapons would be announced as such.
In 1964, it was reported that the Soviet Union launched two satellites in orbits which would take each over Johnston Island and Kwajalein, This occurred shortly after the Presidential announcement of the United States' anti-space weapons.
A prerequisite to attacking a Soviet satellite in space, of course, would be verification that it was actually carrying a nuclear weapon.
Shooting down a peaceful manned or scientific satellite would probably be considered a provocative act of war unless it occurred over friendly territory.
If, however, it were widely believed that a nuclear payload was truly in orbit, the country which destroyed it would be applauded by all the other countries over which the orbital bomb had traveled.
That the Soviet Union would dare to risk the deployment of orbital bombs is at least credible in view of experience during the Cuban missile crisis.
Surprise would be complete since the United States has no way of determining if an orbital vehicle is bearing a nuclear weapon.
The Soviet Union could hint that certain orbiting craft were capable of immobilizing our ICBM system.
Combined with a means of countering|the American POLARIS missile force, this might be the ultimate nuclear blackmail.
I'ln the United States we argue variously that space offensive nuclear delivery forces are less efficiefit, less accurate, and less credible, than ICBMs.
But if the Soviet Union is dedicated to offensive world objectives, the special effects of space-military offensive forces may appear very useful.
Such effects are, for example, prestige, terror, pursuasion, coercion, pressure, psychological warfare, and demoralization.
The exceptional accomplishments of the GEMINI program and those expected of the APOLLO will not assure much military protection.
I would say when we start to talk about the megatonnage we could bring into a nuclear war we are talking about annihilation.
Oak Ridge Laboratory graphite reactor to be shut down m November after 20 years' operation.
President Johnson, ordering cutbacks in manufacture of fissionable materials and manufacture of arms, urges U.S.S.R. do likewise as step toward ""eventual abolition of arms,"" State of Union Message; suggests move is possible because building of arsenal is at point where it is becoming excessive; administration officials note arsenal has increased 50 percent in last 3 years, now includes tens of thousands of weapons; AEC sees cutback saving $50-milhon in fiscal '65, $70-million in next year.
November 1963 January 1964 January 1964 February 1964 June 1964 December 1964 Two uranium-processing plants to close; operations at two others cut.
AEC stresses stockpile increases but at reduced rate, comment of President Johnson statement on cut.
Since then, two of the reactors have been shut down, one at Savannah River, S C, summer of 1964, and one at Hanford, Wash., on January 2, 1965.
The two remaining at Hanford were scheduled to be shut down in May and June of 1965, leaving the AEC with 10 reactors producing plutonium for atomic weapons.
Production of special nuclear materials will decline somewhat in 1966 as a result of reduced cascade power and the first full year of operations after the shutdown of four production reactors during 1964 and 1965.
Work will continue on process improvements to assure continuity and safety of operation and more economical methods of production Weapons program.-Operating costs for the weapons program' are estimated at OT.4-million in 1966 compared with 1965 estimated costs of $753.3-million and 1964 actual costs of $15i9-m\\\m.
November 1965 AEC reports ""no evidence"" U,S,S.R. has carried out nuclear materials cutbacks announced April 20, 1964.
January 1966 President Johnson> Budget Message puts AEC appropriations and estimated expenditures below Fiscal 1966 level; expenditures down $90-million.
January 1967 The Administration, in a budget-motivated gesture toward slowing the atomic arms race, announced today (January 24, 1967) a further cut-back in the production of fission* able materials for nuclear weapons.
On July 1, 1967, AEC will shut down the plutonium production reactor at Hanford, Washington.
Senator Jackson observed thatthe Soviet Union has been ""expanding its output"" of fissionable materials.
Congressman Raricfc, Louisiana, aQviaect mac .jsigfctional Strategy Committee of the American Security Council lias recently ^^^^mW^^Tm-Q^^^^mSmm^iimm^ynyca SiiOUiCi as rsao and , analysed by every citizen of cur country.
MET C AL F £^ MISS GANDY Us ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED HERONWUNiLASSIFiEO y A DATE llwfw.Wfitlb »3 NOV 30 1967 ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED Washington, November 20, 1967 THE GROWING THREAT OF SOVIET SEA POWER 'They've never before felt the need for carriers as contrasted to the United States, or, Bri^ tain because they didn't have many overseas commitments.
Vice Admiral William E Ellis Chief of Staff of the Supreme Allied Command, Atlantic October 21, 1967 With the above words Admiral Ellis dropped a considerable naval bombshell on the Western world.
The Soviet Union, he revealed, has at long last begun to construct aircraft carriers.
By this move Russia is finally taking the last step toward providing herself with a fully balanced navy which already poses a formidable challenge to United States supremacy at sea.
In combination with a tremendously expanding merchant marine, the Soviet fleet has indeed taken to the oceans of the world.
Both strategically and tactically Soviet maritime power has become a most important factor in the world's politico-military arena.
No longer can the navy be regarded as the weak sister of the Soviet military machine.
For a United States vitally dependent upon control of the sea, the remarkable growth of Soviet sea power has become a matter of the gravest concern.
The Development of the Soviet Navy since World War II During the war against Hitler Soviet naval forces played only an auxiliary role and their performance was generally undistinguished except for some daring submarine forays through the German blockade of the Gulf of Finland.
As a result, the Soviet Navy tended to be downgraded by Western military strategis""ts~as of little importance.
In that year Molotov announced that the Soviet Union must have a first class navy second to none.
Besides cruisers, destroyers and submarines, two 46,000 ton battleships and three 30,000 ton battlecruisers were laid down before the outbreak of war.
By the time of the German invasion the Soviets were embarked on a major naval expansion program far beyond the needs of a mere suppprting^role for the Soviet Army.
There was no doubt now who their future enemies would be — the United States and Britain — both great naval powers.
It was clear to them that the battleship as such had lost its usefulness; no further effort was made to complete the battleship and battlecruiser hulls, which had been largely destroyed by the Germans anyway.
The idea of large ships, however, particularly cruisers, was still prominent in Soviet thinking.
The new Navy chief, Admiral Kuznetsov, was a proponent of a balanced, high seas fleet able to challenge the West for maritime superiority.
The new Soviet Navy would comprise a huge fleet of submarines, capable of severing trie sea lanes between Eurasia and America, large numbers of destroyers and smaller craft to preserve Soviet hegemony over the Baltic and Black Seas, and a fleet of cruisers, ""heavy cruisers"" and, eventually, aircraft carriers, for high seas operations.
The Sverdlov class of 20,000 ton ""light cruisers"" was begun in 1948-49, along with the Skorry class destroyers and the first of the post-war design, long range submarines.
And there is evidence that two out of a programmed 4-6 ""heavy cruisers"" designated Stalingrad class had also been started.
The final step in the program, aircraft carriers, had not yet commenced due to the lack of technical expertise in their construction.
The most basic decision^ which was made by 1953 at the latest, was to abandon plans for aircraft carriers.
The Soviets apparently calculated that it would take them another ten years before they could construct and develop carrier power to the point where it would do them any good.
By this time, they felt rapidly developing technology would make carriers obsolete.
The decision concerning the carriers made further construction of the Sverdlovs and Stalingrads pointless.
These ships were originally programmed on the assumption that they would have carrier support.
Without such support their primary mission of high seas operations would be suicidal, arid even as surface raiders they could have only a limited usefulness.
They could still be used in a defensive role, but this function no longer justified the heavy expenditures being made on them.
Consequently, it was decided, about 1954, not to proceed any further with the construction of the Stalingrad heavy cruisers and to put the Sverdlov cruiser hulls which were then on the ways in ""conservation,"" after launching, pending a decision on what to do with them.
The ultimate size of the submarine fleet, once planned at over 1,000, was probably scaled down at this time in favor of the development of more advanced types which changing circumstances were making necessary.
Rather, with Stalin out of the way, naval strategists were more free to follow the lead of Western navies in developing the types of ships dictated by the nuclear age.
It was decided to concentrate in the future on a surface fleet of small, missile armed ships and a submarine arm smaller than originally planned, but packing much more striking power due to the addition of missiles and nuclear power.
There is little doubt where Khrushchev stood on the question of the navy.
He said further, ""I am not interested in ordinary submarines with torpedoes etc.
In a Pravda interview on 8 September 1957 Air Marshall Vershinin asserted that ""The submarine fleets have now become a formidable weapon.
They can bombard coastal cities . . . and other objectives with rocket weapons with hydrogen warheads.
And in 1959 Khrushchev remarked to Vice President Nixon that cruisers and aircraft carriers were , ""sitting ducks"" and the U.S.S.R. had stopped building them.
Meanwhile Admiral Kuznetsov, who apparently opposed the quantitative reduction in the navy, was fired in 1955 and replaced by Admiral Gorshkov, who remains Navy CINC to this day.
It was one thing to create a radically new navy and quite another to get these new ships into commission/The old naval building program ground to a virtual halt before the new one could be fully put into production.
The last Sverdlov hull was launched in late 1955, and perhaps five or more were ultimately scrapped.
Submarine production built up to a peak of 86 in 1956 and then fell off sharply in 1957.
This 1955-58 period, now known as the ""transition phase"" in Soviet naval construction, was followed, however, by the emergence of the modern Soviet Navy that faces us today.
Late in 1958, the first positive confirmation that missiles had been introduced into the Soviet Navy was achieved.
Three ""Z"" class submarines were observed to have been converted, to launch ballistic missiles, and the first conversion of a destroyer into a surface-to-surface missile ship was also spotted.
Since these early conversions a whole new navy of missile ships has been built from the keel up :% In. the surf ace fleet these include large guided missile destroyers of th e Kashin and Kynda classes patrol boats of the Komar and Osa classes (one of which fired the missiles that sank the Israel destroyer Elath) and the reequipment of some of the Sverdlov cruisers with surface-to-surface missiles.
These ships give the Soviet surface fleet tremendous conventional firepower plus a nuclear punch if they elect to substitute nuclear warheads for conventional explosives.
Of these the 5,600 ton E class carries six launching tubes, and a new class, with eight missile launching tubes is expected shortly.
The Soviets may now have as many as 60 ballistic missile firing submarines, plus 50 others which carry cruise type missiles for use against shipping.
In addition, a class of nuclear submarines — the N class — is designed for anti-submarine work.
While all this has been going on the Soviet merchant marine has increased from 3. million deadweight tons in 1949 to 9 million today, with a fleet of 20 million tons planned by 1980.
Carriers mark shift in Soviet Policy D.uring-the. late, fifties and .early, sixties.
Soviet strategists continually disparaged aircraft carriers, asserting that they were too vulnerable to missile attack.
Soviet naval exercises in the Norwegian Sea and North Atlantic seemed in fact to be directed chiefly against the NATO carrier strike fleets.
Soviet guided missile destroyers and Badger bombers with air-to-surface missiles were evidently the weapons with which the Soviets planned to attack these carrier forces.
It is too early to say whether the fall of Khrushchev in 1964 had anything to do with the Soviet decision to begin carrier construction; but in any case the Soviets have reversed themselves and have decided that these ships now have a role to play in their politico-military policy.
The carriers now under construction are not large and do not appear capable of carrying jet aircraft.
Rather, they carry helicopters which could be used to carry troops or for antisubmarine work.
It is highly significant also that the naval shipyards are producing quantities of large ocean going amphibious landing ships.
Certainly the Soviets have been rueful observers of the usefulness of these ships to the United States in the Vietnam war, long after Soviet propagandists had scornfully written them off as ""sitting ducks/' For the time being, the most certain conclusion we can draw is that these new ships in the Soviet Fleet are yet another indication that the Cold War with Russia is not over.
Secretary McNamara's grudging revelation that the Soviets are developing the Fractional Orbital Bombardment System should come as an even more sobering reminder that we face a continuing and deadly contest with Moscow across the whole spectrum of political and military power.
Soviet seapower is an often overlooked but integral and growing part of the Soviet-challenge to America.
USA Admiral Ben Moreell, USN Associate Editor, Radio Producer John F Lewis Bennett Archambault Dr.
Stefan T, Possony Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington Lloyd L Austin General Thomas S Power, USAF Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr.
Schoech, USN Law & Space Editor Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Charles S Craigmtle Major General Dale 0.
Smith, USAF Admiral Robert L Dennison, USN Admiral Felix B Stump, USN Henry Duque Dr.
It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security served except that permission is granted for reproduction in for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions.
Annual subwhole or in part if context is preserved, credit given and two scription rate $12.00.
Additional copies available at 25^ each postpaid for non-members and copies are forwarded to the American Security Council ExeculOtf each postpaid for members. tive Offices.
METC AL F MISS GANDY nm AMERICAN SECURITY COUNCIL* 12$ North Wacker, Chicago"", Illinois 60808 uP ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED fb IS' y ftll INFORMATION CONTAINED Washington, January 22, 1968 DATE / WR 68-3 THE TRUE MEANING OF THE OTEPKA CASE The long-awaited report on the Otepka Case has at last been issued by the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.
In midJanuary, after five interminable years of abortive attempts to settle the matter amicably with a defiant Dean Rusk and his obdurate Department of State, the patience of the Subcommittee finally wore out.
The report also had high praise for the seven other security officers sent into exile with Otepka during the massive purge which gutted SY in 1963.
That problem was quite simply stated by one Subcommittee member, Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen, nearly a year ago.
The ultra-Leftists in the Department of State saw Otepka as an obstacle to their plans.
Briefly, they comprise all of the disarmament measures, all the treaties and decisions restricting United States development of new strategic and space weapons, all the limitations placed upon American forces to bring a quick and successful end to the Vietnam War, all the tenuous bridges being built to the Soviet Bloc — in short, every single step taken since 1961 to create a New World Order of nationless states under the ambiguous suzerainty of an ill-defined global government.
From the outset, Otepka made it plain that he would refuse to issue security clearances to people who could not stand the test of Executive Order 10450.
ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING ATION'S SECURITY This landmark directive, handed down by Dwight D Eisenhower in 1953, required that whenever there was any reasonable doubt as to a Government employee's, or applicant's, loyalty or suitability, that doubt was to be resolved in favor of the national security, rather than the individual.
It was recently disclosed that Otepka outlined his position to Dean Rusk and the incoming Attorney General, Robert F Kennedy, in a confidential meeting soon after the I960 election.
At this meeting, the case that Rusk and Kennedy used to test Otepka concerned the possibility of a clearance for Walt W Rostow, who today holds what Lyndon Johnson calls ""the most important job in the White House, aside from the President."" y ■■ ;^ Otepka, having denied Rostow security clearances in 1955 and 1957^ made it abundantly -clear that he would still not grant him one in I960.
Rostow was then appointed to the White House staff as an assistant on national security to President Kennedy.
Towards the end of 1961, with Otepka's authority seriously undermined, Rostow was brought into State as chief I of the policy planning committee where he served until returning to the White House in April 1966.
He was placed in charge of a special project far removed from the day-to-day business of issuing clearances to incoming presidential appointees.
To be sure, investigations were conducted after the appointments were made.
But as everyone in the security field knows, it is virtually impossible to make a questionable official walk the plank once he is on board.
It is worthy of note that in the entire eight preceding years of the Eisenhower Administration only five security waivers were issued at State.
With the State Department thoroughly repopulated at the policy level, the New Breed moved forcefully to effect what amounted to a revolution in United States foreign policy.
An ersatz ""reduction-in-force"" demoted Otepka from Deputy Director of SY to Chief of the Evaluations Division, a position he held years before.
The apparent purpose of this move was to force Otepka to quit in disgust.
Back on the beat in the critical Evaluations Division, where security clearances originate, Otepka uncovered all manner of malpractices effected during the year he had been gone.
Among many others, he discovered that nearly a third of the security ""waivers"" signed by Dean Rusk had been redated to make it appear as if full field investigations had been made prior to the employment of the officials in question.
When Otepka exposed these questionable procedures before the Senate Subcommittee, a number of State Department officials attempted a cover-up via a seemingly unending stream of evasions, half-truths and outright lies.
One of them, John Francis Reilly, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security, went so far as to question Otepka's sanity.
Even before this he had been placed under close surveillance by his superiors.
His telephone was tapped, his office safe cracked, the contents of his ""burn bag"" traslP regularly examined, and he was surrounded by the New Breed's spies.
When the FBI could find nothing to substantiate the espionage charge, the State Department ordered Otepka's dismissal and he appealed. j In the meantime, the Senate Subcommittee unearthed evidence that Otepka's phone had been tapped.
L^nin, and beatnik who had been placed in charge of SY's electronic counter-espionage division^ Reilly and Hill were permitted to resign in November 1963, although Belisle remains on State's payroll even now.
After the 1964 election, it was learned that Reilly had been given a plush job in the Federal Communications Commission, which continues to afford him a privileged sanctuary today.
Otepka, on the other hand, was forced to wait until June 1967 for his departmental hearing on the 1963 dismissal charges.
On the very first day of the hearing the Department dropped the ten ""criminal"" charges relating to ""mutilated"" classified documents which Otepka says were planted in his burn bag in a deliberate attempt to frame him.
All that remained were three charges pertaining to alleged violation of President Truman's 1948 directive, issued on the eve of the Alger Hiss case, forbidding Government employees to divulge information from personnel security files.
In December 1967, Secretary Rusk upheld the remaining charges against Otepka, reprimanding him severely and de moting him still fu rther to ajob co mpletel y outside the security field, Otepka, already barred from his chosen profession for nearly five years, patiently appealed once more, this time to the Civil Service Commission.
The American Defense Fund, operated on a voluntary basis by James Stewart of Wood Dale, Illinois, is still seeking donations towards Otepka's legal defense.
But as the case drags on year after year, Mr Stewart finds it increasingly difficult to raise funds.
Despite his new demotion, which cut his annual salary more than $5,000, he recently borrowed money to pay the bulk of his attorney's latest bill of $8,500.
Meanwhile, the people who saw in Otto Otepka ""an obstacle to their plans"" continue to formulate the foreign policy of the United States.
Nor, one might add, will the trend of recent history be reversed until sane internal security practices are restored in Washington.
Kenneth M Piper EDITORIAL CONSULTANTS Vice President Stephen L Donchess Kar , Baars | a g Dr.
R/"" has confinlJed to be~the subject of news and feature articles'in publications throughout the country.
I think that two of the most recent items to have appeared are of particular in-t-er es t-s-ine e-toget-he-F-they-p-Fe sent-an-a-G&u-ra-te-^u-mmar^oOh.e^.. present unfavorable status and trend of our strategic -militarybalance.
Needless to say, we're pleased with the continuing coverage being given to the study and I wanted to share the two items with you.
I think you'll find them interesting and I hope that they will serve as a reminder that the present trend can be reversed if an informed and enlightened public clearly expresses the belief that it must be.
On this score, for the historically minded, we might cite the sudden rediscovery of Crispus Attucks, hitherto obscure Negro stevedore, whose sole claim to fame — he chanced to stop a bullet during the Boston Massacre— has gained him a place among the ""Founders of Our Nation"" in the Bobbs-Merrill ""Childhood of Famous Americans"" series, as well as a newly established school holiday in.
There is also the man whose announced resignation as Secretary of Defense last fall evoked an equally extravagant appraisal of net worth.
By the same token, barely eight weeks after the lawgiver's salute appeared in print, the quick-march of time has made a shambles of the Secretary's service record.
Shortly after Mr McNamara handed in his resignation, Great Britain dropped its option on the controversial TFX, a command decision which the United States Navy is maneuvering adroitly to follow.
By pulling out of the Middle and Far East"", moreover, the British have exposed not only the weakness of their own position but also the folly of a United States strategy in Europe based heavily upon their crumbling strength.
Under Mr McNamara the civilians in the Pentagon have overridden unanimous decisions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, undercut the authority of field commanders and subordinated strategic and tactical imperatives — the lives of Americans in uniform, to be blunt — to the dictates of dubiously programmed computers.
Some Whiz Kid — with what a House Armed Services subcommittee later condemned as ""bordering on criminal negligence"" — decided to substitute a cheaper powder for the intricately designed M-16 rifle, thereby causing repeated malfunction.
The vulnerable Pueblo, operating 13 miles off North Korea, had standing orders to ignore harassment and not to fire.
Finally, by urging the doctrine of nuclear parity between the United States and the Soviet Union, refusing to deploy an effective anti-ballistic missile system and stifling weapons development, the ""finest Secretary of Defense,"" perhaps more than any other man in Cabinet history, has come alarmingly close to tipping the balance of terror against his own country.
Unlike the fraudulent missile gap of 1960, which helped him to office, what the American Security Council flatly labels the ""McNamara gap"" today looms perilously real.
The gulf between image and reality shows up perhaps most starkly on the fighting fronts.
McNamara apologists like to boast of their man' s~skttr""at~cb st-e ff ectiWne-ss-sndthe ""far-reaching managerial re volution' '.which he brought to the Pentagon.
To all of which we say ""Tell it to the Marines""— and to the Army, Navy and Air Force.
Dozens of M-13 military personnel carriers, for example, have been red-lined for lack of parts.
Since then, thanks to some management genius' urge to slash inventories, United States forces have run dangerously short of combat aircraft, to the point where the Pentagon reluctantly had to authorize the re-opening of shut-down assembly lines.
Air support wasn't available for the Pueblo because the few planes close enough to help were rigged to carry nuclear bombs.
Enterprise, now cruising off Wonsan, remains tied to a slowmoving conventionally powered j fleet.
Further flare-ups anywhere in the world will find the United States defense posture dangerously strained.
For decades the i North Atlantic Treaty Organization j served the Western world as' shield; t TJ.S. nuclear power was -the sword.
However, under Mr McNamara \(who really hates to waste money on ""*arras and~~should be'KappleFTadling it out at the World Bank), both shield and sword have fallen into disrepair.
Largely at the behest of the so-called defense intellectuals j and with scarcely a by-your-leave' to its NATO allies, the United States in 1961 began a unilateral retreat from the policy of massive retaliation, and toward a new doctrine of graduated response, which envisions the use of nuclear power only as a last, and long-deferred, resort.
In mid-December, as he was emptying his desk at the Pentagon, Mr McNamara had the satisfaction of seeing his brainchild promoted to official NATO strategy.
An Expert Gives Some FriendlyAdvice on Conglomerates 5 AGGRESSIVE SWISS Brown, Boveri & Co.
For graduated response, perhaps more than any other issue, alienated Charles de Gaulle, who quite correctly viewed it as a softening of the United States resolve to. defend the Continent, and led France to withdraw its forces from NATO's military command.
The security of Europe thus has come to rest on a dwindling band of U.S., British and miscellaneous troops, which, instead of reinforcements, as official reliance on conventional weaponry might seem to demand, gradually are getting transportation home.
This winter, Washington and London withdrew some 40,000 men, or over 10% of their total contingent, from the Continent; the Canadians and Belgians soon may follow suit.
Manpower aside, graduated response, as the bloody stalemate known as McNamara' s War suggests, simply is no substitute for victory. * * * rarely speaks in such terms.
Instead, vis-a-vis the Soviet Union — which remains the would-be architect of United States destruction — he stubbornly clings to the hope of disarmament and detente.
Time after time he has shown an otherwise inexplicable willingness to give the Communist world the benefit of the doubt long after grounds for reasonable doubt had vanished.
Last summer, in a grim appraisal titled "" The Changing Strategic Military Balance.
Hence, it concluded that by mid-1968, if not before, a dangerous ""megaton gap"" would begin to open in favor of the Reds.
Last week, however, in a significant statement to the Senate Armed Services Committee, it struck a different note.
Specifically, it urged modernizing the Minuteman missile force; defending all Minuteman emplacements with Sprint antimissile systems; and developing a deadlier successor.
After seven years of appeasement, retreat and defeat, maybe even the icy Secretary of Defense has lost his cool.
Because the hour is late, an informed citizenry must act— now By John G, Hubbell ""n 1962 the United States had the actly the reverse of what it was in I* capability of delivering two and a half to ten times as much nuclear firepower as the Soviet Union.
By 1967, the estimate is that the Soviets had drawn roughly equal to us, possibly even ahead in terms of deliverable megatonnage, that is, the explosive power of the warheads.
Present indications are that the Soviets, with their larger rockets and more powerful warheads^ will have a clear lead by 1969, and will open a massive gap by 1971— with the capability to deliver from twice as much to perhaps ten times as much nuclear megatonnage.
In other words, the situation by 1971 will be almost ex1962, when our strategic supremacy was such that the Soviets had no 1 choice but to accede to our demands during the Cuban missile crisis.
L Mendel Rivers , chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, by a distinguished panel of 17 military and weapons experts of the American Security Council.
Bernard A Schriever, USAF , the officer most responsible for development of our intercontinentahballistic-missile force, the panel, at Rivers' request, confined itself to a study of unclassified sources, obviously drawing on those it knew to be sound.
It was inevitable that the Soviets, having mastered their own nuclear and missile technologies, would gain on us.
But, should they score breakthroughs in the offensive or defensive technologies we know that they are developing, or come up with highly reliable new strategic systems we have not yet heard of, it could overnight shift the balance of strategic power to the Soviet Union.
In short, it would mean an end to the cold war, with victory to the Soviet Union.
Congress is charged by the Constitution with the maintenance of the armed forces, and for years the armed-services committees of Congress have been pleading with the Defense Department to proceed with the development of the strategic-weapons technologies that our military professionals and all logic insist must be developed.
Congress' armedservices committees need the support of an informed American public.
The decision to retain military supremacy still rests with the peoplebut the hour is very late.
Just this week I have received such-requests from the Young Americans for Freedom and the American Security CounciL I am certainly not opposed to helping reputable organizations in their effort to swing us back some from the so-called liberal or left-wing course on which our country has been apparently heading.
Although we would like to be of assistance, this Bureau is strictly an investigative agency of the Federal Government and, as such, neither makes evaluations nor draws conclusions as to the character or integrity of any organization, publication, or individual.
Its ^President, Mr John M Fisher, is a former Special Agent and is — on the Special Correspondents List.
The Young Americans for Freedom is selfcharacterized as endeavoring to provide the Americ public with educational material regarding threats upon Anerican institutions by socialist and communist groups mail roomCZLj teletype unit I 1 FEDERALBUREAU OF INVESTIGATION FOIPA DELETED PAGE INFORMATION SHEET No Duplication Fees are charged for Deleted Page In formation Sheet.
