Adobe Stock The Geopolitics of Renewable Hydrogen Renewables are widely perceived as an opportunity to shatter the hegemony of fossil fuel-rich states and democratize the energy landscape.
Virtually all countries have access to some renewable energy resources and could thus substitute foreign supply with local resources.
Our research shows, however, that the role countries are likely to assume in decarbonized energy systems will be based not only on their resource endowment but also on their policy choices.
What We All Can Do Full event video and after-event thoughts from the panelists.
Burns said that lesson is equally relevant today for those trying to find a solution to the Iran crisis.Allison and Burns were panelists on Oct. at a forum at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston to consider the modern lessons of the missile crisis.
The event kicked off an intensive series of seminars and workshops for scholars from Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs to mark the 50th anniversary of the missile crisis.The moderator for the panel was Juliette Kayyem, Kennedy School lecturer in public policy, who reminded the audience that the missile crisis is often framed through the myth of the tough American president staring down the Russian foe and making him blink.
For example, President Kennedy was considering an invasion of Cuba – but did not know that the Russians had deployed battlefield nuclear weapons that would have been used against United States ground troops, almost certainly triggering a wider nuclear war.Allison said that similarly, the United States knows now about some Iranian nuclear sites where uranium is being enriched, and could target those in an air strike.
Absorbing their own lessons, after the crisis Kennedy and Khrushchev together established the “hotline,” agreed to a limited nuclear test ban treaty and to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.Allison said the lessons today are germane not only for Iran but also for relations with China.Kennedy recognized what he called “the precarious rules of the status quo,” Allison said.
Unless the United States and China can work out their own precarious rules of the status quo, then the chances for confrontation in East Asia in coming years is significant, he added.
News, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, November 2, 2012.
Security and Defense Sophia Becker Christian Mölling Ambassador Victoria Nuland | February 2021 In the Spotlight RSS China’s Tech Crackdown Could Give It An Edge Kevin Klyman While some analysts assume China’s new regulations and restrictions on tech giants will destroy the industry, Kevin Klyman argues they will do the opposite.
Wikimedia Commons/ CTBTO End of the USSR and Nuclear Aftermath in Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine Mariana Budjeryn Mariana Budjeryn reconstructs the paths Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine took toward relinquishing nuclear weapons following the Soviet Union collapse in 1991.
