After the film was developed in Jacksonville, Fla., later that day of Oct., 1962, Ecker continued on in the same RF-8A plane to Washington.
There, he was rushed to a briefing with Kennedy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The black and white photograph of the bunker, now whitewashed and surrounded by towering palm trees, showed several men standing on the roof and several in front.
What appears to be construction materials are piled up off to the side.
Other photographs taken by Ecker's team showed an apparent missile launch site at this military installation about 80 miles west of Havana.
One image showed large tent-like constructions that CIA analysts said appeared to be sheltering medium-range missiles that could travel up to about 1,500 miles, along with a missile erector.
Wearing a black Navy pilot cap, Ecker pulled out his wallet to show the black and white photograph taken the following year when Kennedy stood before him on the tarmac at the naval base in Key West, Fla., to award him the Distinguished Flying Cross.
The visits Sunday followed a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian protagonists in the missile crisis drama, which brought the world to the precipice of nuclear destruction.
Studying thousands of newly declassified materials from the governments involved, conference participants learned that fast-moving events nearly spun out of control and brought them closer to nuclear disaster than they earlier imagined.
Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions on Friday and Saturday as did former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
Later, the former rivals said good-bye late Saturday with a warm handshake as McNamara left Havana calling for an end to the risks of nuclear catastrophe.
McNamara suggested moving ""toward eliminating the risk of destruction of nations by nuclear weapons.
After McNamara left the conference Saturday evening, Castro said that the former American defense chief mentioned that he was now 86 and probably would not be around for the next missile crisis conference 10 years from now.
The missile crisis began in mid-October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Richard Goodwin also attended the conference, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
That we have missed and misunderstood crucial events that took place in the weeks before the confrontation.
And that, while John F Kennedy performed admirably, infighting and distrust between his administration and the intelligence community helped propel a dangerous situation toward a global crisis.
In a new book, Blind Over Cuba , political science professor David Barrett offers a detailed, disquieting analysis of the ""photo gap"" a five-week period in which American intelligence flights over western Cuba were suspended.
That span proved to be exactly when the Soviets were deploying missiles.
Look closer and ""you discover there are all sorts of things that aren't quite the same as the mythology,"" Barrett said.
His book is timed to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the crisis, which played out over 13 days in October 1962.
Coauthored with Max Holland, editor of the online monthly Washington Decoded, it's based on declassified documents, archive materials, and interviews with several participants.
Blind Over Cubatells the story of an intelligence failure as compelling as any in a spy novel.
The CIA director happened to be on a French Riviera honeymoon at a critical moment.
Anniversary seminars and observances abound, from the Kennedy Library in Boston, to Greenville, S.C., where a wreath was placed at the grave of the incident's only fatality, pilot Rudolf Anderson Jr.
But he sought to tell a largely unknown story, documenting how the administration's response was not ""wonderfully coordinated and error-free crisis management,"" as then-national security adviser McGeorge Bundy asserted, but quite the opposite.
In spring 1962, the Cold War in deep freeze, Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to place intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, capable of striking cities across the southeastern United States.
He believed the move would deter any United States attack on the Soviet Union.
Cuban dictator Fidel Castro welcomed the missiles as protection against a repeat of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier.
During the summer of 1962, the Soviets secretly worked to build the installations.
The United States had been conducting U-2 spy plane overflights since October 1960.
An Aug. flight found that surface-to-air missile sites, designed to bring down enemy planes, were being built in western Cuba.
Kennedy, Barrett writes, was inclined to believe that Soviet military aid to Cuba was defensive.
And the United States was still traumatized from the so-called U-2 incident in May 1960, when a plane was shot down over Soviet airspace.
The United States denied it was spying, then had to admit its lie when the Soviets produced the living pilot, Francis Gary Powers.
On Aug., a U-2 violated Soviet airspace, causing a public protest by Moscow.
Then, on Sept., a U-2 manned by a Taiwan-based pilot was lost over China.
At a meeting two days later, Barrett writes, Bundy rescinded presidential approval of the second September flight.
Two flights stuck to international waters off the coast, and two covered portions of central and eastern Cuba.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, dealing with Cold War dangers in Berlin and Vietnam, felt the coastal flights sufficient.
To the public, and to doubting members of Congress, the administration was reassuring, insisting that United States surveillance was vigilant.
Complicating matters, Barrett writes, was that Kennedy and key members of his administration, deeply distrusted the CIA and military leadership, who had pushed for the disastrous Bay of Pigs.
Meanwhile, CIA Director John McCone, a 60-year-old widower, had left Washington in late August to be married for the second time.
His absence meant the CIA's senior leader a man certain in his gut that the Soviets wanted offensive weapons in Cuba wasn't there to personally press for greater U-2 surveillance.
He forcefully pointed out the void to the president and his senior aides.
Students usually went to Mass twice a week, but now they went every day.
Confession went from once a month to every other day, the nuns wanting to ensure the children's souls were spotless in case they were incinerated.
The nuclear showdown ended Oct., when the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for an American pledge not to invade Cuba and for the unpublicized removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Keep open the lines of communication to the mavericks, to the iconoclasts who approach matters in a different way.
In the Kennedy administration, it was McCone, whom the president privately described as ""stupid"" and ""a bastard,"" who demanded the resumption of U-2 flights.
In the years after the crisis, many authors wrote that toughness and military strength carried the day.
Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it.
Historians now say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of backdoor diplomacy.
In reality, the United States came out a winner, but so did the Soviet Union.
But the ""October Crisis,"" as it is known in Cuba, dragged on for another tense month or so in what Cuba analyst Peter Kornbluh dubs the ""November Extension,"" as Washington and Moscow haggled over details of exactly what weapons would be removed.
Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan traveled to Cuba that Nov. and spent 20 days in tense talks with the Cuban leader.
The book explores the sociological and emotional repercussions of the crisis on Americans.
McCarthy, 64, will discuss her decision to write the book during an appearance from 2 to 4m.
The book is a fictional account of an ordinary family's experiences during the tense, 13 historic October days of the crisis while residents prepared for an atomic bomb to be detonated on United States soil.
In the wake of the 9-11 terror attacks, McCarthy said she began having nightmares about the crisis and that time in her childhood.
When McCarthy began researching, she realized not much had been written about the intensity of the memories unique to Floridians, and she decided she wanted to capture the story.
She then went on to write ads for Walt Disney World in Orlando, moved to Atlanta and worked in advertising and then became a full-time freelance writer after moving to California in 1977.
Critics say McCarthy's books blend facts, memories, imagination and truth and are widely selected by libraries and universities.
Her first novel, ""Lay That Trumpet in Our Hands,"" is a fictional account of McCarthy's father, who cooperated with an FBI investigation of a series of race crimes in Florida during the early 1950s.
Her second novel, ""True Fires,"" also was prompted by events that occurred in Lake in 1954.
Library director Stephanie Haimes said she is pleased to host McCarthy again after reading her debut novel several years ago and then inviting the author to speak at the library.
On Oct., 1962, The United States and the Soviet Union are at a stand-still and so is the Avery family.
The town of College Park is buzzing with gossip about the traffic at McCoy Air Force Base and Wes Avery, a World War II veteran and former bomb-dropper, can't help but assume the worst -the United States is on the brink of catastrophe.
At the same time, several former aides to late president John Kennedy, who attended the Cuban conference, warned that President George W Bush is misinterpreting history by citing Mr Kennedy's actions during the missile crisis as justification for a pre-emptive military strike against Iraq.
While most of the information discussed at the conference, held on the 40th anniversary of the Cold War's worst moment, covered old ground, newly declassified documents revealed details about a littleknown incident illustrating how close the world came to nuclear confrontation in October 1962.
On October 27, 1962, the most dangerous day of the 13-day stand-off, a United States Navy destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine near Cuba without realising it was carrying a nuclear weapon.
Angered and fearing death, the Soviet submarine commander ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo readied for launch.
At the last second, the commander decided to hold his fire after consulting with other officers.
While the conference, attended by Cuban President Fidel Castro, former United States and Soviet officials, academics and others, focused on events 40 years ago, some participants drew a parallel between the 1962 crisis over the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba and the gathering war clouds over Iraq.
Robert Nott; The New Mexican Section: Local News 1469 Words OpenURL Link Fifty years ago, Santa Fean Eloy Ortiz found himself in the middle of a nuclear poker game between two superpowers.
Sitting on the couch of his childhood home on Baca Street this week, Ortiz recalled with pride his role in the 13-day confrontation between the Soviet Union and Cuba on one side, and the United States on the other, which ended Oct., 1962.
The confrontation began when American U-2 spy planes discovered that Soviet forces had installed nuclear weapons, including medium-range ballistic missiles, in Cuba.
President John F Kennedy and his advisers kept the news secret until the president gave a nationally televised announcement on Oct., 1962, in which he called the Soviet military move “offensive” and said he planned to order a quarantine of the island.
Many Americans responded in fear and shock to Kennedy’s announcement that if any such missiles were launched from Cuba, he would view it as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States and order retaliatory strikes.
Ortiz dropped out of high school in the 11th grade and was just 17 when he joined the Marines in January 1959.
He visited a Marine recruiter in the upstairs office of a federal building that was, he recalled, near the current location of the Museum of Contemporary Native Arts on Cathedral Place.
The young Marine had no idea that this world would be confined to Southern California and a sea trip to Cuba.
After 16 weeks of basic training in San Diego, Ortiz was assigned to the transportation pool at Camp Pendleton, working as a heavy-equipment operator and truck driver.
He was an expert shot with the M-1 rifle, which, he said, had a clip of eight shells.
It remained locked up with all the other small arms onboard the USS Colonial during the entire affair.
On the way to Cuba, his ship stopped at Camp Garcia on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques, where the men were hastily trained to use the more advanced M-14.
But earlier in October, he and his transportation pool pals knew something was up when they were ordered to install fording gears on all the base’s vehicles, transforming them into amphibious landing vehicles.
He left his wife, Fabiola, and his 7-month-old son, Daniel, behind in Southern California.
They drove back to Santa Fe with a friend, where they would stay until Ortiz received his honorary discharge in February 1963.
Upon reaching its destination, the USS Colonial joined the other ships in the blockade.
Every day, Ortiz would check over the various military vehicles fastened to the ship’s surface.
The crew did not receive any radio or television reports about what was happening.
The noncommissioned officers emphasized the importance of the men writing home to their families — “But don’t tell them anything,” they warned.
That was ridiculous, Ortiz said, because the general public probably knew more about what was going on than some of the men on the ships.
Ortiz did not vote during the presidential election of 1960 — “I have voted in every election since!” — but he looks back at Kennedy’s actions as calm, yet determined.
Kennedy and his advisers used the blockade to buy time and showcase military might while continuing negotiations with the Soviet Union.
Ultimately, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to order the dismantling of the weapons in Cuba in return for Kennedy’s promise to not invade Cuba and to remove American nuclear missiles from Turkey.
On the last day of the blockade, Ortiz and his shipmates watched as some Soviet ships left Cuba with their cargo covered with tarps.
He could see the Soviet soldiers and sailors standing at attention on deck.
Some of the American servicemen yelled obscenities at the “Russkies” until a sergeant quietly told them, “Don’t do that.
More excitement occurred on the way back home, when the ship stopped at Camp Garcia.
After a first group of military men on leave went into a nearby town and raised hell, the town and surrounding area was declared off-limits.
Ortiz was on guard duty the last night there and heard of four American servicemen — two Marines and two sailors — who got involved in a big saloon brawl and were hauled off in a police wagon.
He was still onboard the USS Colonial on Thanksgiving Day 1962, when a storm hit and the seas got so rough that the ship, the tables and the plates on the table kept tipping back and forth.
Though he left full-time military service early in 1963, Ortiz remained in the Reserves for two years.
At 71, he currently serves as a courier for TriCore Reference Laboratories.
To them, he and his son Daniel noted, it was just something that played out on television a long time ago.
Fernandez said most studies of that period concentrated on the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, with Cuba's role less well-known.
Conference participants on Sunday will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in the western province of Pinar del Rio.
To remove the missiles the Kremlin had sneaked into Fidel Castro's Cuba produced the Cold War's defining collision of short-term safety with longer-term credibility, prestige and, for Kennedy, political survival.
A pity then that the Harvard editors of this remarkable and unprecedented exercise in historical documentation, Ernest R May and Philip D Zelikow, donot examine it in its full dimensions.
They make of the proceedings a paean to the modern-day political-science category of crisis management.
Their focus is not on the larger strategic dilemma that framed the instant challenge but on the immediate decision-making techniques practiced along the way.
In the process, the reconstruction of the missile crisis becomes what the editors identify as a progression from history to drama to screenplay.
It becomes a stage on which to nominate John Kennedy, a president who unfortunately was never given the time to make an unambiguous record, for greatness.
Missing from this version is a full evaluation of the mixed political, strategic and psychological results of the missile crisis.
It brought the nuclear nonproliferation treaty and the closure of the Berlin crisis -valuable developments.
At the same time it brought a vast mutual expansion of nuclear arms-building plus the early ouster of the ''hare-brained'' Khrushchev by a Kremlin consensus bent on competing harder and smarter against the United States.
Although hailed as a Cold War victory for the United States, the crisis permanently cost Americans the sense of invulnerability behind two oceans that had been the mark of American innocence until then.
Missing too is any evaluation of the impact of the crisis on democratic practice.
This convulsive event put into a few hands in the White House a constitutionally unauthorized power to make ultimate decisions about the life and death of the nation and to make such decisions affecting not only the United States and the Soviet Union but the rest of an unconsulted world.
Later American disputes over a president's war powers fade into insignificance against the war-and-ruin powers the president found it unavoidable to take onto himself in the missile crisis.
At the end of those days of October, of course, the planet was still there.
Kennedy had forced Nikita Khrushchev to extract -for modest political recompense (a conditional American no-invasion guarantee of Cuba, a secret understanding on removal of American missiles from Turkey) -the nuclear missiles the Soviet leader had slipped in.
The new book's editors find Kennedy calm, lucid, making no serious misjudgments, avoiding impulsiveness, sorting skillfully through varied interlocutors, remaining several steps ahead of his advisers, following a more peaceful course than anyone else could have done, playing out some of his finest hours.
The editors do in fact make a convincing case for Kennedy's coolness under unimaginable pressure.
But they do not ask how Kennedy and his predecessors in the White House and all his other collaborators and advisers -the system, if you will -put a president in the situation where to defend against a genuine strategic threat he had to put at risk the very existence and survival of the United States and the rest of the world.
It seems to me less important to celebrate the high personal qualities of one leader in a crisis that passed than to grasp the deadly systemic qualities of a defense system that remains unchanged in its essence to this day.
With the Cold War behind, we and the Russians both still rely on a model of nuclear deterrence that entails the targeting, the keeping on alert and the preparing for Armageddon of some 10,000 nuclear warheads.
The map that Kennedy called his ""victory map "" was sold by Boston-based RR Auction during an auction that ended Wednesday.
The map shows the position of every Soviet missile, bomber and fighter jet, and nuclear storage facility in Cuba as of noon, October 27, 1962, and includes the nine targets that American planes would have bombed had Kennedy ordered air strikes on the island.
The buyer and seller remained anonymous, but the seller said they were given it about 20 years ago by Robert McNamara, secretary of defense during the crisis.
I finally read David Halberstam's ""The Best and the Brightest,"" which explained how a group of supposedly intelligent individuals could have led us into the Vietnam quagmire It was therefore uplifting to delve into ""The Kennedy Tapes,"" where the decisions of many of the same people led to a more positive result during the Cuban missile crisis.
Professors May and Zelikow have not just transcribed the secretly recorded tapes of the two weeks of meetings that occurred during the month of October 35 years ago.
They also have meticulously footnoted the text with explanatory references and have filled in the gaps between these meetings with notes explaining what w as happening outside the Oval Office.
While this book may not interest the casual reader, it provides a fascinating insight into the workings of government at the highest level during a critical situation.
Most of the participants agreed that the positioning of offensive missiles in Cuba was not a major military problem.
Instead, it was seen from the outset as a political one, a situation the response to which would shape the way that the United States would be perceived throughout the world.
In one of the more poignant passages, the President confides to his brother that he would have been impeached had he not taken some action.
In a similar vein, the transcripts demonstrate that the President did not relish the idea of perhaps starting a nuclear war, even though he was being pushed toward an invasion strategy by some members of his inner circle.
Of the many participants in these daily gatherings, the input of two particularly stands out.
John McCone, the head of the CIA, is extremely thorough in giving the briefings that start most of the meetings.
And Robert S McNamara, as expected, clearly comes through as both the best analyst and the ""detail man,"" setting forth all possible contingencies and their possible ramifications.
The discussions are extremely mundane, not the stuff of historical novels.
This grammar lesson goes on while the country lies on the brink of nuclear war.
Early in the crisis, McGeorge Bundy states, ""I think any military action does change the world.
As thorough as the transcripts are, the tape did not pick up Dean Rusk's ""eyeball to eyeball"" quote that was apparently made as an aside to another member of the inner circle.
The transcripts are perhaps most important in showing how the United States ultimately decided to respond to the two proposals from Khruschev, the first of which indicated that the Russians would remove the missiles in an exchange for a United States promise to not invade Cuba.
Then overnight, he raised the ante to demand removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
All the participants agree that the Turkish missiles are obsolete, and the President wonders how he can reject such an offer that will appear reasonable to the public.
It is perhaps for this reason that the decision is made to respond to the first letter and ignore the second, at least publicly.
I was in high school when the Cuban missile crisis occurred, and it's the first time I remember being frightened by world events.
Reading ""The Kennedy Tapes"" has shown me that, while my fears were indeed justified, as we were on the brink of a Cuban invasion, those in charge of making the decisions, in particular President Kennedy, were well-informed and mostly men of reason.
The inscription in a clearing in a hilly part of western Cuba, is deceptively laconic.
It marks the site where 30 years ago a United States high-altitude U-2 spy plane first pinpointed a launch site for Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles on the Caribbean island.
Almost all that remains of San Cristobal 1, as it was codenamed at the time by CIA analysts, is a small whitewashed silo, now a military museum.
Antonio Castineyra, a Cuban military historian who has studied the missile sites.
Detection from the air of the tell-tale ''footprint'' of the R-12 missile launch site at El Cacho confirmed beyond doubt earlier reports by CIA ground agents in Cuba that large missiles had arrived and were being deployed by Soviet forces.
Recently unclassified CIA documents have revealed that United States intelligence chiefs came close to missing the deployment of the R-12s, known in the West as SS-4s.
Diez said the U-2 plane that discovered the sites at El Cacho, 60 miles west of Havana, had in fact set out to photograph a Soviet anti-aircraft missile battery farther north.
But the pilot flew one mile off course, right over the much more important and hitherto unknown R-12 site.
After this discovery on Oct., 1962, United States planes flew several low-level reconnaissance runs over El Cacho.
Their photographs picked out details such as the silo -still standing -which was used for checking the missiles, missile transporters and erectors, tents used to conceal the rockets and even Soviet troops working on the site.
President John F Kennedy used the photographs to justify ordering United States forces to go on combat alert and imposing a military blockade on Cuba on Oct., 1962.
For a week, the world held its breath until Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to defuse the crisis.
The Soviet missiles were withdrawn in return for a United States pledge not to attack Cuba.
In retrospect, Cuban historians think the Soviet forces erred in not taking greater care to conceal the missile sites at El Cacho and at five other locations on the island.
A total of 36 operational R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads were deployed on the island along with 43,000 Soviet troops also equipped with nine Luna tactical nuclear missiles and antiaircraft missile batteries.
United States aerial detection of El Cacho blew the lid off ''Operation Anadir,'' the top-secret operation under which the missiles were shipped to Cuba and deployed.
Castineyra said Soviet troops may have become careless after receiving an order from Moscow to speed up the installation.
He and Diez said the Soviet engineers were also unaccustomed to the hilly, tropical terrain of Cuba, far different from the East European forests where Soviet R-12 sites were already in place.
In international conferences held in the past two years to debate the Missile Crisis, Cuba has insisted the missiles were deployed as a deterrent against a United States attack on the island.
President Fidel Castro said in a television interview this month that in retrospect he would not have accepted Soviet missiles in Cuba.
A U-2 spy plane photographed launch pads and missiles capable of reaching Washington on Oct., 1962, more than a month after the Soviet buildup began, after repeated warnings from 25 secret agents on the island.
The missiles would have been operational within several days, Soviet officials say.
Had the missiles been ready to launch, the Soviets may not have been so ready to back down.
Dozens of reports from CIA informants in Cuba were disregarded for a variety of reasons, all of which amount to an intelligence failure of nearcatastrophic proportions.
Some analysts found it hard to believe that the Soviets would be rash enough to do anything so provocative.
Others thought that Soviet shipments involved only relatively short-range missiles to defend Cuba from a feared United States invasion.
A Soviet general confirmed for the first time that one-third of his country's nuclear warheads designed to strike the United States were in Cuba at the time.
Soviets and Americans have met before to discuss the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba and the United States response, a blockade of the island and a demand for the rockets' removal.
Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said that at the time of the crisis, 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were on Cuba.
Another 20 warheads were headed to the island aboard a Soviet ship that was caught in the United States naval blockade, he said.
He made the remarks in a closed session of the conference Saturday, and they were reported by Raymond Garthoff, a State Department official at the time of the crisis.
Garthoff said Volkogonov reported 20 nuclear missiles were on Soviet territory targeted at the United States.
Before retiring behind closed doors with his Cold War foe, former United States defence secretary Robert McNamara credited the Cuban leader, president John F Kennedy and Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction.
McNamara said on the eve of the conference, outlining questions he hoped would be answered.
The key Cuban participant at the conference is 76-year-old Castro, who at the time of the conference was young revolutionary leader in power for just three years.
On Sunday, those attending the conference will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in the western province of Pinar del Rio.
The change of heart meant the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis were never made permanent.
The crisis was triggered by the United States discovery in the fall of 1962 that Russia had sent missiles to Cuba.
An anxious world was uncertain whether the two countries would settle peacefully or reduce each other to ashes.
In a Nov., 1962, telephone conversation with George Ball, the State Department's third-ranking official, Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect United States response if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-American country, such as Guatemala.
The Soviets also saw the United States as intent on having a ""free hand so it will not have to keep its obligations,"" the memo said.
As seen by the Soviets, the United States could use the Rio Pact to attack Cuba ""by alleging that Cuba had undertaken aggression not involving the use of armed force, including subversion.
He tends to take an upbeat view, believing that it served as a beneficial learning experience.
Both the Soviets and the Americans, he told The Miami Herald, decided they had come too close to nuclear holocaust during October 1962.
Afterward, Sergei says, ""Khrushchev stopped talking about Berlin, and Kennedy stopped talking about Cuba.
American military leaders felt that, with that superiority, the Communists dared not try anything, and the Americans could automatically win any confrontation.
But other United States leaders feared that the foe with less weapons might fight harder, because he was more frightened.
But, says Brenner, ""what really happened in the missile crisis is both sides were petrified of destroying the world.
Force and threat of force got us into this situation in the first place.
In fact, we now know that the Cubans and Russians had learned about Operation Mongoose, the covert United States program and a proposal to overthrow the Castro government, in October.
But I believe that Cuba is also beginning to understand that we saw its actions as a threat to our security"" -its alliance with the Soviet Union and its support of revolutionary movements.
To McNamara, the main point of the crisis is ""we must place ourselves in each other's shoes.
If they don't, the missile crisis has shown, the actions can have long-lasting effects.
He suggests the major powers backed Third World groups in the ""proxy wars"" in Angola, El Salvador, Nicaragua and elsewhere as a way to avoid another direct confrontation.
Fidel Castro believes the crisis sent the old superpowers into an expensive and damaging arms race.
Blight says that Cuba, then as now, is feeling vulnerable and abandoned, and when Castro feels threatened, he is capable of very unpredictable things.
Just because Nikita Khrushchev responded to President John Kennedy's warnings and agreed to turn the ships around didn't mean he would keep his word.
Then there was the matter of the weapons that had been put in Cuba before the main crisis.
Kennedy was under pressure to assure our nation that the threat was resolved.
But if he gave such assurance and it turned out hollow, it was unlikely Kennedy could win a second term in 1964.
What's noteworthy and the material for this book is that the deliberations were captured on secret White House tapes that are transcribed and made public.
It is believed Kennedy wanted White House tapes for book material after his presidency.
Kennedy kept former President Dwight Eisenhower fully informed about the missile crisis, not wanting to be criticized by Ike.
Students of American history and the presidency will find much that's beneficial in these pages.
