Stephen Kruiser Stacey Lennox Matt Margolis Charlie Martin Rick Moran Dennis Prager Chris Queen Jeff Reynolds Gwendolyn Sims Robert Spencer Spengler David Solway Victoria Taft Athena Thorne VodkaPundit Newsletters Instapundit News & Politics Columns Culture Podcasts MY ACCOUNT Account Settings Newsletter Subscriptions Log Out LOGIN JOIN VIP News & Politics Columns Culture Podcasts Columnists J Christian Adams Paula Bolyard Lincoln Brown Ed Driscoll Richard Fernandez Megan Fox Victor Davis Hanson Raymond Ibrahim Kevin Downey Jr.
The cause was the United States discovery on October 16, 1962, of the installation of Soviet missiles in Fidel Castro’s Cuba.
Yet the two superpowers never stepped over the brink and the crisis was defused after 13 days of high suspense.
The Soviet missiles were withdrawn, and Kennedy’s reputation soared as a result.
He was enjoying stellar ratings when, thirteen months later, he was assassinated.
Inasmuch as the placement of Soviet missiles developed out of the disastrous, Kennedy-authorized Bay of Pigs invasion by Cuban dissidents the previous year, assisted covertly — but so clumsily as to fool no-one — by United States forces, the “victory” consisted of extricating Kennedy from a self-induced crisis.
Khrushchev had placed the missiles for non-offensive purposes, to secure Cuba from future invasion.
We also now know from a tape recording released in 1990 that Khrushchev spoke of selecting American targets with care and with a view to inflicting maximum damage and spreading terror.
And while it later emerged that the missiles had not been fitted with nuclear warheads when the crisis arose, we also know on the authority of Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, that the missiles could have been made operational within hours had Khrushchev given the order.
Khrushchev was later to say that, “I’m not a Czarist officer who has to kill himself if I fart at a masked ball.
But, given the stakes, Kennedy could not afford to be incautious. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; //googletag.pubads.refresh }); A month before the crisis and, with an eye on the the mid-term congressional elections then two months away, Kennedy had said that he would not tolerate a Soviet offensive military capacity in Cuba.
Suddenly, he was facing the prospect of nuclear missiles, and the military service heads, including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell Taylor, were urging air strikes to eliminate them.
It is a myth, popularized widely, including in the film Thirteen Days , that Kennedy was never enamored of this option.
To the contrary, the transcripts of ExComm, his swiftly convened crisis cabinet, show him to have assumed the need for strikes in the opening days.
But confirmation that the Air Force could not ensure 100% elimination of the missile sites induced caution — and a dilemma.
Kennedy opted for placing a naval “quarantine” on Cuba — the more obvious and accurate term “blockade” was avoided, blockade being an act of war — and the Organization of American States’ agreement to this course of action provided the legal cover required for this device.
Soviet ships turned back rather than invite confrontation with the 63 United States naval vessels and 33,000-strong United States forces enforcing the quarantine.
But this was scarcely the end of the crisis. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; //googletag.pubads.refresh }); Kennedy soon came into receipt of two missives from Khrushchev.
Khrushchev proposed removal of the missiles from Cuba in return for a public American pledge never to invade Cuba.
The second, on October 27, was impersonal and rigid — and suspected of being a Politburo production, not Khrushchev’s — and more belligerent, insisting also on the removal of the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
To make matters worse, the same day, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down and its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, killed.
A second U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace and nearly shared the same fate.
ExComm had previously decided that a downed U-2 called for eliminating the offending SAM anti-aircraft missile site.
ExComm had further determined that all SAM sites in Cuba were to be destroyed if a second U-2 was downed.
Kennedy wisely chose not to order retaliation for the first U-2 and to remain silent about the second.
He also ordered United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey defused so they could not be fired without his authorization.
On October 22, the United States moved to Defcon-2, the highest state of alert reached at any time in the Cold War.
Whatever else might be said about the crisis, it cannot be claimed that the two superpowers were not poised near the brink. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; //googletag.pubads.refresh }); Through back channels, agreement was reached along the lines of Khrushchev’s second letter, though the removal of the Jupiter missiles was a secret component of the deal, never avowed in public.
On October 28, the deal was concluded and the world — for once not a hyperbolic image — breathed a sigh of relief.
A nuclear exchange had been averted and the Democrats picked up four Senate seats in the midterm elections that followed.
In short, Kennedy’s wretched judgment on the Bay of Pigs had spurred the Soviets to shore up their Cuban ally to the point of installing nuclear missiles.
Yet with the stakes so high, Soviet determination untested, and the room for maneuver small, Kennedy carefully extricated the United States from the ignominious prospect of Soviet missiles positioned permanently ninety miles from mainland United States.
He thus extricated the world from a nuclear exchange precipitated by this development.
Some thought the deal weak, that a more seasoned, sure-footed president would have insisted on the restoration of the status quo ante and the complete demilitarization of Cuba.
Given the stakes, one is inclined to give Kennedy the benefit of the doubt for not attempting to find out. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; //googletag.pubads.refresh }); Yet no accounting of the deal can omit its costs.
The 42,000 Soviet advisers in Cuba remained, training Castro’s forces to develop what was to become the leading communist mercenary army, which would assist subversion in Latin America, Africa, and Asia for the next two decades.
Cuban exiles had to forfeit any hope of dismantling communism in their homeland until at least after the Cold War and, indeed, up to the present day.
They paid the heaviest price for sparing the world the horrors that might have been unleashed half a century ago.
