THE COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT SOVIET ARCHIVES: Dear Colleague: The Opening Door The Cold War International History Project was established at the By James G Hershberg Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C. in late 1991 with the help of a generous three-year grant from the John D and Catherine For Cold War historians, frustrated for T MacArthur Foundation.
The project seeks to disseminate new information and decades by the secrecy enshrouding the Soperspectives on the history of the Cold War emerging from previously inaccesviet archives, the long wait appears to be sible sources on “the other side” of the superpower rivalry that dominated ending.
It also seeks to the myriad mysteries and controversies of transcend barriers of language, geography, and regional specialization to create the Soviet-American relationship and the new links among scholars interested in Cold War history.
Indeed, since last August’s The project is overseen by an advisory board chaired by Prof.
Samuel F Wells, Jr., Deputy discoveries from the Soviet crypt has proDirector of the Wilson Center; Prof.
Inside the Wilson Center, the initiatives, agreements, exchanges, and plans project is located in the International Studies Program, headed by Dr.
Robert S. for scholarly cooperation and publications Litwak, and run on a day-to-day basis by Dr.
Simmons visited Budapest, Prague and common to all three—the importance of ity.
Already, confusion over rules, jurisdicWarsaw to investigate the situation of Hunpersonal connections and influence.
His findings give archive directors room for wide-rangare based on interviews with scholars and ing interpretations.
Yet the extent to which influence Novikov's Memoirs 16 Warsaw"") obtainable free of charge on replays a role varies greatly in these counBeria's Downfall 16 quest from CWIHP. tries, and a wealth of information concernMolotov's Conversations 17 The situation and conditions of access ing the post-war period is nevertheless now Update 28 to archives in Budapest, Prague and Warsaw available.
Nature of the Soviet Military Buildup No event in the Cold War has Castro’s conversations with UN Secretary in Cuba.
Beginning at Moscow, and in still received more popular and scholarly General U Thant.
A few days earlier, in tional buildup in Cuba their country had crisis expanded beyond the United States response to a Freedom of Information Act planned and actually carried out in 1962. to include scholars and officials from the request filed by the National Security Archive, The intermediate-range missile force was Soviet Union and Cuba.
The Soviet designation) missiles with ranges of scholars and officials , and 16 launchCastro) in Havana in January to discuss conclusion to the series of conferences. ers for SS-5 missiles with ranges of the crisis.
The first invasion throughout 1961-62, the Russians were not, but the consensus prudent assumpgathering, in March 1987, involved only stressed their desire to deter an American tion was nonetheless that they must be asUnited States scholars, officials and documents, attack on Cuba and later to get United States assursumed to be there.
At Moscow a Soviet but three Soviets attended the second ances against an invasion, and the Amerigeneral said that 20 warheads reached Cuba meeting, held in Cambridge, Massachucans highlighted concerns over Cuban suband that 20 more were cut off in transit.
A third conference, version and threats to United States security allegedly Havana, a different Soviet general—Gensponsored by the USSR Academy of presented by a Cuban-Soviet military tie eral of the Army Anatoly Gribkov, who was Sciences, was held in Moscow in January confirmed by the secret installation of Soviet responsible for planning the operation in 1989.
As the 1962—said they had assigned fifty percent pated, and they subsequently offered to three sides attempted to integrate these perrefire missiles , and the 36 nuclear host a meeting.
But the most alarmC OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 3 ing disclosure was General Gribkov’s asseras a fait accompli. not to invade Cuba, 5 the subject of tion that the Soviet military commander in Management of the Crisis.
This subWashington’s assurances against an invaCuba had been ject for twenty-five years dominated discussion was expected to be a lively subject at the given discretionary authority to fire the tacsion of the crisis, and to a large extent the conference.
Yet there was no discussion tical nuclear rockets at a United States invasion force first three conferences.
But at Havana there whatsoever on this point until after the forif he considered it necessary, without need to was little more to add, with one major and mal conference had ended.
The minor one was a press conference in Havana, the official U.S. the least disturbing aspect of the discussion further explanation (beyond the Moscow view was given in answer to a question and that followed was General Gribkov’s apparconference) of the Soviet decision to shoot Russian and Cuban objections were promptly ent inability to understand why his disclodown the United States U-2 aircraft on October 27, raised.
I believe the Russian representasure caused such consternation among the resulting in the pilot's death and spurring tives, aware of the differing United States interpretaAmericans—and this from the man who had fears of further military escalation.
It now is tions, had preferred to leave the matter in been chief of staff of the Warsaw Pact from clear that local Soviet air defense commandabeyance.
For this initiative— had made clear publicly and privately after defense combined command (a “Group of important in Washington's deliberations, and the crisis that the United States did not Forces”) totaling some 42,000 men, about so unexpected by Khrushchev that at first he intend to invade Cuba.
But the United States twice the size estimated by United States intelligence believed the Cubans had shot the plane would not make any formal commitment after the crisis, and four times the number down—the local Soviet military command unless it was clear and explicit that its obliestimated at the time the missiles were disreceived only a mild reprimand from Margations and rights under Article 51 of the UN covered.
In 1962, United States intelligence identishal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet DeCharter, the Rio Treaty, and other treaties fied 4 reinforced motorized rifle regiments, fense Minister. would not be diminished.
Castro denied later press negotiating and reaching an agreement with assumed either to be weapons that Moscow reports of that disclosure that he had recomKennedy to conclude the crisis without even had provided to the Cuban armed forces or, mended a “preemptive strike,” and last year informing the Cuban leadership, much less in the case of the four army regiments, to released the text of his message of October consulting it.
Castro and his associates rehave been sent to protect the Soviet strategic 27.
But the text seemed to justify the sented the fact that this cut Cuba out of the missile sites.
President Kennedy had warned ism, so that a Soviet nuclear strike on the Union vanishes and Russia rapidly disenagainst that possibility, but it would have United States would be a response to an gages from the special relationship of the been much more difficult to argue that the aggression already launched.
The Havana conference repforce posed a threat to United States and hemispheric matter, he reasoned, Khrushchev should not resented for Castro not only an opportunity security.
What if the Soviet Union and Cuba wait for the United States to strike the first to present for posterity his views on the 1962 had publicly announced their plans to deblow on the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev, of crisis, but also to turn a historical review to ploy Soviet forces, even the missiles, in course, did not see things that way and current political purpose.
The Cuban leadership wished to do would not have regarded a United States invasion of 1.
For the results of the Cambridge and Moscow so, and urged at least publication of an agreeCuba as an attack on the Soviet Union or as Conferences, see James G Blight and David A Welch ment on stationing Soviet forces that had an initiation of a global war.
Americans and Soviets Reexamine the been negotiated and drafted that did not now appears, was thinking in those terms.
The documents released by the Cubans at long-range bombers from the island as well as the 5.
Kennedy Left a LoopHavana are available from the Center for Foreign offending missiles.
The newly released Kennedy-Khrushchev request that led to the documents’ release.
On 24 April later served as an arms control negotiator and as U.S. correspondence, dated between 30 October and 14 1992, the National Security Archive released several ambassador to Bulgaria from 1977 to 1979.
He has December 1962, offers a glimpse into the tense barhundred additional documents relating to the crisis authored numerous works on U.S.-Soviet relations and gaining between the two leaders to defuse the crisis, as which it obtained from the State Department through a the Cold War, including Detente and Confrontation and Moscow sought a lifting of the blockade of Cuba and FOIA lawsuit.
This is a generally reliable compilanumber of scholars have had access to Chischolars studying China’s foreign policy tion of original and unedited notes, letters nese decision-makers and historians.
In some during the Cold War worked with docuand cables written by Mao to others—both cases the results have appeared in articles.
Zhou Enlai’s Associbecame available which contained much Deng Xiaoping, Wang Jiaxiang and Chen ates Reflect on Chinese-American Relations new material on the major events and politiYun.
Zhou Enlai waijiao wenxuan [The in the 1940’s and the Korean War,"" Diplocal figures of these years.
Shijie zhishi note is to introduce readers to the sources United Front] , translated as Eight Years found in these papers as well as to discuss zhongyang tongyixian bu, 1984, three volin the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Beijing: some of the opportunities and pitfalls inherumes); Zhonggong zhongyang wenjian xuanji New World Press, 1985); Li Yingqiao ent in their use.
It is not uncomZhonggong zhongyang dangxiao chubanshe, lected reminiscences of colleagues or more mon for historical novels to lend insights 1991). conventional narratives.
He Xiaolu, Yuanshuai waijiao jia ever, they are still fiction and must be used Such works are usually collective efforts [Marshal, diplomat (biography of foreign warily.
Of particular use are histories of wenyi chubanshe, 1985); He Jinxiu, 1986), a novel of the Korean War. military institutions or activities which proMianhuai Liu Shaoqi [Remembering Liu Let us close with a few caveats.
Zhongyang wenxian readers should know that this inventory is policy as well as on international cooperachubanshe, 1988); Jin Chongji, et. al.
Jiefangjun the readers of this newsletter are not without Resist-France struggle] ; Zhou Enlai nianpu, 1898experience in the uses of these types of chubanshe, 1990); Han Huaizhi, et. al., eds., 1949 materials, it may be presumptuous for us to Dangdai Zhongguo jundui de junshi gongzuo (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, add some cautionary notes; but they are in [The Military Activities of the Contempo1989); Zhu De nianpu [Chronicle of Zhu order.
Renmin chubanshe, assurance that the documentary collections ; 1985); Chai Chengwen and Zhao Yongtian, are complete.
Zhongguo Chinese Revolution, Zhonggong dangshi well as to the fallibilities of aging memories. shehui kexueyuan chubanshe, 1989). yanjiu [Studies in the History of the Chinese These problems seem to be particularly com6 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN mon in those memoirs that have been writmacy has clearly been shaped by contempoplomacy has been advanced more in the past ten by the historical figures themselves (e.g. rary circumstances.
Recently, writing groups have tive abundance of materials on Chinese aid to 1949.
Indeed, at no time in the last forty-two been organized by leaders and given access Vietnam during the 1950s is unquestionably years has it been so absolutely essential for to their archives.
Examples complex configuration over the past decade exciting source of knowledge that is likely to of such works are Bo and Hong's memoirs. of China’s relations with North Korea, the grow in importance in the years ahead.
Because so little of the policy process United States, and the Soviet Union has in China is documented, interviews are parundoubtedly influenced the quantity and sub1.
Chinese scholars have stance of recent documentation. presented papers that are pioneerbeen actively interviewing since 1986 and The domestic political context is also ing works in the skillful use of the sources discussed in recent years many non-Chinese scholars important.
In addition, Chen Jian was kind enough no further attribution, and even the infretual openness and a mandate to scrutinize the to share additional papers with us.
The bulk of citations quently available interview protocols, should past encouraged their publication.
Where pact of the Tiananmen events of 1989 has these scholars, as well as Nancy Hearst, for sharing their materials and knowledge with us. possible, such interview material should be been somewhat contradictory.
Publication Special note should also be made of another checked against documentary information of new works has continued.
This can be article on this topic which discusses several of the or other interviews.
However, in general, it has been noted important information on the nature, origins, opportumercy of the author’s judgement as well as that the materials now becoming available nities, and pitfalls of this new documentation. the limitations of the materials to which he seem more repetitive and less revealing than or she may been given access.
Very often hisenriched enormously by the release of matekins School of Advanced International Studtorical figures such as Mao or Zhou are cast rials such as those described above.
CWIHP also organizes a Eastern Europe, and China) to study in the tional nominations and applications (with speaker series at the Woodrow Wilson United States and to work in United States CV, three letters of recommendation, and a Center in Washington.
Theretion governing publication of such informaContinued from page 1 fore archivists can be expected to remain tion is broad, it is important that appropriate justifiably cautious of providing access to permissions be obtained.
In 1989, a passage of a law aimed at punishing former INDIVIDUAL ARCHIVES “30-year rule” was passed at the urging of communist officials.
In November 1991, The Archives of the Institute of Political historian and then-Cultural Minister Ferenc the Hungarian Parliament approved a law History Glatz.
Nevertheliberal and less fearful situation for researchretariat; documents of various organs of the less, permission to research documents creers and archivists alike.
Central Committee such as the International ated over 30 years ago is almost always A related committee of the Council of Department, Propaganda Department, State granted, and exceptions to the 30-year rule Ministers was created in August 1991 to Economic & Administrative Department, are increasing. oversee the declassification process.
A director of the New Hungarian Central György Földes, was appointed to replace movement is underway to transfer the auArchive, István Vass.
The more connections one has, tions, Soviet-Yugoslav relations (since Huncess.
Under any Hungarian archive are advised to conIn addition to the HSWP documents, the current ambiguous laws, archivists make tact the director of each archive first.
The the archive also holds Russian documents their own legal interpretations, and thereby director will then forward research proposconcerning the USSR’s attempts to conceal assume ultimate responsibility for the reals, usually with a recommendation, to the its involvement in the 1956 invasion and in lease of sensitive information.
Since legislawas Secretary-General of the Comintern and 8 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN who oversaw inter-bloc affairs.
Central Archives, who will then submit an ments here— as well as in the Interior MinEach government ministry is required to application to the Foreign Ministry.
Among istry— reveal connections between the KGB deposit documents older than 15 years at this those documents available at the Ministry and the Hungarian Secret Police, but access Central Archive.
However, each ministry are interesting papers on the Comintern mato them requires permission from the less has the broad right to retain any documents it terials, as well as aide-memoirs recounting cooperative Interior Ministry. uses regularly.
István Vida and military goals and agenda more than any in years, but instead retains some important his colleagues at the Institute of History the archives of the Institute of Military Hishistorical documents because it considers have been the most successful at retrieving tory.
Vass has no important Foreign Ministry papers, as evisaid some Warsaw Pact proposals and minidea which records are being withheld, so he denced by their numerous foreign policy utes of full sessions can be found in this cannot catalog the foreign policy documents publication projects. archive, but the related military contracts, which may still be at the Foreign Ministry.
But for scholars without connections, plans and strategies can only be found at the However, he believes that most Foreign Minaccess has been elusive.
One prominent Institute of Military Affairs. istry documents created before 1975 have young researcher reported his research efIn 1990, the Institute of Political Hisbeen turned over. forts had been repeatedly frustrated by “mindtory published a general “Fund List” of its The 30-year rule generally applies, exless” bureaucrats at the Foreign Ministry. holdings, organized by topic.
He This archive houses all central State (about 1200 meters of Council of Ministers noted that if the bureaucrats had read approdocuments from 1945 to the present.
In that case, special The Interior Ministry is required to dehigh official or personal information on an permission must also be granted to photoposit its papers in the New Hungarian Cenaccused criminal) is problematic and decopy and publish materials. tral Archive, but it is withholding docupendent on individual cases.
His cooperation is essential to winThe Council’s chair, Ivan Hlavácek, bening access.
Yet his relatively liberal influGENERAL RESEARCH CLIMATE lieved the group would have no influence in ence is hampered by the foot-dragging of the Researchers interested in delving into speeding up the legislative process. bureaucratic holdovers who actually review the Prague archives should initially expect documents and release only a handful of considerable frustration.
Baconi said that the 30ists concerning document release, archives The State Archival Administration year rule generally applies, except in the are short-staffed and inadequately funded This body, headed by Dr.
Yet those who persevere will find that National Museum, and Chancellory of the ers need permission from both Baconi or the what appears at first to be impossible is often Presidency.
According to Sládek, “the directors lowed to review Interior Ministry documents. ingly bleak situation into a bright one through of individual State archives make the final They include Professor Charles Gati and the use of good connections.
Similarly, decisions” regarding permission and excepfour members of the 1956 Institute— György scholars can usually bypass obstructionist tions to the 50-year rule, but he can greatly Litván, János Rainer, Eva Stándeisky and bureaucrats and gain access to documents by influence the process.
Baconi freer access is also partially due to fears improve the situation.
Scholtroversial lustrace or screening law, which revising the existing vague inventories and ars who learn of the existence of certain aims to identify collaborators of the commuorganizing the CPCz documents.
The archidocuments before applying have a clear adnist regime and to prevent them from holdvists themselves are not yet entirely familiar vantage.
In addition, architime has been spent on research for official Even with access to Interior Ministry vists face mounting pressure from the State government projects.
The present MFA Archives, Marta Kapalínová, and her Federal Ministry of Defense, receives only state of disorganization and the shortage of deputy director, Véra Kozinkova, generally technical advice from the State Archival archivists, however, are the major impedido not make exceptions to the 50-year rule, Administration.
Chances of approval would be 1955 materials are better organized, and that mistic that Pechácek will follow through on better with affiliations, they said, since these materials from World War II are in the best this commitment, as he and Sládek have institutions would be less inclined to use condition.
The entire set is expected to total 5,000 ninism— was evicted from its building.
The pages and cost more than 1,000,000 Czech crowns suspects that many documents of the InterMasaryk papers are contained here as well. . nal and Security Departments of the CPCz The Board seeks financial aid to subsidize The Benes papers are apparently well orgaare missing, as are documents of other Centhe project.
Interested individuals or institutions nized and less difficult to see than other tral Committee CPCz counterparts to state may contact Prof.
Cechura, Besides the CPCz collection, the Cen50 years are well-organized and completely all documents in this archive are accessible tral State Archive houses documents of the accessible.
Since the archive is not federal government ministries, with the exlater records seem to be in excellent order under Sládek’s State Archival Administraception of the Foreign Affairs Ministry and through at least 1970, with detailed finding tion, Cechura is able to grant exceptions to Defense Ministry, and post-1949 Interior aids prepared by professional archivists. the 50-year rule and has thus far refused no Ministry documents.
This collection includes private papers rior Ministry documents are under the conchronological inventories are available for which might be of interest to Cold War trol of the Federal Ministry of the Interior the Cold War period.
Detailed finding aids exist, but well organized to 1964 and easier to refor research has been approved. have not been published due to lack of funds. search.
In general, all of these State docuKapalínová says she hopes the 30-year A descriptive inventory of all the private ments are much better organized than CPCz rule will be passed, since the ambiguities of papers collections is available. documents, yet only 15 archivists are asthe present law put her in a difficult situation. signed to all documents from 1945-1991.
When the law is passed, she said, approving Interior Ministry Archive Consequently, scholars cannot expect the access will be a mere formality and “everyI did not meet with the director of this poorly paid and understaffed group of archithing will be available—including previously archive, Mr Frolík, but was repeatedly told vists to locate documents quickly.
The only exception that access to documents of the Cold War searchers are thus encouraged to request will be documents concerning personal propperiod would be nearly impossible.
Kapalínová ing to Czech scholars, the heads of the whenever possible. said “personal” documents are already physiMinistry’s collection are not archivists, but cally separated from other documents, so former secret policemen who are not willing Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives there will be no need for a formal declassifito grant exceptions to the 50-year rule.
The director of the This archive, formally controlled by the The Institute for Contemporary History C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 11 is the only institute of which I am aware 30-year rule, bureaucratic holdovers relucbe seen for the 1960s or later.
He also said which has an agreement with the Ministry. tant to provide information, and disorganithat his permission is required before publiThe Ministry has agreed to provide data to zation due to lack of space, understaffing, cation of any materials from the Central the Institute on the dates of death of exand poor funding.
Archives. diplomats and ambassadors who were purged Yet the greatest challenge to Polish and after 1948.
The ing documents from archives, files and prithe Chancellory of the Parliament, the SuBenes, Masaryk, and other collections were vate safes. preme Control Chamber, and the Central originally sent to the Institute of MarxismTo make matters worse, Polish scholars Planning Office and other central adminisLeninism and are now housed at the Military and journalists said, numerous documents tration offices.
Also available are trade Archives and the CPCz archives. were destroyed— especially in 1955-1956, union documents and workers’ movement Until recently, very few historians were 1970, and August 1989.
The 1989 burning materials from as early as the mid-19th cenallowed to work in this archive.
She showed me invenently missing crucial documents, such as many key Politburo meetings are said to tories of documents, organized chronologimany minutes of Politburo and other highhave been destroyed or fallen into private cally and sometimes by subject, for both the level meetings.
Hence, connections to those hands, political scientist Andrzej Paczkowski general and secret collection.
The general who know “who has what” play a crucial reported seeing some minutes of Politburo documents, consisting of such items as birthrole in conducting successful research on the meetings from as recent as January 1990— day wishes to Gottwald, seem irrelevant to contemporary period.
The archive is now organizing the terial; takeover and purges; Czechoslovak concerning document access and organizaPUWP documents and revising finding aids, diplomatic mission reports; prosecution of tion of archives.
It has been virtually igand approximately ten people are assigned German war criminals; Czechoslovak delnored, however, due to the confusion surto the task.
A total of 90 people are employed casts; requests for pardons for collaborators. at the Central Archives.
Many items in the Archive are duplicates of INDIVIDUAL ARCHIVES The Central Archive’s director, Bogdan documents in the MFA and Interior Ministry Supreme Board of National Archives Kroll, has worked at the archive for 20 years, Archives.
As in Czechoslovakia, a central body serving as its director for the past ten.
Edoversees all archives, except for “special” ward Kolodziej, the chief of the archive’s POLAND archives such as those of the Ministries of Department of Information, has been emForeign Affairs, Interior and Defense.
Wojciechowski says he abides He contradicted Wojciechowski of the Sution by historians from academia to public firmly by the 30-year rule, and will only preme Board of National Archives by insistservice.
He said inventories in the archive are entitled to publish any those in Czechoslovakia, including a strict are available only to 1958, and that none can materials over 30-years old without prior 12 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN approval.
He also said that the archive is Political Science, a ""gold mine"" of interestSOVIET ARCHIVES working with the Pilsudski Institute in New ing documents exist here, yet there are virtuContinued from page 1 York and Maciej Siekierski of the Hoover ally no finding aids.
Consequently, one is tion, and norms of scholarly conduct has Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace often a “servant of the archivists,” who probecome rampant.
The vide what materials they deem relevant and contemporaneous with the disappearance of archive hopes to obtain many important appropriate for research projects.
He told me long-running political obstacles to unfetForeign Ministry documents of the World that the 30-year rule is irrelevant here if you tered historical research in the former Soviet War II period now only available at Hoover. have good contacts, and suggests that reUnion , ecoThe archive is moving many documents searchers write to the Ministry with detailed nomic pressures are provoking many reto a larger building since it has no more proposals well in advance of arriving. searchers to shift into business ventures to room to store documents.
Only five people Paczkowski is one of the few scholars obtain the hard currency they need to keep are coordinating the move.
Three major allowed to work in the Office of State Protecfood on their tables.
Andrzej Garlicki told me that in some inissues, organized chronologically so he can These are among the conclusions that stances, people have waited 2-6 months for determine which items are missing; and docuemerge from conversations and published specific documents they requested. ments linking activities of the Polish Secret reports in recent months on the situation of Police with those of the Hungarian and archives in the former Soviet Union.
Scholars interested in military archivists, including the head of the Russian der is in the form of “lists of transfer”—the documents should contact Dr.
J Poksínski at Government’s archives commission, Rudolf lists created when documents were relinthe Academy of National Defense.
G Pikhoia, to a conference sponsored by the quished by various departments of the ForPaczkowski said, interesting and more Norwegian Nobel Institute and held near eign Ministry.
Simmons, a graduate of Tufts UniverKremlin actions by Russian scholars, and holds the important materials of the Interior sity, spent a year in Belgrade as a Fulbright fostered a more liberal attitude toward coopMinistry.
He will enter the Johns Hopkins eration with Western historians, only a trickle extremely difficult, and many important School of Advanced International Studies in of internal documents on the post-World materials are still considered “operational” Bologna, Italy in the fall of 1992.
War II era became available for scholarly and are therefore inaccessible.
Reasoning that “the CPSU The scale of the takeover was massive ing Russian language skills or resources to was part of the state apparatus,” Yeltsin — and simply taking inventory of the holdvisit Moscow, their reliability and capabiliissued on August 24 decrees placing the ings of the Soviet state and Communist ties remain to be tested.
As of last fall, the all-union USSR authority to chart the new direction of Rusernment, Pikhoia said.
Pikhoia also universally bemoan shortages of technical chives has been under consideration since has considered a number of Western initiaequipment needed to process, declassify, last fall; scholars say it contains some amtives, including an effort by the Library of and handle the expected flood of requests biguous language but generally favors the Congress to begin exchanges of archivists, for, documents.
When speaking to archive principle of equal scholarly access (for Rusdocuments, scholars, and exhibitions, and a officials, it was common to hear pleas for sians and foreigners alike) to materials more technically ambitious plan put forward by photocopiers, paper, microfilm readers and than thirty years old and enjoins state agenthe American Enterprise Institute, the Hoover cameras, and fax machines, as well as for cies from destroying records.
As of late Institution on War, Peace, and Revolution, money to pay trained staff.
Besides the April 1992, no final action had been taken on and Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe to general economic collapse, contributing facthe bill.
When and if it passes, however, the begin putting the Russian archives in desktors to the sad state of affairs include the archives law must also be meshed with new top-accessible computer storage.
On 14 microfilm copies of materials from both the termination or drastic curtailment of January 1992, Yeltsin issued a decree “On Hoover and Russian state archives to be state subsidies as the archives system and the protection of state secrets” that reportdeposited at the Hoover Institution and the the Academy of Sciences institutes network edly barred the release of minutes of the Library of Congress in the United States, shifted from Soviet to Russian control.
Secretariat of the Central Committee of the and at Roskomarkhiv and the Lenin Library (Nevertheless, the Academy of Sciences CPSU less than ten years old, to all KGB and in Moscow.
The British publishing firm institutes continue to be important centers of GRU 14 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN documents, and to materials related to CPSU in the turbulent atmosphere of post-revolupolitically, as was shown in two recent inciforeign policy for the period 1961-1981.16 tionary Moscow.
The discovery elicited pained and officials, under intense economic prescontext, even the routine provision of finding protests from communists and an official sures, are tempted to make deals to grant aids to scholars is a major breakthrough.
Nevertheless, Pikhoia in20 exclusive access to high-paying Western as Patricia Grimsted notes in her new report sisted that he would not constrict access. customers.
But complaints arose in sian archivists or former officials to buy and foreigners trying to adjust to the new Moscow that foreigners were gaining priviaccess to documents. situation constitute another potential trouble leged access to documents, and that sensiMany Western scholars warn that such spot.
Some Russian archivists and scholars tive materials on foreign relations had been practices will hamper the development of may resent any implication, even unintended, improperly and prematurely disclosed. fair policies and procedures to permit scholthat Western scholars have gained the upper Archives officials denied any improars full and equal access to Soviet archives, hand as a result of Russia’s political and priety.
One appeal to United States scholars to refrain copies of them) to foreigners.
The newspainternal documents, we must expose them to from exploiting the current “anything goes” per Izvestia and the archivist Yuri Afanasiev, a serious examination.
What is more, we atmosphere in Moscow emerged from an rector of the Russian State Humanitarian have no law on state archives in Russia.
Russian Center for Preservation and facilities. policy toward China, Eastern Europe, AusStudy of Contemporary Historical Docutria, Germany, Indochina, and the Cuban ments, also translated as Russian Storage 1.
Pushkinskaia ul., 15; 103009 Mossovremennoi dokumentatsii — TsKhSD]. mentation on the Soviet invasion of Afcow; Metro: Pushkinskaia; Telephone: 229Address: ul.
All express Russian and European Communists, includsolemnity befitting the nerve center of the interest not only in joint ventures with Westing Marx, Engels, Trotsky, Rosa LuxemCPSU apparatus. ern academic projects, but in developing the burg, Zdhanov, Vyshinsky, Molotov, and According to one report, the materials SCCD as a research center in its own right as others.
Inrecords of the Central Committee’s domesContinued on page 23 16 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN academic training.
While Roosevelt had pursued a ized training, but, like many of his colleagues, far-sighted policy of cooperation with MosREPORTS nevertheless advanced rapidly because of cow, Novikov views Truman as driven by the shortage of trained personnel resulting altogether different motives.
Zapiski 1938-1947 [Recollecsador to Egypt, where he also served as policy.
Despite all the revelations about Soviet ington and assumed the duties of deputy Molotov.
Truman’s uncompromising stance history which have emerged from the former chief of mission under then-ambassador on Poland, Novikov recalls, caused the SoSoviet Union in the past few years, many Andrei Gromyko.
Because Gromyko was viet government to reach “the appropriate unexplained “blank spots” remain.
One question of great 1945 until his appointment as Gromyko’s tion with the USSR, and appointed James F. interest which remains relatively undocusuccessor in April 1946.
Describing mented concerns Soviet foreign policy durcapacity until his return to Moscow in OctoByrnes as an active proponent of a “bipartiing the early years of the Cold War.
He was thus quite well situated to san” foreign policy, Novikov argues that have a very incomplete picture of both how observe the transformation of Soviet-Amerithis policy was only a “screen for the interthat policy was formulated and on what can relations in those years. ests of the monopolies within the country information it was based.
After the appointment of Byrnes, mat, makes some small contributions to American ties in the 1945-47 period.
He Novikov writes, “there was no need of furfilling in some of those blank spots, alnever really deviates from the premise that it ther speculation as to which direction the though it leaves many questions unanswered. was United States “imperialism” which caused the Continued on page 21 Novikov, who served as charge falling out between Moscow and Washingd’affaires and then ambassador at the Soviet ton after 1945.
His memoir, published in 1989, Novikov could have published an account CPSU:1991, 1:140-214 & 2:141-208. offers some additional insights into the more critical of Soviet policy.
That he did The minutes of the July 1953 Central Committee sources of the letter itself, the Soviet percepnot, and that his analysis utilizes the same sessions discussing the alleged crimes of Interior Mintion of the United States in the period 1945terms and categories as Soviet public stateister and secret police chief Lavrenti Beria are divided 47, and the functioning of the Soviet diploments of the late 1940s, suggests that the into two installments and found in the “Political Armatic service during those years. views he expresses were sincerely held.
Most Novikov’s biography typifies the cainterpretation, then, should not be simply of the key political figures of that time (Malenkov, reer pattern of many Soviet diplomats of his rejected, but rather looked upon as broadly Bulganin, Khrushchev, Kaganovich) speak in the first section with the exception of Mikoyan whose address generation.
In the early 1930s, in Leningrad, indicative of Soviet perceptions of the United appears in the second installment. he took a degree in the economics of the States at the time.
One should not forget that The sessions occurred four months after the death Near East.
The Soviet leaderpursue graduate studies and a career in able to the Soviet leadership at this time, he ship, the transcript shows, is terrified by the ongoing academia.
At the time however, by the closing of his institute in his views are worth examining, even if we do of the plenum Beria, the former head of the NKVD 1938.
The southern frontiers simply had to Minor poet,2 major Stalinist, Chuyev is Chuyeva [One Hundred Forty Conversabe redrawn . devoted to the Leader and his disciple.
That During a meeting at one of his dachas in to the maximum” , sounded out diplohelps confirm this book’s savage authenticthe summer of 1945, Stalin pinned a map matic opinion but found no support for the ity; it also renders an outside review of the showing the new frontiers to a wall, stepped southern scheme.
It’s worth noting he tapes and transcripts—which we are unback, pointed to the north, said he liked what thought there might be some. likely to get—all the more desirable. he saw.
ContraAnd because what Khrushchev concocted is Mongolia, the Chinese Eastern Railway— dicts our policy.
Azerbaijanis demanded the doubling in size sleep (“went to Mogilyov Province,”1 he of their republic, chiefly at Iran’s expense. said of contemporaries who predeceased I have defended Stalin and defend him They would seize a bit of Turkey in the him ) in November 1986, six weeks today, including the terror.
I believe bargain and give Ararat to the Armenians, before Gorbachev liberated Andrei that, without terror, we wouldn’t have Sakharov.
A Searching for a clue to the man’s perrests, the trials, the arbitrary rule, the decision had been made.
In the West they write that failure to accept the Marshall Plan was a major mistake of Soviet diplomacy.
By the way, at first I agreed and proposed to the Central Committee that we participate—not only we but the Czechs and Poles too—in the Paris Conference.
We’ll go, but suggest that the Czechs and the others decline because we still couldn’t rely on them or their experience.
We advised them not to agree, but they—especially the Czechs—had already made preparations.
The Czech foreign minister was rather doubtful—I’ve forgotten, I think it was Clementis.
Having received instructions from us not to participate, they didn’t go.
Well, such a gang assembled there that you couldn’t expect honorable relations.
It was just as well I didn’t take along any aides who might have muddled the issue.
But if they think we made a mistake in rejecting the Marshall Plan, that means we acted correctly.
No question about it—today you can prove it the way you can two times two is four.
They’d have inveigled us into their company, but as a subordinate member.
We’d have been dependent on them, but we wouldn’t have gotten anything—we’d have been dependent, that’s for sure.
Late in 1948 we did (p. the terror in which Khrushchev proved his hensible the charge that Stalin destroyed the 475). mettle, but he maintained that it involved country in order to save it.
Stalin, his personal staff in the form of the needed some jail time, that real Bolshevik Communist party, and a segmentally exwent cheerfully, thanking him all the way.
I’ve heard that you and Stalin pendable service organization,e., everyone Her husband of course knew the charges issued a directive to the NKVD [secret else. were false (conspiring with Zionist organipolice] instructing it to use torture.
He was Number Two that . creator, a robot that could even be pro“only for the press, for public opinion,” and grammed to weep at the funeral.
Stalin’s health , but held him in wary out of the grip of capitalist slavery.
When they told her they’d he dismissed as “stupid,” rated his contempt will finish off imperialism forever.” buried him two days earlier she surely won.
Soviet people were fond of saying, “If only concedes that innocent, loyal people—in his we can avoid war,” he replied, view a handful of obscure individuals— Dulles was such a pettifogger . . . and his suffered and perished, the bloodshed troubles brother . . . an intelligence officer.
The 4,300 pages of trannot above offering you his hand to yank main goal isn’t the struggle against imscripts Chuyev decided not to use must surely you off balance and work you over with perialism but the struggle for peace.
Of contain much more on that subject; Sto sorok a chair leg, pool cue, or something out of course it’s necessary to fight for peace, besed aims chiefly to settle scores with his pocket. but you won’t get anything with words Stalin’s Soviet opponents, including postand wishes—you’ve got to have strength humously “rehabilitated” victims.
When the Latvian foreign Mikhailovich reveals, “did he remain alive.”4 to us.
Goebbels minister came to Moscow in 1939 for what His first spectacular feat after invented that, and Churchill used it a lot. he hoped would be civilized negotiations, replacing the Jewish diplomat was cutting a That’s for sure.
His second was convincing the West bitter about us, but we had to consoliabout Soviet foreign policy.
We learn a few there was no secret codicil carving up Eastdate our conquests.
Create our own, details of the dreams of regaining Alaska; of ern Europe between Stalin and Hitler.
Of course, you have to by Moscow to consolidate control over East wording of the Yalta communique and says know when to stop.
A double entendre in a folk saying that fell out of usage around the turn of the century.
It’s a [Molotov says of the 1957 conspiracy ince and town are in Byelorussia, but “mogila,” from peasant country—the right deviation is against Khrushchev], and we didn’t have which adjectival “Mogilyov,” means “grave,” hence strong.
Angry Man of the Press , 13; also quoted sured them about those “iron teeth.” replies, “Yes.
The Life of Westbrook Yet, lacking even the modest vision party group feared exposure.
But it was Pegler , necessary to discern that Gorbachev wanted namely Khrushchev who had to be afraid.0. to “reform” the system in order to strengthen This was a well-played game . . . .” it, the Stalinists were soon disappointed.
It’s difficult to say what he was thinking, but it seemed to me he wanted to throw us into consternation.
Stalin, however, reacted to this quite calmly, and Truman decided he hadn’t understood.
The words “atomic bomb” hadn’t been spoken, but we immediately guessed what was meant.
They only had one or two bombs, and when they blew those up over Hiroshima and Nagasaki they didn’t have any left.
I was ordered to take charge, find someone who could build an atomic bomb.
He indicated we weren’t prepared, that the atomic bomb was a weapon not for this war but for the next.
To make a long story short, there was the youngest, still quite unknown Kurchatov, whom they didn’t want to promote.
I decided to give him the material from our intelligence service—the agents had done something very important.
Kurchatov stayed in my office in the Kremlin several days, working on this material.
I myself didn’t understand anything about the material, but I knew it had been obtained from good, reliable sources.
They did well in getting what we needed—at precisely the right time, when we had just begun this project.
There was something in my memory, but now I’m afraid I’ve forgotten the details.
In one ceeded to prescribe to Novikov the concluContinued from page 16 particularly vivid example Novikov writes sions he should reach in the report.
After termed the ""Molotov letter"" if one gives firmed, not only from the published “letter some months of pressuring Moscow to credence to Novikov’s account.
That ter,” but also from unpublished documents recall him for such consultations, Novikov Molotov pushed Novikov to write the report in the archives of the USSR Ministry of finally received orders to return to Moscow and also served as its anonymous co-author Foreign Affairs.
There he was given the suggests that George Kennan is correct when after an Anglo-American summit confernecessary political orientation to the new he asserts that Molotov needed the report ence, the Truman administration publicly international situation—by Molotov pereither to gain the support of the East Euroannounced its desire to discuss with the sonally.
It appears that Novikov felt incapean countries at the Peace Conference, or USSR the idea of the international control pable of sending “correct” reports without as ammunition in an internal Kremlin debate of atomic energy, Novikov cabled Mosinstruction in the proper assumptions and over Soviet American policy.
Even in their interdoes not provide enough evidence to choose nal reports, then, it appears that Soviet dipbetween these two possibilities, however, represents a new tactical approach in lomats were constrained to follow the preand Novikov himself probably did not know relation to the USSR, the substance of vailing interpretation of events in Moscow. exactly why his boss needed the report.
Soviets were actually following at that time. rope and so on, but on the other hand, to This conclusion is reinforced by Novikov, apparently with the support of accomplish all of this in such a form as Novikov’s description of the writing of the Molotov, had already concluded by the fall to somewhat ameliorate the aggressive now published September 1946 report on of 1945 that the United States was pursuing character of the Anglo-Saxon alliance American foreign policy.
Stalin made similar public From this standpoint, even potentially conmitted by the end of the month.
Novikov statements in 1946, and throughout that year ciliatory gestures such as the opening of objected, asserting that such a report deSoviet foreign policy remained relatively discussions on controlling atomic energy manded more time for preparation, and could moderate.
As he operated under documents from his embassy which were ernments led by non-communists continued such assumptions, one can scarcely imagine unavailable in Paris.
However, tioned, largely confirming the assumption its main conclusions.
When Novikov showed he apparently failed to convince Stalin of the that Molotov wielded tight control over the him the draft, Molotov suggested several wisdom of this course for some time.
One actions of Soviet diplomatic missions. changes, essentially dictating its major conmay infer, then, that Stalin had not given up Novikov several times recounts how he postclusions.
Novikov objected that perhaps it all hope of finding some form of accommoponed action on various questions, somewould be better to discuss the report after its dation with Washington until the June 1947 22 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN American announcement of the Marshall However, documents uncovered by Soviet 31a, 241, 1.
Unfortunately, these details will probably remain shall Plan may have precipitated the final as insufficiently “vigilant” in that he perunelucidated.
While in Moscow in the fall of 1990, the break in Soviet-American relations, one ceived American foreign policy primarily as present author tried to obtain an interview with Novikov, but learned that the former diplomat was deceased. should not underestimate the role played by a political, and not military, threat to Soviet Novikov’s reports in preparing the ground interests.
We still do not possess sufficient CWIHP Activities an American plan to gain control over Euinformation to judge whether Novikov’s resrope and to isolate the USSR. ignation was related to this supposed failing November 1-2, 1991.
Workshop on Chinese Foreign In August 1947, again in response to a on his part.
Workshop on Soviet Cold War report evaluating the Truman Doctrine and only grudgingly, and afterwards Novikov Archives, Institute of General History, Moscow. the Marshall Plan.
In this report, Novikov was removed because of his unsound analyApril 2.
During the late Stalin years, those who Organization of American Historians, Chicago.
James G Hershberg, CWIHP Coordinator. were linked together as integral parts of an more severe punishments.
It would, for Gregg Herken, National Air and Space Museum. and United States military base construction overexample, have been quite interesting to hear April 10.
Vladislav Zubok, Senior Researcher, tegic encirclement of the Soviet Union, tion” which Molotov provided during Russian Academy of Sciences. running from the west—through West Novikov’s recall to Moscow for consultaApril 21.
Atlantic, and also in Canada and Alaska, Molotov, which were drawn independently May 14.
This report, though unreleased, correing historical document, deserving of conJune 1.
USSR), 048g, op.g, 19, 1, 120, citing AVP to pursue a career as a writer.
Novikov, Recollections, 394. desire to leave the Foreign Ministry, where 6.
C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 23 SOVIET ARCHIVES tional release of major collections.
The Stalin papers, will go to the two aforemenContinued from page 15 center’s officials also seem eager to reach tioned centers housing the papers of the shed light on policy formulation and decibilateral agreements with United States institutions CPSU Central Committee for the approprision-making in the Stalin era.
However, to provide research assistance in exchange ate chronological period (e.g., most of the scholars who have reviewed materials such for financial support.
Stalin archive would end up in the Russian as Politburo minutes report that they often Center for the Preservation and Study of 33 come across references to special dossiers 3.
Smolenskaya: director, Vladimir dation from a Russian friend, were quietly came under Russian authority.
The that interested scholars write letters of appliAsked in mid-March when the documents trickle of outsiders permitted entry had been cation bearing the sponsorship of their instiwere likely to be turned over, one SCCD increasing since August 1990, when the Sotution and indicating the theme, time span, official gave a reply reflective of the prevailviet Government decreed that materials more and date of their proposed research.
According to Pikhoia, roughly finding aids, and prohibitions on photocopyout commercial relationships with Western 17,000 files of documents, some with Stalin’s ing those documents one was grudgingly partners.
This freedom cannot be the Kremlin or Presidential archives forand to use the footnotes to request additional 34 implemented because the situation in the merly under Gorbachev’s control.
Declassificaently in synch with Roskomarkhiv’s conPolitburo records and recent files on ecotion went forward slowly with only a handtacts with the British firm, the Russian Cennomic and strategic matters, will go to a new ful of former diplomats hired to review seter announced an agreement with Chadwyckpresidential archives center created by cret materials.
On the other hand, some scholars tal state interest or disclose information of a connection with Soviet-American conferspeculate that the Foreign Ministry records, personal nature that could cause “danger or 42 ences in Washington and Moscow orgaeven if fully opened, may be inherently less distress” to individuals.
They also agreed nized by the United States Institute of Peace, the revealing because in the most vital areas the that the international advisory group should Foreign Ministry released the September ministry tended to merely implement deciaid the ministry’s search for Western finan1946 “Novikov telegram” from the Soviet sions made by the CPSU leadership.
Recial assistance to publish a guide to the ambassador to Washington analyzing United States searchers also encountered problems in phoarchives, to xerox finding aids (which would policy towards Moscow.
In Evidence of the cautious attitude of the salaries of former diplomats who would a survey in the fall 1991 Diplomatic Hisold guard in the Foreign Ministry archives review secret materials for declassification. tory, Melvyn Leffler called the Novikov surfaced at the CWIHP archives workshop in Roughly $100,000 is sought from Western document “a tease”36 while Steven M Miner Moscow in January.
Forceive access to more information, we can foreigners might pilfer the national heritage eign scholars interested in gaining access to only recall Stalin’s insight that all informaby making hundreds of photocopies of minthe Foreign Ministry archives should send a tion is incomplete, and some is even intenistry documents during research visits.
In addition, a letter of endorsement failure of Foreign Ministry archivists to also sounded cautious about the notion of from the researcher’s institution, or from the release more materials to them, especially unrestricted access.
However, more ing archives and its intensified interest in was replaced by two Russian intelligence than a half year after the coup, complaints obtaining hard currency support from Westservices, one each for domestic and foreign from Russian and foreign scholars regardern partners.
The Soviet secret police agency’s ing the Foreign Ministry persist in regard to the first meeting between ministry officials files ended up in the hands of the Russian both the quality of materials and the proceand an international advisory panel assembled government, but by the time Russian audures required for using them.
At that meeting, held in March after a amounts of documents had already been kan Studies recently stated.
One of Defense in Podol’sk outside taken in this direction. sign of willingness to allow outsiders at least Moscow58—the largest archive in USSR Last fall, Russian authorities turned the limited access to KGB records emerged with second to the CPSU Central Committee arprickly issue of what should be done with the Russian agreement to allow American histochives—and the main Naval archives center KGB files over to a parliamentary commisrians to investigate charges that the Soviet near St.
While the issue was studied by the secret police interrogated United States prisoners-ofUntil 1991, access was rarely given to commission, which was chaired by Col. war seized during the Vietnam War. foreigners to see military materials during Dmitri Volkogonov and included Rudolf G In February 1992, the parliamentary the Soviet era, and the military archives Pikhoia, reports surfaced that KGB officers commission ruled that KGB records more policy was generally regarded as thoroughly were retailing choice documents for hard than 15 years old must be turned over to state resistant to change.
These attitudes surfaced currency to Western publications and instiarchives for declassification, unless they most prominently in June 1991, when a tutions.
The Soviet General enterprising spirit of former agents such as years and may require a “special political Staff’s leaders expressed horror and shock at Oleg Gordievsky and Boris Kalugin, who decision” prior to release to state archives. the draft, which they labelled as derogatory were busy marketing their stories to Western Nikita Petrov, a representative of the comto the heroic accomplishments of the Soviet audiences,51 the KGB even signed an agreemission, said materials related to political military.
They vowed never to open up ment with a Hollywood production compersecutions and criminal actions may be Defense Ministry archives, and accused the pany to produce popular entertainments altransferred to state archives even if they are project’s head, military historian legedly based on confidential files.
For $30 per person, visitors were new center to store KGB archives. and nothing else,” responded Volkogonov, ushered through an exhibit-filled museum— Yet, while the parliamentary who resigned in protest from his post as head largely devoted to extolling KGB success commission’s report helped clarify the obliof the Military History Institute.
An access to the KGB with materials less explosive than nuclear January, the author was told by the group’s archives will have to be regulated by special weapons, it is taking some time to sort out escort, a rather embittered former counteresrules yet to be designed.
IREX preliminary pre1992, and in “Russian Archives and the New Realities.” ning documents still strikes a nerve. print, March 1992.
V Bukovsky, “To Oppose the Right Forces, A Nevertheless, some steps have been 3.
For further information on this conference contact Strong Left Opposition is Necessary,” Izvestia, 3 April taken to make Defense Ministry records Odd Arne Westad, Research Director, The Norwegian 1992, 3; Tolz, ""Access to KGB and CPSU Archives in more accessible to outsiders.
At the CWIHP Nobel Institute, Drammensveien 19, N-0255, Oslo, Russia,"" 3.
Steven Solnick and Susan Bronson, “The Toronto archives workshop in January, a representa4.
Izvestia 57 ; Yuri Afanasiev, “Proizvol before the coup the military archives had 5.
For an informed account of archive-related events v obrashchenii s obshchestvennoi pamiat’iu begun to show a new willingness to enter immediately following the coup attempt, see Vera Tolz, nedopustim” [Tyranny in the treatment of our collective into commercial relationships with Western “New Situation for CPSU and KGB Archives,” Report memory is impermissible], Yuri Afanasiev, Izvestia 58 firms interested in marketing formerly conon the USSR 3:38 , 1-4.
Letter Alleges Italian’s Role in Soldier’s Deaths,” newly available Soviet journals, records, Stephen D Bryen and Washington Post, 8 February 1992; Pikhoia, “Russian and finding aids, is the Minneapolis-based Mario Corti , November and December 1991.
Materials from For other Western initiatives, see Grimsted, “Beyond 21.
Pikhoia, “Russian Archives and the New Realities.” through the Military-Historical Journal cans, opposed by our historians], Izvestia, 7 March 24.
Further announcements concerning details of the Brief Survey of the Archives Visited,” Oct.91. agreement among Hoover, Chadwyck-Healey, and 25.
The higher figure is from the report of Andrei * * * * * Roskomarkhiv were expected as the Bulletin went to Edemskii, Institute of Slavic and Balkan Studies, “The press in late April.
Grimsted, “Beyond Perestroika,” 11. chival Possibilities and Present and Ongoing Researches altogether unlike that in the political and 10.
Pikhoia, “Russian Archives and the New Realities,” in Russia—A Survey,” presented to the Norwegian economic spheres.
Pikhoia, “Russian Archives and the New Realities.” archive, see Sergei Kudryashov, “Soviet Ideological many potholes remain—but the roadblocks 12.
New Archival Possibilities and Present and Lee, Harry Leich, Vojtech Mastny, Woody McClellan, 14.
Comments at CWIHP workshop on Soviet sources, Amos Perlmutter, Vlad Petrov, Constantine Pleshakov, sages must include the notation, “BOX 5769, Za Institute of General History, Moscow, 8 January 1992.
William tional Research & Exchanges Board, Princeton, NJ, on the Archival Legacy and on Archives,” Nov.91 Taubman during a visit to Moscow in mid-March 1992; Jan.92, prepared for publication in American Archidraft, trans.
Harold Leich, Library of Congress; intersee also Tolz, ""Access to KGB and CPSU Archives in vist 55 ; and Grimsted, “Intellectual views with Leich, Nov.91 and April 1992; Pikhoia, Russia,"" 1-2.
See Christopher Andrew and Oleg Continued from page 17 1952” , fond 048g, opis 24g, 19, 1 & 2.
Despite these comments, the materials are Michael Latysh (Institute for Slavic and 57.
Tsentral’nyi arkhiv Ministerstva not resolved with the expulsion of Beria and that 1989: New Archival Possibilities and Present and OnOborony SSSR; ul.
See also the Moscow oblast’. that collective leadership was their primary goal letter of researcher Georgy Chernyavsky, who com59.
Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 18 June 1991; Eleanor ment on Christmas Eve, 1953, the day Beria's sian scholars during a visit to Moscow in January 1992.
Randolph, “Top Kremlin Generals Criticize Revisionexecution was officially announced, coincides 42.
This language closely follows the formulation used ist Account of WW II,” Washington Post, 21 June 1991; with many of the conclusions of the Central in the latest United States State Department regulations for its Grimsted, “Beyond Perestroika,” 12.
Victor Vasilievich Muchin, to Malenkov and his associates, Bohlen noted, to 43.
William one of their closest colleagues, it was “doubtful if Taubman ; and Prof.
December 1991; Grimsted, “Beyond Perestroika,” 9. by Alfred A Knopf, Inc.
Plenum transcript is scheduled to be issued this Cover-Up In the Disappearance of Wallenberg,” New summer by Nova Science Publishers (6080 JeriYork Times, 28 December 1991.
Chen Jian, “The Sino-Soviet Alliance and cho Turnpike, Suite 207, Commack, NY 11725; 48.
Michael Dobbs, “KGB Spy War With United States Falls Prague and Warsaw.” released under the title, The Beria Affair (ISBN Victim to Glasnost,” Washington Post, 3 October 1991.
Government Printing “Beyond Perestroika,” 27; Tolz, ""Access to KGB and Working papers are available upon request from Office, 1988) 8:1222-23.
Cold War history emanating from the former Commutainment Television, announces that it has concluded an New evidence from Soviet and East European nist bloc.
Readers are invited to alert CWIHP of agreement with the KGB to bring out a series of TV archives could illuminate relationship between World relevant citations. movies and feature films on Cold War espionage cases War II and the onset of the Cold War.
Updated, post-coup reports on status of Soviet fered for sale to the West.
See also “New Informaand “Intellectual Access and Descriptive Standards for release to public await new laws on secrecy.
Officials of the Center for the Preservation of Hodder & Stoughton, 1991) and “More ‘Instructions Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn , Sept.
Outgoing Soviet foreign minister estimates half 69, citing Literaturnaya Gazeta 14, 4/10/91, 5.) “to seek to demonstrate a link between the opposition of all diplomats posted abroad were KGB agents.
Kovalev, Stalin’s special envoy to the ton Post , 3/3/92; Tim Sebastian, “Dialogue with Series based on formerly secret documents from Chinese Communists.
Chadwyck-Healey, British publishing firm, anPravda, 10/2,3,4/91, excerpted in FBIS-SOV-91-195, Gibianskii, “Otkrytyi arkhiv.
Stalin’s “main double,” a man resembling the ally inaccessible,” researcher complains.
Ukraine president Leonid M Kravchuk promrevisionist account is blasted by hardliners as “antiArrest of Stalin’s secret police chief, described by ises Ukrainian-American scholars greater access to communist,” and Volkogonov resigns in protest from a participant.
Russian prosecutors describes plans to investigate Andrei Gromyko’s career as foreign minister is files of the Stasi, the East German secret police, after secret CPSU funding program of United States party.
Revelations from files eration to counterfeit foreign passports, official governGermany spark recriminations, debates.
Vietership of the Cadre”], Frankfurter Allgemeine, 3/30/91, memoirs of military officers and soldiers who took part nam later confirms one interrogation in 1973; head of a 6; also see “The SED, Stalin, and the Founding of the in the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Russian parliamentary commission overseeing the KGB GDR,” Das Parliament, 2/25/91, “Wart nur ab!,” Der The chief of the Bulgarian Army archives, invites United States historians to inspect files.
Newly available East German documents shed “wrongful acts” of the state security apparatus prior to For a review of reports of United States soldiers who allegedly light on the fusion of SPD and KPD in the Soviet zone November 1989.
Vladimir Abarinov, of Germany in 1946; article by Wolfgang Malanowski struction of 1,500 of the 1,700 archive units of the “The Sad Tale of American Captives,” Independent details postwar pressures on East German Social Demoformer political police.
Newspaper report alleges that Newspaper, 4/10/92. crats to cooperate with Communists.
Reporter 7 quotes an unidentified ex-colonel of Soviet diplomat recounts background to 1981 Former SED Central Committee member’s diary the former state security forces as saying that journalist incident in which Soviet submarine was discovered published, containing details of maneuvering inside Vladimir Kostov and emigre writer Georgi Markov intruding in Swedish waters, triggering international East Germany party after Stalin's death.
New details on the 1983 Soviet downing of KoSpiegel, “Walter, du hast Schuld,” 6/11/90, 126, and The “umbrella murder” trial of former intelli30 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN UPDATE gence chief Gen.
Charges Dubynin, General Jaruzelski prevented the intervention Spiegel, 8/12/91, 102. against former deputy interior minister Stoyan Savov of Soviet troops planned for December 14, 1981,” Interviews with Soviet officials indicate October were dropped after Savov was found shot dead.
Vladimir Dudnik, 1961 U.S.-Soviet tank standoff in Berlin was more KGB officer Oleg Kalugin is expected to testify that “‘Dark Room’ Secrets,” Moskovski Novisti 14 , dangerous than previously believed.
Columnists report that stillIn December 1991, the head of the Czech governpassage of new law on declassification, explains politiclassified documents show that only in 1983 did the ment commission to analyze the years 1967-1970 cal obstacles.
For initial Report on Openness Classified Secret,"" WP, 4/23/92.) soldiers.
The Journal of Chinese HisCrisis More Volatile Than Thought,” WP, 1/14/92; J. from Russian Interior Minister Viktor Yerin.
Sino-American relations, 1949-50, and China's asserts United States intelligence knew of short-range nuclearPrague reversal of earlier intent to participate in Paris aims in the Korean War are among the topics scrutinized capable Soviet missiles in Cuba during crisis.
New DocuSubs: $60/yr. , $30/yr. , $22/yr. . mentation from Czecho-Slovak Archives,” intro. by Babrak Karmal and other former Communist Karel Kaplan, commentary by Vojtech Mastny.
The Last Battleground,” WP Magazine, 4/26/92, in Korean War in the fall of 1950.
Recently-released documents on political back669 Soviet officers and soldiers died in the 1956 Two recent South Korean publications containing ground to 1979 Soviet decision to intervene in Afghaniinvasion of Hungary.
Muratov, “Afghanistan,” Komsomolskaya 1,500 were wounded and 51 reported missing.
KGB chief in Kabul describes events leading to Anderson, “Poland and the Marshall Plan, 1947-1949,” invasion.
In a recently-published memoir, The General’s Information presented about activities of Soviet Dossier, Jaruzelski cites a threat by Brezhnev to invade New details on construction of Berlin Wall, indelegation at United Nations regarding Soviet invasion Poland to defend his 1981 imposition of martial law. cluding deliberations of Ulbricht and Honecker, emerge of Afghanistan.
DOCUMENTATION C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 31 During Senate confirmation hearings last fall, incomvoluntary Historical Review Program has proceeded History Project, James G Hershberg, on 14 February ing Director of Central Intelligence Robert M Gates very slowly, and recent legislation has 1992 by James A Barry, Director of the CIA’s Center promised that the Central Intelligence Agency would be mandated greater access to our records by State Departfor the Study of Intelligence, who had contacted CWIHP more forthcoming in declassifying and releasing hisment historians.
Therefore, we recommend that the missile crisis, it might make more sense, both for the making good on this promise.
The Wilson Center did not agree to hold any Cold War International History Project has obtained a allegations, such as the 1948 Italian Elections, meetings sponsored by the CIA.] copy of the 15-page report as well as Gates’ responding 1953 Iranian Coup, 1954 Guatemalan Coup, 1958 directive.
The Executive Committee should establish a Excerpts from the task force report, dated 20 December 3) Have OTE [Office of Training & Education— senior-led Agency-wide group to review CIA policy 1991 ed.] publish an unclassified version of Studies in and practices related to declassification and release of Intelligence and make it available to the public for records under the historical review and FOIA programs 3.
Many of those interviewed said the CIA was sale through the National Technical Information with a view to accelerating the process.
The editorial CIA to keep the secrets it is charged to protect. ernment, and our own employees.
We have used these board of Studies in Intelligence should intensify its 4.
These * personalize the Agency Sponsor either unilaterally or in cooperation should be made available in the same way as other * preserve the mystique with academic institutions or other government unclassified CIA publications.
We have an important story to tell, a story that agencies conferences on the history and craft of 7.
That said, many Americans do Intelligence—ed.] model of substantive conferclaimers—and referencing a CIA conference.
The choice not understand the intelligence process and the role of ences with the academic community and explore should be up to the scholar. intelligence in national security policymaking.
I support still operate with a romanticized or erroneous view of Science and Technology—ed.] and DA [Directorparticipation of Agency employees in relevant scienintelligence from the movies, TV, books and newspaate of Administration—ed.]. tific and professional societies and approve the recompers.
These views often damage our reputation and ______Approve ______Disapprove mendation for updating procedures for individuals to make it harder for us to fulfill our mission.
To increase CIA openness and signal a change hundred unclassified or declassified articles and taken ences at Langley, examining ways to continue to enin how we do business, we need to take initiatives to steps to interest scholars and publishers in them.
I endorse the recommendation that the and outside of government, and develop a strategy for 4.
For example, PAO is currently talking with the Center should sponsor expanding our work with the media as a means of Truman Library about a conference in late 1992 or 1993 either unilaterally or in cooperation with academic reaching an even broader audience.
A Declassifying and releasing records that deto mark the 30th anniversary of the Cuban Missile 18.
I received a number of useful comments from scribe CIA’s history and activities would go a long way Crisis next fall.
Such a proposal was several of the addresses of this memorandum, as well as to educating the public on the work of intelligence.
For further information concation all national intelligence estimates on the former what kinds of information, and under what circumtact: Mr James A Barry, Director, Center for the Study Soviet Union ten years old or older. stances exceptions should be made.
Excerpts follow. mity with these laws, last year CIA received over 4,500 material. new requests for document declassification and com* CIA will publish on an annual basis an index of We are under no illusions that CIA, whatever the pleted action on some 4,000.
Some 5,700 pages of CIA all documents it has declassified under all categories of level of its efforts, will be able to win recognition as an documents were declassified.
As I have tent with our mission and the protection of sources and * Separately, CIA has had a voluntary historical told Senator Boren, Congressman McCurdy and Conmethods. review program since 1985 to review and declassify gressman Louis Stokes, CIA will cooperate fully and Bearing in mind these considerations, CIA will historical CIA records.
However, apart from a very willingly in any government-wide effort to declassify take the following initiatives with respect to the public limited volume of documents declassified from the files these documents.
Over the agency policies and procedures heavily biased toward CIA will not be found lagging in any broader governyears, many hundreds of articles have been written by denial of declassification. ment effort to review and declassify these documents. intelligence professionals on every aspect of our work.
I have directed a new approach that will change I have directed the open publication of unclassified this situation while still protecting intelligence sources articles as well as articles that can be declassified from and methods and conforming to the 1984 CIA InformaCold War International History Project Bulletin this journal.
We are currently discussing with several Study of Intelligence, where there will be a bias toward 1000 Jefferson Drive, S.W. university presses their publishing compendia of these declassification of historical documents.
Rachel A Connell, role, and also will expand its briefing program for directing the allocation of 15 full-time positions to form Stephen Connors, Lena Gavruseva schools, civic groups and other organizations. the historical review unit.
