NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 SEPTEMBER 2019 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 14 pages.
As early as 1956 Nikita Khrushchev began hinting that the Soviet Union might be interested in an end to the Cold War.
The United States, however dismissed these overtures as propaganda, and its policy toward the Soviet Union hardened.
On the small island of Cuba, about 90 miles south of the United States, guerrilla fighters led by Fidel Castro overthrew the island’s dictator in 1959 and established a communist government.
The Cuban revolution had local origins and initially Cuba was linked neither to the United States nor to the Soviet Union.
Economic considerations and the need for political protection soon moved the Cubans closer to the Soviet Union.
The United States then organised an economic boycott of Cuba by noncommunist countries and cut off sugar purchases from that country.
In 1961 the USA supported the Bay of Pigs invasion, an unsuccessful effort by the American trained Cuban refugees to overrun the island.
The failure of the refugees’ invasion made Castro the hero of the communist world and raised the hopes of communist revolutionaries throughout Latin America.
That same year the Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba, armed with atomic warheads that could be launched against the cities of the United States.
Khrushchev was also motivated by his entirely justifiable belief that the Kennedy administration wanted to destroy the Castro regime.
After all, the administration had launched an invasion of Cuba; had followed that with sabotage, paramilitary assaults, and assassination attempts the largest clandestine operation in the history of the CIA and had organized large-scale military exercises in the Caribbean, clearly meant to rattle the Soviets and their Cuban client.
Those actions, as Stern and other scholars have demonstrated, helped compel the Soviets to install the missiles so as to deter ‘covert or overt United States attacks’in much the same way that the United States had shielded its allies under a nuclear umbrella to deter Soviet subversion or aggression against them.
It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union … * * * Sixth: Our resolution will call for prompt dismantling of all offensive weapons in Cuba, under the supervision of the United Nations' observers before the quarantine is lifted.
I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination … and withdrawing these weapons from Cuba by refraining from any nation which will widen or deepen the present crisis and then participating in a search for peaceful and permanent solutions.
SOURCE 2A This extract describes the reasons and nature of foreign involvement in the Angolan civil war from 1975 onwards.
The relationship between Cuba and the MPLA go way back to the mid-1960s.
Various accounts testify to growing cooperation as the Cuban instructors trained and infiltrated large numbers of MPLA combatants into northern Angola to carry out the armed struggle during the second half of the 1960s.
On the eve of the Angolan independence in 1975, Cuba sent high ranking officers to the MPLA leadership to establish the nature of assistance they needed.
On 15 January 1975, the Portuguese authorities in Angola, the MPLA, FNLA and UNITA signed the Alvor Accords, which stipulated the terms of the transitional government that the three movements were going to form on 31 January 1975.
It feared that an MPLA government in Angola would provide SWAPO guerrillas, who were fighting for the liberation of Namibia from South Africa’s illegal occupation, with military bases.
American Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, saw Angola as a morale booster for the USA, which had just suffered a humiliating defeat in Vietnam.
He had hoped to demonstrate that the United States was at least able to drive the communists out of southern Africa.
Similarly, the CIA supplied weapons to FNLA through Mobutu Sese Seko’s Zaire.
This was the Cold War and every inch of the globe had to be contested with the Soviet Union.
They wanted to deny Angola to the Russians not just because of its oil.
Angola has good harbours on the Atlantic seaboard opposite America and the prospect of a Russian naval base there worried Washington.
The presence of Cuban and Russian troops in Angola was also seen as a threat to South Africa.
There was no doubt where America and Europe stood if they had to choose between Apartheid and communism in Southern Africa.
But the main motive and tactic of the Americans was simply to bleed the Soviet Union by making its Angolan venture too expensive.
In practice that meant bleeding Angolan peasants, the main sufferers of the war that lasted more than forty years.
Like many small civil wars of the Cold War period that appeared to be ideological, fought by proxies of the Marxist Soviet Union and the capitalist United States, the Angolan war was actually the continuation of a local historical conflict.
A Marxist regime armed by the Soviet Union and protected by Cuban troops, is kept going by revenues from oil, extracted by American companies, whose operations are attacked by American-backed socialist rebels.
Angola was one of the most bizarre sideshows of the Cold War and also one of the most murderous.
It focuses on the fact finding mission of assistance to the MPLA during the Angolan civil war.
We arrived in Luanda, Angola on Sunday August 3rd, and made contact with the MPLA who promptly took us to a hotel.
When President Neto heard we arrived, he sent to look for us, placing some of us in his home, and the others at the residence of another comrade.
During the first conversation with Neto we sent greetings in the name of Commander in Chief and the Minister of the Armed Forces, and gave him the present from the Commander in Chief along with the card and an explanation as to the motives of our visit.
The petition formulated by the MPLA when they were visited by a delegation from our party and our government in the month of January … … In the January visit they asked for material aid and preparations of troops in Cuba and Angola … That we came to visit the actual situation in order to properly assess what our aid should consist of, taking into account the aggression on the part of the FNLA and of Mobutu to the MPLA and the possible developments of future actions until independence in the month of November.
That we knew that the reactionaries and the imperialists would try all possible methods to avoid having the forces of the MPLA take power, since this would mean having a progressive government in Angola, and based on this situation we brought militant solidarity from the Commander in Chief, our party and government.
It depicts the involvement of the Soviet Union and Cuba in the first phase of the Angolan Civil War.
SOURCE 3A This source explains the reasons that led to the emergence of the Black Power Movement in the United States of America in the 1960s.
Finally, in 1964, the United States Congress passed a Civil Rights Act and in 1965, a Voting Rights Act.
The Civil Rights Movement, and the new laws that were passed as a result, led to progress in gaining equality for black Americans.
But not all African Americans were impressed with the Civil Rights Movement.
African Americans still experienced racial discrimination, lower wages than whites and higher crime rates in their inner city neighbourhoods.
Many young African Americans in particular wanted to speed up real social change.
They saw the Civil Rights Movement as too mainstream, and unable to give blacks the same opportunities as whites – socially, economically and politically … By the mid-1960s, dissatisfaction with the pace of change was growing, and the Black Power Movement arose out of this dissatisfaction.
The Black Power Movement argued that in order to achieve genuine integration, blacks first had to unite in solidarity and become self-reliant.
This meant freedom from white authority in both economics and politics.
The political philosophy of Black Nationalism only means that the black man should control the politics and the politicians in his own community … to carry on a political program of re-education to open our people’s eyes, make us become more politically conscious, politically mature, and then whenever we get ready to cast our ballot, that ballot will be cast for a man of the community who has the good of the community at heart.
It’s not so good to refer to what you’re going to do as a sit-in … An old woman can sit.
Well, you and I have been sitting long enough, and it is time today for us to start doing some standing, and some fighting to back that up.
And if you’re not ready to pay that price don’t use the word freedom in your vocabulary.
The free breakfast for schoolchildren program was set up in Berkeley, California, in 1968 by Bobby Seale and Huey P Newton.
It was the first significant community program organized by the Panthers, and perhaps the most well-known.
By the end of 1969, free breakfast was served in 19 cities, under the sponsorship of the national headquarters and 23 local affiliates.
More than 20,000 children received full free breakfast (bread, bacon, eggs, grits) before going to their elementary or junior high school … … The clinics were called People’s Free Medical Centres and eventually were established in 13 cities across the country, from Cleveland to New Haven, Connecticut; and from Winston-Salem, North Carolina, to Los Angeles.
Some of the clinics were in storefronts, others in trailers or hastily built structures, and most did not last long.
But they offered services such as testing for high blood pressure, lead poisoning, tuberculosis and diabetes; cancer detection screenings; physical exams; treatments for colds and flu; and immunization against polio, measles, rubella, and diphtheria.
Nelson reports that many of the women and men involved in the PFMCs went on to become credentialed health care professionals.
