Thirteen Days in October By Michael Dobbs, Rachel Dobbs | October 8, 2012, 1:44 AM Start Slideshow View as a List Shortly after 8m. on Tuesday, Oct., 1962, President John F Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union had secretly delivered nuclear missiles to Cuba, capable of obliterating Washington just 15 minutes after launch.
Thus began the famous ""13 days"" during which the world came closer than ever before -or since -to nuclear war.
Unbeknownst to Kennedy, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had also sent 98 tactical nuclear warheads to Cuba, capable of destroying an American invading force and the United States naval base at Guantánamo Bay.
In addition to providing context for the events and blogging about the experience, I'm live-tweeting the events leading up to those 13 fateful days at @missilecrisis62.
Khrushchev agreed to remove his missiles from Cuba, but only after receiving a non-invasion pledge from Kennedy and a promise to remove United States nuclear missiles from Turkey.
Before stepping back from the brink, the two leaders unleashed a chain of unpredictable events, culminating in the shoot-down of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba.
As we enter October, the photos that follow offer a comprehensive, day-by-day breakdown of events as Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro hurtled toward the Cuban missile crisis.
Above, Kennedy signs the order for the naval blockade of Cuba on Oct., 1962, in the White House.
On Oct., the Soviet cargo ship Indigirka docked in the port of Mariel, Cuba, with the first shipment of nuclear warheads to arrive on the island.
The ship was carrying six atom bombs, 36 warheads for long-range R-12 missiles, and a further 36 warheads for short-range FKR missiles.
While chairing a meeting of the CIA Cuban covert operations group -called the Operation Mongoose committee -in Washington, Robert ""Bobby"" Kennedy, the president's brother and the United States attorney general , calls for ""considerably more sabotage"" against Cuba.
The CIA decides to consider plans for the mining of Cuban harbor and the capture and interrogation of Cuban forces.
Meanwhile, at Kennedy's instruction, the United States Air Force builds mock-ups of Soviet SA-2 missile launchers to prepare pilots for bombing runs.
Oct., 1962 was the first of the ""thirteen days"" -the crucial fortnight at the heart of the Cuban missile crisis.
From here, we'll go into the events of each day in closer detail.:00 Following the discoveries by intelligence analysts in Washington the previous day, President Kennedy is informed by National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy of ""hard photographic evidence"" showing Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
He later calls the premier of the Soviet Union an ""immoral gangster"" to his brother Robert Kennedy, then telephones Republican lawyer John McCloy, who advises him to take forceful action to remove the missiles.:00 In Moscow, Khrushchev meets with the United States ambassador to the USSR Foy Kohler and tells him forcefully that all Soviet activity in Cuba is purely defensive.
He also claims that the Cuban government has leaked any information regarding Soviet action in Cuba without Soviet permission.:00 President Kennedy briefs Robert Kennedy on the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba, who expresses surprise.
Kennedy then orders a meeting of 14 advisors, forming the group that becomes known as ""ExComm"" -the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, shown above.
ExComm then meet for the first time and are shown photos of the missiles.
The group is informed that the CIA estimates that Soviet MRBMs could explode over Washington in 13 minutes once they are armed and ready to fire.
The briefing board used by the CIA to show the range of missiles on Cuba can be found here.
However, Defence Secretary McNamara suggest that the nuclear warheads required are not yet present on Cuba so the missiles couldn't be fired immediately.
In a meeting earlier in the day, the Joint Chiefs of Staff had been adamant that the military threat from Cuban was ""so serious"" that missiles must be ""taken out"" by air strikes.
ExComm orders six further surveillance flights over Cuba, which are carried out over the course of the day.:30 Robert Kennedy meets with the Special Group Augmented and expresses his brother's ""general dissatisfaction"" with Operation Mongoose -a covert program for sabotage in Cuba -and their lack of progress in ousting Castro.
He informs the Mongoose operational team that they will meet at 9.30am every morning until further notice.:35 President Kennedy meets with reporters, telling them that his priority is ensuring the ""survival of our country"" and avoiding the ""third and perhaps last war"" but doesn't inform them of the unfolding crisis.:15 The Soviet cargo ship Bolshevik Sukhanov leaves for Cuba from Kaliningrad with equipment for R-14 missiles.:30 ExComm meets again and President Kennedy is informed that all missiles on Cuba will be ""fully operational in two weeks,"" with individual missiles ready sooner.
Kennedy thinks that Soviet action is intended as both a ""psychological"" and ""political"" threat to the United States as well as being defensive.
On Oct., the debate heats up over whether or not to launch an air strike at Cuba.:00 Adlai Stevenson, the United States Ambassador to the U.N., warns President Kennedy that he can't negotiate with a ""gun at our head"" and should be prepared to compromise with the Soviets over United States missiles in Turkey and Britain.
In a memo to the president, John McCone, the director of the CIA, states that he thinks Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba should be seen as an attempt to establish a ""trading position"" that would force the United States into removing their own overseas missile bases.:30 McNamara declares that eliminating the missiles via a ""surgical"" airstrike is militarily impractical and would lead to an invasion of Cuba.
He advocates instead that the United States implement a naval blockade of the island.
However, members of ExComm express concern that a blockade of Cuba might lead to Soviet counteractions, including a blockade of Berlin.:20 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, shown above meeting in their conference room, which was known as ""the Tank,"" propose to remove the missiles using 3,000 air strikes against Cuba over five days.:30 An SS-5 intermediate range ballistic missle site is detected in Cuba.
On Oct., tempers flare over the prolonged debate over what to do about Cuba.:30 During a Joint Chiefs of Staff meeting, Air Force Chief Gen.
Curtis LeMay becomes frustrated by the lack of progress in deciding what to do over the missiles in Cuba.
Acheson, however, dismisses the analogy as ""silly"" and advises an airstrike.:00 The USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko, shown above, meets with President Kennedy and accuses him of ""pestering"" Cuba and denies that the Soviet Union is sending offensive missiles to Cuba.
Kennedy subsequently requests the preparation of a brief to establish the legal basis of such a blockade.
ExComm is also presented with the first in a daily series of ""joint evaluations"" from the CIA and is told that ""one must assume that nuclear warheads could now be available in Cuba"" and that MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched in 18 hours.
Over the course of the meeting, ExComm's original consensus to a naval blockade breaks down.
Instead, the group splits and begins developing plans for both the blockade and for a military airstrike to present to the president.
The CIA has now identified three different medium range missile sites on the island with eight missile launchers each.:45 President Kennedy meets with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The Army, Air Force, and Navy chiefs favor an invasion of Cuba, although Army chief Maxwell Taylor only wants to prepare at this stage.
However, Kennedy is hesitant to take firm military action, predicting that a United States attack on Cuba would cause the Soviet Union to retaliate with an attack on Berlin.
Air Force Chief LeMay disagrees with the president, stating that a lack of firm action by the United States would ""lead straight into war,"" and compares it with the appeasement of the Nazis in Munich.
After the president leaves the meeting, the Head of the Marine Corps, Gen.
David Shoup, states that Kennedy's caution will leave them all ""screwed"" and that they should settle matters with ""that little pipsqueak of a place"" for good.
However, they record it as a ""dry cargo"" ship of little importance -however, Soviet nuclear weapons were actually on board at the time.:00 ExComm meets again, with the members increasingly supportive of the idea of a blockade on Cuba, as many feel that the destructive ""price"" of an airstrike is too high.:00 Meeting again in the afternoon, the Joint Chiefs, who are still in favor of an airstrike, state that they are willing to accept a 24-hour delay in attacking Cuba in order to inform allies.
Morning Pierre Salinger, the press secretary for the White House, is informed of the crisis for the first time.
Plans for the blockade are outlined -approaching ships will be signalled to stop for inspection.
Evening The White House realizes that the press is beginning to piece together information.
National Security Archives On Oct., the president addresses the nation.:00 United States Marines began evacuating civilians from Guantanamo Bay Naval base, with 2,810 women and children leaving by warship and plane.:00 In Moscow, reports of unusual activity in Washington reach Premier Khrushchev.
However, this alarms Khrushchev, who is concerned that this could trigger nuclear war.
The United States plans for a quarantine of Cuba -the name was changed from""blockade,"" as it was thought it sounded less aggressive -are outlined.
All aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons for the first time in history.:00 Seventeen congressional leaders from both parties assemble at White House and are briefed on the crisis and the quarantine plan.
President Kennedy is privately furious at these negative reactions, exploding ""if they want this job, fuck 'em, they can have it.
However, he then increased alert levels for Soviet troops and drafts a statement calling the quarantine ""piracy"" and accusing the United States government of pushing the world to war.
The Kremlin then orders General Issa Pliyev to increase combat readiness on Cuba in order to defeat the enemy, but not to use nuclear weapons.:00 President Kennedy makes a televised statement to the nation, shown above, informing the public of the crisis and citing ""unmistakable evidence"" of Soviet nukes in Cuba.
On Oct., President Kennedy asks Khrushchev to show prudence.:00 Having spent the night in the Kremlin on Khrushchev's instructions, Soviet leaders meet to discuss their next actions.
They are especially concerned with the four Soviet Foxtrot submarines in the Atlantic, with some fearing that the presence of these submarines in Cuban waters will increase the risk of confrontation with the United States Navy if detected.
It is eventually decided that the submarines should be held back in two-to-three day sailing range from Cuba.:45 The Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk, which is carrying nuclear weapons, docks in La Isabel, Cuba. tactical warheads are unloaded and taken to cruise missile regiments at opposite ends of Cuba.
The Squadron Commander William Ecker and his wingman Bruce Wilhelmy fly over the missile site at San Cristobal and identify an unfinished nuclear bunker.
Other low-level reconnaissance planes photograph other missile sites such as the one at Sagua La Grande shown above.
Afternoon The Soviet cargo ships Poltava, Okhotsk, Kasimov, and Kimovsk, heading for Cuba, all reverse course on Khrushchev's instructions.
The first two were carrying seven R-14 missiles each, with the latter two carrying five R-14 missiles each.
While it was originally unclear whether or not these ships were incoming or outgoing, it is then clarified that they are all now heading away from Cuba.
However, ExComm is also informed that four Soviet submarines remain in the western Atlantic.
Power makes an unauthorized address to SAC on open airwaves stating that they are ""ready to meet any emergencies,"" which is picked up by Soviet intelligence.
United States Marines plan for an invasion of Cuba with 120,000 troops.
Projected potential casualties in the first 10 days are estimated as being over 18,000, with 4,000 dead.
Soviet armed forces are also placed on high alert -all military leave is cancelled and discharges are deferred indefinitely.
National Security Archives On Oct., Adlai Stevenson makes his case to the United Nations Security Council.:00 The saboteurs sent into Cuba by the CIA, Miguel Orozco and Pedro Vera, reach their destination -a ""break over tower"" between the Matahamre copper mine and the sea -after five days of walking.
Orozco places two bombs on the cables from the tower, which will then be carried to the copper mine in one direction, and to the Santa Lucia docks when the tramway starts in the morning.
Vera attaches another bomb designed to bring the tower down and disrupt power to the mine.
However, workers at the copper mine discover the bombs and dismantle them before they detonate.:00 A message from President Kennedy is sent to Khrushchev stating that United States action and the quarantine of Cuba is entirely in response to Soviet deception over missile deployment.
This is based on an overheard conversation with an journalist in Washington, who insinuated that he would soon be sent to Cuba to report.:00 ExComm meets and is informed that the ships USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest, but it is allowed to continue to Cuba.
Meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff earlier in the day, the Secretary of Defense Dean Rusk authorizes the United States Navy to stop ""non-bloc ships"" and the stopping and boarding of the Soviet tanker Grozny.
Later in the day, the ship USS Kennedy approaches the Lebanese freighter Marucla and informs her crew that she will be boarded in the morning.
United States reconnaissance over Cuba photographs tactical short-range ""Luna"" missiles.
The United States government had previously been unaware of their presence on the island.
United States Navy surveillance photographs the Soviet submarine B-130 surfacing near the quarantine line.:00 Adlai Stevenson shows intelligence photos of Soviet missiles to the United Nations Security Council, pictured above.
He taunts the Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin, who refuses to confirm or deny knowledge of missiles before the United Nations.:00 The Turkish government informs the Kennedy administration that they will reject removal of United States Jupiter missiles stationed in Turkey without nuclear substitution.
On Oct., preparations for a United States airstrike on Cuba are made..03 A United States guard patrolling Duluth Airport in Minnesota shoots at a figure scaling the fence and triggers the ""sabotage"" alarm -the intruder is later thought to be a bear.
In response to the alarm, the Air Force begins ""flushing"" its interceptor force -all nuclear armed planes are to take off as soon as possible.
Troops across the county think that war has broken out and scramble to prepare planes.
The alarm is reversed and the planes called back one minute from launch.
All F-106 planes were armed with four missiles, one of which had a nuclear warhead 07:50 United States Navy officials from USS Kennedy successfully board the Marucla, a Lebanese freighter under USSR charter.
Later in the day, the normally taciturn Pentagon spokesman Arthur Sylvester gives a hungry press a detailed account of the boarding.:19 All four Soviet submarines have now begun to pull back away from Cuba on orders from Moscow.
However, the submarine B-36 is ordered to explore a sea passage between Grand Turk and Hispaniola.
It is spotted 80 miles east of Grand Turk by a United States Navy plane and goes into an emergency dive.:00 ExComm meets and is shown low-level reconnaissance photos that had been interpreted earlier in the day.
These show a military encampment of Soviet troops on Cuba along with Luna missiles capable of destroying a United States invading force.
An ABC News correspondent is invited to lunch by the KGB Washington station chief Aleksandr Feklisov , who presents him with an alternative to solving the crisis.
This involves the Soviet Union dismantling its missile bases on Cuba under United Nations supervision and a promise from Castro never to accept offensive weapons of any kind, in exchange for an official pledge from the United States promising not to invade Cuba.
Feklisov suggests Scali contact his ""high level friends"" concerning this.
Khrushchev suggests that Moscow will declare ships bound for Cuba as ""not carrying armaments"" if Washington pledges not to invade or support any invasion of Cuba.
In Cuba, General Pliyev -head of Soviet forces on the island, shown above with Fidel Castro -tells Moscow that he expects a "" United States airstrike that night"" and begins dispersing nuclear warheads.
He urges Khruschev to consider a nuclear strike against the United States.:00 A U-2 flight piloted by Captain Charles Maultsby takes off from Alaska on a routine air sampling mission to collect evidence of Soviet nuclear tests.
Khrushchev orders General Pliyev to ""not use nukes"" on Cuba without direct authorization from Moscow.
AP and Reuters bulletins arrive stating that Khrushchev says he will withdraw Cuban missiles in exchange for the Turkish ones -President Kennedy has not yet received this message.
A second message from Khrushchev subsequently begins to be received by the United States government, requesting that missiles in Cuba swapped for those in Turkey.
The Kennedy administration is informed that the Soviets have found the wreckage of a U-2, shown in the photo above.:00 Confused by the Northern Lights, the U-2 piloted by Maultsby in Alaska strays into Soviet airspace.
As he crosses the border, six Soviet interceptor jets take off from Chukotka to shoot down the intruder plane.
Picking up Russian folk music on his radio, Maultsby realizes that he is lost and calls for help.
Cuban anti-aircraft weapons fire upon the remaining four but they return unharmed.
Upon being told of this, Kennedy decides not to retaliate immediately, but agrees to attack the surface-to-air missile sites if any more planes are shot down.
At Rusk's request, the ABC News correspondent Scali meets again with KGB head Feklisov to ask why Khrushchev's second message differs from the latter's proposal on the 26th.
Feklisov claims that the introduction of Jupiter missiles in Turkey into the deal was the result of ""poor communications"" with Moscow.
He also states that he is waiting for reply from Khrushchev at any minute and begs Scali to report that there has been no treachery to ExComm -Scali reluctantly agrees to this.
This message attempts to negotiate his initial request of a United States non-invasion pledge in exchange for a declaration that Soviet ships are unarmed.
Kennedy also decides to send an oral message via Anatoly Dobrynin stating that if the missiles are not removed from Cuba, then the United States will begin to take military action.
However, this message also contains an assurance that while no public or explicit deal will be made concerning the Jupiter missiles, they will be removed from Turkey if the Soviets comply.:10 Kennedy's letter, drafted earlier, is transmitted to Moscow and released directly to the press in an attempt to avoid communication delays.
Unbeknown to the rest of ExComm, Kennedy and Rusk begin preparing a contingency plan involving a public Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
He then sends a message to General Pliyev stating that ""We have taken a decision to dismantle the R-12 missiles and evacuate them"" and ordering the General to begin to implement this measure.
The Soviet ship Grozny is ordered by Moscow not to challenge the blockade, and comes to a standstill just outside the quarantine zone.
He subsequently writes to Khrushchev stating that he considers their communications as ""firm undertakings"" to be ""promptly carried out"" by both governments.
He then orders that no more reconnaissance missions be flown over Cuba and that no further action be taken against Soviet ships.
