A conference marking the 40th anniversary of the most dangerous moment of the Cold War heard the account of a United States naval officer whose destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear weapon on 27 October 1962.
According to declassified documents released at the conference by the National Security Archive of Washington, United States intelligence only photographed 33 of the 42 SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles placed in Cuba, and never located the nuclear warheads.
On 27 October, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba, and United States military Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended to President Kennedy that the United States proceed with an air strike and invasion plan.
According to declassified documents, that day the crisis appeared to be spinning out of control.
The next day, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered the withdrawal of missiles secretly deployed in Cuba, pressed by United States photographic evidence and a naval blockade imposed on the island by President John F Kennedy.
Kennedy aide and historian Arthur Schlesinger stated, ""This was not only the most dangerous moment of the Cold War, It was the most dangerous moment in human history.
Never before had two contending powers possessed between them the technical capacity to blow up the world.
President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, later met with the Soviet ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, and offered a deal that included a pledge not to invade Cuba and the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey.
In the middle of the escalating tensions, the destroyer USS Beale was dropping depth charges on the Soviet submarine B-59, one of four at the quarantine line, each carrying nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
The sub's signals intelligence officer Vadim Orlov said in an account issued by Blanton, ""They exploded right next to the hull.
According to Orlov's account, the Soviet submarine's crew thought the war may have started and considered using their nuclear weapon, but decide instead to surface.
Ecker and his 15 pilots flew 82 dangerous, low-level missions over the missile bases to take photographs that were presented by the United States at the United Nations.
