Without limiting the rights under the copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means , without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
This is short for the Latin word circa, meaning “around, and indicates that the date is approximate.
Established in 1846, the Smithsonian—the world’s largest museum and research complex—includes 19 museums and galleries and the National Zoological Park.
Most of what we know about this time comes from remains left benind, Sucn as tools, bones, and ruined buildings.
Until recently, it was difficult to tell now old these objects were, but scientific advances nave allowed us to out together a much clearer picture of not only human history, out also the origin of life on Eartn, ana even of the Universe itself.
Dinosaurs become the The ancestors of humans dominant life form on Earth. begin to use fire.
Over time, they began solar system were formed. known today . dominant animals on the planet. to use tools and make fire.
Invented independently by different cultures around the world, the wheel revolutionized transportation.
It was also crucial to later advancements in farming, construction, industry, and engineering.
Settling down Early humans moved from place to place in search of food.
Working with metal As humans discovered the technology of creating items from copper, bronze, and iron , they crafted stronger tools and weapons.
These atrillionth of asecond,it leftovers build up to form expands tothesizeofa larger particles called protons football—a process and neutrons— the building Known as inflation. blocks of atoms.
Although light travels extremely quickly, it still takes It bIlllons of years to cross the Universe. | his means that peering Into deep space allows us to look back In time and study the Universes early years.
Stars and galaxies Ci eeWiinva eleliismuallenccimclacrsts of gas into clumps that get iitelalcclarclalemile|aits/em Malis aterclesmuals)| mere) goss} dale lelciaialepaleler(orcle reactions, and so giving oiauaMconsitclesme bale newborn stars cluster by the billion in vast whirlpools — galaxies.
Not all the material is absorbed by the new star though—a gigantic disk of dust elalenerstsuionlolimlake)ge)im-leelelaenie OW <leilaalcmmtalon eyclaileosmelmantclatcis Tam dalisnelis)esiilerqcelelciialclmenielane the planets, moons, asteroids, and galoltsne) mele] mele)t-lme\V1to100F 4. billion Life begins mrclalals/ mice leamigionolelamiar-lancyer-liel|are| Venus but not as far as freezing N/FeTaseu @)tclaloim mts l@anicelersimuatomalelayi temperature for liquid water to settle on Its surface.
A random chemical reaction between carbon-based chemicals in the Volo) One le lUlexctonemanle)(ceel(omuarcll can make copies of itself, as DNA anane)mliicn 4. billion years ago"" ed ar Oh oe @ ° cle S The Sun dies About 5 billion years in the future, datomelelamiiiimielaanialtekouasiene|r-lall star as its supply of fuel begins to run out.
The heat will vaporize IANA clic) (1imelaumtclalanclare| possibly our planet's crust, corommaarcl.qiale milion |aalelessssyle)icy 5 billion years in the future The Big Freeze a Matonelaliclasiem ante \ace)aliialels expanding forever.
Matter and energy will become ever more thinly dispersed, preventing new stars from forming.
After the last star burns out, the Universe will Olen Cleanarclallalenvmerela.q-lare| freezing cold—an endless void with no activity.
Jnls vast soan of time is called the Mesozoic Era and Is divided Into taree distinct periods. | ne reign of the dinosaurs and other giant reotiies came to an abrupt end in amass extinction 66 million years ago, bUt not every KING of dinosaur was wiped out.
In the Jurassic Period, plant-eating dinosaurs reach They are small, nimble animals that scamper on powerful hind gigantic sizes, making them the largest animals ever to legs, using their stiff tails to balance and their small arms to walk on Earth.
This successful formula soon leads to variations. one theory Is that predators target smaller animals, some dinosaurs evolve into plant-eaters, growing longer necks driving a process of natural selection that makes both that help them reach leaves or armored skin for protection. prey and predator become larger and larger.
While dinosaurs rule the land, the smallest dinosaurs evade predators by taking other prehistoric reptiles adapt to life in the ocean and air. flight—they evolve into the first birds.
There are now more kinds of dinosaurs than ever, including flightless, feathered giants and small but ferocious carnivores with hooklike foot claws that might be used to disembowel prey.
At the end of the Cretaceous, all types of giant prehistoric reptiles disappear in amass extinction, perhaps victims of a catastrophic asteroid strike, but birds survive.
Albertonectes Mosasaurus 17 End of the dinosaurs Almost 66 million years ago, a catastrophic event occurred that wiped out more than half of life on Earth, including the dinosaurs.
Most experts believe this mass extinction was caused by an enormous meteorite crashing into Earth.
Such a huge impact would have created a worldwide cloud of dust and fumes, choking animals and blocking out the Sun's light and warmth.
The planet's climate would have changed dramatically, making life impossible for many species.
E> . ad a { . ‘ay he 5 »' ¥* ~e bas “y i Dy tes ns iS : Yess Rn Jt: ace 5 t+ rt ed Sg a ie In the African forests, apes ' evolve the ability to walk » upright.
This frees theirhands * for carrying and throwing. el The first known ape which may have been bipedal is called Sahelanthropus tchadensis. fr 5 ae nee tes ~ Human ancestors.
Fumans originated as African aoes-and are related ~~. tochimps and gorillas.
Around 6 million years ago, our closest ape ancestors, called Aominins, began to walk on two legs.
As hominins “~~ evolved, they left Africa to settle all over tne. world.
Making fire Ri RS ote Homo erectus uses fire, Te allowing the species to cook, keep warm, and protect itself from wild animals.
The earliest evidence of fire Is a 1million-year-old ~ collection of charred animal bones found ina cave In South Africa.
The bow and arrow, anew i invention, allows them to hunt Se a small game such as deer. -Australopithecines +» Several species of bipedal ape, Australopithecines, spread across the grasslands of East Africa.
It invents a new kind of stone tool—a hand axe witha leaf-shaped cutting blade.
Homo heidelbergensis Homo heidelbergensis appears.in Africa, later moving into West Asia and Europe.
It is the first hominin species to build shelters and use spears to hunt animals.
Last Neanderthals Neanderthals die out, perhaps unable to adapt to the rapidly changing climate.
The paintings, created in caves, orobably serve a ritual purpose, such as contacting animal spirits to bring about a successful hunt.
Hanic habilis a Human migrations Following the first use of stone” Modern humans left Africa ~ tools by Australopithecines 3. ~ | 120,000 years ago, beginning _ million years ago, Homo habilis | ~ | ajourney that would take them ae EUROPE spreads across | to every inhabitable place on Roe ASIA East and southern Africa.
A \ ee er Cape bios bridge of landlinked Asiaand “& arn SG pS America, and the distance % * Ss by sea to Australia was far v | he Ee ee shorter than it is today.
Modern humans (Homo — See NCS Sapiens sapiens) appear in Africa. vata aR They are the firsthominins _. to bury their dead—they do so in caves with offerings.
They are the first humans to _ sew, using bone needles, -and make jewelry from shells and bones. tall, lives on the island of Flores in Indonesia.
Samuel Johnson, English author Agriculture |The nistory of agriculture is essentially the nistory of oroducing food as opposed to finding It.
It includes farming, rearing animals for food, and learning how to Improve techniques.
Before agriculture took off, oeople relled on hunting and gathering—activities that Involve a lot of chance.
By contrast, farmers can Influence food oroduction by sowing seeds and raising animals.
Scythe The scythe Is an agricultural tool used to mow grass and reap crops.
It is swung along the ground, and the sharp blade slices the grass or crop at the base.
In the town of Jericho in Palestine, a huge stone wall is constructed for defense, surveillance, and flood protection, keeping the 3,000 inhabitants safe.
Byzantine bazaars In the Byzantine Empire, I I around the Mediterranean, public areas and main roads in cities start to become closed off by shops.
With more opportunities for trade and work, | the populations of many Increased, eventually ; resulting in the growtn of major cities.
Many other medieval | Factory towns | European cities also rebuild their original During the Industrial Revolution, walls to contain their growing centers. people move to work in factories.
Mesopotamia's cities become important trading centers, using rivers to transport l goods.
MVal el0lt-tllealsne)i —— upward saves spaceinthe [imitate aare)cemnarclaml@maalllltevammarc\ie A NHOOH00 aaa) cr berry packed city center andis |iijijilsiaaldslal ©. __ become more common.
Nobody Knows exactly how the wheel evolved to form the wheel we see today, but archaeologists think it all began thousands of years ago with simple log rollers and sleds.
Rolling along The ancient Sumerians realized that they could move bulky objects more easily If they rolled them over round log rollers.
Simple sled Rollers proved awkward to move around, so the Sumerians developed a sled witha curved front that could be pulled along more easly.
Teaming up The Sumerians decided to combine the sled and roller, finding that the sled glided over the rollers more smoothly than over the ground.
Making grooves Over time, the movement of the sled over the roller wore grooves in the log roller, which helped keep the sled in place.
Early wheels To improve the design, the Sumerians chipped away at the log to create two wheels and an axle.
The first cart The Sumerians later fixed individual wheels onto an axle and attached the sled to it securely by drilling holes in its frame. | ne story of tne wneel Early humans realized tnat neavy objects could be moved more easily if they were rolled instead of dragged.
Many Inventions developed over the oast 3,500 years would not nave been possiole without It.
This allowed knowledge to be collected and passed on from person to person both reliably and over great distances.
Its thanks to the written word that we know the thoughts and ideas of people who lived thousands of years ago.
It has 24 letters, The Roman alphabet goes on to become and is usually written from left to right. the world’s most widely used script.
They The system Is inspired by contact with the carve monumental inscriptions, paint text Roman alphabet, but uses straight lines, so on vases, and write on fig tree bark. it can be easily carved onto wood or stone.
With the spread of Islam, the Arabic script is later adopted across North Africa and much of Asia.
The script later inspires the Hebrew, Arabic, and Greek writing systems. 5th century isa ve “2 ve tS BR BL BR OBL gt Japanese scripts Japanese people adapt Chinese writing to create a script called kanji.
They also invent two other scripts, hiragana and katakana, with signs standing for syllables.
Indus script The Indus people of India invent a script that remains undeciphered to this day.
Based on Egyptian hieroglyphs, people only need to learn 30 signs to be able to write.
Vet we eZ aby eae oth oor wih ot Aw endlos(iiwize hod +3; Af, sand Mrio ws ‘ abe ano asyy ¥ iS iu ens nna re} bi rue Non ‘er or maiem Raetettmuge seve yo WALA bo) was eats.
Pesto At i133 rye or rau rte ier $ ¢ SiSerale Fret “Ay NOW pease arts art fj ~~ Tats ary 5 \"" (3 AY ehcnaniieat va Las THEBATIAT IAM nAtAre A male SNTARAMOT TUNA AL sand be bal eA 4 1. teprmerlat\Ste MHapey on Yaceve memes ory Munna.
Ve As it Hole oe Teens Nes i oe TA re aA Baty yenna) AT RA BIKE AACE ver ra TP TAL yOM OLebwAr se The Rosetta Stone The Rosetta Stone Is an inscribed basalt block, discovered by French soldiers in Egypt in 1799.
Ase eo Py x YZ a | ne Ancient VVor | ne earliest civilizations established their cultures around huge rivers that could Support farming, Such as the Tigris and Euphrates in West Asia, and the Nile in Egypt.
As technology develooed and trade expanded after SOOO BceE, great empires alSO Sorang up across Europe and East Asia.
As these new societies took snape, many of them came Into conflict with one anotner in competition for land and resources.
Greek Lagash in Mesopotamia. from Egypt across West Asia. based in West Asia. conquer the cities of Greece. | cities are founded as far east as India.
The cultures of this area monuments called pyramids thinkers developed early shared a single culture.
They invented farming and the wheel. to house their royal dead. ohilosophy and democracy. were experts at crafting metal.
Pottery The process of creating pottery was first discovered in prehistoric times, but in the ancient world, many cultures — particularly the Greeks —perfected pottery design as an art form.
Objects such as this Greek amphora give historians many visual clues about the fashions, stories, and societies of the ancient world.
Wisselee)rsinalte Wikstsxe) ele) tslaaltcmaaletel Aismmaalon Am aalom ANON a\icltcre referring to the Tigris and the Euphrates in western Asia.
It was here, more than 5,000 years ago, that the worlds N1GSIMOIINTSXSM cl Rom OLUIIIONN Malem lV lctsre) Ole leslaaliclalsmlanvcclaikere organized religion, royalty, armies, law, and many other fundamental features of civilization as we know It. sF-lepatelal rel ary The Amorites, a people from the western deserts, conquer most of Mesopotamia, which they rule from Babylon.
These huge stone structures were ALON Vastsmaalon my-le)ale)alr-lalswrelalemialcy| marci) built as places of religious worship. empire is called Babylonia.
Hittites and Kassites The Hittites and Kassites invade Babylonia using iron weapons and fast chariots pulled by horses.
At first they use It to make tools of Lagash leading his army to victory, The tome also Beene the bodies of IATOMVcts| CLONRISIRoAYAc IMINO ICUINm@lerclalale aprelaeial ale Re cmrcli(clanslalcanliorsy servants who have been sacrificed. sculptures with it.
BBal-e-)elavetelacme) mele a Malisu ele). @\\clsmielelalen iam ce)/-lmcelanlenlamiaoxelinyae)mOlemim\\r-lsuaar-lele around 2500 BcE and its mosaic decoration shows what life was Ni om Ia stela WalVdlessx@) elo) t-lanltmm alises) @)(e1tmW clare laomUalliomtals other side shows life during peacetime.
Dice grid board, with players taking turns soon become common. to place white and black stones at the grid intersections.
Fun and games People nave been sitting down to play games together for many thousands of years.
Board games were popular in ancient Egypt, while card games were created in imperial China.
Today, old favorites are enjoyed alongside new fantastical storytelling adventures.
Games orovide nours of entertainment and competition at every roll of the dice or choice of a card.
Chess This skill and strategy game is first played in either Northern India or Central Asia.
Six or seven cowrie shells are thrown to decide how many places a player moves their pieces.
Emperor Akbar has a gigantic board built, on which humans are moved around as game pieces.
Dominoes In the 12th century, the Chinese created two-sided tiles with dots to represent numbers on each side.
They were given the name ‘dominoes’ in Italy and can be used to play a variety of games.
Magie’s original 8 GS s £2 board uses made-up street Se ee. 43th t names, but later versions of the C century game each use real place names from a city around the world. 9th century Playing cards The Chinese invent the earliest playing cards.
When cards reach Europe, the suit markings are cups, gold coins, swords, and polo sticks.
In about 1480, the French suits familiar today (hearts, diamonds, spades, and clubs) become standard.
Mahjong This tile-laying game is first developed in China and becomes popular across Asia.
During the 1950s, it becomes such a big hit that stores ration supplies per customer.
Players are suspects who must follow clues to decide which of them Is the murderer, where the crime was committed, and what weapon was used.
Ancient Egyot Around 3000 Bce, the people of Egypt created the world’s first united state.
It was governed by a king “Hail to you O Nilet... —— Known as a pharaoh, who was believed to be the Come, ONile,come™ reoresentative of the gods on Eartn.
Egyptians wore similar white linen clothing, spoke the Hymn to the Nile 22100 BCE same language, and followed a regular cycle of work, — governed by the annual flooding of the River Nile.
Dark period The fall of the Old Kingdom -after a period of political strife and widespread drought Is followed by atime of disunity, called the First Intermediate Period.
There are few monumental building projects during this time, as the power of royal authority was In decline.
Great Pyramid At Giza, Pharaoh Khufu builds the Great Pyramid, which remains to this day the world's biggest stone building.
AAA Vy 4, | | Middle Kingdom Egypt is reunited by Pharaoh Mentuhotep Il, the founder of what historians would later call the Middle Kingdom.
This period is remembered for its great achievements in art and literature, which leave behind clues about the daily 7a lives of ancient Egyptians.
TheHyksos | A people from western Asia, the Hyksos, move into northern Egypt and destroy the Middle Kingdom.
They bring with them the new technology of fighting from horsedrawn chariots.
While the Hyksos rule the north, Egyptian pharaohs continue to govern | in the south.
Egyptis ruled by 15 Macedonian 22 pharaohs, all called Ptolemy. — \ The capital of Egypt during this M periodis Alexandria, founded by 4 Alexander the Great onthe — HW) Mediterranean coast.
Foreignrulers — During the Late Period, Egypt is conquered by a series of foreign powers.
He has many colossal statues built of himself, as wellas a temple at Abu Simbel, where he is. ~ worshipped as a god. ae the Assyrians and the Persians.
Coins showing Cleopatra First settlements Farming people settle in yyy ERKONY villages by the Nile.
They 00,00 XX) XXX % grow wheat and barley, OX) RR ; keep cattle and sheep, AY d make polished red WO NOan nn’ and make po RORY pottery with blackened tops.
This early culture is later called Badarian, after the site of El Badari, the remains of which were excavated in 1923.
Stepped pyramid Pharaoh Djoser, the first ruler of a period that historians call the Old Kingdom, builds the first oyramid.
This is a royal tomb where the king's body, preserved as amummy, is thought to live on after death.
Djoser’s pyramid has stepped rather than smooth sides and is Egypt's first monument to be built out of stone.
New Kingdom Ahmose, ruler of Thebes, drives out _ the Hyksos and reunites Egypt, founding what would become known as the New Kingdom.
Pharaohs are no longer buried in pyramids, but in hidden tombs tn the Valley of the Kings, in the desert to the west of Thebes.
Depiction of Amon-Re Tutankhamun — —— a Under the rule of Pharaoh Tutankhamun, the | old religionis restored.
After his death at the age of around 18, Tutankhamunis buried in a tomb filled with treasures.
Discovered In 1922, thetombof — Tutankhamun Is the only unrobbed Egyptian royal tomb ever found.
Sun worship Pharaoh Akhenaten makes sweeping changes to Egypt's religion, closing down the temples to the gods and introducing worship of the Aten, a disk that represents the Sun.
He builds a new capital called Y 0954 8 _ Akhetaten (modern-day E| Amarna), with open-air temples for the worship of the Sun.
These Arf are carved on stone or painted t Ml iy onsheets of papyrus, awriting & material made from the reeds along the Nile.
Early hieroglyphs on ada wooden labels A kingdom united Egypt, previously two kingdoms, is united under one king.
He is shown in art as a warrior defeating enemies while wearing the crowns of Upper _ and Lower Egypt.
Narmer wears the white Narmer wears the red 4 crown of Upper Egypt. crown of Lower Egypt.
Egyptian Empire Thutmose | aggressively expands Egyptian rule into Nubia, a country that lies to the south of Egypt, as well as into areas of western Asia.
Ancient monuments For most of orenistory, oeople lived as nomadic nuntergatnerers and left behind little trace of their existence.
It was only after oeoole became settled farmers tnat they began to bulla monuments, Sucn as tombs and temples.
Most were simple structures, but some were built on an enormous scale that required hundreds of laborers—a Sign they were built for powertul leaders.
Unusually, it seems to have been people set up more than 3,000 standing stones in long lines. built by hunter-gatherers in the process of becoming farmers.
Their purpose is amystery, but itis possible that each one was placed in honor of a dead person.
Some stand above ground, but others have an underground burial chamber.
About 45,000 are built, giving Korea the world's largest collection of dolmens.
Sanchi Stupa At Sanchi in India, Emperor Ashoka builds a great stupa— a domed monument holding relics of the Buddha.
Stupas are places of pilgrimage for Buddhists, who walk around them praying and meditating.
Dolmens In western Europe, people begin to build dolmens—tombs using three or more huge standing stones supporting a flat tablestone.
Abu Simbel At Abu Simbel in southern Egypt, Pharaoh Rameses || has a great temple carved out of solid rock.
Colossal statues of the pharaoh sit outside and line the temple's entrance hall.
Great Pyramid of Cholula j The people of Cholula in Mexico build a pyramid i Ng \ 4 temple to worship the god Quetzalcoatl.
Newgrange Stonehenge In Ireland, people use 200,000 In Wiltshire, England, people arrange standing tons of rock to build an stones in circles.
Some of the stones are First pyramid enormous, mound-shaped tomb hauled hundreds of miles from Wales.
Their The Egyptian pharaoh Djoser with along passage leading toa purpose Is unclear, but certain stones align builds the first pyramid as his central burial chamber.
It has stepped sides in passage Is aligned with the be used to establish calendar dates. six levels and is made of stone.
The steps may have been seen as a stairway to the heavens for the pharoah. midwinter sunrise, which lights up the burial chamber for 17 minutes.
Pyramids in Peru People at Caral in Peru build ; the first pyramids in South “America.
They have stepped sides like Djoser’s, but they ~~. serve as temples rather than i tombs.
They are arranged il around a plaza in the middle of a great urban center. & ce non 3O. ty Pyramids and Sphinx 7 At Giza, the largest of Egypt's pyramids are built by the pharaohs Khufu, Khaftre, and Menkaure.
Khafre's is guarded by the Great Sphinx, a colossal statue of alion with the head of a pharaoh.
Ziggurats S In Mesopotamia , rulers build stepped temples, called if ziggurats.
Each is seen as the home of the local god, whose statue Is kept inashrine at the very top.
These have eyes of white coral with black obsidian pupils, and caps made of red stone.
Monk’s Mound A At the meeting of the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois rivers, North Americans build Monk’s Mound, an immense, pyramid-shaped mound of soil and clay.
Angkor Wat In Cambodia, King Suryavarman Il constructs Angkor Wat, a Hindu temple containing his tomb.
It takes around 30 years to build and today remains the world’s largest religious structure.
The Great Sphinx The ancient Egyptians built sohinx statues to guard important areas such as tombs and temples.
The most famous sphinx Is the Great Sphinx of Giza, situated on the west bank of the River Nile. lt was carved out of a huge outcrop of limestone that sticks up above the desert floor to guard the pyramid of Khafre in Giza.
It was built 4,500 years ago, and is one of the largest and oldest statues in the world.
The Sphinx has a human head, probably that of Pharaoh Khafre, and the body of alion. wa sharing stories He q Ts Many of the earliest stories were composed as A joems, as the rhythm and repetition of poetry ‘made it easier for storytellers to learn them.
With — the invention of writing around 6,000 years ago, *% tnese stories began to be written down.
Drama ‘and, much later, tne novel developed as new Hopi American Indian proverb ‘forms of storytelling.
Today, books are still a popular format for reading stories, but tney are ~ also available digitally as e-books or online.
In the story, the Monkey King had a magic Staff that could shrink or grow in size.
Scandinavian sagas Medieval romances Monkey magic First Folio Most Icelandic sagas are tales of Tales of chivalrous knights going Journey to the West (also known Shakespeare adds many words to ~ historic voyages, battles, and kings on quests and having heroic as Monkey) is a Chinese novel the English language and has a of northern Europe.
Some sagas adventures are known in medieval based onthe true story of amonk’s huge impact on the development tell of alegendary past full of Europe as romances.
Old French journey to bring Buddhist scrolls of literature around the world.
It is considered one of the Sherlock Holmes, as well as his haunting poetry.
Watson, in his novel of them never come home “ now call science fiction. that capture the spirit of America.
A Study in Scarlet. from the war. ey tne -_, an a> <a ~ ’ . —_ ho The Siig of Aladdin and the genie was added by the French writer Antoine Galland in the 18th century.
Ancient Greek Mien actors wore Pe Teena masks to identify ies Gilgamesh from oe 2 Be oe Mesopotamia in modern-day Iraq is the oldest 1 Surviving epic.
Ancient epics Greek drama 1001 stories First novel Societies of the ancient Early Greek plays involve only a One Thousand and One Nights The Tale of Genji by the Japanese world produce long poems called single actor and a chorus (a group is a collection of popular stories lady-in-waiting Murasaki Shikibu is ~ ) epics.
Playwrights add a in Arabic folk tales, many of its Written on sheets of paper pasted epics celebrate a civilization’s second and then a third actor to well-known characters — Sinbad, and folded together, it tells the culture through stories the stage, laying the foundations Aladdin, and Ali Baba—will be story of “Shining Genji,’ the son of of great heroes. for Western drama. added much later. an ancient Japanese emperor.
Rise of the novel Once upon atime Gothic horror Wonderland The novel becomes an extremely Brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Mary Shelley writes Frankenstein, English clergyman Lewis Carroll's 3 ‘ oopular form of literature.
Many Grimm collect traditionalGerman one of the greatest works of Gothic Alice in Wonderland |s full of European and American writers folk tales such as Snow White and horror—a type of story that deals nonsense speech and fantastical produce their novels in serial form.
One of the last “Golden Age’ in which children’s monthly parts to make them more violence of the original stories Is examples of Gothic horror is books focus on entertainment affordable to the public. toned down in future editions.
Rowling's seven — A new style of writing, called their international empires, the Civil Rights Movement books about Harry Potter and the “stream of consciousness” writers from former colonies in write wizard school of Hogwarts become a — attempts to show fragments Africa, South America, and about the experiences of worldwide phenomenon.
The novels of thoughts and feelings as Asia—particularly India—begin their people.
The decade have since been translated into they pass through a to write about the experience also sees the rise of female around 80 languages and have sold character’s mind. of being colonized.
Throughout history, there have been many reasons for people to sts lM LenVicll AVAe le) AAlomselelleiiloxowrel ale cultures have used jewelry to protect some to display wealth or alae msxe)aalousyianl elmo) melsverele-talelar against evil, elale ° This decorative breastplate red carnelian, and turquoise. was found in the tomb of oharaon.
It is made of gold, Tutankhamun, an Egyptian inlaid with blue lapis lazull, 4) tes \e) en © ® 0.
Modern tenpin bowling will begin in 1841 in the US. {ne story of sports |he story of soorts began thousands of years ago, when ancient people first started playing ball games.
As time passed, new sports emerged, along with competitions and International events at which to play them.
In modern times, sports are a major Source of exercise, entertainment for soectators, and a way for milllons of orofessional athletes worldwide to test tneir SkIIIS. re . at 3200 BCE Modern Olympics World Series French aristocrat Pierre de The two United States baseball Coubertin arranges a revival of Soccer league The world's first Soccer league competition gets underway in England.
Twelve teams take part, with Preston North End crowned champions at the end of the season. ee ® A A 1888 the ancient Olympic Games.
Events include swimming, cycling, weightlifting, wrestling, athletics, and the first marathon. leagues—the American League and the National League—compeie for the end-of-year championship for the first time in what is today known as the World Series.
Tour de France The first Tour de France is held, lasting 19 days and covering 1,508 miles along French roads.
The race was born to help boost the flagging sales of the cycling newspaper LAuto.
Beach volleyball This game Is first played on the beach in Santa Monica, California.
Today, the sport is played on beaches and artificial sand courts all around the world.
OD Cre 1903 Ancient ball game The Mayans play a speedy ball game called pitz.
The objective is to pass a rubber ball through a stone hoop without using hands or feet.
E\ 1880s Football leagues The National Football League begins with a meeting in Canton, Ohio.
A second football league, named the American Football League, gets underway 40 years later.
In 1967, the champions of the two leagues face each other in the first annual Super Bowl. “gs ade * Ancient Olympics At Olympia, a religious site in southwest Greece, the first recorded Olympic Games are held.
Thirteen teams contest It, with the host nation emerging as the champions.
The tournament has been held every four years since, except when World War II twice caused its postoonement. table tennis, and basketball.
Marathon message When amessenger named Pheidippides runs from the Battle of Marathon to Athens, Greece with news of a victory, the distance of 25 miles becomes the measurement for a marathon.
Hand tennis European monks play the earliest version of tennis using their hands to hit the ball.
By the 1870s, a similar game named Sphairistike is played in the UK with wooden rackets.
Leonardo da Vinci sketches Cricket the first bicycle design, complete The Marylebone Cricket Club in with pedals and a chain.
Bicycles London introduces rules to turn and competitive cycling a16th-century game into the sports do not develop sport we now call cricket. until centuries later. 1100s cE 1490 Women’s World Cup The first competition of the FIFA Women's World Cup is held in China, with the United States beating Norway 2-1 in the final.
Present-day mathematicians are amazed by | how complex the Egyptians calculations are.
The system Is , i | sexagesimal, meaning that it uses Piece of Pl — 60 as its base.
This is based on the The Babylonian oeople in Sumerian method of counting on Mesopotamia calculate that a their hands.
They count each finger circles circumference is about segment on one hand to reach three times the size of its diameter.
This ratio Is important 42, and multipy hand) to re number of fingers on that by five (the the other ach 60. any circle of any know that this number Is 3141592... with the numbers after the decimal point continuing forever, This number is represented by the Greek symbol pI . as it applies to size.
Itis known by the formula a* + Oe ot where the letters refer to the length of each side of the triangle. 1655 oa To eo Gam | The concept of anumber going oa ee, 1415 Geen Artistic mathematics Renaissance artists discover they can USE math to make pictures look more threedimensional by drawing distant objects smaller.
In this, the greatest breakthroughs in numerals O to 9 are used math, as it allows Us to write huge to represent all numbers.
The number oogol of Zeros is a googolplex, and 1 followed by a googolplex of zeros is a googolplexian, the biggest named number to date. nephew 1 followed by 1 suggests “goo 4 followed by 29 BF eget — a) nd cet it ee 1 SIME 5, 4202 ; ay e— Fibonacci sequence hematician Fibonaccl ecial sequence of ich each number is found by adding together the two | 1 2,3, 5, 8,13 This sequence canbe draw a perfect spiral to be used to grams, too. ltalian mat O41, and So O used to pattern, and will go on write computer pro Democracy had its origins in the where citizens met in assemblies imoortant decisions.
Voters could now choose reoresentatives to make {ne story of Greek democracy In the ancient world, important decisions were made by the Magna Carta United States ; wealthy.
This all The Magna Carta Constitution changes when is Representatives of a statesman from the written by English the 13 former British Independence Greek city-state of barons after a period colonies that make up for Liberia Athens named of heavy taxation the newly formed The colony of Liberia, Cleisthenes revamps by the king.
This United States of settled by freed United States the system by giving important document America meet to slaves who had ordinary citizens states that the establish rules about decided to emigrate to political rights.
As a monarch Is not above how the new nation Africa, declares result, historians now the law, and promises should be run.
Joseph refer to him as “the to protect certain rights leads to the drafting of Jenkins Roberts, a father of Athenian through a council of the United States Constitution, the merchant and politician, democracy.
However, 25 barons, which supreme law of the becomes the first women, slaves, and gradually develops into United States, which president of Liberia, foreigners are not part a parliament.
The government introduces the Civil Rights Act in 1964, keeping employers from discriminating against people on the grounds of race, religion, or nationality.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 gives most black people the right to vote.
INWASHINGTON,DC 1963 Fall of the Berlin Wall The wall that had split communist East Berlin from democratic West Berlin for 28 years Is finally knocked down when East and West Germany are reunited.
NELSON | MANDELA End to Apartheid A blow against apartheid comes when prominent antiapartheid Campaigners are released from prison, including Nelson Mandela, who had been imprisoned for 2/ years.
The South African word for “separateness, apartheid refers to huge restrictions to the freedoms of black people in South Africa that were enshrined by law for more than four decades.
Electronic Voting Estonia is the first country to hold elections using electronic voting machines.
These area way to encourage young and busy people to vote in governmental elections, creating a more democratic society.
VOTING WITH AN ; _ ELECTRONICMACHINE ~ 1990 Hise of the Celts During the Iron Age, the people we now call Celts soread across most of Europe trom their original nomeland north of the Alps.
Celtic peoples shared common religious beliefs and spoke related languages, whicn are Still Sooken today in parts of northwest Europe. he Celts were feared warriors and skilled metalworkers.
The Celts lived in hundreds of tribes and nations, and never thought of themselves as one single group.
The name “Celt” comes from keltoi/, the Greek name for a tribe that lived in what's now southern France.
The Romans called Celts Galli , which led to areas they settled being called Gallia , Galicia , and Galatia . |ne Persian Empire |The Acnaemenid Persian Emoire, which lasted from the 6th to tne 4tn century Bce, was the worlds Tirst major empire.
It was vast and powerful anc, at its height, stretched from Egypt to northwest India.
Unlike many otner ancient empires, tne Persians snowed respect for the customs of the people they ruled.
He sends ambassadors to all Greek cities, demanding they accept him as king.
Cyrus counterattacks, and eventually conquers Lydia and Lycia . _ 4908cEDefeat at Marathon Darius sends an army by sea to invade Greece.
The walls were decorated with brightly colored glazed bricks and showed an imperial guard of archers as well as mythical animals.
Brau cA © ( ie A “ Seas tarc, , _ — PASTAS ATT \ SNe 4 (/27e 44 URS iat EN its 7) Fi 2 NT ees y pe Heh aii wr At HEIL Le \ GMA aaa EA Fie Wa Bh SOR PAN + 5os'her.
Psamtik is initially well treated, but Is later executed for secretly trying to act against the Persians.
Artaxerxes | The son of Xerxes, Artaxerxes |, allows the Jews to rebuild the Jerusalem Temple, which had been destroyed by the Babylonians.
How the Persians ruled The Persian Empire was too large to be ruled directly by a single king.
The provinces paid tribute to the king, provided soldiers for his armies, and were punished If they rebelled.
At first he does not have the support of the people, but with his loyal army, he is able to suppress any revolts in his first year. aah440 BCE First historian Herodotus, a Greek living in the Persian Empire, writes The Histories, the first-known history book.
He describes the rise of the Persians and the customs within the empire.
Organizing the empire Darius the Great reorganizes government, creating the satrapies , acivil service, anda network of roads for official use.
He issues a gold coin called a daric to be used as money across the empire.
Xerxes II is murdered by his brother Sogdianus, who ts then killed by Ochus.
His great palace has walls covered with stone relief sculptures, showing the citizens of the empire bringing gifts in tribute to him.
The Greeks in Asia Cyrus the Younger tries and fails to seize power from his brother, Artaxerxes II, using 10,000 Greek soldiers.
The eastern Greek cities of the region of lonia rebel against Persian rule.
After the rebels are defeated, Darius vows to ounish Athens and Eretria.
Some yr tomb of Qin Shi Huang, the first are carved from stone, bone, or , emperor of China. f ivory.
Chinese craft Artists of the Shang Dynasty Greek sculpture Sculptors in Greece portray the human body in a lifelike manner never seen before.
Ne “~~ The Thinker Frenchman Auguste Rodin is the most important sculptor in Europe at this time.
This In Britain, sculotors Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore begin to create abstract sculptures and semi-abstract figures inspired by landscape and natural shapes, such as shells and pebbles.
Public sculpture Donatello’s magnificent statue of a pp | ; | Ww horse and rider in Padua is Anish Kapoor's Cloud Gate in Chicago, IL, ~E the first bronze of its kind to be is one of the world’s largest outdoor created since Roman times. sculptures.
Confucianism stressed the importance of education and respect for parents and elders in creating a harmonious society.
The Legalists argued that only strict laws and harsh punishments would make people behave properly.
The First Emperor enforced Legalism, while the Han Dynasty promoted Confucianism.
His coins are (ore (slacwediclselomsierclion olelanliare| circular with a square hole | of books, including ial MishinchaleleleMccecesciitiate alisiKolaloxsue)imtatcu iare aaisuals a square earth encircled by has conquered and works of | the dome of the heavens.
Confucian philosophy and ele\s] IA O@/AlNAKe)dtcesie| ©) ele)aliare| Legalism are permitted.
His reports lead to Han uses the title emperor, Confucianism the state expansion in Central Asia.
I Nexelelameviileit-\mar-laarsre Cai SIEVIOUSINAOIVIESSIAVE ALES China.
To later generations, Lun manufactures the first ate\iehel-\-lalelelele)iaitcvenele the book will be known paper, from bark and rags.
The emperor believed that these soldiers would protect him in the afterlife.
Jimekeeping became more accurate with tne Invention of mecnanical clocks about /OO years ago. loday, we measure time In fractions of seconds and nave instant access to digital ClOCKS ON Our Computers and pnones.
Water clocks People in Egypt use water drips out of the bottom | container, clocks.
Water a small hole in of aconica causing the wa ter level to nside the drop.
Markers | how much container show ed. time has pass _ The first Wristwatc EMS of jewelry PR PAI+ @, OSs Ax... » ¥ 1 lO OU cs S Page 1524 Pocket watch German clockmaker Peter Henlein makes mechanical clocks that are small enough to fit into pockets.
They are driven clock’s wheels as it unwinds. by a steel spring that turns the remaining five days were considered unlucky days.
The 20 days of a month were represented by 20 symbols around the central face.
Seq NU ISEBJe} Bul LO OUO DATeSID SUBLUOY JUsIOUe OU} 4 pov” WOW UBLUOY 8u | of y, Pe oe O75 ys e t 1 ro 4 ie r ‘ a ¥ © iy ; &. i < i Roman tecnnology Under the Romans, Europe and tne Mediterranean world Saw great technological advances.
Often the Romans Used the inventions of earlier oeoples, but on a greater Scale.
For example, they did not invent arches, but Used them for support in many buildings. | hanks to arches, mass-produced oricks, and concrete, the Romans constructed hundreds of massive structures, many of which remain Standing today.
Hot air from a furnace is fed through the space under a raised floor that is Supported on columns of tiles.
Sol se Ca al Measuring tools The Romans were able to plot the routes of dead-straight, long-distance roads and figure out the precise yet incredibly gentle slope of aqueducts that carried water for many miles.
Before these structures were built, surveyors used simple tools to make careful measurements.
Measuring slopes The chorobates was a wooden table witha trough on top, filled with water.
Keeping the water level allowed surveyors to check that structures were built to the right height.
Planning roads Roman surveyors ensured roads were straight by using a tool called a groma.
This had across with weights hanging from it that helped keep it upright and level when lining up distant points. gy, Hero in.
Engine INVe tsa O O °F Sphey; Pe (Cong; that sping act Water boijgy Sop So Steam eo ""Und whe, Oe.
Man tO Merge ‘ Sg o4 two No S from A Muss Tiny, re) United States %8 5 “Soy” es ‘ 39 Aanyusod “QWOP 810J0U0D DSOJOJUIBJUN ISEH se] S PLIOM 9] SUIEWAJ PUB SPUE}S |II1S QWOP 9]9JOUOD $}| ‘AWOH Ul 9/dW9d] & ‘UOdUIUCY 8] Spying UBLIDEH JOJOdWda UBLOY oy | UODYU}]UP gd The Colosseum The Romans built amphitheaters to watch gladiators fight.
Unlike earlier amphitheaters, which were dug out of hillsides, the Colosseum in Rome was a freestanding structure, with three stories supported by 80 arches made of brick and concrete.
Buddhism In eastern India, a wealthy prince named Siddhartha Gautama renounces luxury and embarks on a quest to overcome human suffering.
He becomes known as Buddha and dedicates his life to guiding others, founding the religion of Buddhism.
Zoroastrianism om centur Ve In Persia , a priest named Zarathustra has a series of visions that inspire a Jainism In northern India, a wandering holy man named Mahavira establishes Jainism.
Followers of the faith, which has no god, reject worldly pleasures and lead nonviolent, vegetarian lives.
Religious Ideas nave existed since orenistoric times, wnen our ancestors began to bury their Confucianism The teachings of Confucius, a Chinese scholar and philosopher, are compiled in five books.
Confucianism is a way Of life based on values such as kindness and respect for family.
Since then, hundreds of religions laa cercere| nme have develooed, many growing from older ones.
Nearly all religions teacn belief in life after deatn, but not all religions involve a Supernatural being SUCN as a god or goddess.
Hinduism Judaism The first major religion based ona single god develops among the Hebrews, a group of seminomadic farmers and herders in Israel.
The Vedas—a collection of hymns and chants that form the oldest texts of Hinduism —are written in northwestern India.
Hindus follow many gods and goddesses and believe in reincarnation after death.
Followers of the ancient religion of Cao Dai after being religion, which is thousands of years contacted by aspirit during a old, worship invisible spirits at seance.
Cao Dai combines shrines, believing them to bring good aspects of Christianity and luck.
Shinto spirits are everywhere, Buddhism and promotes peace, and shrines can be natural features tolerance, and vegetarianism. such as rocks, trees, or mountains.
Daoists believe there is an invisible force —the Dao—running through the Universe and controlling it.
Followers try to live in harmony with this natural force and lead peaceful, unselfish lives.
Baha'is believe in the unity of all religions and the equality of all people, whatever their nationality or faith.
Stcentury © © ® Chinese philosopher Confucius Christianity Islam Sikhism In Judea , the Jewish An Arab merchant, Muhammad, Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, has a preacher Jesus of Nazareth is executed by establishes the religion of Islam after mystical experience after bathing In a river the Roman government, who see him as a an angel appears to him ina series in northwestern India.
Hinduism and begins teaching a new faith forgiveness and peace, give rise to the The angel's commandments are that combines elements of Hinduism and religion of Christianity.
It will eventually soread recorded in the Qur'an, the holy to become the world’s biggest religion.
Sikhs believe in a single god and book that all Muslims follow. reincarnation after death.
Then, on August 24, 79 ce, the mountain unexpectedly erupted, shrouding 15,000 unsuspecting miOlAAclARGllEPAs Alou amersla.daletcromslaremelstouier An active mountain Around 62 cE, the Bay of Naples experiences a series of destructive earthquakes as gas builds up inside Mount Vesuvius.
The violent tremors are felt in the nearby towns of Herculaneum, 4. miles to the west, and Pompeii, 6 miles to the southeast.
Milamaaron elolame)myisicalelaar 18 miles west of Mount Vesuvius, the 18-year-old scholar Pliny the Younger spots a towering cloud rising from the quiet Aalelelaitcliamrelesim-litcim alele): mromesli mere) lUlania of hot ash, rock, and gas rises to more than 12. miles in the sky.
Winds start to carry the super-hot ash and rocks southeast toward Pompeii.
Later, harmful oFeWouslelulaccmicelaamiatcuaulanie)iiaenanelelairclia as lightweight volcanic rock, known as pumice, rains down on the surprised Pompeii citizens.
They start to panic, e)ialemialci|mVscllUlo1em ele \sisiorsss) le) aloerels) they flee toward the beach looking for a way to escape.
MoMialle)@lc\clmelmclsianelale, elUlanlierom el0||Celsmelemlamaxe)aa] els) mere lelsiare olUi Ce lialefsmremexe)i(-le\s\omm Maloucts amicelan miele nil /aV, galelelaltcliane).<ccneleimiarcnelelan-lalemialcist-\Vae)i INFele)[crsme(cts\erorale lsu lalienclancrclaivaalle| alam mals iiareneleiieliaressele the panic as citizens gather at the shore.
WMalsullelalavusselaimelelpaliexcmilerciecnlamialcmclicle aatcldiarepimarslcemie)mial-me)V1/ to flee the horror.
The dust settles OW <iaallelaimstaremiaiconial-nel-ladalcrssonelire| Vo) a0]e)sanes(elele| collapses several times, launching more terrifying pyroclastic flows down from the gaelUlaltcliaMm MAlismilaalomualonaclisvenalcrcle southeast toward Pompelil, adding to the dalelU iste late sne)mVdleldlantsmuarclmatc\omcllasrclOny ele /atsi aise Ma wall @\ansalom Cole] ales) ar-lalemualelursy-larers O)MSIUIAVANLO) aH AlerlONlaltclalenc\Vc\VMiceaamialomiloiays disaster.
As they look back into the bay, they notice that Herculaneum has vanished, olUlamolonim mevm-lciamelelanliersy and volcanic rock.
The Bay of Naples is shrouded in darkness for several days as the volcanic cloud finally settles, and Mount Vesuvius Is quiet once more.
Rulers and royalty The first zoo The first historically recorded ZOO Is created in the Egyptian city of Nekhen.
Visitors come to see baboons, leopards, hippos, gazelles, and crocodiles.
The mummified remains of these animals will be discovered thousands of years later.
Many museums begin as private collections of art or artifacts displayed in wealthy homes. also created spectacular shows to reflect their own oower and wealth.
Singing and storytelling have been important for along time in many cultures, O and theaters and music halls out performers on Stage In front of paying audiences.
Over the centuries, millions of people nave gathered to enjoy the greatest snows on tne planet.
Opera house The world’s oldest opera house opens in the Italian city of Naples.
The Real Teatro Di San Carlo showcases the work of leading composers, orchestras, and singers.
The building later survives a fire and bombings during World War “A > @ >< Circus English stunt rider Philip Astley holds a horse show, performing tricks inside a ring.
Eventually, he adds clowns, musicians, and other performers, resulting in circus.
When the first colored \ fireworks are invented in Italy in the 1830s, public displays become even more ames Pe] 2 Big screens The first public cinema screening shown to a paying audience is presented by the French brothers Auguste and Louis Lumiere in Paris, France.
World’s Fair The first international World's Fair is held at the Crystal Palace in London.
Industrial, scientific, and cultural exhibits are displayed for months at a time.
Public aquarium The world's first public aquarium, called The Fish House, opens at the London Zoo.
The to watch a variety of dance, In Mayan culture, there Is a games are watched by up to theater, and musical festival every 20 days.
The classical music crowds gather at the local continue to be held until and dance styles from this era | central plaza for religious the 5th century. rituals, live music, and intricate dances.
Performers entertain are still practiced in Asia today. the crowds by dressing up as gods and mythical creatures.
Ww Carnival The Globe Theatre Based ona spring festival from Royal festivities The home of Shakespeares plays ancient Greece, the world’s French king Louis XIV stages grand ee ee The see sci, largest carnival celebration entertainment at the Palace of eri ates 1,500 people mn me opens in Brazil.
Inside, while crowds gather outside to million people celebrate on the The program includes operas, enjoy the atmosphere. streets and beaches of Rio de concerts, fireworks, light displays, Janeiro every year. and theater.
Santa Claus Land to promote the equality and rights of performance on Copacabana Beach Radio features rides and attractions with the gay community.
Theme parks celebrations have since been held 3. million people gather there on Reginald A Fessenden soon become popular across the in cities around the world.
New Year's Eve for the free concert. invents an electric generator country, with Disneyland Ee that can produce continuous becoming the world’s leading sound waves.
His first public theme park by the 1950s. radio broadcast is from Brent Rock in Massachusetts on Christmas Eve.
YY Al Kushan Empire , The Kushans, a nomadic people from Central Asia, conquer northwest India and modern-day Afghanistan.
They follow anew form of Buddhism called Mahayana , which spreads to Central and East Asia.
Shunga Empire Brihadratha, the last Mauryan king, Is assassinated by Pushyamitra Shunga, the chief of his guard.
Shunga founds an empire in his own name that covers the central area of the Maurya Empire.
Peace pillars « After conquering Kalinga in eastern India, Ashoka decides to stop waging war.
He sets up pillars across the empire, topped by sculptures of lions, elephants, and bulls.
He also warns those who will rule after him not to conquer new territory.
Bodhi tree The Buddha Is thought to have found enlightenment while sitting under a bodhi tree.
Mauryan expansion °—~ Ss NX Bindusara, the second Mauryanking, © © expands the empire into southern India.
Bindusara maintains good diplomatic relations with the Greeks and enjoys the sweet wine and figs they bring.
Elephant exchange © Chandragupta defeats an invading Macedonian army, led by King Seleucus.
Inspired by Greek art, sculptors in Gandhara make statues of the Buddha, who in previous times had been represented only by symbols such as the dharma wheel. e Southern trade a a 0 | C nt | l val | , 7 Qn, The Satavahana Dynasty reaches its height qj under Gautamiputra Satakarni.
The defeated kings are allowed to continue ruling, but must send tribute to Gupta.
On his inscriptions, he boasts that he is “invincible.” af ‘Classical Age The Gupta Empire is at its peak under Chandra Gupta Il, a patron of art, literature, and science.
It is thought that Kalidasa, the greatest poet and playwright in the Sanskrit language, may have been one of the court poets. “9 e © Math and astronomy » AG Aryabhata, the mathematician-astronomer, writes the Aryabhatiya, the earliest-surviving Indian book about mathematics.
He correctly Bed ees ae a | argues that Earth is a rotating sphere, and that the es Sie fame tens Moon and planets shine because of reflected sunlight. lying on his deathbed.
Indian sculptures Hindu and Buddhist temples throughout the subcontinent are covered with intricate carvings of people, animals, and nature.
The sculptures are full of activity, giving an impression of what life was like in ancient India.
IB y NF | | ne transformation geese” OF THE ROManN EMpire of the sack of Rome, written in 412.
From the 4th century, the Roman Empire started to fall apart as Germanic invaders swept into western Europe.
These / Germanic conquerors establisned new kingdoms tnere, out J oreserved many Roman institutions and customs.
In the Middle East, the new religion of Islam took nold, and scnolars made great strides in the study of matn, astronomy, and medicine.
During this period, advanced cultures alSO appeared across the Americas, Africa, and Southeast Asia.
Chain mail offered protection against blades, and was popular throughout medieval Europe and other parts of the world.
It was cheap enough that soldiers other than knights could afford It, and the mesh made it very flexible and easy to wear.
Hundred Years’ War ends in an Picchu is established settle in New Zealand.
Mongol tribes from northern Asia Trade with North Africa brought invaded as with it the religion of Islam. far as Europe and China.
TeEsi6 © SEM BUIUD Buel SU] JOOUA ‘SSlSCUAD HUOS PU HUe] SU] OULIND S8by USPjOH OM] UONOIU] JUSM CUIUD SEBY USPJOH SeUIUO Jin-China wars Nomads from the Wonder crop north called the Jurchen Jin invade and conquer China adopts a new ee northern China, forcing variety of early ripening the Song Dynasty to rice from Champa move south.
Pete 16 1g “e194 O} 8q ||IM 8H ‘WeUlsl/ WIL S8OJOJ ‘UILWIYS JoJedwy epensued O} sjrej oy YBNoULY ‘We|S| JO JOpeSsequue We Se Cull oO} Aep-uJepow pue ealOy Jo sued pure eis’ je41U9D Bulenbuoo SjoAel} ‘peULUeUN/\ ‘Buozie| JOJedwy se jeudolg Jo sjouN BUlYD sed UILIYS V7 ‘sebben, UI pees poisnbuoo BUIYD UI Wey]s| Bisy je1jue45 I] ‘UOS SIY ""979 uj ‘AiseuAqg Bue] 91 SeUsi|qe1se pue JOJEdWs Se JOMOCd SOye] JOUIOAOB jeuoIBal e ‘UeNA 17 A9punoj Buel early Islamic empires The religion of Islam began early In the 7th century in Arabia in southwest Asia.
According to Its teacnings, tne archangel Jioril first revealed God's Word to the Proonet Munammad.
Within a Nnundred years, Arab armies nad carried tneir religion to otner parts of Asia, North Africa, and spain, creating powertul Islamic empires.
By the time of his death, Muhammad had united the whole of Arabia under Islam.
Geometric patterns Islamic teaching does not allow pictures of humans or animals in holy places.
Mosques and other religious buildings throughout the Islamic world are richly decorated with geometric patterns of tiles. 93 -moires of the Americas aMaromilasimalelantclarseclaaniclem|am@rslalieclnelalemeyelelsaw-~\aal-)alercmaar-lany, thousands of years ago.
There they built thriving civilizations on Siide)ale mcelel are rsidle)alcne mas) ile |lelelsmeloillolkswelalemsl@irclilemeleotnesy These great empires eventually fell at the arclaleicne) im mlb] ge) eler-lamerelale les ae) acy L Nie > ¥@ y iy \ on a Double-headed turquoise serpent Double-headed turquoise serpents were featured in Aztec religious ceremonies.
Bs 9 P stern hb st PP it, y <a ri cae hs & 2s"" Ae 9 ©) ie oH * S VA | 3 ) Human sacrifice People throughout the empires of the ancient Americas believed that their gods desired human sacrifices.
Priests would remove the victim's heart and present it to the gods as an offering.
These sacrifices were usually performed inside temples and on mountaintops.
This image shows an Aztec priest sacrificing two victims to appease the gods.
AFTER The arrival of Soanish conquerors during the 16th century brought an end to the Aztec and Inca Empires.
Driven by greed and with little concern for the natives, the Spanish soon destroyed both civilizations.
Hernan Cortés took over the Aztec Empire, while Francisco Pizarro overthrew the Incas.
Based on late-Roman This is areplica of a helmet that was buried with a 7th century cavalry helmets, its decoration is Germanic in style.
Sutton Hoo helmet P f Last Western emperor The last Wester Emperor, Romulus n Roman Augustulus, is overthrown b y Odoacer, a ho makes Germanic chieftain w himself king of ltaly.
BEFORE | Vikings found Dublin As the Western Roman Empire _ Charlemagne crowned | After raiding Ireland, the broke apart, Germanic invaders | In Rome, Pope Leo Ill crowns the | Vikings build a fortified camp founded new kingdoms across Frankish King Charlemagne as by the Liffey River.
Their the first Holy Roman Emperor. permanent settlement Charlemagne unites much of western Europe in his Carolingian Empire. leaders quickly became Christian, and they gained authority from the Church, which taught that rulers were chosen by God. becomes the town of Dublin.
The Vikings go on to found settlements at Limerick, Wexford, Waterford, and Cork.
BO 405k QO ) S$ The First Crusade | Vd L | Cc) Pope Urban Il proclaims a crusade , against the Muslims, who rule the Middle East.
In 1099, the In Europe, the Medieval period, or Middle Ages, lasted ‘our Chllii,states in the Middle East Om Ine Stn 1 Ine 1S Cenlunes.
This begins the Hanseatic League, a great trading more than acentury of on-and-off association of northern German towns. warfare between England and France.
To earn the pope's pardon, Henry stands barefoot in the snow for three days at Canossa in Italy.
Joan of Arc Joan of Arc, afarmer’s daughter who claims to hear the voices of saints, leads the French to victory over the English.
She Is eventually captured by the English, accused of witchcraft, and burned at the stake for It.
At the end of the 15th century, Medieval Europe Is shaken by a series of events.
Christopher Columbus lands in the Americas in 1492, changing Europeans view of the world.
New theories spread by printing also lead to the rejection of many long-held ideas and beliefs.
However, as the combat-nunary French orepared to charge at the Englisn defenses, tne Englisn KING, Edward Ill, orepared a strategy that would surprise and overwhelm the dominant force of nis attackers.
The Hundred Years’ War In February 1328, the death of the French king Charles IV leads to a Succession dispute between the kingdoms of France and England.
King Philip VI of France lays claim to the throne, as does the English monarch, Edward lll.
This power struggle leads to the beginning of the epic conflict that will become known as the Hundred Years’ War in May 1337.
These include the control of the valuable wool trade and disputes over areas of land.
On June 24, 1340, Edward Ill and his navy are victorious against the cumbersome French fleet at the Battle of Sluys.
The English navy dominates the English Channel, allowing invading forces to be transported efficiently to the continent.
The English invade In July 1346, an invading English army lands in Normandy and takes the town of Caen.
Philip VI rallies his troops and with the assistance of King John of Bohemia, who is blind, and a regiment of around 6,000 mercenary crossbowmen from Genoa, they move north to engage the English.
In August, Edward Ill and his invading army of about 14,000 men gather in preparation for battle on the hills between the towns of Crecy and Wadicourt.
Word of the marching French army arrives, so the English dig trenches and construct staked barricades to protect their position.
Edward Ill orders his knights to dismount, and the English divide into three units of spearmen, knights, and longoowmen.
They are under the command of the king, his son , and the Earl of Northampton.
At noon, a unit of horsemen report back to the king about the English position and recommend that his army rests and attacks the following day.
With dominant numbers and an eagerness to prove the might of their army, the French noblemen persuade Philip VI to attack immediately.
At around 4:00m., as the French army marches toward the English, arainstorm hits the battlefield and the Genoese crossbowmen are unable to shield their crossbows from the pouring rain.
On the hill, the English longobowmen are prepared and protect their bowstrings from the downpour.
The crossbowmen launch an attack, but their arrows land short as their range is reduced by their damp weapons.
The French retreat The English longobowmen step forward and bombard the misfiring crossbowmen with their arrows.
Their much greater range and their ability to reload faster creates chaos in the enemy ranks.
Many crossbowmen fall, and in a state of panic, the French army starts to flee the battlefield.
The cowardice of the Genoese Is punished by the mounted French knights who slay their retreating allies.
Again, the English archers bombard their attackers with arrows and many horses tumble, taking their riders with them.
A second charge on the English Is led by blind King John, who Is tied to his horse and pointed in the direction of his foes.
This charge is more successful, beating back the Black Prince's troops, but help from the Earl of Northampton neutralizes the French offensive and the English manage to hold their position.
Victory of the longbowmen Throughout the evening, Edward II watches from the top of the hill as Charge after charge by the French fails to break through his troops’ defenses.
The English longbowmen dominate the battle as more French soldiers fall on the muddy battlefield, including Philips brother Charles II of Alencon.
Just before midnight, the wounded Philip VI abandons the battlefield and seeks refuge at the castle of La Boyes.
The French soldiers and remaining knights follow suit, leaving more than 21,500 dead on the battlefield.
It’s made of solid silver, covered witha found in 2007, more than 1,000 years The coins were found inside a large treasure A huge haul of Viking treasure was after a Viking leader buried it for safekeeping.
Crean call Pope Urban II declares the First Crusade, calling upon European Christian knights to help take Jerusalem from Muslim control.
Hundreds take a holy vow to join the Crusade and wear across as a sign of their commitment.
Capture of Jerusalem The army of the First Crusade sets off in 1096, reaching the walls of Jerusalem three years later. lt captures the city amid terrible scenes of slaughter, and the Crusaders set up four Christian kingdoms in the Middle East.
Second Crusade After a Muslim army captures the Crusader city of Edessa in 1144, a leading French churchman, St.
They defeat a Christian army at the Battle of Hattin, and storm most of the Crusader kingdoms, including Jerusalem. 1187 ey Ti) ee Se iF 6 ee Mee, OR <M ol Third Crusade Led by King Richard | the Lionheart of England and King Philip Il Augustus of France, the Third Crusade recaptures the trading port of Acre from Saladin’s forces, but fails to retake Jerusalem.
Crusader-controlled F thc d conquering the powerful a treaty with the Sultan of Saintly Crusader stronghold in Palestine, falls SAL rusade Muslim state of Egypt.
It marks This crusade sets off to Crusaders are trapped by Jerusalem to the Christians leads two unsuccessful the end of Crusader recapture Jerusalem, but the annual flood of the Nile for a short time. crusades.
Egypt in 1254 during the No further crusades are army reaches the Orthodox seventh Crusade, he dies in organized to Jerusalem.
Christian city of Tunisia in 1270 while on the Constantinople, the capital Eighth Crusade.
From tne 1st century ce, wealthy kingdoms farmers, as well as skilled y . metalworkers of bronze andiron. * emerged here.
The Portuguese were followed by the Spanish, the Dutch, the British, and the French, all conquering separate territories.
Hidden for centuries by jungle, it was rediscovered by Europeans in 1860.
The outer walls represent the edge of the world, and the moat the cosmic ocean.
But In tne late 12tn century, tne elite warrior class Known as the samurai became the real bower behind the throne.
This began a time of contlict between warlords that would only end with the unification of Japan in 1603.
The transfer of power from the emperor's capital at Kyoto is the beginning of an era in which the samurai class would become Japan's military and social elite.
Ashikaga Shogunate Two years after seizing control, Ashikaga Takauji is formally recognized as shogun.
Genko War The Kamakura Shogunate is brought down with the help of one of its former generals, Ashikaga Takaujl.
On both occasions, the kamikaze is credited with saving Japan from foreign invasion.
Firearms Betrayal The first European explorers Oda Nobunaga dies in an attempt by 7 F to reach Japan are Portuguese merchants, one of his own men to seize power.
Shogunate gt Oda Nobunaga brings the ma “AGO Ashikaga Shogunate to an end when he drives the shogun out of Kyoto.
Katana The long, curved, two-handed sword Known as the katana becomes popular among the samurai class.
The katana is worn blade-side up so that it can be drawn and used in one swift movement.
Battle of Sekigahara With this decisive battle, Tokugawa leyasu finally unites Japan under one ruler, finishing the work of Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
Honor and allegiance The samurai class was bound by a strict code called bushido.
In this unwritten set of laws, death was seen as preferable to living without honor and discipline.
In turn, a daimyo Nagashino was forced to give his allegiance to the The combined forces of shogun, the leader of the military government.
Oda Nobunaga and For much of this period, the shogun was the Tokugawa leyasu devastate true ruler of Jaoan—the emperor was a Oda Nobunaga their enemies with powerless figurehead.
As part of his plan to unite innovative firearms tactics Japan under his own rule, that change the face of Oda Nobunaga installs Japanese warfare.
Hel ss creiete ln elimml sie ie) consist of amound topped by a tower , and a yard at the foot of the mound, Roman fort all protected by a wooden fence.
The Roman army construct stone forts, or camps, throughout their empire.
They build them all to asimilar layout, containing barracks, workshops, baths, and stores.
Each fort is called a castrum, which is where the word ‘castle’ comes from. hs ""h) i] Stone keep Castles throughout Europe are now being built of stone.
At first the towers are square in shape, but later they become circular as this means they are more difficult to attack.
Strong defenses Knights returning from the Crusades (see pages 104— 105) bring back new ideas about castle building.
Castles are now built on cliff tops or surrounded by moats © to make them stronger.
They have thick walls, tall towers, Inside the castle and defensive, fortified Castles are home to the lord, his family, and their gatehouses Aaa te servants.
Their huge th —_ stone walls exploit the natural Vauban forts mA features of the land.
They are low in height, and protected by sections called bastions coming off the center.
Japanese castle Rival warlords in Japan build themselves strong castles as symbols of their authority.
These castles are mostly made of wood, standing on tall stone platforms surrounded by rings of moats.
Built for show Castles are now being built for show as much as for defense.
Towers are covered with battlements to make them look PS impressive, and they have round i holes to fire guns through.
Malbork Castle, in present-day Poland, Is built by the Teutonic Knights, a religious crusading order.
Like their ancestors, they were nunting mammotns and other animals, following them along the Siloerian coast and across the land bridge between Asia and North America.
Once in Alaska, over the following thousands of years, these people gradually soread across what is now North America.
JN \VY VY Land bridge During the last Ice Age, Asia and America are connected by aflat, grassy, treeless landscape called Beringia.
Hungry humans Home in Beringia People make their homes in Beringia for generations.
According to some scientists, they are trapped there by huge ice sheets, but when the Ice hunt animals and follow melts, they will move south them across the tundra. into modern-day Canada Some historians believe and the US. people also arrive by boat.
Amazing maize In the Eastern Woodlands (a large part of modern-day eastern Canada), people hunt, fish, and gather, while in the desert regions of the Southwest, people learn how to grow corn and other crops.
Crowfoot Chief Siksika Bridge closed Sea levels start to rise and Beringia is submerged.
AS JN \Y VA Moving south Hunters spread throughout the North American grasslands into the American Southwest.
But skilful sailors In the Pacific Ocean made voyages of up to 3,000 miles to settle on tiny islands.
People can travel to these new regions by acombination of sailing and walking. 1600-500 sce Lapita people The Lapita people spread through Micronesia and part of Polynesia.
All of the Pacific voyagers use canoes that have one or more supports, called outriggers.
On densely populated islands, such as Tahiti and Hawaii, chiefs have great power, receiving tribute and labor from ordinary people.
More equal societies are created on the thinly populated smaller islands.
Modern-day experiments show they were probably transported upright from quarries using ropes and log rollers.
By 1300 ce, Polynesians nad settled a vast area of the Pacific, from the Hawaiian Islands to New Zealand and Easter Island.
Wnen Europeans arrived later, they were amazed to find such widespread Islands inhabited by Polynesians.
Re One “ wes >» 7 1722 Easter Island visit Jacob Roggeveen from the Netherlands is the first European to visit Easter Island.
He finds a thriving society, where the Moai are still standing, and people are still using Canoes.
At first, he that the islanders used the Sun, is attacked by warriors In war Moon, and stars to navigate, and canoes, but the Tahitians soon gains very valuable information make peace.
Easter Island society had collapsed — one theory states that the islanders way of life ruined the island’s environment.
During this time, France colonizes Tahiti, and Fiji, Kiribati, and Tuvalu come under British control.
By 1900, the United States controls Hawaii, and 1835 Massacre Germany has claimed Samoa.
The Chatham Islands, where they kill treaty brings the country into or enslave the local population. the British Empire.
Benin queen The palace craftworkers of Benin in West Africa Songhai Empire Reign of Sunni All, founder of the Songhai Empire.
With Ben; Rej nin E . his 1468 conquest of i Ob 7; nbir e Timbuktu, he takes over the Se ae founder io Ewuare m Mali Empire, and controls “Ware he enin e trade along the Niger River with a fleet of ships. made bronze and brass busts of rulers, Such as this 17th-century warrior queen, Idia.
ARE Oe & ere 1464-1492 —_, . — Yi — an aw Askia the Great Reign of Askia the Great, whose conquests make the Songhai Empire the largest state in West African history.
He creates a centralized state with a professional army, which |s later able to fight and defeat European forces.
This begins a “scramble for Africa’ among the European powers, which ends in the conquest of all the African states, except for Liberia and Ethiopia. and empires rise and fall.
While ordinary Africans were mostly farmers, the wealth of the kingdoms was based on trade, mostly of gold, ivory, salt, and slaves. [rade was conducted across the sanara by camel caravans, and by boat along the Sub-sanaran Africa has seen a series of powerful kingdoms great rivers such as the Niger and the Congo.
African kingdoms —6 |}ne Mongol Empire Jne nomadic trioes known as the Mongols joined together to bulla the largest land empire in history, stretching across Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. [ne founder of tne empire was tne Invincible Genghis Knan.
He was skilled in military Strategy and led his army, which consisted almost entirely of horsemen armed with bows and arrows, to many victories.
Horse trouble Genghis's horsemen lead his rise to oower, but in early 1227, he falls off of his horse.
After his clan 79 with bows and arrows, modern-day Russia) becomes leaves his family to fend for themselves targets China.
It is Known or else starve to death, Temujin goes on to the Xi Xia Empire in central as the Golden Horde, perhaps gather his own tribe of followers.
China, then attack the Jin because of the Mongol rulers 99 Dynasty of the north.
Postal system Genghis and his warrior Arrows in warfare leaders across the huge ' new empire need to Mongol warriors fill the skies communicate with each with deadly arrows.
These can other quickly, so they set up hit targets up to 1050 ft a relay messenger and away, and so the victims never delivery service called Yam, see them coming.
Hollow meaning “checkpoint.” whistle arrows sing like flutes, so commanders can send signals to troops across a noisy battlefield.
One by one, new territories fall, but when he hears about his uncle Ogedei'’s death, he gives up his quest.
Genghis Khan . ee & founder of the Mongol Empire ] L499) trhiher OD ae.
Three invasions fail, but the Tran Dynasty rulers decide to surrender anyway, in order to put an end to the fighting.
The Silk Road and the Pax Mongolica An ancient network of routes, known as the Silk Road, connected travelers and traders from East Asia to the West.
When the Mongols took control of this route at the beginning of the 18th century, they made sure people could travel safely.
These pests carried the Plague from the East to Europe, wiping out about 25 percent of the population.
The Mamluks of Egypt under their general, Baybars, work outa clever strategy to outsmart the Mongols.
The underdogs win at the Battle of Ain Jalut, which ends the Mongol expansion to the east.
In China, he founds the Yuan Dynasty and Is the country’s first non-Chinese ruler.
Intheir last big show of military ‘| power, Kublai’s forces attack 5 southern China.
They capture _ most of the territory and ~ Kublai brings nearly all of China together.
On the ground, his army throws grenades— metal jars filled with gunpowder.
Ina second invasion, typhoon winds wreck most of Khan’s Venice, Alexandriae EXTENT OF THE MONGOL EMPIRE, 1279, SHOWING THE SILK ROUTE fleet.
End of rule in China The Mongols are harsh rulers, and a series of natural disasters make things even worse for the Chinese.
Robert Louis Stevenson Essays in the Art of Writing, 1905 Maos and mapomakino | he earliest maps did not portray the world as It was, but instead reflected the beliefs of those who made them.
AS people learned more about tne world around them, maos became more realistic.
By the Age of Exploration In Europe, maomaking, or cartography, was used extensively by ocean explorers to ‘a, Chart unfamiliar shores. loday, advances In modern technology ensure that no part of Earths Surface remains unmapped.
In 1569, Gerardus Mercator devised a projection that still dominates the way we see the shape of the world.
His projection exaggerates the size of countries near the poles at the expense of those at the Equator.
Although several Infectious Illnesses remain oroblematic, modern medicine nas wioed out many threats to human neath.
Communalliving As people begin living in towns and villages, Mexican epidemic When the New World Is invaded by Spanish and Portuguese explorers, local people are exposed to new diseases.
A smalloox epidemic kills many millions of people in what is now Mexico and the Andes over the next 2 years.
Cramped conditions and First cases of poor sanitation help the bubonic plague diseases to spread.
A mysterious disease Is first With limited medical Rat fleas were reported in China.
Symptoms are knowledge, people blame responsible for bleeding sores, high temperature, evil spirits or angry gods. spreading many and vomiting, leading to a rapid historic plagues.
Antonine Plague This Roman plague takes its name from Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the ruler at the time.
About 5 million die over 15 years, and experts now believe the disease was smallpox.
Plague of Justinian Disease spreads through the city of Constantinople (now Istanbul), killing 40 percent of the population.
It had been carried over by rats coming Ancient plague over from Egypt on grain ships.
The city of Athens in ancient Greece is hit by a plague that kills more than 30,000 people.
The writer Thucydides describes terrible symptoms that lead to death within a week. and painful death. ys ae es we ter SS The Black Death The bubonic plague, or Black Death, wipes out half the population of Europe (around 40 million people) in just 4 years.
As the city is rebuilt following the Great Fire of London a year later, rules are introduced to improve sanitation and congestion.
They believed these would restrict contact with the di eee Ebola outbreak Ebola Is a fast-spreading Life-saving discovery virus causing fever and Scottish scientist Alexander bleeding.
An outbreak Fleming accidentally discovers starts in Guinea, and soon penicillin, which becomes the becomes a 3-year first ever antibiotic.
This epidemic throughout discovery saves millions of West Africa. people from bacterial infections Final outbreak that would once have been fatal.
The bubonic plague hits Europe again, this time in the busy port of Marseille in France.
Doctors and surgeons begin washing their hands to stop infections from spreading, and sanitation standards improve.
The outbreak begins in India, arrives in Europe on merchant ships, and later reaches the Americas. —— HIV/AIDS anges A k dj ine Malaria is a killer a ees cin ‘ i een ol a uiaene| Spanish flu starts to spread.
It becomes Meas i . he More deadly than the Black known as AIDS (acquired developed world in the 1980s but still has a devastating impact in Africa and Asia, killing 2 million people every year.
More than 20 million people die from AIDS, but drugs are later developed to control it.
Spread of the Black Death The Black Death quickly made its mark across Europe, Africa, and Asia.
Bacteria contracted from flea bites was the reason for its rapid ASIA spread.
Rats carried fleas along streets and aboard ships, passing the fatal disease to populations far and wide around the world.
Recent studies also suggest that human fleas and body lice helped to spread the epidemic.
AFRICA VWeapons and armor |he earllest weapons and armor were designed to nelo Numans hunt animals, but it is very likely they could have been used to attack humans, too.
Coll Py, ae ae f OF me WF Warhorses The earliest warhorses were used in Europe and Asia about 5,000 years ago.
Using horses in battle became easier when saddles, stirrups, and the horse collar emerged.
Later on, the Mongol Empire's military power rested on the success of its light cavalry and riders, who could fire arrows with great accuracy from horseback.
As developments in distance weapons continued, the use of horses in battle declined.
New inventions and discoveries led to the oirth of modern science, and voyages of discovery sailed to uncharted lands.
European nations built mignty overseas empires to rival the older empires that continued in the Middle East, China, and India.
Michelangelo unveils his statue of David, a masterpiece of the Renaissance.
Backstaff Voyages of discovery throughout this period were made possible by advancements in navigation technology.
It allowed sailors to measure the angle of the Sun or the Moon above the horizon to work out their location.
Colonial America The rise of science Mughal India Qing China European nations such as Spain, A revolution in scientific thought Spread across the Indian The Qing people take control of France, and Britain quickly took followed subcontinent, the Islamic China from the declining Ming control of the lands of the “New the Renaissance.
Inks | | eas | | | & Ot VV & | 1 | | | As far back as the 3rd millenium BceE, the Chinese and Egyptians made inks using soot, water, and gum.
From the | ne technology that allows peoole to write things down i i cacao tn tbe IS as Important as tne invention of scriots and alonabets and tannic acid (taken from growths on themselves.
It is used first to print Clay tablets pictures on silk, and later for words on paper.
The Sumerians of Mesopotamia in modern-day southern Iraq begin to write on soft clay tablets, making marks with a piece of reed.
Modern paper, made from wood pulp, will not be invented until the 1840s.
Writing begins The earliest evidence of Egyptian writing is of hieroglyphs ~ one | Ry nO carved on ivory and ee 1st Century ce oy bone tablets.
Egyptians ie —_— also write on papyrus, using areed brush, with ink made from soot, water, and gum from trees.
Each book is called a codex, and is more portable and easier to use than along scroll.
Parchment Writing on parchment made from dried, stretched animal skin becomes common across the eastern Mediterranean.
It is made of powdered graphite mixed with clay, pressed between two half cylinders of wood.
Moveable type In China, Bi Sheng invents the first printing system to use movable type, where each letter or symbol can be moved and reused to make different words.
People can now type onto a digital screen instead of directly onto paper. a 9 G Personal printers The United States company HewlettPackard produce their first desktop laser printer.
It allows individuals with word processor programs to produce high-quality printed documents on demand.
Gutenberg’s printing press In Germany, Johannes Gutenberg invents a printing oress with moveable metal type, using oil-based ink.
The oress rapidly soreads across Europe and, by 1500, 20 million books will have been printed.
SNios |ne oceans were first navigated by ancient people on wooden rafts.
Travelers from Asia arrived in Australia on rafts around 50,000 years ago.
Steam powers the — engines, and giant paddle wheels propel the boats through the water.
Setting sail The first boats to replace rafts are built by the ancient Egyptians for transporting cargo along the Nile.
These fast-moving ships have multiple sails and narrow hulls ae to cruise the waters faster.
The Chinese equipped with multiple sails and feature overlapping planks for junk— Malayan for “boat” —has a oars. [hese warships feature a superior strength, sturdy bases strong hull, multiple masts, and heavy beam, called a battering called keels, and carvings of scary concertina sails.
Giotto di Bondone (knownas _ : “Giotto”) begins painting ina . yo 4."" more realistic style.
Classical revival in Constantinople (modernay Istanbul), capital of the be Empire, is captured by the Ottomans, many scholars flee to Italy.
They bring along ancient Greek and Roman texts, which shave long been lost in the West.
It is carved froma single with mechanical wings, block of marble and is more than even if it could never 17 ft high. work in practice.
The term “Machiavellian, from the author's name, comes to be associated with gaining political power by clever but dishonest methods.
Philosophy lessons The artist Raphael paints The School of Athens, a fresco for the Pope's rooms in the Vatican in Rome.
He uses his vast wealth to soonsor great artists such as Sandro la 14th-century mer. ode Italy, el Botticelli and Michelangelo. ; number of artists, arcnitects, and scnolars became Interested In tne Styles and Ideas of Ancient Greece and Rome.
Sar jf Painting moved away trom the sti inven Ba forms of medieval Christian art to Teicical texts cae —— a more realistic style.
The colors sink in, allowing a Northern Renaissance The Renaissance spreads from ltaly to influence art and literature across Europe. [he Ambassadors by German artist Hans Holbein, then working in England, is one of the greatest works of the Northern Renaissance. f the pictures to stay very bright for hundreds of years.
Led by Vasco da Gama, with the help of his brother Paulo, the expedition heads south down the west coast of Africa.
Da Gama follows a similar route that was plotted by the great Portuguese sailor Bartolomeu Dias, but instead of closely following the west coast, da Gama heads out into the open Atlantic Ocean.
After four months at sea and using the Atlantic's strong prevailing winds and currents, da Gama passes the Cape of Good Hope, rounds the tip of southern Africa, and sails into the unknown waters of the Indian Ocean beyond.
African enemies In December 1497, da Gamass fleet heads north along the east coast of Africa, and makes landfall in Mozambique.
Da Gama and his men are met with hostility from the local Muslim sultan.
After fleeing to his ship and bombarding the port, da Gama then heads north along the coast to Mombasa.
Da Gama loots several unarmed Arab trading vessels and angers the local Mombasa people.
After torturing several Muslim sailors, da Gama learns of a plot to avenge his actions in Mozambique, so he flees north to continue his search for India.
Unchartered waters In April 1498, da Gama keeps heading north and finally makes an ally at the port of Malindi on April 14.
Malindi is at war with Mombasa, and its leader offers to help da Gama with his expedition.
Da Gama and Malindi sign a trade treaty and, as a sign of friendship, the east Africans give da Gama a local navigator to help the Portuguese fleet through the unchartered and treacherous waters of the Indian Ocean.
Indian shores On May 20, after several weeks crossing the Indian Ocean and more than 10 months at sea, Vasco da Gama and his fleet sail into the port of Calicut (modern-day Kallicote) on the southwest coast of India.
The Zamorin is unimpressed with the oresents and, as tensions rise between the local Muslim traders and the Christian explorers, the Hindu ruler becomes less receptive to da Gama’s trade offerings.
After three months, in August 1498, da Gama and his men leave without a trade agreement, but carrying cargo worth nearly 60 times the cost of the expedition.
Homeward bound The journey home is ill-fated as monsoons, scurvy, and exhaustion take their toll on da Gama’s crew.
In September 14939, two years and 24,000 miles after he first left home, Vasco da Gama sails into the port of Lisbon.
To celebrate his historic achievement, the king of Portugal honors Vasco da Gama with the title “Admiral of the Indian Seas.” rv “ -, Ss ah ss . —e — iS ee Sy Re Se Se WE, f . is A return to India After Vasco da Gamass first expedition, Pedro Alvares Cabral, a Portuguese navigator and explorer, is immediately sent to establish a trading post in India.
However, an uprising by local Muslim traders destroys the encampment and Cabral is forced to leave.
In 1502, da Gama sets sail for India for asecond time to re-establish Portugal's trading post in the region.
This time da Gama uses excessive force to persuade the Zamorin of Calicut to sign a trade treaty.
Da Gamais seen as a villain in the Indian Ocean, but when he returns home once again with more precious cargo, he Is celebrated as ahero.
Twenty-two years later, in 1524, Vasco da Gama makes his final journey to India, which also happens to be his last-ever voyage.
He arrives at Cochin in India, but eventually dies on December 24, 1524.
In the past, they painted them directly onto the walls of tneir caves, temples, or nouses.
Artists nave since experimented with different styles of painting. [hey developed viorant paints and created engaging images on paper and canvas.
Painters continue to be Inspired and influenced by artists from the past.
The Arnolfini Portrait by Jan van Eyck, 1434 Baroque painting Renaissance masterpiece Painting with oils Dramatic use of light and shade ltalian Renaissance painter Leonardo da Oil paints, made by mixing pigments with and depth perspective are Vinci paints the Mona Lisa, a hauntingly flaxseed or walnut oil, are introduced in typical of the Baroque style of art.
Hasan, C1610 Mughal miniatures Dutch Golden Age As the Mughal Empire flourishes in India, Rembrandt van Rijn is the most famous miniature paintings full of color and painter of the Dutch Golden Age, a time of detail become popular.
His painting book Illustrations, personal portraits, or for The Night Watch Is characteristic of art at Keeping in art aloums. the time, full of color and realistic detail.
American Modernist artist, best reality, finding a new kind of art that reflects He enjoys painting friends and family, and Known for her studies of flowers and the changes that are occurring in science exploring how to paint skin tones, such as cityscapes such as East River from and technology.
They use simple shapes, in this portrait, Woman with Eyes Closed. the 30th Story of the Shelton Hotel. colors, and lines to create effects.
They are common in the Eastern Orthodox Christian Church, a Catholic religion practiced in Eastern Europe and Asia.
The Death of General Wolfe 3,000-300 sce Sennefer’s burial ——\ A OSS chamber Portrait of Venus Pye Nobleman Sennefer is This wall painting . depicted with his wife. was buried during the eruption of Mount Egyptian tomb painting In Ancient Egypt, paintings cover the walls and ceilings of the tombs of pharaohs and nobles.
Deceased people are portrayed performing everyday tasks or making offerings to the gods.
British painter Turner is admired for his depictions of the shimmering effects of sunlight, as in his 1839 painting The Fighting Temeraire.
They come to be known as Impressionists, and include Monet, Renoir, and Degas.
Sunflowers by Vincent van Gogh, 1888 Post-Impressionism Artists like Van Gogh, Cezanne, and Gauguin add their own ideas to those of the Impressionists.
Conflicts resulted as these settlers and American Indians battled over lana, leadersnip, and local resources.
Almost two million Spaniards moved to the Americas In the 300.years that followed, and Spanish influences are stil present in North, Central, ard South America today.
Silver is shipped back to Spain Weapons mismatch to pay for its wars in Europe.
Spanish colonization Large numbers of Spanish settlers come to South America.
ENOL America, Mexico, and North America. eS a ae “ ys hes SS ee ATLANTIC OCEAN Yucatan een suid Beans as currency > ego Cocoa beans are used like money by both the Maya and the Aztec peoples of Central America. cs Cocoa beans PACIFIC Beans from the cacao tree are aero CEEAN shipped to Spain from the forests Trade triangle of South America.
These are sent to Europe and exchanged for guns and THE SPANISH EMPIRE nails, which are then sold in Africa for slaves.
New foods, . | flowers, and animals arrivefromthe | Hernan Cortés, 1485-1547 Americas.
Sadly, they also bring with » them diseases such as measles, « “smallpox, and influenza. bale Portuguese progress Encomienda In1500, Portuguese navigator Pedro Alvares The Spanish introduce a system called Cabral set sail for India.
Instead of traveling “encomienda, in which settlers receive east, Cabral was blown westward across gold, labor, and land, as long as they protect the American Indians and convert them to the Christian religion. the Atlantic, ending up on the coastline of modern-day Brazil.
He claimed the land for Portugal, beginning a widespread colonization of the country by the Portuguese. ws aod + ig > The slave trade begins s Spain’s King Charles V gives permission for 4,000 Africans to be forcibly brought to the New World to work as slaves in the booming mining and sugar industries.
New foods Pineapples, chiles, potatoes, and turkeys are seen in Europe for the first time.
Those who survive are treated » A » ztec defeat | . like slaves, working long hours in poor conditions for little or no pay.
Father Eusebio Francisco Kino is one of many religious figures Nae to introduce Christianity to the . colonies.
Americas —New Spain, New Granada, Peru, and River Plate — continued to be ruled by Spain.
The Aztecs surrendered on August 13, 1521, when an army of # Spanish and Tlaxaclan warriors, led | % by the Spanish explorer Hernan Cortés, a pa t N captured the Aztec ruler of Tenochtitlan, ., ti sma Cuauhtémoc.
After conquering Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, Selim is acknowledged as caliph in 1517.
End of the Ottomans Ottoman Sul | tanate j Olished and the last ‘ an, Mehmed VI, flees.
How to read a tughra A tughra is read from right to left because it is in the Arabic language.
The words of the sultan’s title, shown here by different colors, have been combined with the shapes that make a tughra, each of which reflects a feature of the Ottoman Empire.
It was used by the sultan as a seal or signature on important documents.
Ziilfe Three S shapes indicate the Key Ottoman winds, which blow @ Mahmud from east to west.
At Its height, It stretched from Eastern Europe and the Black Sea to Arabia and North Africa. [he rulers of the Ottoman Empire were known as sultans.
He regularly attacks Sg ints ""2 convert to the Islamic the neighboring Byzantine religion and to work for the sultan as clerks, soldiers, or bodyguards.
Battle of Ankara The Ottoman Empire almost collapses when the Central Asian ruler Timur defeats Sultan Bayezid | at the Battle Battle of Kosovo Osman’s grandson, Sultan Murad |, leads an army against Prince Lazar of Serbia at the “Field of the of Ankara and takes him _ Blackbirds” (in modern-day 1h Prisoner.
Both leaders are << Timur kept the Sultan ina killed, but the Ottomans win SS golden cage. the battle, giving them control of southeastern Europe.
It is the JUlelelswsiilalemiarcimiarcrelelay largest and best of its r y rather than Earth, is the late Mian sarousiiclaaleniielale a ul center of the Universe.
Many think it was used to mark dalomalsiialemclalemsio1illalep ele )ialisne)miaionelela at the summer and winter solstices.
Hawaii observatory The observatory on top of the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawail is the largest in the world. s[eyets} Distant stars Hans Lippershey of the Netherlands is the first to try to register a telescope design.
This invention reveals that stars are much farther away from Earth siatclamiarcne)iclalcvesulamialcnere)tclm@eNcikolnaF Laie ible. the felisitclalersrs araway galaxies.
These explosions spread material elc@ le ale MialonUlal\Viclesiomiarcimersla form new stars.
He shows @ that all galaxies are moving apart, which aalerelalsmiarclmialom@lal\Viclaciouisuey.<ey-larelialep Supernova A very large red giant explodes.
Black dwarf A white dwarf has no source of energy, so it cools and fades away.
Planetary nebula A red giant from a smaller star creates a glowing shell of gas.
Dig battles Even before the earliest civilizations began, families and tribes went to war with eacn other.
As cities and states aopeared, rose, and fell over many tnousands of years, decisive battles fougnt on land, at sea, and In the air changed the course of nistory again and again.
Salamis Invading Greece, the Persian navy is defeated by the Athenians, led by Themistocles, in a naval battle off Salamis.
The following year, an alliance of Greek cities defeats the Persian army at Plataea.
Gaugamela After invading the Persian Empire, Macedonian Alexander the Great wins a decisive victory over Darius Ill of Persia.
The Persian army greatly outnumbers the Macedonians, but Alexander's men are better trained and led.
Kadesh This great chariot battle Actium is fought between the The Roman politician Octavian defeats his enemies, Egyptian army of Pharaoh Cleopatra of Egypt and Mark Antony, in a naval battle Hameses land the off Greece.
The victory allows Octavian, now renamed hittites, led by Mutawalli ll.
Augustus, to take sole control of the Roman Empire Rameses claims victory in and become emperor of Rome. inscriptions on Egyptian temples, which provide the earliest detailed account of a battle.
Changping The Chinese state of Qin defeats the state of Zhao at Changping.
Mounted Norman knights fight the charging many men that his victory is as bad as At Cannae, he uses Anglo-Saxons, who fight on foot, standing ina a defeat.
French-speaking Normans take victory” to mean a hollow triumph. army of 80,000 Roman soldiers. control of England.
Battle diagrams Battle diagrams have been used throughout history to help plan battles.
Waterloo United States General William Tecumsah Sherman, The troops of British Duke of Wellington speech at the Michigan Military Academy, and Prussian Marshal Blucher defeat June 19, 1879 Napoleon Bonaparte in a major battle that brings the Napoleonic Wars to an end.
Wellington fights a defensive battle, holding off repeated French attacks until Blucher arrives with reinforcements.
TRY £8 we Co Sy ae eh 2% eens) sy Stalingrad The German army fights a major battle to seize the Russian city of Stalingrad.
In November, when the Germans have almost med) ety Gettysburg This three-day battle, the largest ever fought in America, sees the Union captured the city, army of George Meade, the Russians mount aN Fee defeat ez The Somme a counteroffensive.
Robert E Lee, numbering _During World War |, the British and yan 72.000 men.
French launch a major attack, but fail to break through the German lines at the Somme.
The Tet Offensive Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces launch a massive offensive against the cities of South Vietnam.
But in the US, the scale of the attack shakes public support for the war.
Midway The United States defeats Japanina great World War Il ocean battle in the Pacific, fought mostly by planes launched from aircraft carriers.
Japan loses all four of its carriers, while the Americans lose just one.
Lepanto The Holy League, an alliance of Catholic Mediterranean states, wins a great victory over the Ottoman navy (see pages 150— 151), inthe waters off Greece.
The Battle of Lepanto This painting shows the Battle of Lepanto, between the Ottoman Turks and the Holy League of Spain, Venice, Genoa, and the Pope.
The battle took place on October 7, 1571, and was the last battle to be fought entirely from rowing vessels called galleys.
A golden age of peace, prosperity, and production followed, known as the Edo period, which saw new forms of Japanese art flourish.
The major cities of Edo, Kyoto, and Osaka catered for the wealthy, who could spend their money on new entertainments and luxury goods.
BEFORE In 1492, Italian explorer Christopher Columbus reached the Americas, a land mass unknown to Europeans at the time.
After his return, many more people made the journey to this — “New World,’ eventually establishing oermanent settlements there.
Colonial America AS soon as Europeans became aware of the existence of | the Americas, many were eager to visit what they called the | New World.
Lots of people imagined a land of untold riches, / others saw an opportunity for a new life away from religious oersecution. | he lands were already nome to communities of native peoples who suffered displacement and destruction at the nands of European colonists. 1534 aa ee FRENCH JOIN SURGE FOR LAND ACQUISITION acques Cartier first explores the eastern edge of es IS now Canada, going on to 5 aim the land for France.
Lawrence River, in present-day Quebec os French America eventually stretches from the Hudson Bay to the Gulf of Mexico.
In 1590 their Settlement leader | John White returns from a three-year trip back to England to find everyone gone.
Their disappearance remains a Mystery, ; 1607 JAMESTOWN STRUGGLES ON DESPITE HARDSHIP AND DIFFICULTY his Virginia town is the first permanent English settlement in North America.
The colony faces frequent food shortages, especially during the winter of 1609-1610.
Virginia plants the seed fora GOOD HARVEST he Virginia colonists plant cotton seeds for the first time.
Cotton, tobacco, rice, and indigo (a plant used to make blue dye) become the major crops in the southern English colonies.
Upon arrival, they established a settlement and named it Plymouth after the English town that they had sailed from. _—_ — eyetengh jit} "" 4 During the 16th and.th centuries, Europe NiVzckom aalomsieis) alone) i , glelle late revolutionary scientific progress.
Establishedideas . “were rejected and religious thinking was challenged.
The first Cheaper source of labor than American slave-carrier ship, contracted servants, who can Desire, is built here.
Freedom in Canada The Canadian Attorney General says that all former slaves living in Canada are free and will be protected by law.
Uncle Tom’s Cabin and the Abolitionist movement Sojourner Truth The novel Uncle Toms Cabin by Harriet Born into slavery, Sojourner Truth So) SNe SEL eM We TES less End of trade becomes a leading Abolitionist and ol ee, and ies peoples The United States passes a law that takes spokesperson for women’s rights. arid 2 nie s eee nelps We the country out of the slave She gives a famous speech in Ohio eG irccherameae: orgs eae trade.
It sends ships to Africa that highlights the need for rights for to helo rescue slaves from black women as well as men. traders and return them to their homelands.
By anyone arguing for the 19th century, Abolitionists were campaigning to free slavery, | feel astrong all slaves, in the face of opposition from many American impulse to see it tried states.
This resulted in civil war, with the north fighting to on him personally.
It A life of slavery In Virginia, the General Assembly takes a lot of work to grow, so European Ee A passes a law stating that any child born settlers need slave labor to tend the See | to an enslaved mother will also become crops and help them make it protitable.
The Sor yee ye ee so pe oe se Quakers are Christians, who believe in treating others a 5 —_ bar dr ee Fe HE fairly.
Later, the Quaker Church prevents members from wer eeey Lawes. profiting from the slave trade and from owning slaves.
Many more slave Spain and join the Catholic Church. es Re AE EE EE narratives follow, one of the most Many settle in St.
The 13th Amendment to the United States oe yr ye 34 ie oe ye aaieY a ‘ at : is poe oe Constitution brings a permanent end amen : 3 ite ' an en oy ae a‘ ri i ene to slavery in all of the United States, Rae ose their lives . states together. including new territories. ca a a 1863 Slave triangle About 6 million Africans were taken to the ee oe <gerias mee Americas In a triangle of trade.
Ships from eon 4 Britain carried manufactured goods such as iy cloth, ironware, and guns to West Africa.
ATLANTIC 2, AFTER These were exchanged for men, women, and OCEAN a fc lion I feeraaLar is | Z g our million slaves were freed, but the cinlleliern, Tle S248.
These delicate red sandstone cusped arches provide cool shade and calming Berney symmetry around doorways and along ae ai 7 open-sided pavilions Arab ; end SOs.
He executes thousands of officials who are accused of plotting against him.
Lfets) Yongle Emperor The Ming Dynasty is at the height of its power under the Yongle Emperor.
He repairs China's Grand Canal and restores the system of Civil service exams, which the Mongols had discontinued.
Feng Guifen, Chinese reformer, 1861 Ming tombs The Wanli Emperor is buried ina great tomb outside Beijing, which holds thousands of items of silk, porcelain, and jewelry.
The tomb will be excavated in 1956 —the only one of thirteen Ming royal tombs to be excavated to this day.
Last emperor Military revolts lead to the proclamation of a Republic of China under President Sun Yat-sen.
On February 12, 1912, the last Qing emperor, a six-year-old named Puy), abdicates, ending more than 2,000 years of Chinese imperial history.
Dowager Empress Cixi Dowager Empress Cixi controls the Chinese government.
She is traditional and resists attempts to modernize China with Western-style industrial production of ships, railroads, and firearms.
The Ming Great Wall The Great Wall of China that people see today was mostly built between 1570 and 1583.
The rebuilding was overseen by the Ming general Qi Jiguang, who wanted to keep out the Mongols.
Ming ceramics The Ming Dynasty is famous for milky blue and white porcelain, which they oroduced on an industrial scale.
The imperial kilns at Jingdezhen made enough porcelain to supply not just the whole country, but the rest of the world.
In the West, porcelain became so identified with the country that we still call it china.
Following the discovery of atoms, | Slant Kolo fe Wasnelalclaalislisiel komo @)(mc hc IU LON oe ic substances in incredible detall. ®* se ate.
He invents the first carbonated fizzy water after seeing a reaction between gases at alocal brewery.
This marks the startofthe |» atomic theory of the Universe | Clay pieces '« Democritus thought that a piece of claysplit into | smaller and smaller.
RRS eid fs LP | . ; murDIeces would eventually , Fixed air ye "" become So tiny it be Scottish chemist Joseph Black couldnt be divided. | shows that a gas called “fixed air” is exhaled by people.
Made of one part Carbon and two parts oxygen, It becomes Salen Viairstsners la ele) anelle).drels) } | “Chemistry begins tn the stars.
At constant . temperatures, he discovers that ann in¢reasing the pressure on a gas IN squeezes it Else Teg gees HKSAVo) Ul ante Early alchemy Ngele) scientist Ar mtcV4h (store oxo) exe) an] e)(eikers ""experiments ola alate N@rslisviUll Nae) Olio) actu aalelicl ich classifying them inte ver.
It is so'accurate that he leaves gaps in‘the:right places for elements still tobe discovered.
Sorensen (1868sKeKeto) ue) mesitcl are loure) am ole)\\ me)manvielcelel-ian because acidic or alkaline levels depend on hydrogen ions — particles produced by ea atoms.that are electrically charged. tag oP EN oe SMES Al wy Veh pt Lif | Vitierengeice eet HAAN i ose | Newelements "" | The periodic table receives an TH haa) update with the inclusion of ty four new elements, officially A completing the seventh row.
Like many dance styles, it blends African and European influences. | ne story of dance | ne urge to dance |s as old as numan life.
Peoo danced to nonor tneir gods, to celebrate important moments, or simply for the sheer joy of It.
Many Styles of dance nave emerged over the centuries, evolving trom, and comoining, traditional dance steos.
Some forms of dance, such as ballet, take many years of training. is Secret dance Forbidden from following their own customs and traditions, African slaves living in Brazil develop a dance they call the capoeira.
Combining martial arts with music and dance allows them to secretly practice combat moves. vw, ‘S The galliard aa Popular at royal courts throughout Europe Is a lively ~~ ¢ , dance with kicks, leaps, and a 1600 hops, called the galliard.
Queen ——r C er ¢/ \ Elizabeth | of England is said —_ to dance six galliards every morning in order to keep fit.
Classical ballet Se, e 1500s cE Swan Lake is first performed at the Modern dance American |sadora Duncan, a ploneer of modern dance, creates a sensation by performing barefoot and wearing a simple tunic.
Her free, flowing dance movements are supposedly based on classical Greek dance.
Ss 1900 Ballet outrage African highlife A new ballet, The Rite of Spring, causes a near riot at its first performance in Paris.
It stars Russian dancer Vaslav Nijinsky and has music by Igor Stravinsky.
The audience is outraged by the daring choreography and shocking sounds.
Influenced by American jazZ music, it Combines Western dance steps with local rhythms.
It is choreographed by Marius Petipa and features typical elements of classical ballet, such as turnout of the leg from the hip, high leg lifts, and dancing en pointe.
Court ballet King Louis XIV of France, who is himself a ballet dancer, establishes the Royal Academy of Dance in Paris to train dancers are the leads in ballet performances. ts 1661 Ballerina Marie Taglioni dances the ballet La Sylphide “en pointe” (on the tio of the toes), and shortens the length of her skirt to show off her footwork.
Social dances In European high society, men and women dance side by side at balls, ge ¢ seldom touching.
Such dances are often based on traditional country dances. 1700s1775 Flamenco The first written accounts of flamenco, the traditional dance of Andalusia in southern The waltz Spain, date from this time.
The arers ior trenehz These routines involve hand. oe ustria, soreads rapidly wie « through the ballrooms of e~ | flamenco may be much earlier. o ~ Europe.
They bring Hollywood glamour to the world of dance. drying their backs with a towel.
They combine the classical dance traditions of India with the disco dance styles of the West.
The Pirate Round bountiful booty, and cutthroats, swashbucklers, and The Indian Oceanis scriminals sailed the seas in a Golden Age of Piracy. r ihomBetew den dee ~ %. to sail around the Cape of Good Hope in Africa to End of privateering plunder in a route that became known as the some greedy privateers get ' . out of hand, breaking the Pirate Round.
They | home base, giving their _French follow in 1697. shared their proceeds with the crown. protection to the town.
Explorers often pilfered treasures to Soon It Is packed with bring home.
He grinning skull is hoisted over — Mcieval bringin th ee a French pirate ship while it largest city aie joe is being chased by an WE Hemisphere fone eet English navy vessel.
Ihe United States War of Independence was the Tirst in a series of political revolutions In whicn old governments were overthrown and new nations formed.
During the Industrial Revolution, oeople left the countryside and flooded into towns and cities to work in factories. | he steam engine and electricity transformed peoples everyday lives, and offered new modes of transportation sucn as trains and cars.
United States War of Independence. to start a British colony. leading to the Napoleonic Wars.
The rule, leading to a revolutionary that powered the Industrial to establish colonies there.
Latin America The people of Central and South America fought for independence from Spain inaseries of conflicts that saw the end of Spanish colonial rule.
Many American Indians die ina forced march to new territories known as the Trail of Tears.
United States expansion As the United States gained more territory, pioneering settlers moved into the new lands.
The issue of slavery causes a civil war in the United States between the northern and southern states.
Three provinces in North America unite to form the Dominion of Canada within the British Empire.
A meeting between Europe's most powerful nations marks the start of major colonization in Africa.
New Zealand becomes the first country in the world to give women the right to vote.
Newton's work transforms people's understanding of the ohysical universe.
Will of the people In The Social Contract, French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau challenges traditional views of society by arguing that laws are strong only when they are supported by the will of the people who must live under them.
His ideas concerning liberty, government, and the rights of individuals are deeply influenced by Locke, Montesquieu, and other Enlightenment thinkers.
It means that scientists in different countries can be certain that they are describing the same plants.
Wealth of Nations Adam Smith publishes The Wealth of Nations, the first modern book on money matters.
Smith is a leading figure of the Scottish Enlightenment in Edinburgh at atime when the city isa center of scientific and philosophical debate.
Idealism In The Critique of Pure Reason, German thinker Immanuel Kant asks challenging questions about how we think and how we know things.
Useful knowledge Future president Benjamin Franklin founds the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia with the aim of ‘promoting useful Knowledge’ and spreading Enlightenment ideas in North America.
Chemistry French nobleman and scientist Antoine Lavoisier’s Elements of Chemistry lays the foundations for the modern study of the subject.
However, in 1794 he is executed by guillotine during the French Revolution.
The female citizen Playwright and feminist activist Olympe de Gouges oublishes a pamphlet during the French Revolution declaring that women are equal to men and have the same rights of citizenship.
It is 17 books in total and contains thousands of articles by the leading French thinkers of the day.
They are in Many Chu rcones, Chapels, ana cathedrals a celebratory mood as they mark All Saints’ Day in the capital of the kingdom to celebrate All Saints Day.
After midnight mass, King deeo below the waves of the Atlantic Joseph | of Portugal leaves Lisbon with his family to celebrate outside the city.
Large cracks up to 18 ft wide tear across the streets and the religious heart of Lisbon collapses, killing thousands of celebrating churchgoers.
People flee through the shuddering streets, heading toward the seemingly safe harbor to seek refuge on departing boats.
Waves of destruction The people of Lisbon gather at the harbor and witness a curious marine event.
The sea withdraws away from the city, revealing sunken shipwrecks scattered across the exposed seabed.
A series of devastating waves arrive with tremendous impact, flooding the harbor and city streets, and drowning the crowd.
Overcrowded boats traveling out to sea and up the Tagus River capsize as the ocean surge swells the river, killing even more people.
Fires rage As Lisbon crumbles and floods, the religious candles in churches and homes tumble with the falling debris.
Broken buildings block the network of narrow streets and prevent the survivors from putting out the growing flames.
Soon the fires spread Stillness returns On November 6, a stillness falls over the city, the fires burn out, and the survivors of the disaster return to count their dead.
Around 60,000 citizens of Lisbon are estimated to have lost their lives in the catastrophe.
The earthquake was So strong, it was felt throughout Europe and North Africa.
The quake was also destructive In Morocco, where approximately 10,000 people were killed.
The church proclaims the disaster “an act of “* *+amee God’ to punish the sinful.
However, as Lisbon starts to rebuild, people struggle to understand why so many churchgoing people had suffered, and they cant explain what their citizens had done to deserve such dramatic punishment.
It is the largest explosive volcanic eruption in the last 25 million years.
The Great Dying The worst mass extinction in Earth's history—the Great Dying— occurs just before the Age of Dinosaurs.
Around 95 percent of the planet's species vanishes over a period of about 80,000 years.
Pe es VN Dinosaur extinction An asteroid at least 6 miles wide hits the Yucatan Peninsula in Central America, blasting rock into the sky and blocking sunlight for years.
Nearly all large animals are wiped out, including all types of dinosaur except birds.
Greek tragedy Much of the Greek island of Thera is destroyed by a massive volcanic eruption.
The city of Akrotiri is buried under ash, and the eruption triggers tsunamis and earthquakes that devastate surrounding islands.
Toba supervolcano ihe Sha burying the town of Pompeii in ash and killing thousands.
Centuries Hollows in the ash are filled with Lisbon earthquake A catastrophic earthquake hits the city of Lisbon in Portugal, triggering tsunamis and fires that cause further devastation.
Entombed in ash Mount Vesuvius tn Italy erupts, later, the site is rediscovered. plaster, revealing the dead.
The following year, Europe and North America experience a ‘year without summer’, with heavy snow in June, July, and August.
The death toll is very high because the traditional dwellings in the area are artificial caves excavated from loose, dusty soll.
American journalist Charles Kuralt a » 2 we a Ft he ° a > . oy ane ee oo Se Se , “By ae ot. “% ri 7) ae MR Zz nT A a oe oe Natural disasters | he forces of nature that snape our planet can be soectacular In their destructive Dower.
Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, and nurricanes nave occurred tnhrougnout nistory, and their unoredictable fury reminds us that we are small and vulnerable.
But history also shows that these natural onenomena only rarely clash with human populations on a disastrous scale.
Storm surge A massive hurricane hits the village of Coringa on the coast Loudest eruption of India.
It causes a disastrous storm surge, raising sea levels Two-thirds of the island of Krakatoa In by 40 ft and submerging Indonesia Is obliterated by a volcanic the land with seawater.
Around eruption that can be heard more than 300,000 people are killed.,000 miles away, making it the loudest eruption in recorded history.
China floods Heavy rain causes three major 2 Se rivers to flood 70,000 square 7 miles of land ‘ — _inGhina—anareaaboutthesize ‘ bs > of Florida.
Between 1 million and a A million people die. r a ~*~ San Francisco Rohs earthquake Famine in China More than 80 percent of the A prolonged drought in city of San Francisco is northern China leads to destroyed by an earthquake three years of failed crops that kills 3,000 people and and widespread famine. renders most of the city's ce At least 10 million people population homeless.
Chile earthquake Asian tsunami The most powerful An earthquake on the earthquake on record seabed off the coast of hits Chile.
It lasts Sumatra sends a series of 10 minutes, kills several tsunamis across the Indian thousand people, and Ocean, causing devastation leaves 2 million homeless. in Indonesia, Malaysia, r Tsunamis caused by the Thailand, Sri Lanka, and quake hit Hawaii, Japan, India.
European music cevelooed during tne Middle Ages, but other traditions can be traced to mucn earlier dates.
All forms of music are used to express Japanese court music emotion, to mark religious ceremonies or important Officials from Japan travel to China to learn about its culture.
The Japanese events, and, above all, as a Source of pleasure blend Chinese court music with Korean and other Asian styles to create their own classical orchestral music, gagaku. i 7 ee lex fe @~ | tem A eT [NV Gamelan Religious music An Indonesian gamelan orchestra consists of The rise of Christianity metalloohones hit with mallets, spreads music throughout Indian ragas hand-played drums, gongs, and xylophones.
Plainsong (asingle Gamelan music is played in traditional ceremonies unaccompanied melody The Indian classical music and on formal occasions. with free rhythm) is sung in church services.
Ragas are particular patterns of notes, associated with certain moods and times of day.
LU 20. i 1894 z a 1930s 1. ee et, ee *~° y | T 7... ee ee ee ee ee ee Modern music Jazz Age Umm Kulthum Rock and Roll Frenchman Claude America’s new musIc, jazZ, Egyptian Umm Guitar-based popular Debussy composes becomes more popular.
It Kulthum sings in the music, Known as “Rock Prelude a /apres-midi dun is a blend of African and first broadcast on and Roll,’ emerges in faune, which is considered to be the start European styles, and Radio Cairo.
His works use features improvisation, expressive vocal style stars of performers new kinds of harmony, and create moods where performers each makes her one of the such as Bill Haley & His and atmospheres, like the art movement play the music in their most popular artists of Comets, Elvis Presley, known as Impressionism . own unscripted way. the Arab world. and Chuck Berry.
Johann Sebastian Bach German composer Bach is considered one of the greatest of the Baroque era.
Bach is the master of “counterpoint, where different melodies are weaved together.
Ludwig van Beethoven German composer Beethoven writes his Ninth Symphony, which revolutionizes this type of Clara Schumann orchestral piece by including the human voice.
Despite being totally Influential German Clara Schumann deaf he conducts its first is one of the most respected pianists performance.
He has to be turned of the Romantic ies she has a 60year career at a time when women around to see the enthusiastic applause from the audience. rarely perform in public.
Works of this period are longer, richer in | . “ sound, and full of emotion.
Lana 1762 ; s[oyotom 1819Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Gifted Austrian pianist Mozart begins a concert tour of Europe at the age of six.
He becomes one of the leading composers of the Classical period, in which music has anew simplicity.
His many works include the operas Don Giovanni, The Marriage of Figaro, and The Magic Flute.
Chinese opera Emperor Xuanzong founds the first opera school in China, called the Pear Garden.
Developments in instrument-making, and the availability of printed music, allow more people to play music.
The stave The stave Is a set of five horizontal lines that Western composers use to write their music.
British pop group The Beatles Pop singer Beyonce's popularity attract huge crowds wherever makes her the highest-paid black they go, and 73 million musician in history.
Her album oeople watch them on Lemonade encompasses a The Ed Sullivan Show. range of musical styles, Fans often scream such as reggae, hip hop, and faint at their and funk.
Czar Alexander Il, March 30, 1856 “It is better to begin to abolish Yo) acelolemmineleneslelel ** ¥ of the United States a Ralsw-\aalslalerclanm, ore laalomice)anme| Ken iviiale mis) arsilelatsmelcialicisla the residents of the 13 colonies (see orclelstomlol@miiolp mclalomialsiimsiaidicianaeliclacy i Rarsonere)@)alisikcmliclaouelalarcle)e)yactelelel BIAiUSiam ich dorswclalemisiimuarcimaals V5]aalaalcialmellelanm cess) el-rert their rights.
General Washington The Second Continental Congress names George Washington as Commander of the Continental Army, which will become the foundation of the United States army.
Independence On July 4, the Second Continental Congress votes to adopt the Declaration of Independence, which announces that the 13 American colonies now see themselves as independent from Britain.
This inflames anti-British feeling, giving the patriots (who oppose British rule) a boost of support.
The first conflicts of the Revolutionary War take place in the towns of Lexington and Concord.
British troops try to capture and destroy the colonists supply of weapons, but the colonists have been warned of the attack.
Patriot Thomas Paine writes this anonymously published essay in Philadelphia, arguing in favor of American independence.
Every rebel against British rule gets a copy. ~ own Yorktown After a stalemate in the north, the battlefront moves south.
British forces surrender at Yorktown in Virginia, trapped by French warships off the coast and overpowered by the Continental Army.
October American Constitution Representatives of the 13 American states meet to approve an official Constitution.
Called “the supreme law of the land,’ the Constitution establishes the government of the United States.
New capital Washington commissions French architect LEnfant to design a grand city to become the capital of the new nation.
July September May January July 1781 1781 1783 1787 1789 1790 James Armistead Treaty of Paris First United States president Lafayette Born a slave, African-American Armistead works as a spy for the Continental Army.
He will help them to secure a victory at Yorktown. ey EES | 7 pie oe Wh i This treaty formally ends the Revolutionary War and sets the boundaries of the United States.
Britain agrees to recognize United States independence, and British troops leave for home.
United States representatives vote unanimously to elect George Washington as the first United States president.
Crossing the Delaware River On December 25, 1776, George Washington led his troops across the icy Delaware River to deliver a surprise attack on Trenton, New Jersey, captured in this iconic painting.
Washington hoped that a quick victory would boost morale within his army following a series of defeats during the Revolutionary War.
Despite the dangerous conditions, they crossed successfully and marched into Trenton the following morning, achieving an important victory over the troops fighting for Britain.
It brought develooments in technology that revolutionized farming, factories, and travel. | nese changes began In Britain In the 1/60s and rapidly swept across the globe.
Town life The results of the British census show that, for the first time, more people are living and working in towns than in the countryside.
Factory towns British industrialist Richard Arkwright builds a village to house workers for Canal mania his cotton spinning mill in Cromford, Originally built to transport coal from mines England.
It eventually includes a to Manchester, England, the Bridgewater school, market, and church.
The success of this long-distance canal kicks off a period of construction known as canal mania.” ¢ a Power loom British inventor Edmund Cartwright builds the first power loom, a weaving machine that is driven by water instead of workers.
Worker riots Textile laborers attack factories and destroy the machines they fear will replace them.
The Geordie lamp and the Davy lamp 1842: Britain's Mines Act bans are created.
A piece of gauze covers the women and young children lamps flame, preventing explosions. from working underground.
Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel invents dynamite, which provides a safer way to blast holes in mountains or the ground rather than simply lighting black powder.
Dynamite is important in clearing paths to build things such as roads and railroad tracks. ———S SS SSeS Se SBS SR SSS SSS SS Ee SS ee ee eee | ai moo deta O y ; Power stations Worker health Night shift The first central electrical power station Britain’s Public Health Act requires American inventor Thomas Edison creates a light bulb is completed in Deptford, England, due the government to ensure that lasts longer than other designs.
Edison's light to increasing demand for power in that housing and sewer systems bulbs allow factories to continue operating after dark. industrialized central London. are clean and safe.
They take advantage of the sea levels being much lower at this time. 45,000 sce Megafauna More than 85 percent of Australian megafauna (huge mammals) have been wiped out in Australia by this time.
It is likely that humans prey on them, but a change In climate about 70,000 years ago may also have contributed.
These creatures included tortoises as big as a small car and carnivorous kangaroos. 45,000 sce Rock engraving Aboriginal engravings are found on rocks in Murujuga, featuring ancient pictures and symbols of animals, figures, and ceremonies.
Mungo Man's body was carefully laid out, the earliest example of Aboriginal burial traditions.
It is played by blowing into one end of along tube to produce deep, resonant sounds.
Red pigments are made from Iron-rich clays, elalemclkon Cau sialcreme)m ee) isamice)aamialouanleleliamcenere)s the rock surface.
Settling in Australia Life for both jailers and convicts was tough in Australia, especially in the early years of the colony.
At the end of a convict’s sentence (which was usually seven years long), they were given a Certificate of Freedom.
This meant they were allowed to leave to return to Britain, or stay on the colony and start life anew.
Many decided to stay, and as the colony grew, It offered them a better standard of living than they could have hoped for back In Britain. | ne colonization of Australia The first Europeans turned Australia into a jail— a place for British convicts to serve time.
In the orocess, Aboriginal inhabitants of the land were mistreated, a legacy that is still felt today.
Within the first century of settlers arriving, 90 percent of the Aboriginal population will be wiped out by disease and conflict.
Another Dutchman, Abel Tasman, sails around It in 1642, but mistakes it for another place.
Cook maps eastern Australia for the first time, and claims the land for Britain.
From 1822 onward, renewed violence will end in hundreds of Aboriginal casualties.
THE STORMING OF THE BASTILLE A revolution begins During a summer of unrest In 1/789, thousands of angry Frencn people crowded around a fortified orison called the Bastille in eastern Paris. [he Bastilles governor neld firm in his towering stronghola, but the tense standoft turned into a violent battle that would kick-start the French Revolution and end the Kings reign.
A symbol of terror In 1370, during the bloody conflict known as the Hundred Years War, the French king Charles V reinforces Paris's walled defenses and builds the imposing Bastille to guard the capital's eastern approach.
Summer of rebellion Inthe summer of 1789, France is in turmoil as taxes rise and food is in short supply.
French commoners—people who are not members of the aristocracy — demand political change.
In angry opposition to the nearly bankrupt King Louis XVI, they form a revolutionary organization that they call the National Assembly and demand changes to the French constitution.
The search for gunpowder On July 11, 1789, Louis XVI dismisses the finance minister Jacques Necker, who Is seen as sympathetic to the revolutionaries.
French troops move into strategic positions around Paris as the monarchy tries to reinforce its grip on power.
In the early morning of July 14, a mob of commoners loots the Hotel des Invalides, searching for weapons.
Unchallenged, the mob leaves with thousands of rifles but very little gunpowder, rendering the weapons useless.
A firm standoff In the late morning, the mob surrounds the Bastille and demands gunpowder and weapons.
The prison’s governor, the Marquis de Launay, stands firm inside the heavily defended stronghold.
Delegates from the swelling crowd of commoners surrounding the Bastille are turned away by the marquis as the angry governor refuses to listen to the mobs demands.
By early afternoon, with frustration and impatience spreading through the crowd, a small group of raiders gain entry into the prison’s courtyard.
The governor surrenders Fearful of losing his grip on the fortress, the marquis orders his men to fire on the invading force.
The gunfire angers the crowd, and more people join the assault, including defecting French troops.
A battle begins as the mob storms the building, bolstered by several cannons.
The Marquis de Launay, sensing defeat, threatens to light his stock of gunpowder and blow up the Bastille and most of Paris, but the revolutionaries call his bluff.
At 5:00m., as the Bastille’s garrison switches sides, the fortress is lost and the governor Surrenders.
The Bastille—for years a symbol of tyranny and terror—is liberated by the victorious masses.
The few prisoners that were imprisoned are released as the mob loots the armory and gunpowder stores.
Not a rebellion... a revolution The Marquis de Launay is transported to the Hotel de Ville to stand trial, but en route he is captured by the furious crowd and is beaten and killed.
In August 1789, the National Assembly abolishes feudalism — a social system that gives the aristocracy control over commoners.
On September 3, 1791, King Louis XVI is forced to agree toa constitutional monarchy, limiting his powers, but this lasts only a year.
In September 1792, France Is proclaimed a republic, its power held by the people instead of the monarchy.
Bloodletting At this time, it is wrongly thought that having too much blood causes illnesses, SO doctors use Avicenna Persian scholar Ibn Sina, better Hearing heartbeats bloodsucking leeches to Nursing pioneer Known as The first stethoscope Is a remove blood from patients.
British nurse Florence Avicenna, basic wooden tube created Hospitals in London use Nightingale sees soldiers publishes The by French doctor Rene 7 million leeches a year. dying from disease rather medical schools and added to the original design.
Laénnec to listen to than injuries in the military This textbook is heartbeats and breathing. hospitals of the Crimean adopted by many Two earpieces are later War.
She reforms hospital care, improving Survival remains one of the most 1833 rates.
Nursing becomes a important works in the new profession. history of medicine.
He is the first to suggest that diseases arent caused by the supernatural, and stresses the importance of ahealthy diet and regular exercise. disease cowpox to make him immune to the killer disease smallpox.
This is the world’s first vaccination, bringing an end to smallpox in 1979. successful blood transfusion.
Unfortunately, many of the earliest transfusions caused the death of patients. basis of her gender, but she eventually graduates from Geneva Medical College as the first woman with a medical degree.
Instead of bad air being the cause of infections, French microbiologist Louis Pasteur shows that bacteria and other microscopic germs cause disease.
He soon develops vaccinations against the deadly diseases anthrax and rabies. 1890s Sterilization Infection rates drop when surgeons start boiling their instruments to remove bacteria from them.
Body scanner The first full body scanner is designed by American professor Raymond Damadian.
The magnetic resonance imager scanner fertilization . creates a picture of the England's Louise Brown body's internal workings is the world’s first “testusing the principles of tube baby,” born from an magnetism, allowing it to embryo created ina help identify diseases laboratory dish. and trouble spots.
First IVF baby The first baby is born following in vitro Cell division Stem cells have the potential to grow into any Stem cell advances pe oreel Scientific research reveals that stem cells can be altered to become different types of cells.
This Penicillin Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming is studying bacteria in petri dishes when he spots mold growing there.
This mold had killed the surrounding bacteria, and this first antibiotic, Known as penicillin, is mass produced by the late 1940s.
X-rays are still used to locate broken bones and spot problem areas inside the body.
Inthe 19th century, scientists found that an electric shock can start a stopped heart, leading to the invention of the defibrillator—a device that passes an electric current through the heart.
In 1965, British doctor Frank Pantridge designs a defibrillator small enough to fit inside ambulances. breakthrough provides the potential to transplant stem cells to treat a range of blood and bone diseases.
This invention allows scientists to work at the nanoscale, moving even the tiniest atoms.
Tests show the replacement kidney works successfully in rats and pigs, but further research Is needed for humans to receive artificial kidney transplants. | ne Napoleonic Wars Having become Commander of the Frencn army in 1/96, ambitious officer Napoleon Bonaparte led his nation into the French Revolutionary Wars and sougnt to take control of Europe.
Britain and France signed tne Peace of Amiens treaty to end the conflict.
When France falled to keep the agreement, Britain declared war in 1808, marking the start of the bloody Napoleonic Wars.
Emperor of France As the French Republic comes to an end (see page 201), Napoleon announces himself the new emperor at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris.
Battle of Trafalgar At this naval battle off the southwest coast of Spain on October 21st, the French and Spanish navies are beaten by the British navy, led by Admiral Horatio Nelson, who dies while fighting.
Battle of Austerlitz Feeding armies In 1795, Napoleon offers a financial reward for budding inventors to find a way to preserve food for his army.
A French confectioner claims the prize in 1809 for his design for sealed bottles.
One of Napoleon's greatest victories occurs on December 2nd at Austerlitz (in the modern-day Czech Republic), where 68,000 French troops beat the combined forces of nearly 90,000 Austrian and Russian troops.
European Empire Much of Europe is now controlled by Napoleon and the French army.
After 1,000 years, the Holy Roman Empire finally ends as France conquers ltaly and parts of Germany.
The Napoleon and asmall army head for Paris to overthrow King Louis XVIII, who had been restored Hundred Days End of Peninsular War 1814 sees the end of a six-year war, In which the French fought the Spanish, Portuguese, and British for control of the Iberian Peninsula.
French defeat at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813 eventually leads to the end of the war.
Hundred Days sees Bitter end to the throne in 1814. oe ae Failed invasions and battles result in Battle of Napoleon being sent Waterloo into exile for a second The Napoleonic Wars we fica lat ae Invasion i gs eee the remote island of St. of Russia preci Napoleon's Helena before his death.
Napoleon launches a army Is beaten by disastrous invasion the British and Prussian of Russia, so other armies.
King Louis countries declare war XVIll returns to the on the now weakened French throne. only to escap to France seek of Europe again.
His ambitions drove him to military success, but ultimately ended in failure.
Brussels, Napoleon is Ter Bae a a Following six battle of the years In exile, Napoleonic Napoleon dies on May 5th.
JUOS OU} JO ISO JOAO BIN S}] EY} WPS 01 sey pue 9040} Aq eO|OWy Z unos eye}eL 0} sue|d b sy suopuege A\/euly uledS 8 Ye OS ie cy sapeouo0s uledsS 5% @,% ce 2 e % “Oy Yo % %, oo \ yy A <e) Sy % s “S %, a, b 7) Lope xB Soy %, “© % Ye © % ® % 5%"" ©, ""e ae 9Esl % %. 2% (nS SD ; So igi Trains Jrains have come a long way since early horse-drawn wagons. | he first railroads were snort links between neighboring towns.
Whetner going aeeo underground or overnead on monorails, rail iS Now one of the worlds too modes of transportation.
It will travel nearly 1. million miles (2. million km) before retiring in 1963.
Early locomotive English inventor Richard Trevithick develops the first steam locomotive.
Wagonways Basic railroads called wagonways are used for the first time in European mines to transport heavy rock and coal.
Carts are pulled along wooden rails by horses. eee ee sm ¢1550 — Epic railroad Completed in 1904, Russia's Trans-Siberian Railway becomes the world’s longest rail system.
Fastest on wheels At atime when most trains are powered by diesel engines, France's Traina Grande Vitesse service uses electric motors to reach the world’s highest speeds for wheeled trains.
It becomes a byword for luxury travel. igil t Stephenson’s Rocket English engineer Robert Stephenson designs the Rocket, the most advanced steam engine of its day.
First passenger trains The world's first public railroad opens in England.
The Stockton and Darlington Railway carries passengers in horse-drawn carriages at first, but these are replaced with steam locomotives In 1833.
Intercity link The first intercity railroad opens, connecting Liverpool and Manchester in England.
Going underground Transcontinental The world's first underground The First Transcontinental Railroad rail system opens in London, opens in the US, linking the east and with wooden carriages pulled west coasts via a 1,777-mile (2,860by steam engines.
His eons ae by Gea arlus j ians, are use SyStem, leleven United States IMpro eae arovantonicelnanstecelacerclenia modern-day Iraq.
Pen journatie AS empires expanded and Civilizations spread, eNables any ene Wr okexe))manre1salelelsmelms)e)acr-lellale | personay to” 0 upiogs cnn eMOr you news, trom messengers on horseback to town criers. aeees nang Ges sree organ the free a avomlanvislaldcelamevmsarom elalaidialem e)actcrcmanrecelomelaiaiaiare opiculMalism gpACttizen ma PVEage hour nO gale leiameial-r-\e\-)arclalemet< Nien 0-10) alcl maroon a More cone ccomes °8 apps PDhatoy ce v2 daily newspapers before both television and radio —— the Now ayaa Oba brought the news directly into their homes.
As history demonstrates, well-engineered bulldings.can stay standing for centuries.
Sixteen ~~ lt ascends a 1,070 ft nations cooperate to build it. cliff, giving ChannelTunnel ~~ breathtaking views over the sandstone pillars and gorges of the Wuling Mountains.
The Channel Tunnel, the world’s longest » continuous undersea railroad tunnel, opens between England and France.
They were explorers, traopers, tracers, and ordinary oeople. [he frontier ideas of individualism and self-reliance are still influential today.
They will later be joined by Sacagawea, an American Indian woman who will act as an interpreter and guide.
In 1860, the Pony Express mail service completes Its first delivery from St.
The history of the “Wild West” will be full of deadly outlaws and their run-ins with the law.
It joins Sacramento, California to Council Bluffs, lowa (itself connected to the east-coast train lines). ""214 ‘eu Frontier towns As more and more people moved westward, frontier towns such as Tonopah, Nevada spring up all over the west.
In 1876, they inflict a major defeat on the United States army, led by Colonel George Custer, by the Little Bighorn River, Montana.
Frontier wars Almost from the start, relations between European settlers In the United States and American Indian tribes were difficult.
Both cultural differences and the settlers insatiable demand for food and land caused conflict. [he settlers eventually seized the land, but only after a series of bloody wars and massacres.
She marries an Englishman in 1614 and travels to London, England in 1616.
Their long walk will be known as the “Trail of Tears.” —e 1862 Sioux Uprising Broken treaties, hunger, and stress cause the Sioux people to rebel against settlers.
Other native peoples, such as the Arapaho and Cheyenne, soon follow him.
A few tribes go peacefully to the specially designated “Indian territory” across the Mississippi, but many resist.
The situation explodes when the United States army and settlers massacre hundreds of tribespeople in Sand Creek, Colorado.
In France, protestors called for 3 January 12 — economic reform and the right to vote.
In parts of the Austrian Independent state F raosourg Empire, they demanded independence. | neir Following an uprising Siy. whichhasbeenunted wih B_CQVernments promised reforms, but very little changed, | 18 icilla the Kingdom of Naples since ~~ ba fate inde endent state.
Riots in Vienna force Prince Metternich, r Fearing revolution, the Chancellor of Austria and a hated symbol government calls in the army, of repression, to resign.
Hungary demands but the protest is peaceful. independence and Is granted its own parliament.
Written in German by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, it calls for a revolution of the working class.
As copies spread through Europe, it encourages angry people to protest against their governments.
Soldiers fire shots into & Protestors in the German Confederation (an the crowd, killing 52.
The rioters © ~ organization of separate German states) call for overthrow King Louis Philippe and } German national unity.
This map shows the location of the revolutions that are mentioned on this timeline.
KEY Boundary of the German Confederation brutal Stop ‘ t © army puts a ; PRUESA ' 5 Berlin yd Xe, 3 le ¥ Zz POLAND Paris FRANCE 2 Ut ge f & % _ { ay Budapest PAPAL STATES Rome a SEARS KINGDOM Mediterranean 5.
After the army has retaken control, the leaders of the uprising are executed.
H+ Minister assassinated The Pope flees Rome minister of the Papal ace tthe parts of Italy ruled by the Pope) is aSSassinated.
Protesters fill the Streets demanding Social reform and a democratic form of government.
In April 1849, the Frankfurt parliament offers Frederick William | of Prussia the imperial crown of Germany.
He organizes olfelaleseclalemelaliaarslismialce alerse-lalemarelaaess) different species.
The invention helps scientists . ite i a Our interest in the natural world began more than 40,000 5 Wists | acme le OMm\Vialo1am Olas) alisice@) aren elie) e) alee cave walls.
Over time, zoology, the study of animals,and botany, the study of plants, orolanleliatc\enconielgaateualeni) science 2 Save ~ Known as biology.
By studying these © jumping genes, she finds that’ genes can be switched on or off, ~~. changing the characteristics of misono) aap eee.
Today, itis better tp gg known as s deoxyribonucleic Elelle . rey late ats weakest die.
The British Empire ee Britain takes control of The origins of the Britisn Empire were in trade New Zealand with the signing a of the Treaty of Waitangi.
It with the East, but its ambition soon-spread to guarantees thenative Maori ; thei other areas of the world.
Over time, its mission Enteg GetA TACO their rights of sovereignty. expanded beyond commerce to total political control, eventually making It the largest empire In history.
But the empire went into decline after World Warl, wnen it became clear that oeople were no longer willing to accept British rule.
Queen Victoria becomes Empress of India in 1870, although she never visits.
South African War ™~ The Boers, settlers of Dutch descent, fight a bitter war against Britain for control of lands in Transvaal.
From there, it uses its private turns global as fighting spreads The 13 colonies in North army of Indian soldiers, called “sepoys,” to overseas colonies.
At the end America revolt against British — «— vc | | to take control of much of India. of the war, Britain gains New rule.
They declare their YY a Vv independence on July 4, leading to the creation of the United States of America.
By the midThe British seize the Cape of Good 1800s, there are nearly 400,000 Hope on the southern tip of Africa, settlers in Australia. which has been a Dutch colony since 1652.
They will lose it again, but win it Singapore back in 1806, when it then becomes Sees nae ae the first British presence tn Africa.
Raffles founds a trading port on the island of Singapore in Southeast Asia, on the main trade route between India and China.
The “Easter Rising” the mainly Hindu India, and Pakistan, which is quickly put down, but the fight World War | is mainly Muslim.
The Irish settlements known, forces millions of people to migrate, -| Ea Free State, forerunner of the Republic | leading to riots and thousands of deaths. — ea of Ireland, will be founded in 1922.
AFTER Nearly all Britain's colonies and possessions became independent states between 1957 and 1980.
Many joined the Commonwealth of Nations, a voluntary association of states with previous ties to the empire.
Others operated as individual republics. gba See te i s 1919-1920 |ne American Civil War Years of conflict over slavery and the rights of Individual states eventually led to the American Civil War.
This was more than tne combined total of American soldiers tnat nad died in all otner wars to date.
Belle Boyd Confederate spy Belle Boyd—one of several female spies inthe Civil War— passes on information that helos Confederate general Stonewall Jackson's army recapture Front Royal, Virginia.
Gettysburg This Pennsylvania battle is a turning point, finally ending Confederate hopes of invading the Union states.
Washington States to create their D C. is fortified for own Confederate protection.
In August government, with 1862, the Confederates Jefferson Davis as will win the Second Battle president.
Confederate forces attack Fort Sumter in South Carolina, and the Civil War begins.
After a Union victory, Lincoln introduces the Emancipation Proclamation, an order to free every slave in the Confederate states.
Napoleon Field Gun Named after the French emperor Napoleon Ill, this type of cannon was widely used in the Civil War.
It could hit a target up to 5,250 ft away and fire a cannonball at 1,440 ft per second.
Gettysburg Address President Lincoln delivers Surrender meeting his most famous speech After an attempt to break through at the dedication of the Union lines fails, Confederate soldiers National commander Robert E Lee meets Cemetery in Gettysburg.
Union general Ulysses S Grant at He declares that the Appomattox Court House Civil War Is a struggle for to sign a document of surrender. freedom and equality.
Around half are recaptured, but the others make their way back north. the Union started conscription in March, and people feel the system for drafting men into fighting favors the rich.
The Hunley is the port of Savannah, dies the next morning. as NEW presiden first combat submarine to sink bringing devastation Andrew Johnson an enemy warship, but it doesn’t to Confederate declares the official survive the attack and also sinks. states. end of the Civil War.
Key battles From the first shots to the final surrender, the American Civil War divided the country.
The Union had more soldiers and money, but the Confederates had cunning and strategic generals.
Virginia Fredericksburg April-May 1863 May 1864 This clash between two ironclad This is alow point for the Chancellorsville Spotsylvania ships has plenty of flying Union as the Confederate The outnumbered Confederate Neither side claims victory cannonballs, but no victor. army defeats them. army achieves a strategic win. in this brutal Virginia fight.
April 1862 May — July 1863 July 1864 Shiloh Vicksburg Atlanta The battle blazes for two days in The Union army is victorious as it General Sherman and his troops Tennessee before a Union victory. surrounds this Mississippi town. seize control of this Georgia city.
Aalism ca Colon Air In 1870, althougn tne slave trade [| had ravaged Africa for centuries, European powers controlled just 10 percent of the continent. |ne next SO years saw from local communities.
It would take more than half a century for these countries to gain their indeoendence.
By 1900, they nad seized 90 percent of African land This map shows the domination of European powers in Africa by the end of the 19th century.
France and Britain colonized the largest areas of land across the continent.
Scramble for Africa ~~ Portugal ial Spain a) Belgium i France B® united Kingdom eI Independent a Germany a Italy Stolen treasures British soldiers set the S co Kingdom of 0’ stealing thousands ot local valuables. spreads, Europe to steal trea native Africa bronze carvings an lTelecommunications Communication nas come a long way since ancient times, when messages were sent by smoke Signals, beacons, and carrier pigeons.
With the invention of the telegrapn, teleonone, radio, and the internet, oeople Could send messages and converse across countries, and even continents, for tne first time.
The television transported scenes into the nomes of milllons, Shaping the way oeople spend their free time today.
Electrical messaging Continental cables Tesla’s transmission The invention of an electrical telegraph by British A new era of cross-continent Serbian-American engineer Nikola Tesla is the inventors William Fothergill Cooke and Charles communication dawns when the very first first person to produce and transmit radio Wheatstone makes long-distance messages possible. telegraph cable Is laid across the Atlantic waves.
He is also the brains behind many Electric signals are sent along wires attached to Ocean.
By 1902, cables have been placed inventions, including the electric motors that needle pointers, which can be made to point to under the Pacific Ocean too, allowing power modern machines. specific letters and numbers on a plate to forma telegrams to be sent all around the globe. message. [he messages sent by telegraphs are Known as telegrams.
Morse code American inventor Samuel Morse creates a code to interpret the electric signals being sent along telegraph wires.
It uses different lengths of signal to create patterns of dots and dashes, which represent different letters and numbers.
Radio waves German scientist Heinrich Hertz is the first person to discover radio waves.
He recognizes the potential of these electromagnetic waves to transfer information.
Marconr’s message Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi sets up his own company to investigate radio waves.
He devises Telephone call a wireless telegraph, which uses radio waves to send Morse code through the air without any wires.
Scottish inventor Alexander Graham Bell experiments with sending sounds through telegraph wires.
These can be heard at the other end, in an early version of a telephone call.
Telegraph system French inventor Claude Chappe devises asystem of movable wooden arms, the position of which indicates letters or numbers.
These arms are placed on tall masts so they can be seen from far away, allowing messages to be passed from town to town.
Voice for radio Canadian-American inventor Reginald Fessenden is the first human voice to be broadcast via radio.
This sparks the construction of radio transmitters to create an exciting new form of entertainment that many people can enjoy, gathered around their radios in their own homes.
Mechanical television British inventor John Logie Baird creates the world's first mechanical television, which uses rotating discs to generate a video signal.
He constructs this from random objects including Knitting needles, cookie tins, and a tea chest.
Color vision The first color television is unveiled in 1928, but it is not until the 1950s that color televisions become affordable.
First mobile phone The first mobile telephone is launched, but it is too large and expensive for people to use.
The first mobile phone call is made ona phone that weighs a massive 2. lbs and takes 10 hours to charge.
Email will become one internet resources across of the world's most popular the world.
This informationforms of communication. sharing system of linked webpages can be accessed NN A from any computer.
Heavyweight phone The DynaTAC becomes the world's first commercial mobile phone.
Nicknamed “The Brick,’ this device goes on the market for a Jawdropping $4,000 (equivalent to around $9,000 today), which few can afford.
Digital TV Analog television technology, which manipulates electrical signals to create sound and color, is replaced by olasma screens and digital technology, which provides high-definition images anda huge choice of channels.
The first digital television broadcasts take place in the early 2000s. man@)k@e|tcl eal, Imagine a world without onotos—no selfies, no breaking news snots, and no way of recording tne most important events In our ives, When ohotograony oegan in the early 1800s, It changed the way people saw and understood the world around them.
Louis Daguerre photographs this street scene using his invention, the daguerrotype.
The only person to appear is aman having his shoes cleaned, as he stays still for the seven minutes it takes to capture the exposure.
Photojournalism golden age of photojournalism NS, as technological advances make cameras More portable.
In the US, Magazines such as Time and Life Start to include “photo essays,” Which reveal] SOCial injustices.
To tak Must sit stil] the first Self-portrait nga daguerreotype e the €xposure, he for 15 minutes.
Polaroid cameras After his three-year-old daughter asks why she must wait for a picture, Edwin Land invents the Polaroid 95 instant camera, which develops photographs in 6O seconds.
Re, Ke) EP x © * time of avictims death by Oo \\ on <O™ ~\ OO studying the life cycle of x \ Now SS OS se maggots found on the corpse.
The headshot can be quickly matched against a database of millions of faces.
Montgolfier send a sheep, a chicken, and a duck soaring in a hot air balloon.
In the 15th ce rulliey, Italian artist Leonardo da Vinc The Montgolfiers’ balloon will later be sketched designs for flying machines, which he based on eT lalla his studies of birds.
For the next four centuries, inventors continued to set their signts on tne skies, but it was not until the Wrignt Brotners historic flight at the dawn of the 20th century that true aviation history began.
Battle of Britain Mod heli During World War Il, members of the | Oo SL. e icopter British Royal Air Force , flying The first practical helicopter is invented in Supermarine Spitfires, fight in the by Russian-American Igor Sikorsky, and skies with the German Luftwaffe in takes to the skies.
Like modern _ close-range aerial combats that helicopters, the design features a main become known as “dogfights.” rotor on top and a tail rotor for balance.
Jet power The world's first fully functioning jet-powered aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, takes off for the first time.
Piasecki invents twin-rotor helicopters, De Havilland DH106 Comet can carry including the famous Chinook design. more people around the world more These are used to carry soldiers into quickly than any other aircraft. conflict and take part in rescue missions.
Jump Jet The Harrier Jump Jet takes flight, becoming the world’s first vertical takeoff plane.
Ce es < Crossing the Channel French inventor Louis Bleriot becomes the first person to cross the English Channel by air.
YIN ' ; 1852 1903 Around the world Four Douglas World Cruisers, specially designed aircraft operated by the United States Army Air Service, become the first Jet SROMIS. planes to circumnavigate the Earth.
The British engineer Frank Whittle around-the-world trip covers 27,500 designs plans for the jet engine. miles in about six months.
He patents the design and e makes this first working version seven years later.
Atlantic crossing The first nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean is completed by British a | F aviators John Alcock and Arthur * Brown, who cross 1,890 miles in less than 16 hours.
Supersonic flight British-French turbojet-powered supersonic passenger jet airliner Concorde takes off for the first time.
Ne yy Traveling at up to twice the speed of sound, it remains in service until 2003. 1969 21st century Getting the vote The ancient Greeks first held elections 2,000 years ago.
In the 1/tn century, the idea of reoresentative government emerged—that the public snould vote for, and be represented by, elected officials.
The Rights of Man Over Tine 26 oeople nave FOUG Nt for their The United States Constitution, which sets out The Declaration of the Rights of America’s laws, comes into effect.
The Man, written by France's National VOIGeS tO De a Ara. decision about who can and can't vote is left Constituent Assembly, states to the states.
Most states only give the right that all men, not just those with to vote to white males who own property. money and property, can vote and participate in lawmaking.
New democracies e——e When the Soviet Union collapses, anew wave of democracy Sweeps across Europe.
With more people going to the polls, teams of international observers begin to monitor elections to keep them far.
Civil rights progress The hard-earned 1965 Voting Rights Act is aresult of the United States Civil Rights Movement campaigning for change.
It outlaws discrimination against African-American voters, such as turning people away on election day, or making voters pass literacy tests.
Freedom Day South Africa holds its first election with universal Young voters suffrage, meaning all people regardless of their race Austria becomes the first country in the now have the right to vote.
Previously, South Africa's European Union to open the vote to 16-year-olds. system of racial separation, known as “apartheid,” A handful of countries allow 16-year-olds to vote, meant that black people could not vote. but in most states, voters are 18 or over. fl UAL Great Reform Bill The 15th Amendment Atter widespread rioting in Britain Although slavery was abolished in the United States in 1865, about unfair elections, parliament tries African-Americans in the southern states still to make voting fairer.
Campaigning for change The 19th Amendment Emmeline Pankhurst founds the Women’s Social and After decades of struggle and protest, United States women Political Union in England.
Campaigners like Elizabeth Cady words, iS acall to action for suffragettes, who use Stanton, Susan B Anthony, and Alice Paul have shock tactics to win support.
In 1918, women over worked for years to improve opportunities for 30 get the right to vote; in 1928, women of all ages do. women in education and employment, as well as for the right to vote.
Those over the age of 18 must pay a fine If they dont vote, and if they fail to four times in a row, they lose the right.
Australia follows in 1902, then women gain the right to vote In Scandinavia, Canada, and parts of Europe.
Tiny particles aliressre) e)aleys Democritus das\e)ay4ersmuarolmalcy Universe is made up of tiny aalenvilaren er-laileitorsmrelinalelelela aloerslanme)c@\ on salismim(s (oral iSmlalorsiou @rclall@l[ers elco)aatcyn elUlmgliswlelatetomateliic little to do with what we Know as atoms today.
He drops orelalaveyalarcllisneimelinicicclalasivcstomicean great heights and shows that they all nlimeat—ne|celelalekctmigieuctola sion aelommmls) also theorizes about inertia—the idea that objects will Keep going or stay still ” unless a force Is acting on them.
Yes X-ray invention ) pane elaicelcia produces the first X-ray after discovering electromagnetic iealo|telilelamerclan elslacligclicusie)|(e objects.
When.an atom SPINS sat it Gives off radioactivity, either as tiny)"" _ chunks ofiparticle or waves of énergy.
The Higgs boson, iplkei,dalclaalsvomtalcmn olen ey-lalle(ommaleNVclaleers Ulallikere mils emuatcre) Avan aelleaieliaaismlens).4e)i-lie particles and forces.
Erwin Schrodinger imagines a cat inside a ‘box with radioactive material.
But ""Gkph) andhas tobe refiled with it took more than 5,000 years for the first norseless WC Od even tou carriages to hit the road. | ne real breakthrough was the invention of the internal combustion engine, which allowed cars to run on gas.
Mass oroduction followed, forever changing the way we travel. eg Tin Lizzie American businessman Henry Ford starts the Ford Motor Company.
Five | . years later, the Model-T, nicknamed Tin Lizzie, is produced at Ford’s factory in Detroit and becomes the world’s first affordable car.
Traffic lights The first electric traffic | ‘ lights are installed in Assembly line | Se terrae ai Ford introduces a moving assembly stop and go line to his factories, using a conveyor és belt to haul parts past teams of workers.
First diesel car The German car manufacturer Mercedes-Benz brings the first diesel passenger car to the market.
In the Unimate is a robotic arm that —-—__— , a3 interest of safety, Volvo makes the welds parts and stacks metal . patent open so that all car on the production line at United States manufacturers can use It. car giant General Motors.
Explosive design English engineer Samuel Brown patents an internal combustion engine tueled by hydrogen.
Four-step cycle He mounts the Se German engineer Nikolaus Otto aie cart and drives It invents the four-stroke engine, an up a hil in Greenwich, internal combustion engine that Carriage a short distance.
He uses the engine to drive a st 2, 0) An el — Lal Deal — 1823 — — ae First road trip Inflatable tires German engineer Karl Benz Scottish inventor John Boyd masterminds the Motorwagen, the Dunlop invents pneumatic first commercial gas-powered rubber tires for his automobile.
Driverless cars use a computer assisted by a GPS unit, laser sensors, cameras, and other devices to find their way without human intervention.
Sporty numbers ltalian car manufacturer Lamborghini is established by Ferruccio Lamborghini.
Luxury sports cars become popular on both sides of the Atlantic, but only a small number of people can afford them.
The Toyota Prius—one of the earliest and most successful hybrid cars—goes on sale.
It is powered by both a gas engine and an electric motor, improving efficiency and reducing toxic emissions.
Within the next decade, more than one | million hybrid cars will be sold.
Altnougn scientific and technological advances heloed to make these endeavors possible, their Ultimate Success was due to tne inspiring courage and resilience of extraordinary men and women.
Lift off American Orville Wright flies the first powered plane, which he designed with his brother Wilbur Wright.
Everest conquered Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay from Nepal successfully climb Mount Everest, the world's highest mountain, for the first time.
It is a dangerous and grueling Pioneering flight American Charles Lindbergh flies solo across the Atlantic Ocean nonstop in his plane the Spirit of St.
Mysterious disappearance Amelia Earhart takes off from Oakland / Airport, California, on the first leg of her journey to become the first woman to circumnavigate the globe.
Their 6.8-mile (11famous for her pearls and hairstyle, km) descent into the Mariana Trench in the becomes the first woman to fly solo western Pacific Ocean takes almost five hours. around the world.
The flight takes They spend just 20 minutes on the ocean floor. days with 21 stopovers.
Historic swim At the age of 64, endurance swimmer Diana Nyad becomes the first person to swim the 60 mile distance from the Bahamas to Florida, encountering crocodiles, jellyfish, and sharks along the way.
Later, experts argue that Peary missed the pole by about 30 miles , but it remains an incredible story of courage.
Finding the way Sailing in asmall fishing boat, famous Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen and his crew find a way through the Northwest Passage, the waterway that links the Arctic and Pacific Oceans.
The unsolved mystery of his disappearance makes international headlines.
The crew survives thanks to Shackleton’s extraordinary leadership skills.
PR ARM Rh 1914-1917 Walking the Amazon British explorer Ed Stafford walks the length of the Amazon River, 6,000 miles in total from its source to the ocean.
Race to the South Pole Five years after navigating the Northwest Passage, Roald Amundsen sets off on arace against Britain’s Robert F Scott to reach the South Pole.
Amundsen gets there first and Scott dies on the harrowing journey home.
The highest jump Na alslalerclaWaliclanmlelsirclexcmlecliclis to the edge of Space ina balloon.
Two days later, olaw.\ el di mC muanlelacom(es1el-1cem\-laallalelseclas received.
At 11:00m., Captain Smith orclalers) smlalomilacimsvealslelUl(ceniliclelercimelallaravt 2:00m., he tells the managing director of White Star Line, the owner of the Titanic, Joseph Bruce Ismay, who Is on board for the celebratory maiden voyage, about the LeromyiVclaalialelsy A moonless night On the evening of April 14, the temperature drops close to freezing.
The message Is ignored by the operator, who Is busy transmitting passenger messages to shore.
At 11:40m., ona anlelolallcxsiswrers li naualle|alemualon , <elU)micllismre spot an iceberg until it is only 1,000 yds away.
First Officer William Murdoch orders the engines into reverse and the “There is no danger that Titanic will sink.
Californian, which is only 5 miles ENN Aran 4740 A POlOWA\ eo) a] mi ho mO@rcloliclia Smith orders use of the lifeboats.
Survivors disembark amid crowds of eagerly awaiting family, friends, and photographers who followed the story that shook the world.
European nations were weakened by tne cost and destruction of these conflicts, and lost control of their overseas empires.
Humans ventured into soace, wnile tne Invention of computers led to a digital age tnat continues In the 21st century.
World War I The Soviet Union World War Il Decolonization Beginning in Europe, World War | A communist revolution in When Adolf Hitler of Germany After World War II, many quickly Russia transformed the country invaded Poland, World War II colonies in Africa and Asia spread to colonies around the into the Soviet Union engulfed successfully fought for world.
But it wasn't until the late 20th century that the age of computers really got underway.
Between 1914 and 1918, Russia, France, and Britain fought against Austria-Hungary and Germany, with both sides Using devastating new weaponry and tactics.
Gallipoli Campaign British, French, Australian, and New Zealand troops mount a huge attack on the Gallipoli Peninsula hoping to capture Turkey, but the plan is a failure.
Two Western Front The German advance across western Europe Is halted by Allied troops.
Both War in the skies War erupts sides dig trenches, which World War | is the first major hundred thousand Allied Austria-Hungary blames form the Western Front, a war during which aircraft troops are killed Serbia for the Archduke's line that eventually are used.
From early 1915, or wounded. assassination and declares stretches from the Swiss planes are used for war.
They are later BEFORE Germany to declare war on deployed to drop bombs Russia.
Country after and fight against one Hey Seat Ee country rushes to defend another in the skies.
A ses as an i . a The heir to the AustroEurope), the Russian army spontaneous truce is called at ee Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, is assassinated on a visit to Sarajevo, Bosnia.
The killer, Gavrilo Princip, is a nationalist who believes that Bosnia should be part of Serbia, not Austria-Hungary. invades Germany, but they suffer a crushing defeat.
The Russian commander commits suicide and the army never really recovers. ve Christmas.
Soldiers enter ""No Man's Land"" between the trenches to play soccer, sing carols, and swap simple gifts. soldiers die as gas seeps into the trenches, and 10,000 are injured.
Trench warfare Each side dug aline of trenches along the Western Front.
The trenches ranged from small dugouts to sophisticated structures, but living conditions were horrendous.
The open space between, Known as “No Man's Land, was criss-crossed in miles of barbed wire.
Peace With United States troops now helping the Allies, the Germans are overwhelmed.
Both sides agree to end the Passchendaele After relentless heavy rainfall, this four-month battle campaign near Ypres ~<a Battle of Jutland sees 600,000 casualties. war.
The fighting stops The only naval battle of the The Allies gain only 5 miles officially on the 11th war is fought off the Jutland U-boats of land.
Lo horrendous conditions and terrible death toll. use U-boats , to fire torpedoes at unarmed British merchant ships carrying vital supplies of food and ammunition. between the British and German navies.
The Uary 2iTreaty of Versailles, December 16, 1916 November signed in 1919, ends 18, 1916 the Austro-Hungarian and Turkish Empires.
USA joins the war The Spring ey Sale America has stayed neutral, Offensive and angry.
Despite all but the German sinking of After Russia surrenders, leaders promising Battle of Verdun Batile of the the passenger liner Germany focuses ona peace, by 1939 the The war in France is at a Somme Lusitania on May 7, 1915, series of huge attacks worldis at war again. stalemate.
More than 700,000 men lose their lives in the ensuing battle, which is the longest of the war.
More than 19,000 British troops die on the opening day. killing Americans on board, Changes public opinion.
When America discovers that Germany Is urging Mexico to start a war with them, America Joins the Allies. against the Allied forces, which now include United States soldiers.
An economic boom there meant people had money to enjoy the finer things in life—from cars to culture.
Music, writing, and fashion all buzzed with new ideas, and the powerful artistic medium of film began.
Criminal gangs grow rich by illegally making and selling their own alcohol and running bars called soeakeasies.
Factories that had increased The dance is deemed indecent, production for World War | switch to making consumer goods.
Logie Baird demonstrates the first television images to scientists in London.
Its Success |s down to mass production and the economic boom. — oy 1929 The Wall Street Crash Billions of dollars are wiped off the value of the American stock 1929 Academy Awards r vey The Academy of Motion | Picture Arts and Sciences hand out the market on Wall Street, as the first awards (soon to economic boom turned into a be called “Oscars’) bust.
Flappers wear shorter skirts, bob their hair, and listen to jazz—all things that are seen as rebellious by older generations.
MTaliave me) omielmceyere, aM atoxsvore)ale)anlaism laa lelelmaleantersy jobs, or both, and forces many to rely on charity to survive.
Long lines gather at bakeries and soup kitchens in order to receive free food.
Many dress elce)iersis Le) Atel NWAKON@|Aomualomlanle)cersts)le)amcenals)as that they are off to work for the day. , eT Se ie “~ _ The 1930s The Wall Street Crash spelled the end of the Roaring | wenties. [ne 1930s were to prove a decade of hardship and conflict like no other before, with dire consequences for almost every part of tne world.
Tnere were some positive aspects, however. [he “New Deal’ got the United States economy back on track, and comic books entertained people all over the world.
Millions lose their jobs, homes, and ability to pay for basic things, such as food.
Austria's largest commercial bank collapses in May, and this triggers a financial panic throughout Europe.
Slums—mockingly called “Hoovervilles’ after President Herbert Hoover, who fails to helo — start popping up.
This includes jobs anda a huge social welfare package to 1934 Dust Bowl help ease the Great Depression.
Years of severe drought across the prairies of the United States and Canada cause winds to whip up the light, dry soil into dust storms, destroying agriculture and worsening the problems of the Great Depression.
Pro-government supporters unite against the nationalists, and a civil war breaks out.
Around the world, archaeologists nave uncovered entire buried towns, discovered tne existence of long forgotten civilizations, and unearthed spectacular treasures. | heir findings have revealed fascinating details, not just about the lives of past kings and queens, but of everyday people, too.
Uruk, founded in around Assyrian palaces of Nimrud and orehistory into the Stone, 4500 sce, is the world’s oldest city.
He finds statues of gods a ——— Bronze, and Iron Ages, that have human heads, bird wings, SSS based on human tool use. r and the bodies of lions or bulls.
O68I-LZ8IL 1880 AFTER The Terracotta Army Tollund Man Archaeological discoveries are still Chinese archaeologists begin Two brothers cutting turf at Tollund being made.
In 1991, hikers in the Alps excavating pits holding an army of in Denmark discover the perfectly find the 5,300-year-old frozen body 7,000 life-size terracotta warriors.
His stomach held handwritten tablets ever found in tomb of China's First Emperor. ‘ his last meal, a gruel of barley and Britain are discovered.
He finds many thousands of animal ‘ton Pi Gees | ee bones, inscribed with the earliest found wearing a beautiful jade known Chinese writing. mosaic mask. ‘ — i 1928-1937 1948-1952"" ath, The Indus civilization In India, John Marshall excavates the cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro.
He reveals the existence of the forgotten Indus, or Harappan, civilization, which flourished here from 2500-1800 BcE. e—_—e ltombs of Ur Leonard Woolley excavates the Sumerian royal tombs at Ur, dating from27502400 sce.
Among the Machu Picchu treasures oe golden and “, In the Andes of Peru, Hiram eee ee Bingham finds the lost Inca eM eat oh etal Oba od citadel of Machu ; Picchu.
Lc6lh Pharaoh’s tomb Howard Carter discovers the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun, the only unrobbed Egyptian royal burial ever found.
The king was buried in 1327 BCE wearing a solid gold mask, inlaid with blue glass.
Sequence dating The Minoan Civilization In Egypt, Flinders Petrie develops Arthur Evans excavates the Palace sequence dating.
Fe i 1880-1901 1900-1905 |The Soviet Union In the early 20th century, Russia transformed—its monarchy ended, and there were two revolutions and OIA Fol m//miarcu@lets) nt mill olererslanomaslom Ola Okcmalacimerelanlaalelalicimcieclicmm eloli(c\alaremearctt the government should take control of resources such as land and farms and share wealth created by these resources among the people.
In the wake of this political uoheaval, the Soviet Union was formed in 1922.
Aialc West drops supplies into West Berlin by ey efeelialallare mule Cold War contlic between East and West.
At the time, European leaders fail to oppose Hitler, who becomes more aggressive.
Invasion of the Balkans German, Italian, and Bulgarian troops attack Yugoslavia.
Russia invaded Germany attacks Russia with a huge force, but after almost two years of fighting, Germany is defeated at the Battle of Stalingrad on February 2, 1943 after a bitter winter.
The Battle of Stalingrad Is a crucial turning point in the war. bl by M00 2 oui ay A AN fp yy PAK AX ANAT Operation Torch When President Franklin D Roosevelt brings America into the war, his soldiers help in the successful Invasion of North Africa.
After seven months of fighting, German and Italian troops are forced to surrender.
Around 17, 1945, the Allies divide Germany, 150,000 troops land on the French coast, and and Berlin, into controlled zones. after six weeks of fighting German forces, they The United Nations is created, with Start to push across France, liberating towns and the alm of finding peaceful | ai cities from Nazi occupation as they go. solutions to ne fsa the ae Oi hgh han eH ROR s peiheihey are etl K RTT ETRE RA RAR OR pen fe.
The Women’s Land Army , which played a crucial role during World War I, is re-established to provide extra labor for farms.
Evacuation September 1 Anticipating Nazi bombing raids, the British government moves almost three million people, mostly children, to rural areas as well as overseas, as oart of Operation Pied Piper.
In France, the entire population of Strasbourg Is evacuated to avoid German bombs.
Germany introduces food rationing, but Hitler, fearing a drop in public morale, keeps the restrictions to a minimum.
In Britain, bacon, butter, and sugar are rationed in January 1940. he FREE FRANCE — June 18 Launching resistance After the Nazi occupation of France, Charles de Gaulle, a junior general, flies to London and makes an appeal on the radio for France to resist the Nazi invaders. itis the beginning of “Eree France,” the exiled government of France.
Battle of the Atlantic German U-boats sink three million tons of vital supplies carried by Allied merchant ships traveling from North America to Britain.
Men, women, and children Nad to adjust to wartime conditions and their daily lives changed dramatically.
In London, the first of many air attacks, Known as the “Blitz,” takes place on September 7.
The raids force people to seek cover in air raid shelters and underground rail stations.
Soviet 2 posters urge young men to join the military encourage workers to produce more for the front, and inspire Civilians to carry out acts of sabotage to halt the invasion. to transport Jewish people from all over Europe to death camps in Poland, where they will be from Nazi-oC killed or forced to carry out hard labor. % a a Dangerous work S KIRTE D SOL D | E RS At the eal war, each country depends on keeping its war machine going with December 7 ~ ammunition, tanks, guns, and explosives.
Harbor, Hawaii, United States Ve of men who have left for the front line.
The step work as mechanics, welders, engineers, iS controversial; many at the time believe this drivers, and machine operators. type of work is only suitable for men.
The Blitz During the Blitz (September 1940May 1941), Germany launches 71 nighttime bombing raids on London.
ASU] QIOUM ‘SAWS UOITEJJUQOUOO sie eee van r JO SOUBSNOU} JING SIZEN OY | ‘SOUNTOJSIUW OUP JE9} JUC]SUOD 8U} JO JOPUILUAI 2 S| BUM JOH ‘owUIG94 JO] 8}|AOSd USIMEP DSLWE|G Jeu] BHulpiy SEM 9US J|IUM SBOUSLEdx9 pue s}YBnou} Joy Bulpiooes ‘YBNoUy ‘PaAlAuns UONEZIUBDIO JEONNOR O1ilWUeS-l]uUe Ue ‘AUC AJEIP JOH ‘AWeD UOITE11USOUOD USS|ag -uebieg ul pep s81e| SUS ""1NO ayOJG IZE\ OU] AQ Do} SEM AUCWIES Grbl O] see.
Troops landed on the beaches of Normandy, France, including the code-named Omaha Beach, seen here.
They moved inland, allowing more troops to land over the next few days.
This marked the first step towards freeing Europe from } Nazioccupation. | |ne Pacitic War Altnough World War || began in Europe, by 1941, conflict nad eruoted worldwide.
Mucn of the fighting took place in Asia and the Pacific between the Allied forces and Japan, suoported by the Axis powers Germany and Italy.
Hitlers invasion of France and the Netherlands in 1940 nad left European-controlled territories In Southeast Asia vulnerable as Japan attempted to expand Its empire in the region.
Japanese victories With astonishing speed, Japanese forces attack Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaya, Thailand, Guam, and Wake Island, taking vast areas of land.
Military alliance Japan enters into a military alliance with Germany and ltaly, Signing a document Known as the Tripartite Pact.
Battle of the Coral Sea Allied forces halt Japanese plans to invade New Guinea.
This is the first sea battle in which neither side's ships catch sight of the other.
Instead, the battle Is fought between planes sent out from aircraft carriers.
They ruled the skies until 1943, when American air capabilities improved, overtaking Japans.
Island hopping The tide starts to turn as United States forces fight back and begin to defeat Japanese troops one island at a time.
Many Japanese soldiers refuse to be taken prisoner, choosing to commit suicide instead.
Japanese cities Hirohito pressures them to Z Japanese pilots adopt are attacked, too.
A raid on admit defeat, and after Battle of Midway extreme tactics during Tokyo creates a firestorm A years of bloodshed, the The Japanese navy’s attempts to take control of Battle of lwo Jima United States troops land on Iwo Jima, meeting fierce resistance from Japanese troops hiding in tunnels that criss-cross the island.
Japanese soldiers Atomic bombs The cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki are destroyed when the United States drops two atomic bombs.
Tens of thousands are killed immediately, and tens of thousands more die later from the effects of radiation. battle, flying their planes into the decks of United States refuse to surrender, but the United States declares victory. that kills 100,000 people.
Burma and India to rise up against Its British colonial rulers, Japan tried to invade India from Burma.
Expecting the Indian population British fought back, however, and the jungle conflict became one of war finally ends.
Both the INC and Muslim League feel that these concessions dont go far enough, and the independence campaign rolls on.
As the INC is mainly Hindu, Indian Muslims form the Muslim League in 1906 to campaign for them.
Many are arrested, but the march draws more attention to the independence movement.
The British Empire declares India's entry into World War II without consulting India’s leaders.
Although 2. million Indian soldiers fight, the decision only increases Indian resentment.
Gandhi is arrested and the movement is banned, but this only increases Its Support.
It simply did not have the ability or the desire to attempt to hold on to India, and so it sets about negotiating an end to its control.
It is later agreed that the largely Muslim populations in the northeast and northwest will become Pakistan.
Later on, India and Pakistan go to war over the disputed Kashmir region.
XS y mete v, Migration The partition of the colony in 1947 turns ™ fF 4 millions of Muslims in India, and Hindus ~ and Sikhs in Pakistan, into religious minorities.
These Sikhs are leaving Pakistan to make it to East Punjab, in northern India.
Ghana’s first president Kwame Nkrumah becomes the first president of an independent Ghana in 1957.
He immediately sets about improving conditions in the country by opening schools and establishing a social welfare system.
Perhaps one of his most enduring Ideas is his oromotion of Pan-Africanism— an intellectual movement dedicated to studying, understanding, and communicating African culture.
Some African countries fought for freedom, but otners were granted it democratically.
About 138,000 of them are killed, but Kenya will finally gain independence in 1963.
Rwanda also gains freedom from Belgium, and Uganda Its independence from Britain this year.
In 1964, Malawi and Zambia go, followed by Botswana and Lesotho two years later.
Mauritius and Swaziland gain independence in 1968, along with Equatorial Guinea, which cedes from Spain.
The British Empire's grip on the country Is finally loosened by a revolution led by Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser, who becomes the country’s first president.
Morocco achieves independence after a short period of unrest, but Tunisia’s transition comes in a largely peaceful fashion.
It aims to improve the lives of ordinary Africans through cooperation and discussion between member states. ——EEEee 1974-1975 Portuguese colonies The dictatorship that had led Portugal since 1933 is overthrown in 1974.
Angola, Sao Tome, and Principe, Mozambique, and Cape Verde, all seize their opportunity and gain independence from Portugal.
J the artor war In his book The Art of War, the ancient Chinese general Sun Tzu advises that spying Is necessary In wartare.
Using spies allows you to learn as much as you can about your enemy and their battle plans.
Ancient spies Some of the earliest spies operate during the war between the ancient Egyptians and the Hittite Empire.
Most spies work for governments, finding out the secrets of enemies or potential enemies. |he most important part of soying, or espionage, Is to keep the activity secret, and over tne centuries, soles have devised ingenious ways to conceal their work.
Today The age of digital spies A USB flash drive is able to store vast amounts of data ona tiny stick, making It easier than ever to obtain secret information and keep it hidden. Early codes In order to avoid their communications being read by the enemy during the Peloponnesian War, the Spartans develop the scytale.
This was one of the earliest systems for coding and decoding secret messages.
It becomes one of the world’s most effective intelligence organizations.
CCTV cameras can be used to monitor traffic and crime, but are also an important tool for spies and intelligence agencies, who use them to track the movements of people of interest. 1974 ¥ fos is The French Resistance groups emerge within France to Resistance sets up escape routes for airmen and escaped prisoners of war, and attacks German transportation and communications.
Ministry, known as the Stasi, Is impressive technology, such as 1467 ceE-1603 cE Masters of infiltration Using great stealth and speed, the shinobi (later known as ninja) are trained secret agents employed by oowertul Japanese warlords.
Shuriken Also known as throwing blades, shuriken could be thrown at a shinobis enemy or used by hand to slash.
The first spy network Frances Walsingham becomes the principal secretary and spymaster of Queen Elizabeth | of England.
Walsingham builds up a network of spies whose aim is to uncover plots to overthrow the queen.
Ss d o ‘ff 3 Wy: ieee ) af a — ; The Spymaster Walsingham had conspirators tortured in order to get them to confess to their plots. 1573 si pation, Pencil fuses Used during World War Il, these timedelayed pencil fuses allowed the person setting the bomb to escape before the attached explosives detonated. f A The Public surveillance Formation of the CIA ast Germany's State Security In order to improve Its intelligence gathering after World War Il and with the Cold War beginning, the United States creates the Central Intelligence Agency , a foreign intelligence service. formed.
Secret agents use tiny cameras concealed in everyday items, to observe people of interest.
Camera Stasi soles would use this secret camera to gather intelligence.
Middie East conticts Altnougnh the Middle East is nome to many identities, Muslim Araos make up the majority of Its people.
After Worla War |, EUropean empires that nad power in tne region collapsed, and tne Arabs regained control, But soon after World War Il, Jews were granted the state of Israel in Palestine.
Age-old tensions, Arabo—Israeli conflict, and intervention by the West, have combined to make the Middle East a volatile region.
BEFORE From the 1890s, a political campaign Known as Zionism called for a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
In the Balfour Declaration of 1917, Britain pledged to help create this nation of Jews.
The conflict ultimately leaas to Israel gaining more land. "" ad be > ewe a ee 1948-1960s Palestinian displacement he Ce es ie 750,000 Palestinians flee or led from their homes, becoming aie h sides blame each other.
Bot from Muslim countries and 250,000 Holocaust survivors settle In Israel. ear following the creation of Israel, Arab forces from Egypt, Jordan, and Syria attack Israel, but Israel emerges victorious, capturing swathes of Arab territory.
January 1978February 1979 Iranian Revolution The monarch of Iran, Mohammad Reza Shah, is overthrown and forced to leave the country in the Iranian Revolution, also known as the Islamic Revolution.
The nonreligious way of life he promoted Is replaced by anew regime based on strict Islamic law, headed by Muslim leader Ayatollah Khomeini.
March 26, 1979 Israel and Egypt peace deal Hosted in the United States by President Carter, the leaders of Israel and Egypt attend peace talks.
Temple June 6, 1982 Israel invades Lebanon In an attempt to attack Palestini | stinian rebel forc in Lebanon, Israel invades the country.
AFTER Palestinians continue to call for independence for the occupied territories, and conflict still rages across the region.
In 2010, a period of uprisings across the Middle East known as the Arab Spring challenged leadership and called for democracy.
The worst violence was In Syria, which descended into brutal civil war.
Some of the key players are listed here, with the year they were founded.
This movement aims to create a permanent Jewish national state in Palestine.
This Islamic military group Is dedicated to destroying Israel and creating an Islamic state in Palestine.
Formed by Osama Bin Laden, al-Qaeda wants to rid Islamic countries of Western influence.
Also known as ISIS, this terrorist organization seeks an lslamic state across lrag, Syria, and beyond.
Huleg a1ldseq ABDUSEMYUSIG Huluol}IPuoD AV A9}]SCO} D1}99/5 ASAP S94}0|9 VACPMOADIIN 6c6} 6c6l 6c6} Se6l Z96/L f~ toy i” , y ge ve. |ne Korean Var In 1950, conflict between North and South Korea threatened to explode into a much wider war.
It became an International concern when the United States supported the South Koreans, and the communist countries of China and the Soviet Union championed the North Koreans.
After Japan’s defeat in the war, the Soviet Union occupies the north of the country, while the United States controls the south.
The North makes great gains, and captures the South Korean capital, Seoul.
The border between the two countries stays where It was before the war, and a demilitarized zone is set up between them.
By October, they have driven the North back and have even taken the North's capital city, Pyongyang.
A stalemate emerges, with each sides territory reverting back to the prewar borders.
The Korean peninsula remains divided to this day—with a communist North and a democratic South.
By 1951, about 500,000 refugees crowded into the South Korean city of Busan, with the overall number of refugees created by the war believed to be between four and six million.
A difficult war The United States found fighting in Vietnam to be incredibly difficult.
The Vietnamese communists were guerilla fighters, which meant their attacks were Sporadic and unpredictable.
Tne Vietnam Var One of the major conflicts of the late 20th century, the Vietnam War raged for almost 20 years.
It destroyed large swatnes of the country and led to the deaths of millions of soldiers and civilians.
As the conflict dragged on, an international antiwar movement protested what seemed to be a senseless, bloody war.
Communist leader Ho Chi Minh declares North Vietnam independent, and his Viet Minh guerrilla fighters take on France, Vietnam's old colonial masters.
They use this to support pro-communist rebels in the South, Known as the National Liberation Front.
This causes long-lasting health issues for civilians and troops on both sides, and ruins large swathes of Vietnamese soll.
Initially surprised by the assault, the South Vietnamese and United States forces regroup and retaliate.
North Vietnam launches another attack and the South's capital, Saigon, falls.
The People’s Republic of China (formed in 1949) and the Soviet Union support North Vietnam.
Vietnam is divided in half, with Ho Chi Minh taking control of the North, and anticommunist, US-supported Ngo Dinh Diem ruling in the South.
In response, the United States issues the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, committing the country to defending itself and South Vietnam.
These show the government felt the war to be unwinnable, but had lied about it.
The United States had begun to pull out troops in 1969, and secret peace talks began in 1970.
The world fears full-scale nuclear war, but, after 13 days, the Soviet Union offers to remove the weapons In return for aUS promise not to invade Cuba.
The protest is led by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament organization. |ne 1960s |The 1960s saw great change take President John F Kennedy John F Kennedy becomes the youngest-ever United States president in the tightest election since 1884.
New attitudes ee ea aoe la about freedom of expression and SOL Mss ec lmers equality were reflected in muSIc, % fashion, and politics, and % anything and everything seemed possible.
It is attended by more than 400,000 people, causing massive traffic jams and road closures.
Musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and Ravi Shankar perform.
The Feminine Mystique Betty Friedan launches the modern feminist movement with a book that discusses the role of women in society and promotes equality.
British invasion British bands such as The Beatles, The Who, and The Rolling Stones storm the United States charts, achieving fame and changing music forever.
Vietnam War The United States becomes involved in along war in Vietnam to prevent 8 > ' it from falling under communist rule.
The loss of life on both sides Pop art leads to mass protests Taking inspiration from comic books around the world. and advertising, the pop art movement flourishes.
Artist Andy Warhol is the most distinctive pop artist, using bold images and bright colors a to depict everyday objects. 0) pa Fashion revolution Teenagers begin to have their own money to buy clothes, and they feel less Underground press pressure to dress like their New publications develop for parents.
This causes a young people who don't agree revolution in the fashion with the traditional views of world, with designs aimed at Hive their parents.
These include these new customers. ae Oz, International Times, and Ink, and are dedicated to poetry, music, and promoting political change.
Hippies A movement of young people Known as “hippies” emerges In San Francisco.
They are recognizable by their long hair and colorful clothing, and they promote ideas of nonviolence and love.
Although there was freedom In many olaces, there was also corruption, military COUupS, CIVII war, and division among different ethnic groups.
However, inthe 21st century, optimism is growing, with greater wealth and improving political stapllity.
Ghanaian independence Kwame Nkrumah becomes the country's first independent prime minister after years of British colonial rule.
Jonas Savimbi, Angolan politician, inaspeech in 1975 Idi Amin Ugandan president Amin expels Asian minorities from Uganda and launches attacks onhis Tanzanian enemies.
Congo Crisis The Congo (modern-day Democratic Republic of Congo) dissolves into crisis after becoming independent from Belgium in June 1960.
A breakaway state of Katanga exists until the United Nations intervenes in 1963.
African Unity Following the independence of many African nations from European rule, the Organization of African Unity is established by 32 African states to encourage and protect Africa's interests.
Angolan Civil War The Republic of Angola, rich in diamonds and oil, becomes independent from Portugal in 1975, but becomes impoverished by a civil war.
Rwandan Genocide More than a million people of the Tutsi ethnicity in Rwanda are killed by members of the neighboring ethnic group, the Hutus.
President Nelson Mandela After decades of apartheid (racial segregation) in his country, and 27 years of imprisonment for protesting against this, Nelson Mandela is elected the first black president of South Africa.
Vv Ethiopian famine Decades of war and extreme drought cause starvation in Ethiopia, where more than ‘fet 400,000 people die and millions more are ’ left hungry and poor.
The United States helps to rebuild western 4945 ~~ European countries. — P Se Eastern Europe World Chess becomes cut off from a ak Championship ~ a the West.
This ends 24 years of 4 Soviet domination G of the World Chess "" ( Championship.
Three of them are forced to move to the Soviet Union, and one shares Soviet secrets in ~ exchange for his freedom.
Berlin Wall “German communists erecta wall dividing East Berlin from West. -Itbecomes an oN ""sy VG wo Cold and economic power of Wa Hideals. — each country.
It ends 7 nea ewallseparates when American many p Sperone spacecraft Apollo 11 a homes, _ % ee < Warsaw Pact The USSR unites the Eastern Bloc through the Warsaw Pact which, like NATO in the West, creates an.agreement that the countries will support one another.
The world looks on in amazement as the USSR disintegrates into 15 separate countries.
As the USSR weakens, East Germans are astonished to finally be allowed to travel freely to West Germany.
They are fruit flies, launched on board a German-designed V-2 rocket from World War Il.
First satellite orbit of earth, The USSR's Sputnik 1, the world’s first artificial satellite, orbits Earth.
First animal in orbit Laika, a stray dog from the streets ef Moscow, is the first animal to orbit Earth, on Russia's Sputnik 2.
Neil Armstrong Is the first human to walk on the Moon, and his co-pilot Buzz Aldrin is the second.
Apollo launches Apollo 11 was the first crewed mission i to land on the Moon.
AY 3 ; 2 > -THECUBAN © -MISSILECRISIS | Aworldonthebrinkofwar In the fall of 1962, the global superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union were.in a diplomatic deadlock.
Tensions rise During the 1950s, former World War ll allies — Relations between the United States and the On October 23, 1962, Premier Khruschev the United States andthe Soviet Union.
Soviet Union continue to decline with ~ “replies to President Kennedy, claiming that become rival superpowers, and they each > © disagreements over Allied-occupied Berlin » all weapons on Cuba are defensive.
Malalalsy 01S As this “Cold War” develops, in 1952, the . finalizes a deal to make ready their nuclear approach the United States naval blockade,-with Soviet United States secretly backs a military coup in Cuba, weapons in Turkey, close to the Soviet ~*~ submarines close behind.
The United States reacts elgelelareml@lOhanll Reni taleKever-s1ae)i lofelgel-leulan’ ""1 \’aulanccitellteui ready hisweligerctsicrsn lam ua @)aleremecl ale Florida.
This allows military dictator © — Kona) isnecele laldavamiarseeve)va¢cianiieys Ova 0) clelale pO lene lieclicre]palanrelalenela * Fulgencio Batista to regain power.Seven.
Castro to build Soviet missile bases onthe Over the next two days, communications Cuban nationalist Fidel Castro overthrows .. _ island.On August 31, US.senator Kenneth —. flow between Kennedy and Khrushchev Batista, and Cuba becomes the first Keating. warns his government of the Soviet — through the United Nations.
Tam k2\oX¢ MUlswel¢e\sife| lineal ¢ The world holds its breath mlis\olg) ale Vicl@ arclinsmigclea(@Mi\clneamctsualeles(crels Cuba's isolation encourages Castrotoseek The crisis begins 3 war looms.
Law change September 3 ROSA PAR KS Little Rock Nine Some states ignore the new rules.
When nine African-American high school students enrollinan all-white school in Little Rock, Arkansas, the governor calls the National Guard to stop them.
Later, the United States government sends troops to escort the Little Rock Nine to school.
Marti which decides that ing, Jr. leads black towns in Luther a year-long bus b people in S boycott before the segregating black and white children in public schools |s unconstitutional. ourt _ buses is illegal. rules segregation on September 9 Civil Rights Act of 1957 The United States government responds to the growing movement with the Givil Rights Act of 1957, the first civil rights law in more than 80 years.
The legislation helps to protect ime voting rights of African-Americans and signals support for change.
FebruaryJuly 1960 DINERS PROTEST G reensboro sit-in Coll Ege students in Greensbo ro, North ata ene take their seat counter § only Woolworth’s Iy S Fe SOON, peaceful “sit-j nch S like this one take ie ace all over the south May-December 1961 ee REEDOM RIDERS Campaigners attacked Black and white college students show their suoport for civil rights by riding on buses together in segregated areas.
A protest following a night of bombings targeted at civil rights 1964 peaks turns into 8 days of April 3 July 2 rots in Birmingham, Alabama i ivil Ri Act of 1964 Local police respond violently, Malcolm X givesspeech | Civil Rights stunning the country.
Shock spreads quickly, and riots break out in several United States cities.
President Johnson asks Americans to reject violence and puts Pressure on Congress to pass new legislation quickly.
Congress Signs this act to é give everyone fair and equal aCCess to housing.
The impact of civil rights legislation like this IS huge, but the march for Equality continues.
SEGREGATED § Selma RULES The march in Alabama from Selma to ‘mn Montgomery was organized to draw of, ~~ PUBLI 8 attention to the difficulties African Americans > f SCHOO is faced when registering to vote.
Although African Americans had the right to vote, state Officials tried to stop them from registering.
Registration offices were rarely open, and officials made people complete unnecessary literacy tests, fill in long forms, and pay fees.
Fasnion Ancient Greeks A simple chiton (along sleeveless shirt tied with a belt) is worn by men, women, and children.
It can be short or long, printed or plain, gathered or loose, and topped with a cloak for extra warmth.
People nave always been interested In what they wear, from the ancient Egyptians and their caretully crafted wigs, to todays Ssnoppers, wno can buy the latest fashions online.
Its nistory IS as long and colorful as some of its most sensational creations.
However, concerns grow about working conditions in factories, and the environmental impact of cheap, disposable clothes.
Designer decade In the 1980s, fashion designers became superstars, and models became celebrities.
If a celebrity appears in adress, It can sell out in moments on the other side of the world.
The Romans Most people wear simple tunics and togas made from wool and linen.
Flares and heels Trousers are more popular with women than ever before, and flares get wider for men and women.
Platform shoes step into fashion, influenced by oerformers such as David Bowie and Elton John.
Hose (thin, fitted trousers with feet, much like tights) begin to become popular for men.
As wealthy people begin to travel the world, fashions from different countries influence each other.
Many copy the style of Queen Elizabeth | of England, Known for her full-skirted Youthquake Teenagers, now with their own money to spend, break free from the fashions of their parents.
Young designers lead the way, such as Mary Quant, who shocks older generations when she designs the miniskirt in 1964. dresses and large ruffs. b Leisure time After World War Il ends, travel and leisure, once just for the wealthy, become more affordable.
Ottoman finery The Ottoman Empire, stretching from southern Europe to Asia, inspires European fashion.
This includes turbans and long, flowing robes, crafted from beautiful, expensive fabrics.
European fashions France (and to a lesser extent, England) leads the way in fashion, with the rest of Europe following.
The rich splurge on the latest fashions in hand-decorated silk and velvet.
Kimono The Edo period in Japan sees a rise in the kimono, a robe with flowing sleeves anda wide belt.
Wealthy people compete for the richest fabrics, expressing their status and style.
Rococo An artistic movement Known as rococo inspires lighter, more flowing clothes.
Fitted dresses are replaced by full-skirted gowns known as mantuas, and later by open robes and petticoats.
T-shirts The United States Navy introduces this iconic item of clothing, meant to be worn as an extra layer under a shirt.
It is stretchy and holds its shape, as well as being easy to clean and inexpensive.
Blue jeans Sportswear The introduction of vacation in the 1800s gives people more leisure time to do sports.
Rich people adopt outfits for soorts such as hunting, riding, and archery.
African prints A new printing technique is Jazz age Following World War |, practical, comfortable clothes become popular.
Skirts become shorter, and many young women, Known as flappers, cut their hair short, smoke, and dance to jazz to rebel against oldfashioned society. developed, which prints fabric with wax to create colorful patterns.
This printed fabric is a huge hit in Ghana, and soon is being used to make clothes across much of West and Central Africa.
The jeans have metal fastenings at the seams, making them tough and long-lasting.
They become popular with laborers across the US, and by the mid-20th century will become a key feature of wardrobes across the world.
Film star fashion A financial crash puts an end to the fun of the jazz age.
Unable to buy into fashion, normal people instead admire the clothes of glamorous film stars such as Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers.
The women wear long, fitted dresses, and mens suits have narrow waists and wide shoulders.
Wartime fashion During World War II, money and material is in short supply, meaning few can afford new suits or dresses.
It is the first craft to fo)gie)torelgeleaneue)claiers other than Earth.
Humans in space __ 1965 1969 | ee on™ ao Soviet Alexey American Neil | y\3 Businessman For as long as humans have looked up at Leonov walks Armstrong walks _— Dennis Tito is the the stars, we have dreamed of exploring in space. on the Moon. a first space tourist. ; the universe.
In 1961, the first person ee entered space in his spacecraft, marking the beginning of an extraordinary journey 1961 2003 for humans venturing into space.
P rings to send stunning | images back to Earth. ; fA _ ak. ne pooasiaenaciens After World War Il, many East and Southeast Asian countries orogressed from poverty to extreme wealth.
This develooment began In the 1960s, as Asian countries, starting with Japan, oXere felamcen ©) cele lUlercm alle] abatcle/amicclanicncieleiamctomers|palcleckcmel ale computers.
They symbolize British rule to help the Hong a million people to leave their struggles to make money.
Itis a ol ate lalexcmie)a @valiarcmconianl elicits the rest of the world—more idatslanay are)|lielan eXs1e)e)(-mnVclceie the events on televisions around the world. eF-Tiiliare mai ceyiena al Wielerelalowsxonerelanl CrclaWaNiialceralel® FEW alevaloromivarclmiVllmelerexe)anlomialsy best-selling game console of all time, known as the Famicom.
Its decision is based amialsnere)an] er<lalsrelane)miaices)74e) elm alexe)aalesulanerelelaliatcys across the world.
COMpDUTtING Before 1935, the word computer referred to a person whose job It was to do mathematical calculations. loday, a computer is a machine tnat takes Inout, stores and orocesses data, and gives outout.
Computers were Initially built from mecnanical components such as levers and gears until electronic parts were used in the 2OtN century.
Now, the computing power of the Smartonone in your pocket Is juSt aS DOwerTul.
This massive 30-ton computer glowing with 18,000 tubes Is intended to ers a a a Turing machine make more calculations British computer than all of humanity has scientist Alan up to this point.
It uses electricity to read a pattern of holes Ada Lovelace punched in a card.
His invents programming invention saves both time Babbage shows math whiz and millions of dollars.
She works out how the computer can Babbage's manipulate letters and symbols Difference Engine as well as numbers.
Babbage draws up plans for Historians consider her the first mechanical device that can do complicated calculations.
He imagines that this machine will store data in the future, anticipating the Artificial intelligence his Difference Engine—a computer programmer. we x computer technology that is cA tar is tha mnci . . to come.
Nowadays, pay ee gy aa gh computer scientists and inventors with access to oTratk ,ic\ ‘clef ror our mings.’ even faster and more powerful machines are coming Steve ""tobe ina1990 documentary closer to achieving Turing’s goals of creating a machine with the intelligence of a human.
Two players use buttons language is still in use today. disk that lets users share cee and dials to bat a blob of light data quickly.
Thousands of Jobs create and sell one of the first desktop first smartphone, created years controlled with a mouse.
A software programs, such as computers, Apple |, as a kit for computer before there is aname for the drop-down menu makes it simple word processors, spreadsheets, and enthusiasts.
Microsoft releases a games, are released for the machine, and appeals to a wider audience with its users to make calls, email, and mouse-friendly Windows which is one of the highest-selling keyboard, game controllers, and manage schedules. operating system the next year. computers ever. the video game Breakout.
Mary Wollstonecraft A Vindication of the Rights of Woman by British writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft Is published. lt sets out the reasons why women and men are equal and deserve equal rights and opportunities. lts arguments are still relevant today.
Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz This Mexican nun Is known as the first feminist writer of the Americas.
Her work La Respuesta is a letter written in response to a priest who has attempted to silence her and other women, and deny them education.
Two million people will join, and it will play a key role in passing the 19th Amendment, which will guarantee women’s right to vote In the United States in 1920.
She writes some of the first feminist works of literature, which argue for equal rights and treatment, and celebrate female heroines from history.
Anna Filosofova Russian womens rights leader and social campaigner Anna Filosofova leads amovement to provide women with work, education, and low-cost housing.
Heminism Feminism is the belief that women and men are equal, and snould nave equal rignts and opportunities. however, nistorically, men nave been given more powertul roles than women.
Early feminists focused on getting women tne right to vote, but over time the movement nas come to address tne role of women In a International Women’s Day A day Is created to promote women’s rights and support suffrage.
It is initially only marked ina few European countries, but will soon spread across the world.
UK suffragists The National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies forms in the UK, under the leadership of Millicent Fawcett.
It believes that a nonviolent approach will show that women are respectable and responsible enough to participate in politics.
They march, stage hunger strikes, break windows, and chain themselves to railings outside important buildings. many more areas, from politics and nome life to music and sports.
Indian women’s movement India becomes independent from British rule, and the government writes a new set of laws, with the involvement of women.
These support freedom and nondiscrimination for all, helping to inspire a women's movement in India.
In 1951, she storms the Egyptian parliament with a group of women, demanding the right to vote.
A week later, a bill is passed allowing women to vote and become members of parliament.
She writes The Feminine Mystique, a book that insists women deserve to go to college and have successful careers, just as much as men. <q Billie Jean King Women’s March In response to sexist language and abuse of power, people take to the streets in rT We cannot Washington D.C., and many places across the world.
It is all succeed a show of support for women's when half of us rights, and equality more generally, across gender, are held back.” race, religion, and more.
It is estimated that seven million Malala Yousafzai. people take part worldwide. inaspeech to the UN, 2013 1979 1990s 2014 Riot Grrrls This feminist musical movement begins in the state of Washington.
Frustrated with being surrounded by all-male bands, women begin to form their own bands.
They make music, create magazines, and hold meetings to express and discuss their thoughts on feminism and politics.
Malala Yousafzai Simone de Beauvoir French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir writes The Second Sex, a book that discusses the treatment of women throughout history. lt attempts to define what It means to be female, inspiring generations to follow.
Tennis star Billie Jean King founds the Women’s Tennis Association, which campaigns to give female tennis players equal pay to male players.
It is a Start in breaking a trend in sports where female athletes are paid less than men.
In its early years, the >< First email internet was a tool for scientists and the military to share Bie coronene information.
Leonard Kleinrock figures out a way of enabling an| lui Kelasmcem ral | e@kenctc(eanelialcia ON me) aereldiaremiacelanar-tuelaniaire small blocks.
Viral video wc) Delaliaarcticeane)i a baby dancing goes AVIEclMAVAcMle)Al\cclaeaarell chain messages.
Video-sharing YouTube Is created, and becomes one of the fastest-growing sites on the internet.
Eric Schmidt, former head of Google, inaspeech at the Internet World Trade Show, 1999 Fresh coffee Researchers rig up alive shot of a coffee machine oni alo\ mers lansicionelamials)is Computer screens when a fresh pot has been brewed. a Ralisuismiatelelelalmelir-tomials first webcam.
Protesters can quickly ce felalp4onelssanlelarsiacctilelars elalonsy elccr-lenlaelaanrclllele on the sites.
Estonia is the world’s il esimexellaliavmcOnelsyoulaltslaatc| voting ina governmental election.
This makes It easier ie) ma ntclalva esx) (om KOMVelKoy encouraging more people to participate in the election.
The Internet roy am Mallar ts a als)comslaonanlelecnel\ulerers ore) alalsieitcre mon ialoulalic)aalcimearcla there are people in the world.
The Reproducing robot Scientists in the United States develop a robot that can make copies of itself.
This technology could be used to create robots that repair themselves while working in difficult or dangerous following year, another Japanese environments, such as outer space. company, Honda, will introduce ASIMO, a humanoid robot able to walk, climb stairs, and change direction.
The goal of the race Is to kickstart research into the develooment of a future fleet of even better robot cars.
They trek for miles across the planet, searching for information about its surface, and clues to conditions that could have once supported SY extraterrestrial life.
United States car company General Motors installs Unimate on its assembly line to do tasks such as stacking hot pieces of metal and welding car bodies.
Elektro and Sparko AUS company builds a metal person, Elektro, for the New Shakey York World's Fair.
Standing Basic artificial intelligence allows this “I visualize a ttme when we will be to robots what dogs are to humans.” 7 ft tall, it rolls on mobile robot to see and move around wheels, moves Its fingers and in its environment.
Its robot dog, person, but the robot named for his Sparko, begs, barks, and wobbly walk becomes iconic.
Claude Shannon, mathematician, wags Its tail. in an article in Omni Magazine, 1987 {ne story of ropotics For centuries, oeople nave been fascinated by the idea of mechanical devices tnat can be programmed to perform In a particular way; robots.
They hope that Atlas’s strength and agility can be put to use in search and JIBO rescue operations in the future.
Face and voice recognition technology allows JIBO to recognize up to 16 people.
The blue ring around Its waist lights up when it hears someone talk to it.
Citizen Sophia Saudi Arabia grants citizenship to Sophia, a humanoid robot.
She can hold simple conversations 4 and has more than 60 different facial expressions.
Drone delivery The online store Amazon Baxter makes its first delivery (a This industrial robot can be TV streaming device anda programmed by ahumanmovingits bag of popcorn) by drone to arms to perform a task.
Baxter a customer in the UK. memorizes these motions so it is The package is delivered able to repeat the task independently. amere 13 minutes after lt can be programmed by anyone. the order Is placed. an. % nid p QQ W® ye ty A&E Us oresidents since the office was created in 1/789, there nave been 44 presidents of tne United States.
Jo be eligible, a person has to be at least 35 George Washington John Adams Thomas Jefferson I Led anarmy against the British | Helped draft the Declaration The main author of the YEdls Old and porn either ia tne US, Of in the War of Independence, of Independence.
Established Declaration of Independence, os then became the first the naval department, so he Is which stated that the OVElSEds tO United States CItIzen parents. president.
Died of cholera states, but the peace many and edgedtheUS ever — but by the end of his term, civil without being elected to office.
New Mexico and California. a year after taking office. was short-lived. closer to civil war. war was looming. 1841-1845 1845-1849 1849-1850 1850-1853 1853-1857 its toy Gailolon| Grover Cleveland BenjaminHarrison WilliamMcKinley Theodore Roosevelt William H Taft Woodrow Wilson The only president ever to Grandson of President Oversaw expansion of United States The youngest person to A lawyer by profession,heset Took the United States into World War | serve two non-consecutive William Henry Harrison, territories, including Hawaii become president, at 42.
After the war, he terms—he lost an election, during his term the country and Puerto Rico.
Six months — the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906 and passed a law allowing proposed the formation of then was voted back in again expanded and six new states into his second term, he for negotiating peace between _ states tocollect income tax. the League of Nations to try four years later. were admitted to the Union. was assassinated.
Johnson Richard Nixon Gerald Ford Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan His work to reform civil rights Brought in the Civil Rights Ended the Vietnam War and Unexpectedly became vicePresident during a difficult A former movie star, he and promote racial equality Act, but faced opposition for improved relations with the oresident, then president, period for the US, both at helped end the Cold War.
He was cut short when he was sending more troops into the Soviet Union.
After his was shot by a would-be shot dead in Texas. war in Vietnam. in disgrace after political honesty helped restore the term in office, he became a assassin but recovered. corruption was uncovered. image of the presidency. respected statesman.
After his presidency, he became a campaigner against slavery. the United States would resist attempts by other countries to establish colonies in the Americas.
Ulysses S Grant A hero of the Civil War, he was an inexperienced politician whose presidency was overshadowed by scandal and corruption.
Days after the war ended, he was shot dead by John Wilkes Booth. utsioy Bai tslote) Andrew Jackson became a national hero for RutherfordB.Hayes James A Garfield William Henry Harrison The first president to die in office.
Martin Van Buren After financial panic and stock market crash led to economic depression, Van Buren became unpopular and was not reelected.
Before he took office, he leading the army that defeated the British at the Battle of New Orleans.
Chester A Arthur Brought in a law that meant that civil servants were hired ourely for their ability rather than because of their political connections.
After winning one of the closest presidential elections ever, he fought to end corruption in politics and public life. 1877-1881 utsTou Bai tetote) Herbert Hoover Shortly after his election, the United States entered an era of serious economic depression.
Warren G Harding An unpopular president who was dogged by rumors of financial wrongdoing.
George W Bush After the terrorist attacks of 9/11, he ordered the invasion of Afghanistan and declared the War on Terror.
Bush Bill Clinton Anoiltycoonandformerhead Presided over a time of peace of the CIA, he took the United States and and prosperity, but his its allies into the first Gulf War — reputation was damaged by a with Iraq . scandal over a relationship with a White House intern.
Harry S Truman Authorized the dropping of two nuclear bombs on Japan, which ended World War Il.
Franklin D Roosevelt Led the United States through the Great Depression and World War Il.
He funded a plan to revive the United States economy and help people out of poverty.
Donald Trump Barack Obama The first African-American Before entering politics, Trump was a wealthy oresident.
His healthcare reforms were disliked by opponents, and led to stalemate in government. businessman, anda famous television personality.
After Richard of York oe ial Lani fostered national pride was killed in the Battle of Wakefield > ) , his son Edward became the ; and prosperity strength under them.
The manufacturing and merchant classes rose in Status, and architecture, literature, and theater blossomed.
A plague killed more than 100,000 people and a great fire destroyed most of the city.
James Il tried to restore the Catholic faith but fled when William of Orange was invited to restore rights in the Glorious Revolution.
Robert Walpole became the first prime minister to German-speaking George |, and Britain developed into an industrial society.
For the first and only time in Its history, England was a Commonwealth (or republic) without a king or queen.
Ruled by puritan Oliver Cromwell and his parliament, the country took Jamaica from the Spanish and defeated the Dutch at sea.
This dynasty was dominated by political battles between king and parliament, which ended with a civil war and a beheading.
Although the Stuarts believed they had a god-given right to rule, they were tolerant of Catholics, and made peace with Spain.
They were patrons of the arts and left a legacy of beautiful art and architecture.
He in Scotland then the throne. by Oliver Cromwell in own council of 15 and a took a keen interest in scandal when a South the Civil War, he was tried and executed by his parliament. parliament of 400.
He was followed by his son Richard. architecture and science, and introduced yachting to England.
William the Conqueror claimed the throne after he defeated Harold Il at the Battle of Hastings.
The Normans built castles and brought with them a feudal system of lords, who held land, and peasants, who worked it.
Confessor but his reign was crowned king on Christmas Day 1066. short-lived.
Originating in Anjou in France, this dynasty took its name from a yellow flower an ancestor wore in his hat.
During much of their rule, England was at war with France and Scotland, and Wales and Ireland came under English rule.
The Plantagenets laid the foundation for law and government by creating justices of the peace and the first parliament.
French territory was recaptured and then lost, and in the War of the Roses, the royal houses of Lancaster and York fought over the throne for 30 years.
His battles to unite Englandand _ the rights of people, 1327-1377 Edward ll of Germany, he was returned at the Battle of reign was marked by Scotland.
A model parliament Church, and 1377-1399 Richard Il for a huge ransom and was Agincourt. many rebellions. was formed during his reign. monarchy. eventually killed in France.
The Americans won independence Saxe-Coburg-Gotha Windsors and England fought France in the Napoleonic Wars during Georges reign. ms 4 Od) William IV 1830-1837 Many more people got the vote under William lV, and slavery was abolished throughout the British Empire.
After her husband Prince Albert died, she went into mourning but was coaxed back to public life.
This dynasty of just one king Is named after Queen Victoria's husband Prince Albert, who was the son of the Duke of SaxeCoburg and Gotha.
Edward became king at the age of 59 and reigned during the first years of the 20th century, when new inventions like the first automobile were taking Britain into the modern age.
He helped restore relations between France and England and built anew royal estate at Sandringham in Norfolk.
George V changed his surname to Windsor during the World War | because of the strong anti-German feelings of his people.
Prince William and managed to overcome his — Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, speech impedimentand — and their children lead anew became popular during generation of royals. and after the war.
This abbreviation has largely replaced sc . blockade The isolation of an area so as to prevent supplies from entering or leaving.
Bronze Age, the A period of ancient history when people mostly used bronze for making tools and weapons. caliph The title of the religious and political leader of Islam . capitalism An economic system based on the private ownership of oroperty and free competitive conditions for business.
It lasted from shortly after World War II until 1989. colonization The act of sending settlers to establish a colony in another country, sometimes involving taking political control over the people already living there. colony An area under the political control of another state; or the group of people who have settled there. communism The political belief in a society in which ownership of property and wealth is shared.
Congress The law-making branch of the United States government. conquistador One of the Spanish conquerors of American Indian civilizations. constitution A set of laws or rules that determine the political principles of a government.
CounterReformation, the The period of change in the Catholic Church after the Protestant Reformation.
This included internal reform and opposition to Protestantism. coup The sudden violent or illegal seizure of power by a group.
Crusades, the Eight military expeditions of the 11th to 138th centuries, in which Christian knights tried to seize back the city of Jerusalem from the Muslims . culture The customs, beliefs, and behavior shared by a society. daimyo A Japanese lord. democracy A form of government based on rule by the people, usually through elected representatives. depression In history, a period of drastic decline in economic activity, marked by widespread unemployment and hardship. dictator A leader who rules a country alone, with no restrictions on the extent of their power.
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid, the chemical that stores genetic information inside living cells . domestication The taming of wild animals to make them useful to humans. dynasty A royal family ruling a country for successive generations. element A substance in which all the atoms are the same, which can't be broken down by another substance. empire A group of lands or peoples brought under the rule of one government or person.
Mesoamerica “Middle America,’ the name for the region stretching from central Mexico in the north, to Guatemala in the south.
Mesopotamia The region of modern-day lrag lying between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, where many of the earliest civilizations began. missionary A religious person who seeks to persuade others, often living in foreign lands, to adopt his or her religion. molecule A group of atoms linked by chemical bonds. monarchy A type of government in which a king or queen is recognized as head of state, even though he or she may have no real power. morality Beliefs based on the principles of what is right and wrong.
Muslim A follower of /s/am. nation An independent country, or one or more countries whose people share historical, linguistic, or cultural (see culture) ties. nationalism The belief that the interests of one’s nation are more important than the interests of other countries.
Neanderthal An extinct species of early human closely related to Our Own Species.
Protestantism A form of Christianity, resulting from the Reformation, in which allegiance is no longer offered to the Pope. recession A decline ina country’s economic activity, but less serious than a depression.
Reformation, the The reform movement of the 16th century, in which many churches broke from the Catholic Church headed by the Pope in Rome.
Renaissance, the A period of European history, beginning in the 14th century, when far-reaching changes occurred in the arts and intellectual life. republic A country without a hereditary monarch or emperor.
Solar System, the The Sun, together with its orbiting planets, including Earth, and smaller bodies such as asteroids. sovereign A ruler or head of state exerting Supreme power. species A type of organism, such as a horse or leopard.
The members of aspecies can breed with each other, but usually not with other species. stalemate A situation where further action by either side ina conflict appears impossible. stockade A line of stout posts or logs set inthe ground to forma defense against attack. stock exchange An organization that allows trading in shares of companies and other financial assets.
Universe All of soace and everything it contains. vaccination Precautionary medical treatment, usually given by injection, that keeps people from contracting a disease. virus A tiny life-form that can invade body cells , where they multiply, causing illness.
West, the Europe and North America or their ideals when seen In contrast to other civilizations.
Zionism The movement to create and maintain a homeland for the Jewish people in Israel. ndex Page numbers tn bold indicate main entries.
Vikas Chauhan, Rachael Grady, Baibhav Parida, Sean Ross, and Heena Sharma for design assistance; Charvi Arora, Suefa Lee, and Rupa Rao for editorial assistance; Ed Merritt for cartography; Mohd Zishan and Baibhav Parida for additional illustrations; Steve Crozier at Butterfly Creative Solutions for picture retouching; Victoria Pyke for proofreading; Helen Peters for the index.
VANNINI/ De Agostini ; Tim Graham ; DEA / A DAGLI ORTI ; In Pictures Ltd.
