For 50 years Enterprise was involved in every major United States conflict and is now scheduled for decommissioning.
Cid Standifer is a freelance reporter, web designer and translator based in Arlington, Va.
A Denis Clift October 25, 2012 12:22 PM Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George W Anderson Jr. was part of the inner circle of military officers advising President John F Kennedy on how to deal with the Soviet Union’s shipping missiles to Cuba.
At this time of extreme challenge for United States leadership, there were serious disagreements within that echelon.
Excerpts from those recollections presented here are of enduring value.
President John F Kennedy and a new generation took office in January 1961.
If there were hopes for improved relations at the outset, Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev soon found themselves on a road turning rocky.
In April, the United States move to oust Fidel Castro from Cuba in the Bay of Pigs invasion failed miserably.
On 1 October, the President appointed Army General Maxwell Taylor, center, to take over for General Lyman Lemnitzer as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Taylor had been serving in the White House as military representative to the President.
Flanking Taylor, left to right, are Army Chief of Staff General Earle Wheeler, Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson, and Commandant of the Marine Corps General David Shoup.
A critical factor during the blockade was the presence in the area of several Soviet Foxtrot –class dieselelectric submarines.
The strengthening of naval and military ties between Cuba and the Soviet Union no doubt pleased Prime Minister Fidel Castro, pictured with some of the task force’s officers and sailors.
Those few boats were to have been the precursor of a massive naval force that the Soviets planned to base in Cuba.
Operation Anadyr—the Soviet codename for the movement of strategic missiles and protective air, ground, and naval forces almost 8,000 miles from the USSR to Cuba—was one of the most remarkable undertakings of the entire Cold War.
Earlier, Great Britain, Japan, and the United States had on numerous occasions transported hundreds of thousands of troops and their weapons across oceans and seas, but they were traditional sea powers with large navies and merchant fleets.
The Soviet Union had neither a major surface fleet nor a large merchant marine in 1962.
Indeed, its navy did not possess a single ceangoing amphibious or landing ship.
Further, beyond military advisers, the USSR had never sent troops great distances by sea.
Under these severe limitations, the Soviet Union had begun the massive movement of troops and weapons from its home ports to Cuba.
While the Soviet leadership realized that the shipments could not be hidden from the prying eyes of United States and other NATO nations’ intelligence services, Kremlin officials believed that their precise contents could be kept secret.
Indeed, even after the weapons and troops arrived in Cuba special efforts would be made to keep their numbers and identification secret from Cubans as well as Americans.
Kenneth V Jack October 21, 2012 11:52 AM On Oct. 1962 two unarmed and unescorted Navy photo-reconnaissance jets were speeding over the Cuban landscape on their way to photograph an intermediate-range ballistic missile site being constructed by Soviet technicians.
Jerry Coffee, flew sorties with the first VFP-62 low-level reconnaissance missions on Oct., as part of the classified operation codenamed Blue Moon.
Coffee spotted a military encampment and broke formation with his flight leader to get a closer to take pictures.
This evidence of battlefield weapons of mass destruction got submerged in the flood of intelligence reaching the president.
Paul Stillwell September 11, 2012 9:59 AM Naval History, October 2012 During World War II, the war-ship that made the largest contribution to victory in the Pacific was the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise —hands down.
The ship was soon decommissioned, and in 1959 she was scrapped—despite efforts to pre-serve her as a museum and memorial.
Her legacy was perpetuated, however, in that she bequeathed her famous name to the world’s first nuclear-powered air-craft carrier, which was commissioned in November 1961.
Kent Lee aboard the USS Enterprise The namesake carrier, originally CVA-65 and later CVN-65, is now on her 22nd and final overseas deployment, serving with the 5th and 6th fleets.
When she returns to the United States this autumn, she will be inactivated and then defueled.
The current Enterprise , like her World War II counterpart, will be scrapped.
The process of removing her eight nuclear reactors will so disfigure the ship that she will not be recognizable as an aircraft carrier and thus not suitable as a museum.
