In addition to demanding that Russian Premier Nikita S Khrushchev remove all the missile bases and their deadly contents, Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in order to prevent Russian ships from bringing additional missiles and construction materials to the island.
In response to the American naval blockade, Premier Khrushchev authorized his Soviet field commanders in Cuba to launch their tactical nuclear weapons if invaded by United States forces.
Deadlocked in this manner, the two leaders of the world's greatest nuclear superpowers stared each other down for seven days until Khrushchev blinked.
On October 28, thinking better of prolonging his challenge to the United States, the Russian Premier conceded to President Kennedy's demands by ordering all Soviet supply ships away from Cuban waters and agreeing to remove the missiles from Cuba's mainland.
After several days of teetering on the brink of nuclear holocaust, the world breathed a sigh of relief.Although it may seem that the events of the seven days between October 22 and 28 unfolded at a blinding pace, the entire incident -which has come to be collectively known as the ""Cuban missile crisis"" -was the culmination of a longer process.
In June of 1961, while still in the early months of his presidency, Kennedy attended a summit with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna to discuss cold war confrontations between the east and west, in particular the situation in Berlin.
The failure of the two leaders to resolve any of their differences during the summit led Khrushchev to view Kennedy as a weak president who lacked the power or support to negotiate any meaningful concessions in the arms race.
The showdown in Cuba may indeed have been the result of such accumulating anxiety among the Soviet political elite.Viewed in hindsight, it is not surprising that the Soviets chose Cuba as their stage of operations against the United States Ever since his rise to power in 1959, Cuban Premier Fidel Castro struggled to survive America's efforts to ""encourage"" his political demise.
When General Castro came to power, the United States stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with much needed oil.
After weathering the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961, Castro observed as United States armed forces staged a mock invasion of a Caribbean island in 1962.
The purpose of the invasion was to overthrow a leader whose name, Ortsac, was Castro spelled backwards.
Although Ortsac was a fictitious name, Castro ""got the message"" and soon became convinced that the United States was serious about invading Cuba.
Sensing an opportunity to gain a strategic foothold in America's ""back yard,"" Khrushchev eagerly extended an offer of assistance to the desperate Cuban general.
The Soviet Premier offered Castro new trade opportunities, to ease the effects of United States sanctions, and a promise of protection from United States hostilities.
They include President Kennedy's personal recollections of discussions, conversations with his advisors, meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and members of the president's executive committee.We are releasing four tapes in this series now.
The tapes are unedited and represent digital copies of the materials distributed by the Library.
A U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, piloted by Richard Heyser, reveals several SS-4 nuclear missiles in Cuba.Tuesday, October 16: After learning of the missiles during breakfast, President Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America's options.Wednesday, October 17 Friday, October 19: Amid scheduled campaign trips to Connecticut and the Midwest, President Kennedy meets with and advises Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko that America will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba.
October 18, 1962After an evening meeting, President Kennedy spends about four minutes recording his personal recollections of discussions that day.
He states that opinions tended to move away from an air strike toward a blockade as the discussion evolved.
Specifically He identifies former secretary of state Dean Acheson as an advocate of the air strike, former secretary of defense Robert Lovett as a supporter of the blockade and his national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, as urging the United States ""to avoid playing the Soviet game"" and take no military action at all while waiting for a Soviet response in Berlin.
Kennedy affirms that there will be no declaration of war but rather a limited blockade for a limited purpose.
He concludes that he will go ahead with his political speeches to maintain cover until the weekend.
JFK meets with the secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before leaving on a scheduled campaign trip to Ohio and Illinois.
JFK discusses various military options and possible consequences with the Joint Chiefs of Staff:Joint Chiefs chairman General Maxwell Taylor states that the JCS was initially agreed on military action along with the blockade.
JFK concludes that an air strike would give the USSR ""a clear line"" to take Berlin the way they took Hungary after the 1956 Suez invasion.
He states that our allies would think of us as ""trigger-happy Americans"" who lost Berlin because we did not have the guts to endure the situation in Cuba.
Air Force chief of staff General Curtis LeMay, argues forcefully that the blockade and the political talks without accompanying military action will lead to war.
JFK cites the fact that nations automatically expel diplomats if their own diplomats are expelled and concludes that if we take military action the USSR will have to as weIl.
Several members of the JCS argue for military action and express fears that the blockade alone is a weak response which could lead to nuclear blackmail.
Despite being urged by Senate leaders to call for air strikes, President Kennedy addresses the American public and announces his resolve to implement naval blockade only.
The Organization of American States unanimously supports the United States decision to quarantine Cuba and, by the end of the day, all naval vessels are in place.
Stunning reconnaissance photos reveal that Soviet missiles are poised for launch.
Review of the latest intelligence from Cuba and the proclamation and implementation of the quarantine:Robert Kennedy expresses irritation about the failure of United States intelligence to discover the missiles earlier.
Discussion of how to handle the press specific reporters to be briefed by specific ExComm members on a strictly off-the-record basis.
McNamara indicates that a ship carrying offensive weapons will have to be stopped and perhaps disabled.
But Kennedy states that the Soviets will likely turn around such ships on their own to avoid a confrontation.
JFK argues that the only way the placement of the missiles could have been prevented would have been by invading Cuba six months or one, two or even three years ago.
McNamara reviews plans for destroying any SAM site which shoots down a U-2; JFK adds that when taking out the SAM site, the United States should simultaneously announce that if another plane is brought down all the SAM sites would be destroyed.
When a U-2 is actually brought down by a missile from a SAM site four days later, JFK decides not to issue the order.Bundy suggests that the president should delegate the authority to order an air strike against a SAM to the sec. of defense.
JFK does not object but insists that there must be absolute verification that the plane was brought down by hostile military action and not as the result of an accident.
Discussion of the need for hard photographic evidence to help convince the public especially, in Latin America, that the missiles are real.
Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States:Discussion about possible Soviet responses to the quarantine especially in Berlin.
President told that at a minimum the Russians will inspect our truck convoys more closely.
JFK quickly concludes that ""we ought to accept that"" because ""I don `t think we're in very good shape there"" to fight over whether they inspect our trucks.
Review of the wording of the quarantine proclamation to be issued by the president JFK notes that he title states that our purpose is ""to stop the introduction of Sino-Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba"" He suggests dropping the words ""Sino-Soviet"" because it could ""hit them harder to name them in a way which may not be desirable.
No one questions the Cold War assumption that monolithic communism is responsible for the missiles in Cuba and the term ""Sino-Soviet powers"" does appear in the textJFK predicts a real fight including shooting in order to board and search a Soviet ship.
Says we might have to shoot the rudder or even sink a ship-very dangerous and uncertain situation.
He suggests the Soviets might have hundreds of marines on board but Bundy says crews on these ships are small and a big fight unlikely.
Laughter results when JFK talks about stopping and disabling a ship, towing it to a United States port and finding it carried baby food.
Soviet ships reach the quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions.
Consideration of civil defense options and planning for possible Soviet responses in Berlin:JFK concludes that if we invade in the next ten days, the missile base crews in Cuba will likely fire at least some of the missiles at United States targets.
He asks whether we could evacuate civilian populations from cities a few days before the invasion.
Response is that cities actually provide the best protection against radiation.
JFK and RFK talking alone before the next Excomm meeting about the strategic situation in Cuba and its political implications:RFK mentions that General Lucius Clay has offered to return to Berlin where he had been the United States commander during the 1948 Soviet blockade.
RFK advises that it would be a bad idea to focus attention on Berlin at this time.
JFK agrees and they decide to ask General Taylor to tell Clay to stand by over the next few days but not to go now.
Discussion of the president's decision to take action in response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
RFK concludes that the president could not have done less and that his judgment has now been supported by our allies and almost allthe OAS states.The brothers talk about the political side of the crisis and Khrushchev's apparent willingness to embarrass the president before the upcoming congressional elections.
JFK asks about the views of Soviet Embassy official Georgy Bolshakov, who had been used in the past in communications between JFK and Khrushchev.
RFK reports that Bolshakov believes the ships will attempt to go through the quarantine and that ""this is a defensive base for the Russians.
JFK derides Khrushchev's ""horseshit about the elections, ""presumably referring to earlier assurances by the USSR that there would be no political complications before November.
Continued review of the impact of latest intelligence on thequarantine, world reaction, negotiations at the UN and possible developments on the high seas and in Berlin:Detailed briefing on new reconnaissance photos from Cuba and discussion of the need to disperse planes at Florida bases in the event of attacks by MIGs based in Cuba.
JFK questions what will happen if a United States destroyer tries to board and search a ship and is then sunk by a Soviet submarine.
JFK recommends placing Russian-speaking personnel on all ships at the quarantine line and is told by Bundy and McNamara that it is already being done.
General Maxwell Taylor reviews the latest intelligence which suggests that many Soviet ships are turning around.
We don `t want the word to go out from Moscow to turn around and then suddenly we sink their ship.
During a discussion with congressional leaders, Senate minority leader Everett Dirksen mention's Khrushchev's public request for a summit meeting to resolve the crisis.
JFK and Dirksen agree that a summit at this time would be entirely useless.
A participant, probably Senator Bourke Hickenlooper, asserts that congressional leaders should refuse to answer any questions from the press on the meeting.
JFK replies that security from these meetings has thus far been awfully good.
Continuation of briefing for congressional leaders:A participant, probably Senate majority leader Mike Mansfield, expresses his concern about the ""congenital habit of overstating the ease as well as the results of an air strike.
I don't think there is any such thing as one of these quick, easy and sanitary air strikes.
Urges careful analysis of Soviet intentions over the next few days before taking this critical step.
United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at the United Nations but they refuse to answer.
The aircraft carrier Essex hails the Soviet tanker Bucharest and allows it to proceed to Cuba after being told that it was not carrying cargo covered by the quarantine.
October 25, 1962Tape 37.4, October 25, 10:00, Review of the movement of ships toward the quarantine line and potential United States responses:Brief discussion of the arrival of Fidel Castro's list of baby food, plasma and medicines as part of the continuing negotiations for release of the Bay of Pigs prisoners.
JFK asks if there are any up-to-date intelligence reports on the status of Cuban morale and support for Castro.
McNamara reports that it was hailed, responded that it was not carrying prohibited items, and is being shadowed by United States destroyer.
Recommends establishing a pattern of aerial surveillance which looks like an air attack so that surprise could be maintained as long as possible if an air attack is eventually ordered.
JFK raises the question of the political ramifications of letting the Bucharest pass through the quarantine.
Suggests that it might be worth giving the USSR ""sufficient grace to get its instructions clear"" or for the UN to reach an agreement.
McNamara agrees with JFK's argument and states that the advantage is to avoid a shooting incident over a ship that is not carrying offensive weapons.
JFK asserts that the quarantine has already been successful since the USSR has already turned back fourteen ships presumably carrying offensive weapons.
But, JFK adds, ""we've got to face up to the fact that we're going to have to grab a Russian ship.
Bundy then observes that ""Nothing in your speech requires you to stop any ship, even if it is found to contain offensive cargo we deem unacceptable.
JFK says that we could lift the quarantine if the UN provides guarantees that no new offensive weapons would be introduced.
That would make us seem less negative than if we say we won't lift it under any circumstances.
Bundy and McNamara point out that the real issue is the removal of the existing missiles not the introduction of new ones.
Rusk explains that the plan being discussed at UN would put UN guarantees against new missiles into place as a substitute for the quarantine for only 2-3 weeks while negotiations continue for a permanent solution involving complete removal.
McNamara wonders what we will do in the next 24 hours if there is no Soviet ship carrying offensive weapons which can be intercepted and construction of the missile sites also continues.
He recommends spending the rest of the day planning escalation of the quarantine.
JFK agrees but notes that we will have to ""pick up some ship tomorrow"" and prove ""sooner or later that the blockade is reaL"" McNamara recommends stopping the tanker Grozny instead.
Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon agrees with the ""logic"" of having a confrontation in Cuba rather than on the high seas.
Walt Rostow, chair of the State Department Policy Planning Council, recommends adding POL to the embargo list and not having any confrontation for now.
EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the United States will not invade Cuba.October 26: The CIA reports that the construction of the missile sites is continuing and accelerating.
JFK asserts that only an invasion or trade for United States missiles will break the impasse.
He orders the State Department to make plans for the establishment of a civilian government in Cuba after an invasion.
Planning also proceeds for massive air strikes against military targets in Cuba.
A new public letter from Khrushchev outlines a possible deal to end the crisis.
RFK meets secretly with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and agrees after a phone call to the president that the removal of United States missiles from Turkey is negotiable as part of a comprehensive settlement.Khrushchev receives a cable from Castro urging a nuclear first strike against the United States in the event of an invasion of Cuba.
Further discussion of the quarantine, potential United States reactions on the high seas and the latest intelligence data as well as the possibility, of invading Cuba and establishing a new civil government.
Discussion of a post-invasion Cuban government and the advantages of using Cuban exiles in any invasion.
Bundy refers to ""post-Castro Cuba"" and recommends using the Mongoose organization in planning a new civil government for Cuba.
Bundy also expresses concern about the need to accelerate civil defense measures without creating panic in the country.
Also notes that carrying out the invasion will mean consulting many more people in the government , will be much more complicated and will also require answering many questions from the press.
Douglas Dillon again argues for an air strike against the missiles rather than a serious confrontation at sea.
Says the former is directly related to Cuba and the missiles and the latter can take on a life of its own with grave international repercussions.
The missiles would be kept inoperable rather than actually dismantled during these few days.) negotiations would then continue to dismantle and remove the missiles along with a guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba.
He also adds that the other side may ask the United States to dismantle the missile sites in Turkey and Italy as part of a settlement.
These proposals are essentially identical to the agreement which RFK, speaking for the president, would propose to the Soviet ambassador late on 10/27 and Khrushchev would accept early on 10/28.
However, the understanding concerning the removal of United States missiles from Turkey would remain secret for several decades and was not included in the public announcement on 10/28.
CIA director John McCone dissents vigorously saying we should not drop the quarantine until these weapons, ""pointed at our hearts,"" are removed.
I don't see any other way you're going to get the weapons out"" Kennedy then clarifies his position, stating that he is not, like Stevenson, advocating lifting the quarantine.
Intelligence briefing by CIA director, further military planning and a discussion of the Sino/Indian war between JFK and the Indian ambassador to the US:As McCone reviews the latest pictures of the missile sites, JFK asks if anyone has seen the London Times which claims that the United States has misread the photos and misidentified ground to air missiles as ICBMs.
McCone expresses concern that they could have missiles pointing at us by tomorrow morning.
JFK states that if we invade, by the time we reach these sites""after a very bloody fight."" they might be fired at us.
He expresses doubts that we can get them out by diplomacy and raises the issue of whether they will be fired at us if we begin air strikes and/or an invasion.
While one U-2 spy plane accidentally flies into Russia, another is shot down over Cuba.
A new message arrives from Khrushchev in which he expresses willingness to remove the missiles from Cuba under UN supervision in return for a United States commitment to dismantle its missiles in Turkey.
A U-2 plane is shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile and the pilot is killed.
JFK and Dean Rusk, without the knowledge of the Excomm, prepare a contingency plan later that evening in the event that the USSR rejects the terms negotiated by RFK and Dobrynin.
Discussion of maintaining aerial surveillance during the day and at night ""keeping the heat on,"" since they are working 24 hours a day on the sites.
After a ticker tape comes in saying that Khrushchev has offered publicly to trade the missiles in Cuba for the United States missiles in Turkey, JFK argues that ""we are going to be in an insupportable position on this matter if this becomes his proposal.
In the first place, last year we tried to get the missiles out of there because they were not militarily useful number 1.
Discussion of whether the Soviets are moving on two different tracks the public track offer of a straight trade and the private track offer which includes a demand for a United States guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba.
JFK repeats that ""you're going to find a lot of people thinking this is a rather reasonable position.
JFK insists that we must talk to the Turks to be sure that they don't issue a statement which is totally unacceptable.
Also must make sure they understand the peril they are in after we take action in Cuba.
Kennedy expresses concern that we will have real problems in England and the continent because Khrushchev's proposal seems so reasonable and if we act in Cuba and the USSR responds in Berlin, many people will justify the Soviet move ""on the grounds that we were wholly unreasonable.
October 27, 1962Tape 41A, 10/27, 10:00 ; resumes at 4:00:General Taylor reports that the JCS wants an air strike no later than Monday morning unless there is irrefutable evidence that the missiles are being dismantled.
McNamara recommends more surveillance flights Monday morning with proper cover.
Every time I tried to put a monkey on somebody's else's back, I got one.
Khrushchev is saying, ""I'm going to dismantle the foreign policy of the United States for the last 15 years in order to let you get these missiles out of Cuba.
Kennedy reiterates the McNamara proposal tell the Turks that they would be safer if the United States missiles are eliminated before an attack on Cuba and replaced by Polaris missiles.
The meeting resumes later in the evening with further discussion of surveillance flights over Cuba.
The crisis is over.The CIA's early morning intelligence update concludes that Soviet technicians have completed the work necessary to make all the MRBM sites fully operational.
Radio Moscow announces that the Soviet Union has accepted the proposed solution and releases the text of a Khrushchev letter confirming the details.
JFK suspends U-2 air surveillance over Cuba and orders that no military action be taken against ships approaching the quarantine line.
Several members of the Joint Chiefs warn of possible Soviet deception and urge the president to reconsider air strikes against the missile sites.
JFK orders United States ships to remain on the quarantine line and authorizes continuation of low-level reconnaissance flights.
Soviet deputy premier Vasily Kuznetsov meets with U Thant to work out details for the removal of the missiles from Cuba.
Citing Khrushchev's October 28th letter agreeing to remove ""those weapons you describe as offensive,"" JFK decides that until the Soviets remove the IL-28 nuclear bombers, which the United States has classified as ""offensive weapons,"" the quarantine cannot be lifted.
Rusk argues for continuing surveillance today while waiting for developments in the discussions with Kuznetsov at the UN before making any further decisions.
Discussion of making United States planes available to the UN for surveillance.
Some discussion of whether U-2 flights are technically capable of revealing any Soviet effort to hide some of the missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy insists that only continued aerial photography can prove whether the missile sites are actually being dismantled ‹ notwithstanding U Thant's upcoming inspection trip to Cuba.
Kennedy notes that it is difficult to trust the Soviets since they apparently deceived their own ambassador to the United States about the missiles.
JFK expresses the hope that we can use this moment to initiate a ""decent deal in Berlin"" since it is our most ""paralyzing"" problem.
Just over a month after the crisis began, JFK terminates the quarantine when Khrushchev agrees after several weeks of tense negotiations at the UN to withdraw Soviet IL-28 nuclear bombers from Cuba.
Three decades later a Soviet military official would reveal that mobile tactical nuclear weapons and more than 40,000 Soviet troops were in place in Cuba for use in the event of an American invasion.Prepared by Jerry Goldman and Giel Stein.
