Call/SMS 03336042057 Latest Edition The energy to see and the energy to do.
Novemher/Deeember 2017 **The United States requires the next generation of national security professionals to face a host of new issues.” — Dr.
Steven Meyer Dean of Graduate Studies, Daniel Morgan Graduate School MISSION The Daniel Morgan Graduate School educates and prepares Future leaders to develop actionable solutions to global and domestic security challenges.
It does not accept responsibiV^Jbr the views in any ariides. s^ed or unsigned, which appear in its pages.
What h does accept is the re^Ptsibdi^ for ^ing them a chance to appear.
JOHN WATBRBURY HIAHIOQINS Interim Publisher ANIQUE HALLIOAY Senior ftoduct Manager JONATHAN CKUNQ Aasodate Director, Business Operations NORA R EV ENAU OH AssodaCe Director.
Marketing EDWARD WALSH Advertising Director MICHAEL PASUIT Sensor Manager.
FareignAifain xeoiA emces TaLIPHONl M0-C29-S$}9 U S /Canada SU-T 1 CHS 60 S All echo eouAtritt eMAiL. seTi^icetfForegnASatfs eusteaMnvc eoei mail; PJl Boa 60001 ,ta^aFL.BUa OOOt Street, Ne« York.
FuSLcatioe *40055710 CONTRIBUTORS Despite having opposed the 2003 United States invasion of Iraq, EMMA SKY, once the invasion happened, headed to Iraq to work for the Coalition Provisional Authority.
Over the next decade, she became a key player in Western efforts at reconstruction, sendng as the govemorate coordinator of the province of Kirkuk and later as a political adviser to General Raymond Odiemo, the commander of United States forces in Iraq.
Over the past decade, lisa Monaco has worked on many aspects of the United States’ fight against terrorism, serving as chief of staff to the director of the FBI, head of the Justice Department’s National Security Division, and President Barack Obama’s homeland security adviser.
In ""Preventing the Next Attack” , Monaco sets out bow the United States can protect itself from the terrorist threat.
But after fainting at the sight of blood during a biology class, he switched to the humanities.
In 'When Stalin Faced Hitler” , Korkin tells the story of the fateful night leading up to the morning in 1941 when, after years of mutual nona^ression, Germany finally attacked the Soviet Union.
As a young scholar in the early 1980s, OLIVIER ROY roamed Afghanistan with the mujahideen, studying the relations between the Afghan resistance and fundamentalist Islamic movements.
AMERICA'S FORGOTTEN WARS Y ou don’t hear much about it :a the media, but American forces are waging several conflicts around the world these days.
As Washington obsesses over soap operas and scandals, the actual work of maintaining global order continues under the radar.
Our lead package this issue is an attempt to redress the balance, giving United States interventions the serious scrutiny they deserve.
We asked top experts on six key conflicts to sketch where things are, where they are going, and what the United States should do next—and we’re delighted to bring you their answers.
Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystaJ explain why pursuing some form of the current United States strategy in Afghanistan continues to be the least bad option there, even though nobody is particularly happy with the results to date.
Emma Sky and Robert Ford bring their wealth of experience to bear on the post-i5is landscape in Iraq and Syria, respectively, with Sky advising Washington to focus on local politics and institution building while Ford suggests curtailing most engagement beyond refugee assistance.
Ivo Daaider tackles the new eastern front, a^uing that given Russia’s actions in Ukraine, the Middle East, and elsewhere, the United States and its NATO allies should focus on preventing miscalculations and unintended escalation.
And Lisa Monaco and Susan Hennessey explore the more amorphous realms of terrorism and cyberwarfare, respectively, arguing that international cooperation, restored deterrence, and calibrated pushback can help contain these complex and enduring threats.
Inexperienced, understaffed, and lacking a coherent grand strat^y, the Trump administration has generally reacted to global events rather than driven them, engaging the world episodically and idiosyncratically.
Some issues, however—like the ones covered here—are simply too important to be pushed to a back burner or delegated to staff wearing uniforms.
It was February 2010, and after months establishing a relationship, Pakistanis chief of army staff, Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, and one of us, Stan McChrystal, were having the kind of conversation senior military commanders are supposed to have, discussing the role of the NATO-led coalition’s efforts in Afghanistan and northwestern Pakistan.
We’d spent hours alone, each laying out in detail a strategy for the conflict.
While not quite my second home, the Pakistani army’s headquarters in Rawalpindi was now familiar ground, and Kayani, a colleague with whom I spoke easily.
K08H SADAT is • former Lieutenant Colonel in the Afghan Special Operations Forces.
From 2009 to 2011. he served as Aide-de-camp to the Commander of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
He first served In Afghanistan In 2002 as Chief of Staff of Combined Joint Task Force 1B0. end from 2009 to 2010, he served as Commander of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
There was nothing revelatory in the general’s assessment, because like many others, 1 had already reluctantly concluded that it was likely correct.
It may seem laughable that back in 2010, nine years after the war had begun and eight since I had first started serving there, we felt pressed for time.
But for most of those years, the coalition’s efforts had been underresourced and poorly coordinated.
And in December 2009, United States President Barack Obama had announced a commitment to begin reducing the United States’ role in 18 months.
Still, the president had also decided to reinforce the United States effort so that it would comprise 150,000 United States and coalition forces and include an ongoing effort to train, equip, and advise 350,000 Af ghan forces.
If ever the United States had a realistic shot of success in its post-9/11 involvement in Afghanistan, it was then.
The U.S.-backed government in Kabul remains plagued by political infighting and corruption, and the Afghan security forces cannot control significant parts of the country.
The Taliban, while no longer the idealistic young fighters that swept north in 1994 and not particularly popular with the Afghan people, have leveraged Kabul’s weaknesses to make gains in recent years.
Against this backdrop, United States President Donald Trump has outlined a new strategy.
That leaves something resembling the current approach as the only real option.
Stuck with doing more of the same, Washington must try to do it better.
The United Slates invaded Afghanistan in 2001 to destroy al Qaeda and overthrow the Taliban regime that was hosting it.
The overarching goal was always to protect the United States by denying terrorists a safe haven in which to plan and train, but over time, the mission grew.
Eventually, it came to include the establishment of an Afghan nation that defended its own sovereignty, embraced democracy, educated women, and cracked down on opium production.
Although the initial operations appeared to work, complexities on the ground, plus the distraction of the war in Iraq, sidetracked the effort, and the Taliban’s presence expanded.
When Obama came into office, in 2009, he cook a hard look at the Afghan campaign and announced a surge of United States troops and a reinvigorated counterinsurgency Novemher/December 2017 1 Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystal strategy.
But by the tniddle of 2015, the troop suige was complete, and a subsequent drawdown left only 9,800 coalition troops in the country, most of whom were focused on training and advising the Afghans.
Although the Taliban have de facto control over only limited areas of the country, their presence and influence are likely at their highest levels since the group lost power in 2001.
Remnants of the al Qaeda network and one of its branches, al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent, are also active, having been pushed out of Pakistan’s tribal areas in late 2014 by the Pakistani military.
The Islamic State in Khorasan, as the branch of is is in Afghanistan and Pakistan is known, enjoys free rein on both sides of the two countries* border.
Although each of these groups has its own transnational agenda, all have made common cause with the Taliban to overthrow the Afghan government.
The fragility of Afghanistan’s security sector is making their job easier.
The 180,000 soldiers of the Afghan National Army, trained and equipped largely by the United States, are employed primarily at static checkpoints around the country that are vulnerable to Taliban attacks.
The Afghan National Police, which is riddled with corruption and poor leadership, is used more for the protection of members of parliament and other officials than for its intended purpose of enforcing law and order.
A^hanistan's premier intelligence agency, the National Directorate of Security, is increasingly involved in military operations against terrorist groups instead of providing essential intelligence.
Compounding the challenges, the Afghan legal system struggles to deal with corruption and criminality.
Knowing little about the law and the rights of citizenship, Afghan security forces often make cridcal mistakes, for instance, detaining innocent civilians.
By contrast, Taliban fighters— especially those in the lethal Haqqani network, an offshoot of the Taliban based in Pakistan—often have a thorough understanding of the law.
When captured, they have proved adept at minimizing their sentences or avoiding conviction altogether.
Despite its name, the National Unity Government—a powersharing deal brokered by the United States in 2014 that made Ashraf Ghani president and Abdullah Abdullah chief execudve—Is deeply divided.
Whatever progress the United States has made after 16 years, it is inaiguably incomplete.
To some Americans, the effort has succeeded in building a shaky foundation on which more can and should be constructed.
For the ordinary Afghan, however, the US. campaign has led to frightening uncertainty about the future.
In 1902, Vladimir Lenin published a now famous pamphlet titled Whas 1$ lo Be Done?, in which he prescribed a strategy for what later became the Bolsheviks* successful takeover of Russia’s 1917 revoludon.
Lenin argued that Russia’s working classes required the leadership of dedicated cadres before they would become sufBciendy politicized to demand change In tsarist Russia.
There is material for endless debates about the merits of each, but it helps to begin by remembering what the United States* objectives in Afghanistan were and still are.
As Obama said in his 2009 West Ebint speech about Afghanistan, “We must deny al Qaeda a safe haven.
We must reverse the Taliban’s momentum and deny it the ability to overthrow the government.
If those objectives, or anything close to them, remain valid, it is hard to vievr doing less as an acceptable course of action.
Although the government of Afghan President Mohammad Najibullah survived for three years after the Soviets withdrew, before falling to opposition forces, it took muscular logistical support and i nfigh ting among the opposition warlords to keep it in the fight for so long.
Many observers believe that absent at least the current level of support, Ghani’s government could last only a small fraction of that time.
As for the doing-more option, why couldn't the United States consider a version of the 2009 troop surge again^ That strategy, while flawed due to ambitious timelines and the failure to execute a truly whole-of-govemment approach, could have succeeded had Washington demonstrated the necessary patience and commitment.
But executing a counterinsurgency campaign over an extended period, always difficult for the American psyche, was a particulaHy tail order after the recent experience in Iraq.
Today, gathering the popular and polidcaJ support for a major increase in United States troop levels and a renewed commitment of many years is even more unlikely.
Unless condidons on the ground changed drasdcally, it would be unrealisdc to propose such a strategy.
Besides, Afghans across the nadon appreciate that a siepped-up United States presence would not be polidcaily sustainable for long, thus increasing their concerns about what would happen after the Americans left.
Under this strategy, Washington would have to lower its ambidons in Afghanistan, with the goal being merely a long-term reladonship with and a limited military presence in a troubled but fonedoning country.
As they shed some of the loftier goals of the past, policymakers will have to make it dear that the United States is unequivocally committed to its core goals.
It would sdJl promote regional stability, encourage modest but steady economic development, and maintain a platform from which to collect intelligence and carry out counterterrorism operations.
Although this strategy would indeed come at a cost, its advantages—namely ensuring the survival of a non-Taliban government— would be worth the price.
Critics may charge that following this course would meet the definidon of insanity—which, as that old adage has it, is doing the same thing over and over again and expeedng a different result.
The United States has no better choice at hand, and in fact, this one is not all that bad.
What’s more, within the confines of this strategy, there is room for improvement—in terms of fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan, dealing with them and their allies in Novemher/December 2017 S Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystal Pakistan, and building a more responsible government in Kabul.
TARGETING THE TALIBAN Continuing to dismantle the Taliban in Afghanistan is easier said than done, of course, but it is probably essential to the survival of Afghanistan as a nation.
No other opposition group in the country has been as successiul in building a movement os the Taliban have.
Portraying themselves as the more l^dmate alternative to the current regime, the Taliban threaten the state and continue to offer sanctuary to isis and other transnational threats.
The United States should continue to squeeze the Taliban with a steady campaign of targeted strikes against their leadership, training camps, and other facilities.
But Washington also needs to look outside Afghanistan and seek to increase international pressure on the group.
Getting a UN resolution designating the Taliban as a global terrorist group would be a powerful move—it would severely undercut their legitimacy and reduce their access to external support— but on admittedly heavy lift.
More likely to bear fruit would be the application of diplomatic pressure on countries offering support and sanctuary to the Taliban, especially the Arab Gulf slates, where to this day, the Taliban freely collect donations and run businesses.
Tbat would also mean putting pressure on Pakistan, of course, a tactic that has proved diiHcult and largely ineffective.
Although the Pakistanis have taken acdon against some threats, the leaders of the Taliban, the Haqqani network, and other terrorist groups continue to operate relatively freely in major Pakistani cities, such as Peshawar, Quetta, and even the capital, Islamabad.
It would be nice if it were possible to secure Afghanistan without reorienting the United States relationship with Pakistan, but experience proves that it is not.
Disappoindngly, pressuring Pakistan to take more effective acdons to deny the Taliban sanctuary is not the silver bullet some hope for.
Pressure could come in the form of reduced military assistance, but Washington’s leverage is reladvely limited and could threaten United States supply lines chat run through Pakistan, as well as add further friction to an already strained relationship.
A polidcal solution to the problem of the Taliban would be preferable, and it’s possible chat renewed military pressure could drive the group to the negodadng table.
But it would be a mistake to overestimate the Taliban’s sensitivity to such eifbrts.
As long as the group believes there is any probability of success, even over a long time horizon, it is likely to stay in the fight, so a peace deal remains a distant prospect.
It’s worth remembering chat the efforts of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, a body designed to negotiate a deal with the Taliban, came to a halt in 2011, when its leader, Burhanuddin Rabbani, was assassinated.
And the Taliban's steady drumbeat of high-profile attacks in Afghanistan, resulting in scores of civilian deaths, makes negotiations nearly Impossible in the current environment.
The best the United States can do is to put uiuelenting pressure on the Taliban while helping build the capacity of the Afghan state—so that the Afghans can eventually 6 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Staying the Course in Afghanistan assume fuU responsibility for maintaining their sovereignty and preventing the reemergence of terrorist sanctuaries.
Likewise, no United States military campaign in Afghanistan can succeed if the enemy enjoys a safe haven in Pakistan.
The United States must therefore refine and focus its operations there.
Filtering the water upstream, so to speak, has proved politically difficult across national borders.
The United States military’s 1916-17 incursion into Mexico to hunt the guerilla leader Pancho Villa was famously controversial, as were its campaigns against North Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia and Laos during the Vietnam War.
British forces acting on behalf of Malaysia conducted crossborder operations in Indonesia in the 1960s; the Soviets threatened to attack mujahideen safe havens in Pakistan in the l9S0s; and during the Iraq war, United States Special Forces reached into Syria in pursuit of al Qaeda in Iraq operatives, tn each case, the complexities were huge.
Still, it would be a mistake to rule out United States operations in Pakistan, Like the mujahideen in the 1980s, the Taliban today are organized around three main hubs in the country—the province of Baluchistan, the Waziriscan region of the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas, and the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
From all three places, the Taliban launch attacks across the border into Afghanistan with impunity.
Teams of Haqqani network operatives sent to conduct highprofile attacks have even managed to pass through the Torkham border crossing, in the famous Khyber Pass, using Intimate documents.
Specially selected and trained inside Pakistan, they conduct meticulously planned and rehearsed lethal attacks against foreign embassies, Afghan government offices, and United States and kato military installations.
A purely defensive strategy against these threats will never be sufiident; highly focused offensive operations, primarily in Afghanistan but, when necessary, also inside Pakistan, are required To be sure, the United States has conducted such operations since the war in Afghanistan began, but it can do more.
To maximize their effectiveness, the United States should assemble an integrated task force with Afghanistan that allows the two countries’ intelligence communities, law enforcement agencies, and militaries to collaborate.
Lo the best-case scenario, Pakistan wauld willingly participate in these joint efforts, but in the event that it does not show such unprecedented cooperation, they should go on regardless.
A MORE CAPABLE KABUL The final element of the United States’ strategy in Afghanistan should involve convincing the Afghan government to press forward with reforms.
Absent a concerted and effective campaign to reduce corruption and increase the effectiveness of key Institutions, legitimacy with the Afghan people will remain elusive.
Over the past 16 years, Washington has spent billions of dollars on training and equipping Afghan forces and building Afghanistan’s infrastructure, yet the Novemher/December 2017 7 Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystal country still has few properly fiincdoning instirurions.
The handful of ones that do work owe their success to investments in developing leadership.
Driving reform in the Afghan government will require continuous coordination with the Afghans themselves, and many more than three cups of tea.
Improving Afghanistan’s institutions will take the long-term work of building human capital and changing officials' behavior, rather than short-term in&astrucrure or other projects.
Accordingly, the United States needs to work closely with Afghanistan to select, train, mentor, and support the right caliber of leaders.
Putting in place a ""civilian surge"" of large numbers of nonmilitary experts, as some have called for, is impractical.
Creating and fielding such a group has proved difficult in the past, and the American public has little appetite for such an effort.
But the United States could find purchase in supporting a smaller network of United States and international civilian advisers who would stay in Afghanistan for longer tours of duty.
Driving change in any society is difficult, but Afghanistan’s complex environment is no place for well-intentioned neophytes or dilettantes.
For the greatest probability of long-term success, the United States will need to create across multiple o^anizadons a cadre of dedicated professionals who are steeped in the language, culture, and political realities of Afghanistan and who are connected by a coordinated strategy.
PRESSING ON It’s tempting to view any further effort in Afghanistan as the ultimate example of stupidity or stubbornness.
But such pessimism ignores that a majority of Afghans oppose a Taliban regime and few would benefit from the Taliban’s return to power.
Furthermore, the United States and its allies in post-9/Il Af^ianistan have largely aroided being cast as colonialists.
To be sure, Afghans have expressed their irustradons—from outrage over civilian casualdes to disappointment about the lack of economic progress—but more of them wish for a better-executed effort than wish for abandorunent.
Other skepdcs may argue that even a limited effort could fail, and if it does.
Washington could be forced into the hellish position of reluctandy increasing its commitment to an unworthy client state.
The prospect brings to mind memories of the gradual, and ultimately unsuccessful, escaladon in Vietnam, This is indeed a risk, but it is manageable, if Washington carefiilly identifies its objectives, and worth accepting in light of the alternatives.
As satisfying as it might be to declare ""game ewer"" and move on, a post-American Afghanistan is not a pretty picture.
Even though too great a Western presence in the Muslim world generates resentment, it is also true that a total absence reinforces the narrative that the United States doesn’t care about the non-Christian parts of the world.
Without resurrecting the domino theory from the Cold War, one can still say that an American retreat from Afghanistan is unlikely to return the country to the tranquil place that served as the exotic setting for James Michener’s 1963 novel Caravans.
More probable is a repressive and ideological regime that supports transnational terrorist groups.
Among a range of unpalatable choices, the best option is to pursue some version of the current policy.
ECONOMICS, AND MORE sais-jhu.edu/purpose New from The Aft of Sanc^ns yim ft$m Ikt FidJ RICHARD NEPHEW “Ai Richard Ncphaw points out in tNs hiphly readabla book, tb« UM or aconemk sanctions to affact tha bahavkr of oUiars Internationally r^s been around for a tonp time.
Brecba^y because ha Ivs been a practitioner in the appllcatlen of sanctions, hia Insiphts and conclusions are theuphihil and should kiform policy makers.
Snyder emphasizes the contradictory forces that have draped Seoufs forelpn policy, such as the pluses and minuses of peopmphy, nationalism and Intematienallsm, and autonomy and alliance throuph each administration.
Mr, Raimi tackles ad of the hoHiutton topics surrounding hacidnp .,. concisely and In plain language easily accessRale to lay parsons.
The freckir^ Debate belortgs on the bookshelf of every local aiected ofTIclal and state legislator who is greppQr>p Silencing the Bomb One Saen/uri Qaeo n fJah Nvdter Tiffing LYNN R SYKES 'Lynn R, Sykes has a long record of using seismology to study the Important question of how to differentiate nuclear explosions from earthquakes.
That experience makes him uniquely quaQfled to present this cautionary tale about the sclerotic process by whid) well*founded scientific Insight niters its way into the politically loaded formulation of national pdlcy^particulaHy defense policy.
For nine grueling months, Iraq’s Counter Terrorism Service, an elite group of U.S.trained forces, suffered heavy losses as they fought street by street to uproot isis fighters, who used the local population as human shields.
Thousands of civilians were killed, and a million or so were displaced from their homes.
The liberation of Mosul ended a reign of terror that saw children brainwashed in schools, smokers publicly flogged, Yazidi women reduced to sex slaves, and gay men thrown from rooftops.
The victory also struck a devastating blow to ISIS, killing thousands of its fighters.
She was Gaver* norate Coordinator of Kirkuk from 2003 to 2004 and Political Adviser to United States Army General Raymond Odierno from 2007 to 2010. shrinking its resources, crushing its organizational capacity, and diminishing its global appeal.
With a military victory in hand, United States President Donald Trump might want to declare ""mission accomplished"" and seek a hasty exit from Iraq.
Fourteen years after the United States invasion, that choice is no doubt tempting.
As much as Trump and other Americans may wish to end any involvement, what happens in Iraq does not stay in Iraq.
Isis has lost most of the territory it controlled in the country and is severely weakened as an o^anization, but the group retains the capacity to conduct attacks internationally.
And United States support is still needed to strengthen the Iraqi state and to discourage other countries in the region from filling the power vacuum.
The collapse of Iraq was instrumental in the unraveling of regional orde^ its stability is key to restoring a balance of power.
Ln March 2003, the United States invaded Iraq on the assumption (which later proved incorrect) that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was developing weapons of mass destruction.
Military success was quick— the U.S.-led coalition toppled Saddam’s government within a few weeks—but political success proved more elusive.
In 2003, the Coalition Provisional Authority dismissed Iraqi civil servants and dissolved the security forces.
These decisions led to the collapse of the state and civil war, which allowed al Qaeda in Iraq to gain a foothold and Iran to expand Its influence.
During U.S, President George W Bush’s second term, however, the United States managed to reverse a seemingly bleak November/Decemher 2017 9 AMERICA'S FORGOTTEN WARS Emma Sky prognosis.
The surge of additional United States troops into the country in 2007, combined with the cooperation of Sunni tribes (the so-called Sunni Awakening), dramatically reduced sectarian violence and brought about the defeat of ai Qaeda in Iraq.
When United States President Barack Obama took office, in 2009, both the Americans and the Iraqis believed that the sectarian civil war was over and that the country was finally on the right track.
But rather than capitalizing on these successes to cajole Iraqi politicians toward compromise, the Obama administration disengaged, 'Hie 2010 Iraqi election marked an inflection point.
Instead, it signaled its desire to keep Maliki in power, despite the stipulations of the Iraqi constitution and the objections of Iraqi politicians.
The Obama administration insisted that Maliki was an Iraqi nationalist and a friend of the United States.
But in reality, the decision to keep him in place played into the hands of Iran.
Tehran pressured the anti-American Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, one of Maliki^s most outspoken foes, to align his powerful political bloc with Maliki^s coalition, a move that was instrumental in securing another term for the prime minister.
In exchange for Iran’s help in forging the alliance with Sadr, Maliki agreed to ensure the complete withdrawal of United States forces from Iraq by 2011, when the status-of-forces agreement between the two countries was set to expire.
Instead of marking the peaceful transition of power in a new democratic system, the 2010 election undermined confidence that change could come about through politics.
Secure in his seat for a second term, Maliki reneged on his promises to the Sunni Awakening.
He labeled Sunni politicians as “terrorists,"" driving them out of the political process, and he ordered the security forces to violently crush Sunni dissent.
In so doing, Maliki created conditions that allowed a new group to rise up out of the ashes of al Qaeda in Iraq.
Ists, as it came to be known, proclaimed itself the defender of Sunnis against Maliki’s regime.
Feeling betrayed and discriminated against by the government, many Sunnis determined that ISIS was the lesser of two evils.
Maliki further undermined Iraq’s fledgling democratic institutions by politicizing them.
These moves were particularly damaging to the military, where Maliki replaced many effective Iraqi security forces commanders—whom he regarded as too close to the Americans— with loyalists.
The Obama administration’s decision to disengage from Iraq ultimately brought about conditions that required it to reengage.
By 2014, is is had taken control of a third of the country, and the Iraqi army—trained and equipped by the United States at a cost of billions of dollars—had disintegrated, leaving behind its U.S.-supplied equipment for ISIS to capture.
Confronted with a well-armed terrorist group and a weak state whose army had collapsed, the Obama administration withdrew its support from Maliki and demanded that he be replaced before once again dispatching U.S, forces to Iraq.
The current fragmentation of Iraqis political landscape provides a chance for meaningful cross-sectarian coalition building.
But there is also a risk that other countries in the region might seize the opportunity to increase their influence as Iraqi politicians compete with one another for power.
Maiiki*s replacement as prime minister, Haider al-Abadi has sought to balance American and Iranian support and has tried to remain neutral in regional power struggles.
He has also adopted a much more inclusive approach to domestic politics.
To stay in power, he might form political alliances with a range of factions.
One potential ally is Sadr, who has already announced his intention to form a political alliance with Allawi, the politician whose coalition defeated Maliki in 2010.
Abadi may also find allies among Shiite Islamist political parties, such as the newly formed al-HUcma group, led by Ammar al-Hakim.
The recent victory against isis has strengthened Ahadi's position, but he still needs to build up his own power base.
Still smarting from being deposed, Maliki is constandy working to undermine Abadi and advance his anti-American and pro-Iranian agenda.
Another key player is Hadi al-Ameri, the leader of the Badr Organization, a Shiite militia-cumpolitical party intent on deepening Iraq’s ties to Iran and attacking secular activists.
Sunni leaders, meanwhile, remain divided and disgraced, and the old guard has been unwilling to step aside to allow a younger generation of politicians to emerge.
Shiite leaders accuse the Sunnis of being beholden to neighboring countries Novemher/December 2017 II Emma Sky such as Saudi Arabia and Turkey—a fear stoked by (he Sunnis* habit of holding political conferences abroad.
S and a widespread suspicion that many Sunnis initially welcomed isis into their dties.
THE KURDISH QUESTION The Kurds, in contrast, find themselves in a stronger position, which they hope to leverage in their bid for independence.
Kurdish ambitions for statehood date back to the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, when the imperial powers drew new borders in the Middle East, Despite promises to (he contrary, the Kurds did not receive a country; instead, their lands were incorporated into Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey.
During the campaign against isis, the Iraqi Kurds received weapons directly from the international community (rather than through Baghdad), and they were able to extend the territory under their control to include the multiethnic and oil-rich city of Kirkuk.
These developments generated momentum, which led Masoud Barzani, the president of the Kurdistan Regional Government, to schedule a referendum on Independence for September 25, 2017.
To achieve independence, however, the Kurds must surmount numerous obstacles, both internal and external, Iran and Turkey both strongly objected to the referendum out of the fear that it might strengthen the Kurdish secessionist movements in their respective countries.
The United States also continues to support a unified Iraq, and United States Secretary of State Rex TiUerson pushed the Kurds to postpone their referendum.
He has overstayed his legally mandated term as president, and young Kurds in particular have grown increasingly critical of his government's corruption and mismanagement.
To make matters worse, low oil prices and ongoing disputes with Baghdad have left the salaries of many Iraqi Kurds unpaid and lowered the standard of living.
THE VIEW FROM TEHRAN In Iraq, domestic political dynamics are inextricably linked to circumstances beyond the country’s borders.
Concern about the level of Iranian influence is particularly widespread.
During the campaign to defeat isis, Iran not only provided military advisers; it also supported certain Shiite militias, which it wants to maintain in order to extend its political influence in Baghdad and secure the land route from Iran to Lebanon.
Because of their role in preventing ISIS from marching on Baghdad, the Popular Mobilization Units enjoy wide support on the Shiite street, and some of (heir leaders are now looking to convert their military successes into political power.
But these militias undermine the legitimacy of the state; their continued presence keeps Iraq from becoming strong enough to push back against Iranian influence.
And widely disseminated reports of the 12 FOREIGN AFFAIRS torture and murder of tsis suspects at their hands have instilled fear among the Sunni population.
Despite having welcomed Tehran*s support in the past, the Iraqi leadership is now taking steps to balance Iranian influence by making signiiicant overtures to Saudi Arabia.
In February 2017, Adel al-Jubeir became the first Saudi foreign minister to visit Baghdad since Iraq and Saudi Arabia cut ties in 1990, when Saddam invaded Kuwait.
Later in 2017, Abadi and Qassim al-Aiaji, Iraq’s interior minister, each paid separate visits to Riyadh, Even Sadr, a Shiite cleric, visited Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in August 2017, where he presented himself as an Arab and Iraqi nationalist, thus poking Iran in the eye.
Iran has taken advantage of Iraq’s volatility to cultivate clients in Baghdad and establish land corridors to the Mediterranean Sea, These moves are not simply about resupplying Shiite militias such as Hezbollah or evading sanctions by establishing a presence beyond Iran's official borders.
They are also a reflection of Tehran’s ambition to extend its sphere of influence and create strategic depth, Iran is now the external power with the most influence in both Iraq and Syria.
Left unchecked, this could lead not just to an Iranian-Saudi confrontation but to an Lranian-Israeli one as well.
Increased Iranian power in the region exacerbates Israel’s fear that destructive weapons in Syria might fall into the hands of its enemies, many of whom are supported by Tehran.
Both Bush and Obama made disastrous decisions on Iraq during their Erst terms.
It was only in their second terms that they came up with sensible policies to address their mistakes.
These initial missteps cost the United States influence and credibility.
But given the importance of United States military support in the fight against ISIS, Washington has new leverage, and it should take care not to squander it.
The defeat of isis in Mosul should not lull the Trump administration into a false sense of security As the past decade and a half have made clear, nothing in Iraq is irreversible.
To reverse those, Iraqi politicians will have to reach an agreement on politically sensitive questions such as the nature of governance and resource distribution in order make the central government less vulnerable to external meddling.
This, in turn, will require a commitment to strengthening institutions, imposing the rule of law. and cracking down on corruption.
But doing so would require it to view its national interests in Iraq through a wider lens than simply counterterrorism.
This would entail sustained support for Iraqi LDStirutions and a greater commitment to pushing back against Iranian expansionism, which is in itself one of the factors that rallies Sunni extremists.
Support for the Counter Terrorism Service has arguably been the most successful U.S, initiative in Iraq since 2003.
Composed of Iraqis of all different backgrounds, the Counter Terrorism Service maintained morale and cohesion despite enduring heavy losses in the brutal battle to liberate Mosul, United States support for these forces should be continued and reinforced.
To secure the recent military gains, the United States should also help build the capacity of Iraqi battalions to control the western desert between Iraq and Syria and help bolster Iraqis inteUigence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities.
Washington should advise securitysector reform, including bringing militias supportive of the state into the fold of the Iraqi security forces—while disarming, demobilizing, and reintegrating into Iraqi society those loyal to Iran.
All this assistance need not entail thorny negotiations; nor would such support require United States bases or combat forces.
The United States can work toward these goals with advisers and trainers under the terms of the existing Strategic Framework Agreement with Iraq.
If separation is CO occur—whether in the form of confederation or independence—the process should be negotiated between Baghdad and Erbil, endorsed by neighboring countries, and recognized by the international community.
This process should also consider granting Kirkuk special status in recognition of its diverse population, contested history, and oil wealth.
While the negotiations are ongoing, Washington should help reduce the risk of conflict between Arabs and Kurds.
In 2009, during another period of heightened tensions, the United States military facilitated cooperation between the Iraqi security forces and the Kurdish peshmerga in the disputed territories.
And when approaching the Kurdish question, Washington must remain mindful of Turkey’s concerns in order to alleviate the risk that Turkish forces will intervene in northeastern Syria or that Turkey will gravitate toward Iran and Russia.
No plan for Iraq is complete without taking into account the regional context.
Mosul was once renowned across the region as a cosmopolitan city, with an excellent university, a successful merchant class, and a diverse population of Arabs, Christians, ECurds, Shabaks, Turkmen, and Yazidis.
Its reconstruction would restore pride and provide young Iraqis with opportunities to live for rather than dystopian causes to die for.
Such assistance, provided through the Iraqi government, would help balance Iranian influence and give Iraqi Sunnis hope for a better future.
McMaster, his national security adviser; and John Kelly, his chief of staff.
One can hope that Trump’s advisers might push him to select the least bad options from the choices available.
But implementing the resulting policies would rexjuire a skillful secretory of state supported by a strong State Department.
And at the moment, the Slate Department lacks the resources to play that crucial role.
At the end of the day, isis is not the cause of Iraq’s problems but a symptom of failed governance.
Assad, with Iranian and Russian help, is starting to project more povrer into eastern Syria.
As isis’ remaining territory shrinks, Syrian and U.S.-backed forces are converging on the same cities.
Before long, Washington will have to decide whether, when, and how to withdraw.
The United States has no good options in Syria, but some are worse than others.
By now. hopes of getting rid of Assad or securing a reformed government are far-fetched fantasies, and so support for antigovernment factions should be off the table.
The Syrian government is determined to take back the entire country and will probably succeed in doing so.
From 2011 to 2014. he served as United States Ambassador to Syria. separate Kurdish region or securing respect for human rights and democracy.
And because Assad’s government is deeply corrupt, the United States should also rule out providing the regime with aid for reconstruction.
By focusing on their plight, Washington would help some of the most vulnerable Syrians, reduce the burden on the countries that host them, and curb opportunities forjihadlst recruitment in refugee communities.
VICTORY IN THE WEST Over the last year and a half, Assad’s government has achieved an unprecedented string of military successes in western Syria.
In December 2016, it forced the last rebel fighters and their families to quit Aleppo.
Syria’s secondlargest city, and then in May, it seized the final rebel holdout in the country’s thirdlargest city, Homs.
Meanwhile, government forces have advanced steadily against longtime rebel strongholds near Damascus, capturing Daraya in August 2016 and Barzeh and Qaboun this past spring.
Murderous leadership nvaJries among the opposition have prevented unified military operations.
The opposition’s political leaders have failed to reach out to elements of the government’s support base, such as religious minority communities and middle-class business interests, that might have been sympathetic to their aims.
The opposition was slow to reject extremist oiganizadons operating in its midst, most notably the al Qaedaaifiliated al-Nusra Front.
Ksjrdish fighters in Raqqa, Syria, July 2017 groups have never openly punished fighters who have committed atrocities.
These failures have allowed Assad to retain enough support among Syrians disparate professional, business, and minority communities, who fear they would suffer under Islamist rule, to mobilize the necessary resources and manpower to hang on.
The Iranian government has assembled tens of thousands of Shiite fighters from Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, and even Pakistan to fight for the Syrian government.
Together with Russian air support, these troops helped Assad's ground forces recapture Syria's main population centers.
At the same time as Assad has received help from abroad, the opposition's foreign support has withered away.
In 2016, Turkey and the United States fell out over U,S. backing for Syrian Kurds fighting IBIS in eastern Syria.
Turkey, fearing the development of an independent Kurdish region along its southern border, dropped its campaign against Assad and redirected its aid to Syrian rebels who would fight the Kurds.
Then, in July, United States President Donald Trump ended a largely moribund ciA program that had been intended to help secular rebels fighting Assad, as the groups it had supported had turned into mere auxiliaries of al-Nusra Front.
CEASE-FIRES AREN’T THE ANSWER As the military outcome has grown more certain, Russia has sought to capitalize on its intervention to secure a favorable political settlement that would halt the fighting and leave Syria under the control of the existing government.
Moscow brought delegations from the Syrian government and several opposition groups together in Novemher/December 2017 17 Robert S Ford Astana, Kazakhstan, along with officials from Iran and Turkey in the hope that each country would compel its Syrian allies to end hostilities on the ground.
Idlib in the northwest; an area including towns north of Homs; the eastern suburbs of Damascus; and the southwest corner of Syria near the Jordanian border, including the city of Daraa, where the uprising started in 2011, Under the agreement, all combatants would halt attacks against the nonextremist forces in those zones, and the Syrian government would allow access for humanitarian aid and returning civilians.
So far, these diplomatic efforts have met with incomplete success, largely because the Syrian government, with Iranian backing, has failed to observe the cease-fires whenever doing so would be to its advantage, Of the four de-escalation zones declared in May. only Idlib experienced a substantial decline in fighting at first.
Government air strikes and ground assaults continued north of Homs, in eastern Damascus, and in the southwest.
Then, in July, Russia—working with Jordan and the United States, which had backed the southern rebels— introduced a new cease-fire deal in the southwest, which has held up better.
The ability to selectively respect de-escalation zones has proved a military gift to the Syrian government.
In the southwest, the Syrian army was making only slow headway in Daraa.
And without sustained Russian air support to complement Syrian ground and air assaults, retaking Idlib would have been difficult, if not impossible.
As a result, by August, the Syrian government was largely respecting the cease-fires around Daraa and Idlib while shifting its troops away from the southwestern border to attack the eastern suburbs of Damascus and towns north of Homs.
This strategy of obeying some of the cease-fires and ignoring others has allowed the government to achieve military victories it otherwise would not have.
Of course, Damascus will not respect the remaining cease-fires forever.
In southern Syria, civilians are establishing local governments to provide services and promote economic revival.
And in several towns in Idlib Province, residents have organized elections for town managers.
Because the Syrian government has consistently rejected all other political entities within Syria as illegitimate, it will make great efforts to quash these organizations.
In Damascus in 2015 and 2016, for instance, it shut down independent administrations in neighborhoods chat had made peace with the government.
Assad^s envoys refuse to discuss any political reforms, much less a transition away from Assad himself Meanwh£e, the opposition's delegation, backed by Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and the West, has insisted that Assad must give up power as part of any deal.
This deadlock shows no signs of breaking before the next round of talks, scheduled for October or November.
Over the coming weeks and months, Syrian government forces will keep advancing, mile by mile, by turns obeying and flouting cease-fires as military advantage dictates.
At some point, Assad might agree to token political changes at the behest of Russia or even Iran.
He might 18 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Keeping Out of Syria allow a new prime minister or a new economy or culture minister, but he will never accept transparency or hold free and fair elections.
The core of the vicious security state—one that has used chemical weapons, dropped barrel bombs, co-opted terrorist groups, and tortured and killed thousands—will remain.
ISIS' FALL In eastern Syria, detached from Assad’s struggle against the opposition in the west, U.S.-backed forces have made great progress against tsis.
By August, three years after United States President Barack Obama launched the anti-isis campaign in Syria, the U.S.-led coalition had driven the group out of nearly 60 percent of the territory it once held.
United States air strikes have killed hundreds of civilians, and United States support for Kurdish forces has damaged the United States’ relationship with Turkey.
In an attempt to assuage Turkey’s concerns, the United States recruited a group of Arab fighters to create an alliance with the Kurds, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces , but the ypo forms the backbone of the group.
In the summer of 2017, for the first time in the Syrian civil war, isis began confronting sustained attacks ftom both U.S.-backed and Iranianand Russianbacked armies.
As of this writing, the SDF, with U.S, air support, has nearly retaken isis’ capital, Raqqa, and has moved into the group’s last bastion, the southeastern province of Deir ez-Zor, whose oil fields have supplied ISIS with funds.
Meanwhile, in early September, Syrian government forces charged into the province’s capital, also called Deir ez-Zor, which lies on the banks of the Euphrates River.
Russia and the United States have agreed chat the river should separate the two forces, with Syrian government troop remaining on the west bank and the SDP staying on the cast.
At the same time as government forces are advancing on the city, they are in the process of recapturing the rest of the province of Deir ez-Zor west of the Euphrates, while the SDF takes the portion of the province east of the river.
Once the SDF captures R^qqa and Syrian government troops reach Abu ECamal, the last Syrian city west of the Euphrates before one reaches the Iraqi border, there will be no is is bastions left to retake.
Then, Damascus will look for a way to seize Deir ez-Zor’s oil fields, which will be vital for financing reconstruction, but which lie well east of the river.
The Syrian government will also take on extremely dim view of the provisional civic council that the SDF is setting up to govern the portions of the province it controls.
The internal tribal feuds that will likely split the SDP in the wake of isis’ collapse will give the Syrian government a chance to move its forces east of the Euphrates, as well as providing Sunni militants with recruitment opportunities.
The Syrian government has already rejected the legitimacy of the Syrian Kurdish autonomous region, known as Rojava, being established in northeastern Syria.
For his part, Assad has repeatedly stressed that his government will defeat “sepajatists.
Their forces may delay before moving against the SDF in Deir ez-Zor or the Kurds in northeastern Syria, but they won’t accept local governments that can ignore and insult Damascus.
After all, the civil war began back in 2011 over Assad’s refusal to reform his autocratic government.
WASHINGTON'S BAD OPTIONS Now that the end of the campaign against ISIS Is in sight, the Trump administration will have to decide how long to keep a United States military presence in eastern Syria.
Between 1,000 and 2,000 United States soldiers and a handful of American civilians are currently deployed in the country.
The United States mission inside Syria started as military support for the Kurdish forces fighting ISIS but has grown to include keeping the peace between government forces, Arab rebels, and even Turkish soldiers in the northern Syrian city of Manbij and helping carry out initial reconstruction work.
The United Slates’ first priority should be avoiding further mission creep and, above all. taking care not to get ensnared in any costly new military campaigns.
When the Syrian government and Kurdish forces inevitably fight over Kurdish selfgovernance in Rojava, or if the Syrian government attacks SDF forces in eastern Deir ez-Zor, the United States may be tempted to step in on behalf of old allies.
No significant actor in the eastern Syrian war—not Jordan, nor the Iraqi Kurds, nor the Iraqi government in Baghdad— would help defend the Syrian Kurds or even the SDF fighters in Deir ez-Zor.
The Turkish government would cheer Assad’s repression of the Syrian Kurds and would likely impede any United States aid that passed through Turkey.
Russia is sensitive to Western intervention against authoritarian governments and has, in any case, limited leverage, Iran, facing its own restive Kurdish population, would back Assad.
Moreover, there Is no political will in the United States for a war on behalf of Syrian Kurdish interests or Syrian Arab tribal fighters in Deir ez-Zor, and eastern Syria has never been important to United States national security.
Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba, one of the largest Iranian-mobilized Iraqi fighter groups in Syria, has already vowed that its next fight will be to liberate the Golan Heights.
Air strikes won’t compel Iranian forces to quit Syria, and ground incursions would simply force the United States to defend territories against sustained Iranian and Syrian unconventional warfare tactics.
History indicates that the Iranian and Syrian governments might even recruit jihadists to fight United States forces.
And the 20 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Keeping Out of Syria United States couJd expect little help from Turkey in any conflict with Iran.
United States aid to Kurdish groups in Syria has created the potential for cooperation between Ankara and Tehran; in August, the chief of staff of the Iranian army visited Ankara for the first time since 1979, No one can know how long a war to limit Iranian influence in Syria would take or what achievable victory would look like.
As a result, many policymakers in Washington and Jerusalem hope that Russia will limit Iran’s influence, forestalling the need for a direct military confrontation.
Russia will not jeopardize its political and business relationships with Iran, which include shared interests in the Caucasus and Central Asia.
Washington and Jerusalem should recognize that they both made their choice years ago.
Having accepted that Assad will stay in power, the United States must also accept a newly influential Iran.
Fortunately, the United States can live with greater Iranian influence in Syria.
Iran’s presence will complicate Israeli security but will not threaten the country’s existence.
Worse would be jihadists regaining Syrian territory and using it as a base to export terrorism.
This is a real danger, as new jihadist groups have repeatedly appeared from the remnants of old ones.
If a new version of ol Qaeda emerges in Syria, it will have learned from al-Nusra Front and tsis and will likely be far harder to identify and contain than its forerunners.
The best way to forestall extremist recruitment in the few areas still controlled by the opposition would be to restart the local economy.
Economic frustrations among the residents of poor suburbs around Aleppo, Damascus, and Homs helped stir the original 2011 uprising.
And according to a poll conducted by Burson-Marsteller, a public relations firm, in 2017,25 percent of young people in the Middle East considered providing better education and jobs the best means of resisting isiS; only 13 percent thought the solution was military action.
Only when the fighting stops will businesses be able to reopen and administrations be able to restore essential services such as clean water, eleccricicy, hospitals, and schools.
The Russian diplomatic strategy of creating de-escalation zones mi^t allow for better local governance and economic recovery in those zones if the Syrian government would respect them.
The United States, therefore, ought to back the Russian approach on the condition that economic aid will flow only if the cease-fires are respected.
Russia hopes that the West will eventually offer aid to rebuild Assad's portions of Syria.
But recent UN humanitarian programs have proved that attempting this would be a fool’s errand.
Because outside resources have to flow through the Syrian government, substantial portions of UN aid have ended up in the pockets of government cronies or flowed solely to favored groups that support the government.
United States sanctions against the Syrian govemNovemher/December 2017 21 Robert S Ford ment will make such an aid program legally impossible for the foreseeable future.
Some analysts, including the Syria specialist Joshua Landis, have argued that the sanctions should be dismantled because they primarily punish the Syrian people rather than the government.
The only question is whether to waste United States resources on the Syrian government.
Likewise, securing even minimal respect for human rights, democratic norms, or good governance in Syria is now impossible.
Assad and his spokespeople have consistently said that the government will reassert full control over all Syrian territory.
The Baathist ideology that infuses the Syrian state rejects decentralization, and Syria lacks skilled provincial and town administrators.
Iraq's experience of corruption, mismanagement, and political infighting shows how hard it can be to decentralize a Baathist state, even with a degree of willpower and oil wealth that Syria does not have.
Assad would rather live with a weakened but brutal centralized state than try to introduce real reform, a choice he made years ago.
The governments of those countries, already overstretched, would likely allow the United States government and partner organizations to operate with greater autonomy than they could in Syriangovemment-controUed areas.
A renewed United States drive to raise funds would be extremely useful at a time of growing donor fatigue and dwindling UN resources, which have led to cuts in food rations in some refugee camps.
Given the economic hardships in Syria and the government's ethnic-cleansing program—the regime has seized whole neighborhoods in cities such as Damascus and Homs from restive communities in which the opposition found roots— many refugees are unlikely to return home in the near future.
Helping those refugees maintain a semblance of dignity would diminish the appeal of extremists and partially relieve a vast humanitarian crisis.
Such a meager policy would represent a sad response to an uprising that demanded at its start only basic accountability from the government and a recognition of Syrians’ dignity as human beings.
But for the time being, it is the best the United States can do.O 22 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Earn Your Master of Arts in Diplomacy Online Norwich's Master of Arts in Diplomacy online program can help you develop the specialized skills you'll need to build cooperation and solve problems on an international scale.
Whether your background is business, milrlary, governmeni or In the nonprofit sector, you'll gain a new perspective on the complexities of communicating and negotiating global affairs.
Visit graduate.norwich.edu/fapa NEW FROM GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY PRESS War and the Art of Governance Consolidating Combat Success Into Political Victory nudift Schadlow paperfaMfc.
B19S, 97S*1-6251S4t3-0 hardcover, $64.95.975-1-42B16412-3 North Korea and Nuclear Weapons Entering the Naw Era of Detarrence Sur>g Chull Kim and Mkhaal D Ctitan, Editor* paperbad.
B9,9S. 975*l-62B1S4a-7 hardcover, $89.95,975*1-52B16-4aB*0 Wartime Sexual Violence From SilancB to Condemnation of a Weapon of War Kerry R Crawford paperbad.
Never again would it let shadowy networks of jihadists, acting in the name of a perverted version of Islam, carry out a catastrophic attack on American soil.
Washington sought to disrupt plots wherever they emerged and deny terrorists safe havens wherever they existed.
But when necessary, it would act alone to disrupt plots and kill or capture terrorist operatives and leaders, including with drone strikes and daring special operadons raids such as the one that killed Osama bin Laden, Today, the terrorist threat looks much difierent than it did right before 9/11.
From 2013 to 2017, she served as Homeland Security and Counterterroristn Adviser to United States President Barack Obama. capabilities.
Detennined to “connect the dots” in the future, the United States government created new agencies and insdcuted a new paradigm for intelligence—share by rule, withhold by cxcepdon—and set up a slew of “fusion centers” and joint task forces to foster interagency cooperation.
Borders were hardened, cockpit doors reinforced, and watch lists created.
In Afghanistan, the United States overthrew the Taliban regime, which was hosting al Qaeda, Today, despite recent Taliban gains, al Qaeda still does not enjoy free rein in the coimtry.
In Iraq and Syria, al Qaeda’s ofTshoot, the Islamic State , is on the run, thanks to the work of a global coalition assembled in 2014 and US.-led air strikes and special operations raids.
The group’s Iraqi capital of Mosul fell in July, and ic Syrian stronghold in Raqqa is almost certain to follow.
Owing to the relentless pressure that the United States and its allies have placed on terrorists* safe havens, the threat of a complex and catastrophic attack emanating from abroad—although not gone—has diminished.
At the same time, however, the threat from homegrown and so called lone-wolf terrorism has increased.
But these threats have taken on new urgency as isis in particular has harnessed the power of social media to inspire mostly yoimg men to commit violence.
A threat that began with an attack planned by a small group of veteran terrorists in Afghanistan has transformed into a dil^e movement of recendy radicalized individuals planning pop-up attacks across the globe.
The answer is one that confronts three main challenges; physical safe havens from which terrorists condnue to plot attacks, virtual safe havens through which is is and other groups mobilize individuals to commit violence, and a global and domestic environment increasingly hospitable to terrorists.
NO PLACE TO HIDE Although the likelihood of another 9/11 has diminished, it is from zero.
The most dangerous elements of its laigest afEliace, Jabhat alNusra—more accurately described as al Qaeda in Syria—are still intent on attacking the United States.
So is al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, al Qaeda’s Yemeni affiliate, which has proved persistently focused on attacking airliners.
Isis, for its part, faces almost certain defeat in Iraq and Syria, but it seeks to sustain its brand with no fewer than eight global branches, from Afghanistan to Libya.
Its affiliate in Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula brought down a Russian passenger plane in 2015.
Australian poUce announced that they had foiled a sophisticated plot by ISIS to blow up a passenger jet.
Ln separate shipments, an isis commander in Syria had sent followers in Sydney the parts for an explosive device that could be assembled in country—an approach that the analyst Paul Cruickshank has called “an IKEA model of terror.
The lesson here is that the United States cannot take its eye off the threat of a massive, sophisticated attack.
Finical territory not only provides terrorists with room to plot but also offers reliable revenue from taxation and. often, oil sales, as well as human resources through forced conscription.
And so the United States must continue to put relentless pressure on safe havens.
In practice, especially as the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have wound down, this has meant adopting a “light footprint"" counterterrorism strategy, premised on training and enabling local partners to take the fight to terrorists and, failing that, doing so directly through air strikes (both manned and unmanned) and special operations raids.
This strategy has been successful at eliminating dangerous operatives, but it has had its downsides.
At times, United States air and ground operations have generated backlash among locals, and unfortunate instances of civilian casualties from these operations have further ftieled terrorists* propaganda and recruitment efforts.
United States drone operations, widely seen as the hallmark of this light-footprint strategy, have proved particularly controversial.
Pbinting to the problems with using force against targets outside of traditional battlefields, critics have called for more transparency regarding targeting decisions and civilian casualties.
In an effort to enhance the legitimacy of these operations, answer questions about who is targeted, and check others* use of drones as the technology proliferates, the Obama administration developed a set of standards to guide the United States’ employment of drones.
These policies included a requirement for near certainty—the highest achievable standard—that no civilian would be injured or killed in the strikes.
President Barack Obama also issued an executive order requiring the director of national intelligence to provide an annual report on civilian Novemher/December 2017 25 Lisa Monaco casualties from United States strikes undertaken outside traditional battlefields.
In some places, such as Libya and Yemen, the lack of stable governance and capable partners on the ground has made it impossible to sustain military gains.
And of course, no amount of drone strikes or raids can counter distantly inspired violence.
Ultimately, the administration's lightfootprint strategy to combat ists and al Qaeda in Iraq and Syria gave way to what the political scientists Peter Feaver and Hal Brands have described in rhi< magazine as the ""counter-isis plus"" approach.
The Obama administration stepped up operations in Iraq and Syria, increasing the number of troops and advisers there and launching a more a^ressive air campaign and a series of special operations raids.
To deal lasting blows to tsts and al Qaeda, and to keep others from seizing new safe havens, the United States will need to continue some variant of this stepped-up strategy.
So far, President Donald Trump's plan to defeat isis closely resembles that of his predecessor—albeit with the additional element of delegating greater authority to commanders in the deld.
But military operations will always be half measures if they are not paired with a strategy to make United States partners more viable—security assistance and diplomatic engagement aimed at getting countries to govern inclusively, bolster their security sectors, and reform their economies.
That’s why the Trump administration’s proposed budget cuts to the State Department—at a time when military leaders regularly call for increases in foreign aid—are so worrisome.
HIGH-TECH TERRORISTS Pressure on safe havens will merely keep a lid on a threat from terrorists who are growing more creative by the day.
From AQA^’s 2010 plan to stow printer cartridges filled with explosives in airplane cargo holds to IS is’ recent plot in Australia, terrorists have shown a determinadon to overcome the post-9/11 security obstacles to bringing down airliners.
The Trump administradon has wisely put an emphasis on aviation security.
In March, for example, it issued a temporary ban on the use of laptops in the passenger cabin on flints originating irom certain airports.
The administration threatened to extend the ban to all U.S.-bound Bights, prompting some internadonal carriers to improve their security measures.
The government should continue to focus on aviadon security, but it should go further and partner with the private sector to generate innovadve methods of detecting new explosive materials.
Terrorists, of course, are doing their own innovation, and some of them have even experimented with drones.
Iraqi officials announced 26 FOREIGN AFFAIRS that they had thwarted a plot in which al Qaeda operatives intended to use toy planes to deliver sarin and mustard gas.
Adding to the danger, more and more devices are going online as part of “the Internet of things,” creating new vulnerabilities that ISIS and others could exploit.
That’s why the Trump administration should heed the call from the 2016 report of the Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity to work with the private sector to build security features into new technology at the design stage, rather than play catch up with terrorists’ attempts to commandeer such devices.
The United States’ future safety demands that it, and not its adversaries, dominate the technological domain.
The innovation that has benefited terrorists the most, however, is social media.
Lone wolves are never truly alone; they deliberately search for and find communities online.
To draw in vulnerable youth, isis has created a sophisticated media machine that pumps out professionally produced videos, multilingual tweets, a glossy magazine, and Instagram posts, all serving up an intoxicating narrative that followers can belong to a cause greater than themselves, Other groups, including al Qaeda, are now mimicking ibis’ tactics.
Gone are the amateur videos of al Qaeda’s leader Ayman al-Zawahiri sitting crosslegged before a drab backdrop; those rare releases are now dwarfed by al Qaeda’s Syrian branch’s steady stream of slick videos and magazines.
The United States government has stru gg led to beat terrorists at the social media game, but Silicon Valley is taking promising steps.
Gel paid to learri Live, study, ar>d interact with 20 harvd-pkked internadoral students from zones of confict af>d socral strife while learning public speaking, negotjatlon, mediation, and social entrepreneurship stalls.
UniveisUy (^^SanDie^* scNKAceuApeiBMe iiinimirimwiifim To learn more or apply, vbft www;hansefunimarkislHirta.er9 or contact BorvieLamb,ftognimO»»drKWor»btoinhi ai a n ^e90.edii Ron Bee.
Manogiog Direcfor* rbaagifandiegaedu 61»>260*7S4< RECRUITING NOW FOR JULY 2018 n extremely eloquent, extraordinarily well written, and impressively informed piece of work, Rich provides a highly readable and accessible runthrough of all the main challenges with which democracy IS currently beset.’’ -4U(hard Yeungs, Camagie Suropa h< $32.50 I LYNNE RJLNNERtnEmilE Tel* 303*«44-66&4 • 27 Lisa Monaco Terrorism, a consortium devoted to making their platforms less hospitable to extremists.
Facebook, which boasts more chan two billion active monthly users, is employing artificial intelligence and image-matching technology to stop known terrorist content from proliferating.
Twitter, for its part, has suspended more chan 375,000 accounts promoting terrorism.
Deleting by hand after the fact will not suffice, however, and so social media platforms will need to train their algorithms to detect extremist content—international and domestic— and banish it immediately.
At the same time, companies will need to ramp up their support for legitimate voices that rebut terrorists’ narratives.
Jigsaw, a think tank created by Google, has developed the Redirect Method, a project that ta^ets online users who have been identified as susceptible Co IS is’ messaging and serves them alternative content that subtly debunks terrorist propaganda.
The government can play a role, too—not as the messenger but as a partner to the private sector.
In 2016, the State Department launched the Global Engagement Center, an office dedicated to supporting voices that rebut terrorists’ messaging.
But so far, Secretary of State RexTillerson has refused to spend the $30 million already earmarked for the center, which currently lacks a director and is losing some of the privatesector talent recruited last year.
OUT OF ORDER What may most influence the future terrorist threat, however, is not the flourishing of physical and virtual safe havens per se but the breakdown in order that is sure to spawn more of both.
Across the Gulf and the Levant, and even in Afghanistan, Iran and its proxies are promoting and taking advantage of instability.
Russia is doing the same in eastern Europe, and it has worked hard to protect its client in Syria and create a new one in Libya.
The future threat will be defined by these areas of chaos—the safe havens presented by them, the foreign fighters drawn to them, and the violence inspired by them.
So there is a dangerous irony in Trump’s invocation of “America first,"" a message that has caused United States allies to wonder whether they can still count on Washington to continue as a partner in—if not the guarantor of—their security.
If the United States pulls up the drawbridge in the name of protection, it may deny itself counterterrorism tools that are essential to the country’s safety.
By banning the travel of all citizens from certain countries, rather than tailoring screening to specific threats, the United States risks alienating the very partners it needs to fight today’s terrorists and fueling the “clash of civilizations"" narrative that ISIS uses to recruit ftiture ones.
As the campaign against ists has laid bore, partnerships with local allies are the key to successfully taking back territory from terrorists.
In the past, the United States has taken the lead on working with foreign governments to share watch lists, improve border security, and impose new criminal penalties on foreign fighters.
But given that some of these fighters have spent years peifecring their violent craft on the battlefield, the greater concern may now be “not so much one of quantity as one of quality,*’ as Nicholas Rasmussen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, put it earlier this year, Europe will continue to face an immediate threat from skilled returnees of the type that participated in the 2015 Paris attacks and the 2016 Brussels bombings.
Unfortunately, however, the continent has yet to experience the kind of sea change that occurred in the United States, which radically rethought its practices for sharing information among law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
In many European capitals, the wall impeding such sharing is far too high.
And since the Atlantic Ocean is not a perfect buffer, what happens in Europe matters for the security of the United States.
So rather than confusing United States allies with travel bans and mixed messages about the value of NATO, the United States should expand its counterterrorism cooperation with its European partners.
For example, it should press its partners to more rapidly share airline passenger data and intelligence gleaned from investigations.
And it should resume the dialogue begun by James Clapper, the former director of national intelligence, on promoting intelligence sharing with and among European countries.
It would be a mistake, however, to look only outward, ignoring the growing terrorist threat at home.
The hit-andrun murder of a peaceftil protester in Charlottesville, Virginia, by an avowed white supremacist is only the most recent reminder that the United States has a terrorism problem unrelated to violent jihadism.
The challenge that bedeviled both the Bush and the Obama administrations—building trust between communities and their government to address extremism in all its forms—seems harder than ever.
The Trump administration has proposed a budget that zeroes out funding for a Department of Homeland Security program aimed at countering violent extremism and has already withdrawn a grant for a group dedicated to combating domestic hate groups such as the Ku BClux Klan.
Sixteen years after 9/11, many Americans are weary of the war on terrorism.
Having built up its defenses, the United States should no longer go abroad in search of monsters to destroy, some contend.
Instead, they say, it should stick to keeping the bad guys out and adjust to a new normal in which some attacks are inevitable.
But it would be a grave mistake to conftjse a mitigated threat with a weak one.
To date, the United States’ strategy has succeeded in preventing another 9/11-rype attack, largely because it built a net designed to do just that.
But for the next phase in the war on terrorism, the country will need a new net.
Although there is no question that Moscow’s meddling in American elections is deeply worrying, it is just one aspect of the threat Russia poses.
Under Vladimir Putin, Russia has embarked on a systematic challenge to the West.
The goal is to weaken the bonds between Europe and the United States and among EU members, undermine NATO’s solidarity, and strengthen Russia’s strategic position in its immediate neighborhood and beyond.
Putin wants nothing less than to return Russia to the center of global politics by challenging the primacy that the United States has enjoyed since the end of the Cold War.
He has undertaken a major military modernization designed to intimidate neighbors and weaken NATO, and be has resorted to the overt use of miliary force to establish new facts on the ground—not just in what Moscow calls its “sphere of privileged interests,"" which encompasses all of the former IVO H DAALDER Is President of the Chicago Council on Global Affairs and served as United States Ambassador to NATO from 2009 to 2013.
Soviet republics, but also further aHeld, including in the Middle East, an area where the United States military has long operated with a free hand.
For some time now, ""the Kremlin has been de facto operating in a war mode,"" the Russia scholar Dmitri Trenin has observed, and Putin has been behaving like a wartime leader.
First, it is critical to maintain transatlantic unity; divisions across the Atlantic and within Europe weaken NATO’s ability to respond to Russian provocations and provide openings for Moscow to extend its reach and iniluence.
The alliance has responded to the new Russia challenge by enhancing its presence in eastern Europe and the Baldc states, and Russia has so far not threatened the territorial integrity of any NATO member state.
But NATO must do more to bolster its deterrence by sending a clear message to the Kremlin that it will not tolerate further Russian aggression or expansionism, At the same time, policymakers must remember that the United States is not at war with Russia; there is no need for Washington to put itself on a war footing, even if Moscow has.
Dialogue and open channels of communication remain essential to avoiding misunderstandings and miscalculations that could escalate into a war no one wants.
The military confronration that had marked relations for more than 40 years rapidly and peacefully disappeared with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, the withdrawal of Soviet forces from eastern Europe, and the negotiation of far-reaching arms control agreements.
Freed from the strategic logic of the Cold War, governments focused their energies on transforming eastern Europe^s command economies into liinctioning market democracies and on the task of unifying the continent.
In Russia in the early 1990s, economic “shock therapy"" rapidly dismantled the state-controlled economy of the Soviet era but failed to produce immediate or widely shared prosperity.
The Russian financial crisis of 1998 imposed significant costs on the population—including a sharp rise in prices for basic goods as a result of the rapid depreciation of the ruble—and helped set the stage for the emergence of a new generation of leaders committed to stability and order even at the cost of economic and political liberalization.
By the end of the decade, a demoralized Russian public welcomed the arrival of a strong new leader; Putin, the former head of Russia’s security services, took office in late 1999, promising an end to chaos and a return to stability.
By tightening his control over the state bureaucracy, Putin fulfilled his promise.
And as rising oil and gas prices filled government coffers, he also managed to raise the standard of living of ordinary Russians.
The focus during this time was on domestic renewal rather than foreign engagement, although Putin did indicate a desire for increased cooperation with the United States, especially when it came to confronting common threats, such as terrorism.
Putin chafed at what he saw as Washington’s growing power and arrogance, especially in the wake of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and he gradually abandoned any thought of seeking common ground with the West.
The first signs of this shift came, unexpectedly, in a speech Putin delivered at the Munich Security Conference in 2007.
He railed against NATO expansion and accused the United States of running roughshod over the sovereignty of other countries in its pursuit of a unipolar world.
Russia exploited internal disagreements between ethnic Russians and Estonians to launch a cyberattack against Estonia’s government, media outlets, and banking system.
Russia’s war with Georgia, ostensibly designed to secure the independence of two breakaway r^ons but in fact meant to send a clear message that Russia was prepared to stymie Geoigia’s ambitions to join the West.
THE PUTIN PLAYBOOK Although Moscow achieved its objectives in the war against Georgia, the conflict laid bare real weaknesses In Russia’s armed forces, including failing command and control, a woeful lack of military training, and significant shortcomings in its military hardware.
Some 60 to 70 percent of Russian tanks and armored vehicles broke down during the five days of fighting, and although Russia’s per capita military spending was 56 percent greater than Georgia’s that year, the heavy armor deployed by Tbilisi was far more modern and advanced than Moscow’s.
None of these deficiencies went unnoticed in Moscow, and the Kremlin immediately embarked on a massive military reform and modernization program.
Military spending in 2016 amounted to 5. percent of Russia’s GDP, the highest proportion since Russia’s independence in 1990 and the highest percentage spent on defense by any major economy that year, tn 2011, Moscow announced a ten-year modernization program that included $360 billion in new military procurement.
At the same dme, the Russian armed forces began a wholesale restructuring and an overhaul of their training programs.
The effect of these improvements became clear in Ukraine six years after the in Georgia.
As Kiev was rocked by political upheaval over its ties to the EU, Putin—who had once told United States President George W, Bush that Ukraine was “not even a state"" and claimed that the Soviet Union had given the territory of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 as “a gift""— responded by invading and annexing Crimea in early 2014.
Not satisfied with controlling this strategically vital 32 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Retponding to Rusiia V Returgence peninsula, Moscow then fomented a separatist reboUioo in the eastern Ukrainian provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, home to a predominantiy Russian-speaking population and to many of Ukraine's heavy industries.
Russia sent military equipment, advisers, and ultimately thousands of troops to the area in order to prevent Ukraine &om securing control over its own territory.
The thrusts into eastern Ukraine were straight out of the Putin playbook, but the Crimea operation represented a qualitatively new effort by Moscow to get its way.
Crimea was not just invaded; it was annexed and incorporated into the Russian Federation after an illegitimate, rigged referendum.
Putin wanted Russia's “gift"" back, even though Moscow had agreed to respect the territorial integrity of every former Soviet republic when the Soviet Union broke up, in 1991, and had explicitly reiterated that commitment in a legally binding memorandum negotiated with Ukraine, the United States, and the United Kingdom in 1994.
For the first time in postwar European history, one country had annexed territory from another by force.
The operation in Crimea also demonstrated a whole new form of Russian military prowess.
Stealthily deployed special forces took over key facilities and organs of the Ukrainian state.
Sophisticated cyber-operations and relentless disinformation diverted attention from what was happening.
And the speed of the operation meant it was completed before anyone could mount an effective response.
Russian special forces, dressed in green uniforms without identifying patches, suddenly appeared at strategic points throughout Crimea and effectively took control of the peninsula.
Simultaneously, a large-scale propaganda operation sought to hide Moscow's fingerprints by suggesting that these “little green men"" were local opposition forces that reflected the popular will to reject the political change in Kiev and reunite with Russia instead.
This, in short, was no traditional military invasion; it was hybrid warfare in which goals were accomplished even before the adversary understood what was going on.
It represented an entirely new threat for which neither Ukraine nor NATO was prepared.
Moscow justified the invasion and annexation of Crimea with arguments based on a new form of Russian nationalism.
From the outset of the conflict, Putin had maintained that Crimea was rightly Russia’s and that Moscow was fully within its right in retaking it.
Moreover, Russia claimed that it had to act because Russian-speaking people in Ukraine were being attacked by a violent mob of “nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes, and anti-Semites” who had carried out a coup in Kiev.
And Putin was adamant that he was not talking about just Russian citizens, or even ethnic Russians, when pronouncing this absolute right to defend them anywhere.
To many, these words echoed claims made during the 1930s that Germany had No^emher/Decemher 2017 33 H Daalder a right—and an obligation—to protect Germans in other countries, such as Austria.
GAMES WITHOUT FRONTIERS Russians invasion of Ukraine and the conrinuetl fighting there have exacted a huge toll on the country.
According to the Ofiice of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, more than 10,000 people have died since mid-2014, nearly 25,000 have been injured, and some 1. million Ukrainians have been internally displaced.
Yet the incursion into Ukraine represents only one part of the expansion of Russia’s military footprint, which stretches from the Arctic in the north to the Mediterranean in the south.
Russia’s military buildup is both vast in scope and strategically significant.
In the country’s far north, Russia has reopened former military bases near the Arctic Ocean, establishing a position of military dominance in a region where peaceful cooperation among the Arctic powers had become the norm.
From there, Russia has bolstered and modernized its military presence in its western territories, which stretch from the Norwegian border in the north to the Ukrainian border in the south.
Moscow has also beefed up its presence in what is already the most heavily militarized piece of land in Europe, the Kaliningrad exclave—just under 6,000 square miles of Russian-controlled territory sandwiched between Lithuania and Poland.
More than 300,000 welltrained troops are deployed in Kaliningrad, equipped with modern tanks, armored vehicles, and missile batteries, including a nuclear-capable short-range missile system—posing a significant military threat to Poland and the three Baltic states.
Since the war in Ukraine began, Russia has sent additional brigades to the Ukrainian border and announced the creation of three new divisions that will face in a ""southwest strat^c direction”—in other words, toward Ukraine.
It also has deployed thousands of troops to occupied areas in eastern Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova—as well as some 5,500 troops to Armenia, which are there with the consent of the Armenian government in support of its claim to the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Finally, Russia has enlarged its air and naval presence in Syria in order to better assist the endangered regime of Bashar al-Assad, effectively ending NATO’s uncontested control of the eastern Mediterranean, a strategically pivotal area chat includes the Suez Canal.
Although many analysts worry about the Russian threat to the Baltic states, the more dramatic shift has been in the Mediterranean, where Russia's navy now boasts missiles that can threaten most of Europe.
Russia's enhanced military presence has been matched by increased military assertiveness.
Tha srovving tnfluanea of naw world powers, amargtng statas and nori'Stata actors, soeioaeonomkc transformation, and cross’bordar crisas have rasnapad tha ftald of global affairs.
Thosa pursuing earaars in this araa must study tha Issuas and ba daaply Invefvad In tham.
Tha MS lr\ Global Affairs, offerad by the NVU School of Profaulonal Studios Cantor for Global Affairs, posibons you tn tha heart of the ir^ternatlonal commurtlty of NYC. providing you with tha contextual parspeetevas you naad to Pacorrw an ofTectiva proplam solver and innovator.
H Daalder long-range missiles £red from naval vessels in the Caspian and Mediterranean Seas.
It has flown fighter and bomber missions close to or even within the airspace of NATO member states and other European countries.
It has deployed nuclear submarines armed with ballistic missiles from its northern ports to the Adantic.
And it has engaged in often dangerous air and naval activities, including buzzing NATO naval vessels and aircraft, flying military aircraft with their transponders turned off, and intentionally failing to monitor emergency communications channels.
Meanwhile, the Russian military has significantly enhanced the scale and scope of its training exercises, launching many without any notice.
In 2014, days before the invasion of Uliraine, a snap exercise mobilized 150,000 troops near the Russian-Ukrainian borden in September 2017, Moscow conducted its quadrennial Zapad exercise, mobilizing up to 100,000 troops in western Russia, Kaliningrad, and Belarus and requisitioning enough rail cars to transport 4,000 tanks and armored vehicles.
At the same time, Russia is modernizing all three legs of its nuclear triad, building new long-range missiles, submarines, and bombers to maintain a nuclear force that is at least the equal of the United States arsenal, ALARM BELLS Russians military buildup and posturing have provided Moscow with renewed confidence—a sense that Russia once again matters and that the world can no longer ignore it.
In the Kremlin’s eyes, Russia is again a great global power and therefore can act as global powers do.
But Washington and other NATO allies must work harder to thwart the challenge Russia poses to security and stability in Europe and beyond.
For years, the NATO allies had been divided in their views of Russia, with some (such as France, Germany, and Italy) insisting that the alliance should seek a strategic partnership with Moscow, and others (such as Poland and the Baltic states) warning that Russia still posed a threat.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine ended much of rhls internal debate, and NATO responded with actions designed to leave no doubt about its commitment to defend all its members against a possible Russian attack.
The alliance created a new 5,000-member joint task force that can deploy within to 72 hours, sent four multinational combat battalions to Poland and the Baltic states, and established command-and-control headquarters in all its eastern European member states, including new multinational headquarters in Poland and Romania.
NATO has also increased the number of exercises it carries out in central and eastern Europe, made infrastructure investments to enable reinforcements to arrive at their destinations more quickly, and ramped up its naval and air presence in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea.
It heads the new combat battalion in Poland and has added an additional combat brigade, which deploys to Europe from the United States on a rotating basis.
Beginning this year, it will also begin forward-deploying tanks and other heavy equipment for a combat division in order to allow for the rapid reinforcement of NATO’s eastern territories.
Annual spending on this European reassurance initiative has risen from less than $1 billion two years ago to a budget request of nearly $S billion for the coming hscai year.
Together, these steps amount to the largest reinforcement of NATO’s collective-defense efforts since the end of the Cold War.
The steps taken by NATO countries since 2014 to strengthen deterrence have halted the alliance’s decline in overall capabilities, but the response has been too slow and too limited.
These steps must be backed by real improvements in the overall capability of NATO’s military forces, as well as signiffcant investments in land, air, and naval infrastructure to enable the rapid reinforcement of the alliance’s eastern European member states.
Unfortunately, for over a decade, most European countries have cut their defense spending and &iled to invest sufficiently in maintaining, let alone increasing, iheii armed forces.
Meanwhile, distracted by conflicts in Afghanistan and the Middle East, the United States has steadily reduced its overall military footprint in Europe.
After Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, NATO leaders finally agreed to stop cutting defense spending, and all members committed to spending at least two percent of GDP on defense by 2024.
European NATO countries ivere spending two percent of their combined GDP on defense; by 2014, that number hod fallen to 1.45 percent.
Given the magnitude of the threat and the pressing need to demonstrate every ally’s commitment to the collecdve defense of NATO’s territory, NATO should move more quickly and push all members to reach the two percent target by 2020 at the latest.
But the current confrontation is very different from the actual Cold War, an ideological clash that extended to every part of the world.
Huge armies were deployed on either side of the Iron Curtain, many thousands of nuclear weapons were ready to launch at a moment’s notice, and proxy wars were fought as for away as Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Today’s confrontation lacks the intensity, scale, and ideological divisiveness of that earlier, deadlier conflict.
Moreover, the biggest threat today is not a deliberate war, as it was then, but the possibility of miscalculation.
One worry is that Russia might not believe that NATO would actually come to the defense of its most exposed allies—which is why strong statements of reassurance and commitment by all No^emher/Decemher 2017 37 H Daalder NATO countries, and not least (he United States, are so vital.
Improving the military capabilities and extending the forward presence of NATO forces are important signals of resolve, but they need to be backed bywords that leave no doubt of the intention to use these forces to defend allies if th^ are attacked.
Another possible miscalculation could come from the failure of NATO or Russia to understand the other party’s true motives and intentions.
Doubts are fed by snap military exercises involving large numbers of troops near borders, a lack of transparency in deployments, and dangerous military activities (hat simulate attacks and threaten the safety of opposing forces.
At a time of rising tensions, actions like these contribute to on uncertain climate and increase the possibility of accidents and escalation.
The most pressing priority is to encourage direct dialogue, at both the political and, especially, the military level.
The NATO-Russla Coimcil, forged in more optimistic times but still a body that brings Russia and all 29 NATO members together under one roof, is well suited to this task and can help devise rules and procedures that will reduce the likelihood of confrontation.
Rising poliricaJ tensions have sidelined the council and turned it into a venue for debating differences rather than finding common ground.
Yet it provides a forum for discussing ways to increase transparency, build confidence, and ensure communication during crises, which are all necessary to avoid mlscalculadon and escalation.
Russia poses a threat unlike any the United States and its allies have faced since the end of the Cold War.
It is a challenge the United States and its European allies can meet only through unity and strength, If they to unite and bolster NATO’s defense capabilities, Europe’s future stability and security may well be imperiled.
It Is greatly encouraging that the IMF is paying attention to these developments."" —Simon Johnson, Professor of Entrepreneurship.
MIT Sloan School of Management "" An engaging read that is relevant to all who are keen to discover and study the possibilities that digitalization and data brings to governments and people, across the world."" —Nandan Nllekanl, Pounding Chairman of Unique Identifkation Authority of India S25.
StDcldIDRPFEA Support for this book and the conference on wKkh it is based was provided by the Sill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
The Red Star and the Crescent Cuhure and Gavemante <fier the Arab Spring China and the Middle East Osama Abi-Mershed, ed, James Reardoo-Anderson, ed.
To contribute to the existing body of knowledge on issues related to die Persian Gulf region, the Middle East, and Asia.
I n the two years before the 2016 United States presidential election, hackers targeted a number of prominent political organizadons of both parties, including the Democratic National Committee , and managed to steal a trove of documents pertaining to the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton.
The hackers got ahold of private e-mails, including those belonging to Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the dnc chair, and John Padesta, Clinton*s campaign chair.
Some of these exchanges discussed hot-button issues such as the Clinton Foundation’s fundraising or suggested that senior dnc figures had sought to aid Clinton in her primary campaign against Senator Bemie Sanders of Vermont.
Eollow her on Twitter @Suaan_Hennessey; WikiLeaks, began publishing the stolen e-mails, fueling right-wing conspiracy theories about Clinton and generadng anger among Sanders supporters, Donald Trump, the Republican presidendal nominee, seized on the leaks to criticize his opponent; ""1 love WikiLeaksI"" he declared at a rally in October.
Meanwhile, Democrats seethed as reports emerged that the hackers were Linked to Russian military and intelligence agencies.
Those rumors were officially confirmed in early October when the Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the Department of Homeland Security issued a joint statement asserting that the Russian government had been behind the hacking, which aimed to interfere with the election.
In January, the ODNt released a declassified report stating even more definidvely that the hacking had been part of a Russian attempt to “undermine the U.S.-led liberal democratic order"" by sowing chaos and eroding faith in the democratic process.
One reason Moscow succeeded is chat Washington has failed to devise a strategy to deter cyberattacks or to respond strongly enough when such attacks have occurred.
In the face of crafty and concerted assaults on United States interests, Washington’s retaliatory Novemher/December 2017 39 AMERICA'S FORGOTTEN WARS Susan Henntssey measures have amounted to little more than largely symbolic sanctions and diplomatic slaps on the wrist.
This has remained true even in the wake of Russia's unprecedented meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
Put simply, the United States failed to deter Russia; instead, Russia has deterred the United States from meaningful retaliation.
In Tht Cybersecuri^ Dilemma, Ben Buchanan, a cybersecurity specialist at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center, oudines the structural challenges unique to interacdons among states in cyberspace.
In Cyberspace in Peace and War, the economist and security expert Martin Libicki authoritatively details states’ operational and strategic consideradons in the cyber-realm.
These two books add nuance to debates about digital conflicts while resisting the temptadon to treat them as analogous to nuclear or conventional ones.
And together, they help explain why the United States has failed to adequately protect itself from cyberthreats.
Although these authors do not address the hacking that targeted the 2016 campaign, they offer clear-eyed reviews of United States responses to earlier state-sponsored hacks and provide analytic frameworks that could help policymakers think through the challenge of preventing future digital assaults.
Moving forward, the United States must clearly delineate what consdtutes unacceptable behavior in cyberspace and embrace a broader range of retaliatory measures so that it can deter attacks that are certain to come harder and faster than ever before.
TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT Buchanan and Libicki agree that deterrence is primarily about messaging, or the ability to clearly communicate boundaries and consequences.
Each of these components is exponentially more complex in cyberspace than in a conventional setting.
As Buchanan notes, hackers can easily intrude into a network without attracting attention.
Even when an attack is discovered, it can be notoriously diihcult to confidently attribute it to any one particular actor.
And if authorities do identify the perpetrator, they sdll must determine whether the cyberattack crossed the retaliation threshold and merits a response.
In conventional settings, physical troop movements, progress along a path to nucleariaation, or military buildups have long guided these decisions.
Secrecy and surprise are essential because cyberdefenses can block particular methods of intrusion completely, unlike convendonal military defenses, which cannot necessarily prevent the actions of a more powerful state.
WHEN DETERRENCE FAILS Washington has gained ample experience with these strategic dilemmas in the past decade, as it has faced escalating cyberthreats from a range of adversaries.
The United States may well have deterred the worst; after all, it has yet to experience a cyberattack that direcdy threatened lives.
As is often true in deterrence, success is invisible but failure is public.
But two high-profile feilures—the 2014 hacking of Soi^ Pictures, attributed to North Korea, and the 2015 cyberattack on the United States Office of Personnel Management , attributed to China—revealed important weaknesses in U.S, deterrence policy.
In 2009, President Barack Obama announced a new U.S, strategy to address the threat posed by increasingly aggressive actors in cyberspace.
But repeated digital assaults tested the comprehensiveness of these new policies and revealed strategically significant shortcomings.
Novemher/December 2017 41 Susan Henntssey 1q November 2014, a group sponsored by North Korea and calling itself the Guardians of Peace inBltrated computer networks at Sony Pictures, extracting sensitive personnel information and stealing copies of unreleased films.
The hackers attempted to blackmail Sony, demanding that the studio abandon its plans to release a comedy critical of North Korea’s supreme leader.
The disclosure of studio executives’ hacked e-mails proved embarrassing and expensive; one Sony executive estimated that it cost the company $35 milbon.
The United States government, however, did not publicly attribute the attack to North Korea until the Guardians of Peace threatened physical attacks on United States movie theaters if the film were released.
Sony initially capitulated, but following widespread public criticism, including from Obama, it reversed course and released the film on a limited basis.
The Department of Homeland Security insisted there was no genuine threat to theaters, and the screenings proceeded without incident.
In January 2015, the United States government announced new sanctions against North Korean government agencies and officials in response to the hacking, but this haphazard response demonstrated the difficulty Washington has had in defining thresholds for retaliation.
The Sony episode revealed three notable shortcomings in United States cyberdeterrence policy.
First, there was persistent ambiguity about the government’s role in responding to attacks on privately owned information in^astructure.
Second, the government and private industry were unable to coordinate a unified response to the threats.
Finally, the press was eager and willing to report on the substance of the hacked e-mails, even if they were brought to light by on aggressive foreign actor, and focused far more on the often frivolous or salacious content of the e-mails than on the motives behind the hacking.
Because a movie studio fell outside the definition of critical infrastructure, Washington was slow to recognize the broader implications of the attack and the need for a government-led response.
Drawing the line at intrusion of government networks failed to deter consequential attacks on private networks.
In this case, it seemed that United States officials had not anticipated an attack on the country’s core values—here, freedom of speech and expression—as a potential trigger for retaliation.
And the fact that government action came only after physical threats may have communicated to North Korea and other adversaries that Washington did not consider the cyberattack itself sufficient grounds for retaliation.
Attacks on government networks themselves have also failed to elicit a strong response, a fiirther blow to United States credibility.
In June 2015, the Obama administration revealed that hackers had stolen a trove of data from servers at the OPM, which houses massive amounts of sensitive personal information about government employees.
James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, said that China was the “leading suspect” in the attack.
But the Obama administration's updated cyber-deterrence policy, which was signed into law in December 2015, did little to address the weaknesses revealed by the Sony and OPM hacks.
Even after such visible deterrence failures, the Obama administration continued to narrowly define thresholds for retaliation in cyberspace, focusing on threats to human life, critical infrastructure, economic security, and military command and control.
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE The Russians have long engaged in cyber-enabled information warfare campaigns—including targeting the elections of its strategically important neighbors.
In 2014, for example, a Russianbacked group known as CyberBerkut interfered in Ukraine’s presidential election.
Ultimately, those efforts were detected in time and did not alter the election’s outcome.
Given that track record, Russian interference in the 2016 United States election should have come as no surprise.
The Russians targeted nongovernment networks, just as the COUNCIL orL' FOREIGN RELATIONS The Internship Program riitf Counrif on Foreign Relaiiom is uekCtilenioJ inJiviJuuls u'ho infi 0 amer rn iMcrnstuontil reiuions.
Inieriu are rcLTuiied vear-ruiind on a semester iiv work in both the Nev^' York CUv and Washington, D,C.> uflioes.
An intern's duties generaJIv ctnibbi ofadministratise s^ork, editing and writing, and event ccMtrduiation.
The Counoil ctimideri both undergraduate and graduate students with ma[oc^ in IniernatiunaJ Kebtiont, Political Science.
A regional specialiaariim and language skills may alio be retfuired fur some positions.
In addition to meeting the inteUrctuaJ requirements, applicanitt should have evoellent skills in administration, writing, and research. and a airaniand of word processing, spreadsheet applications, and the Internet, Vi) apply fur an internship, please send a r^umc and cover letter including the semester, days, and times available to work Id ihe Internship Coordinator in the Human ELrstJurce;S Office ai the address listed below.
N^' 1006$ ILL 01.4^.9400 9S92 humjntc%tfU(ieS(A'(rur{ bnpu(g 43 Susan Henntssey North Koreans had done eailier.
The Kremlin seems to have noted that the leaked e-mails of Sony executives were deemed an embarrassment rather than a form of information war fa re.
And indeed, because the DNC and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee networks that the Russians infiltrated were not government systems or election infrastructure, their penetration by a foreign power did not set off sufficient alarms within the U,S. government.
Clapper indicated in May 2016 that the intelligence community was aware that hackers were targeting the presidential campaigns but implied that the activity was within the ordinary course of passive intelligence collection.
By the summer of 2016, there was strong evidence of Russia's involvement in the hacking and release of the DNc's e-mails, but the United States government did not publicly attribute the attacks to Russia until October.
If anything, the fact that the e-mails had been surreptitiously obtained created the impression that the Clinton campaign had something to hide; information that was otherwise unremarkable became headline news.
Strong and speci£c United States government attribution from the outset could have substantially shifted the focus to Russia's motives.
When the Obama administration finally did respond to the Russian hacking, the tri gg er was not the theft itself or the release of stolen e-mails.
Instead, it was the ta^eting of election infrastructure—the threat of actual vote counts being compromised—which had been uncovered by state election administrators.
Herz posited that actions undertaken by states for defensive reasons—such as increased defense spending or amassing troop on a border—are frequently perceived as threats by ocher states.
Those states respond by affirming their own security, which others in turn perceive as threatening.
Activities meant to be defensive unintentionally create and fuel an escalatory cycle.
In conventional armed conflicts, Buchanan explains, states have partly dealt with this dilemma by trying to make sure that others don’t mistake their defense for offense.
As a result, states have gotten better at making such Judgments and have developed a sec of standards about what constitutes ""normal” defensive behavior.
But those improvements have yet to reach the 44 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Deterring Cyherattacks cyber-reaJm, where chnlian and government networks are commingled and defensive and offensive tools are often Lodistinguishable, A lack of shared norms complicates matters, as does the nature of cyberdefense.
As Buchanan highlights, slates sometimes intrude into the networks of other states for genuinely defensive purposes, but evaluating intent in cyberspace is often more difficult than Judging a conventional military move.
And when a state cannot determine intent, it will generally assume aggression.
Furthermore, Buchanan argues that even defensive intrusions in cyberspace can compromise the security of the targeted state by establishing footholds that might be later exploited for offensive purposes.
An acute awareness of the risks of escalation has inhibited Washington’s response to cyberattacks.
So has the fact that the United States is more reliant on information systems than its adversaries are, contributing to a cautiousness that borders on paralysis.
But by failing to come up with an effective cyber-deterrence policy, the United States has increased its vulnerability to adversaries that are more willing to embrace risk.
FAILURE AND CONSEQUENCES The Obama administration’s concerns about the risks of retaliation ultimately resulted in a feckless response to Russia’s election interference.
According to a deeply reported postmortem in The Washington Post, the White House considered responses including cyberatiacks on Russian infrastructure, damaging economic sanctions, and the release of information embarrassing to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Some officials even floated the idea of sending aircraft carriers to the Baltics.
According to the ftn, the administration also approved a covert action to infiltrate Russian cyber-infrastructure in order to plant “cyber weapons” that could be used in the future.
Trump, who, as president, has repeatedly cast doubt on the idea that the Russians interfered in the election, appears disinclined to use chose tools.
Moreover, the United States government report on Russian interference overpromised and imderdelivered, outlining the intelligence community’s top-line conclusions without offering much evidence to back them up.
Although the protection of sources and methods is important, the document failed to persuade skeptics, and the report’s release backfired.
A subsequent series of highly specific leaks of classified information have revealed far more detail, but they lack the persuasive strength of official confirmation.
The Obama administration was loath to be viewed as improperly influencing the election.
According to The Wishingion Rwf, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Republican from BCenrucky, told the Obama administration that he would view any effort to publicly challenge the Russians over their interference in Novemher/December 2017 45 Susan Henntssey (he election as politically motivated, thereby blocking any chance for a uniiied, bipartisan response.
The delicacies of electoral politics, however, provide yet another compelling reason for establishing clearer rules of the road when it comes to cyberattacks.
By setting neutral standards, future administrations can guard against claims of partisanship should they choose to respond forcefully to foreign attempts to interfere in United States politics or policymaking.
Sometimes, an adversary desires a response, and so relying to acknowledge an attack is one way to fight back.
By that measure, the United States cyberdeterrence strategy, both past and present, has failed.
In May. the French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron was targeted with a similar hack and e-mail dump on the eve of a national election.
Although the evidence is less definitive than in the United States case, Russia—which favored Macron’s opponent, the right-wing populist Marine Le Pen—is widely believed to be responsible, NEXT STEPS To avoid a repeat of the 2016 fiasco, the United States must chart a new course shaped by a higher tolerance for strategic risk.
The Obama administration’s cyberstrategy presented ambiguity as a deterrent tactic, claiming that a lack of specificity would discourage states from simply tailoring their malicious activities to avoid crossing lines.
But experience has demonstrated that aggressive adversaries considered that zone of ambiguity to be a zone of impunity.
Although setting clearer lines does risk encouraging some additional below-the-threshold activity, containing behavior in that space is a better outcome than allowing more serious violations to go unchecked.
Likewise, the United States should be more consistent and proactive in publicly attributing attacks.
When ofiiciaJs fail (o point fingers for fear of revealing sources and methods, they offer United States adversaries plausible deniability.
Strong attribution and statements that unambiguously link retaliation to corresponding offenses are important steps toward shaping and enforcing the norms necessary to govern state conduct in cyberspace.
Finally, the United States must cease to be inhibited by the fear of sparking escalatory cycles.
Stronger responses to hacking, such as counterattacks and aggressive sanctions, do carry significant risks, but Washington can no longer rely on a do-nothing or do-Uttle approach.
SO' • One-year master's degree in international affairs COUNTRIES RERISSBNTBO t 20+ without Interrupting your career or relocating AVBRAOB A6Ci 40 Hybrid program structure of 3 two-week residencies and 33 weeks of internet-mediated learning Diverse cohort of approximately 50 mid-career and senior-level professionals working around the globe in the public, private, and non-profit sectors Professional network of 9500 Fletcher alumni CLASSES START JANUARY 3,2018 AND JULY 30,2018 fleteher.tufto.adu/CMAP fleteher-gmap ftufts.edu • *1.617.627^29 Dr.nm Hoffnwt SSP DIraeUv.
Secure Our World, Advance Your Career As the oldest and most respected master’s degree program In hs freld, the Security Studies Program is dedicated to preparing a new generation of analysts, policymakers, and scholars fully knowledgeable about the raige of international and r;ational security problems and foreign policy issues of the 21st Century.
SSP teaches students about the latest security challer>ges arxl cor\nectsthem with the most influential practitioners in Washington. beteve 50 stmngty in SSP. it truly changed my life.
Stephen Kotkin T hrough the first four decades of his life, Joseph Stalin achieved little.
Instead of becoming a priest, he became an underground revolutionary fighting tsarist oppression, spending the next 20 years hiding, o^anizing, and serving time in prison and internal exile in Siberia.
Stalin’s life was altered forever by the outbreak of total war in 1914, which helped precipitate the Russian tsar’s abdication in February 1917 and, later that year, a putsch by radical leftists led by Vladimir Lenin.
Sfetfn; IVe/Cinfi fbrffftfsr. . the second in athree*volume biography of the Soviet ieeder.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS embassies, spy networks, scientific and artistic circles, and party organizations.
He annotated works by Karl Marx and Lenin, of course, but also Russian translations of Plato and Clausewitz, as well as the writings of Alexander Svechin, a former tsarist officer whom Stalin never trusted but who demonstrated that the only constant in war was an absence of constants.
No^emher/Decemher 2017 49 Suphtn Kotkin Stalin spoke softly, sometimes inaudibly, because of a defect in his vocal cords.
He stood five feet seven inches, roughly the same as Napoleon and one inch shorter than Adolf Hiller.
Beginning in 1929, as the might of the Soviet state and Stalin’s personal dictatorship grew and grew, so, too, did the stakes.
Communism was an idea, a dream palace whose attraction derived from its seeming fusion of science and utopia, and Stalin was an ideologue.
Exploitation, colonization, and imperialist SO FOREIGN AFFAIRS when Stalin Faced Hitler war would give way to solidarity, emancipation, and peace.
The most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth, The purported science of Marxism-Leninism ostensibly explained why the world had so many problems and how it could be made better , with a role for all.
Accumulated resentments, too, fueled the aspiration to become significant.
People under the age of 29 made up nearly half of the Soviet population, grvif^ the country one of the youngest demographic profiles in the world, and the youth proved especially attracted to a vision that put them at the center of a struggle to build tomorrow today.
Novemher/December 2017 51 Sttphtn Kotkin Stalin was a ruler of seemingly irreconcilable contradictions.
He prided himself on his voracious reading and his ability to quote the wisdom of Marx or Lenin; he resented fancy-pants intellectuals who he thought put on airs.
He was a cynic about everyone’s supposed base motives; he lived and breathed his own ideals.
His colossal authority was rooted in a dedicated party, a formidable governing apparatus, and Marxist-Leninisc ideology.
But his power was magnified many times over by ordinary people, who projected onto him their ambidons for social justice, peace, abundance, and national greatness.
At age 20, Hiller found himself on a bread line in Vienna, his inheritance and savings nearly spent.
He had twice been rejected from Vienna’s Academy of Fine Arts (""sample drawing unsadsfactory”) and was staying in a homeless shelter behind a railway station.
Soon, with a small loan from an aunt, Hider got himself into a group home for men.
He S2 FOREIGN AFFAIRS When Stalin Faced Hitler managed to find odd jobs, such as painting picture postcards and drafting advertisements.
He also frequented the dcy’s public libraries, where he read political tracts, newspapers, the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, and the fiction of Karl May, set in the cowboys-and-lndians days of the American West or in the exotic Near East.
Film footage from 1918 shows Hitler marching in the funeral procession of provincial Bavaria’s murdered leader, a Jewish Social Democrat; he is wearing two armbands, one black and the other red.
Ten days before Hitler’s 30th birthday, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was quickly crushed by the so-called Freikorps, made up largely of war veterans.
Although he had begun to earn a reputation as a transfixing for-right agitator.
Still, he managed to turn his trial No^emher/Decemher 2017 S3 Sunken Kotkin Hitler was a master improviser who grasped opportunities that came his way. into a triumph.
Hitler refused to eat, believing he deserved to die, but letters arrived congratulating him as a national hero.
The richest opportunities perceived by Stalin and Hitler were often supposedly uigent “threats"" that they inflated or invented.
History is driven by the interaction of geopolitics, institutions, and ideas—but it takes historical agents to sec it all in motion.
Stalin’s direct experience of Germany consisted of just a few months in 1907 in Berlin, where he stopped on the way back to Russia from a Bolshewk meeting in London.
But like several tsarist predecessors, Stalin was a Germanophile, S4 FOREIGN AFFAIRS STRONGER ON THE GLOBAL STAGE H aving shed its image as a strife^ridden country, the Kingdom of Cambodia has made great strides in building a bright, sustainable future for its people.
Made up of a population of 15 million, half of which are under 25 years old, Cambodia's demographics presentee perfect condition to speed up economic growth.
Growing at an average of seven percent during the last two decades, Cambodia already boasts one of the fastest growing economies m the world.
Justin Wood, the head of the World Economic forum Pacific Region, praised Cambodia for boosting economic growth and reducing poverty in the country, There is a different stoiy to be told about Cambodia.
We want the world to uriderstand a bit more about what is happening in Cambodia,* Wood s^d.
Setting the Foundations As Cambodia pursues Its growth strategy, the government recognizes that it needs to attract more Investment in various vital sectors, particularly in infrastructure and education.
Kao KJm Mourn, UC can accommodate 10,000 students and stands as a leader in business and entrepreneurship education.
E HA HD COV EH S24.ee PAHEREACK * lb ought •pmoldog. decesion and b’ecurity Is oo excelleot odditioii to the sdiolaity literature oo subnadoMl reoveinenls.'' —AmuA AUTHOkor T}ie Stnggk Jar Patistan SSE.Sa HAHOCOVEH Available wherever fine books and ebooks are sold.
C COHMELIPRESS.COHNELLEDU When Stalin Faced Hitler admiring chat country's industry and science—in a word, its modernity.
PACE-OPF On Saturday, June 21,1941, Stalin paced and paced in his Kremlin office, with his usual short steps, gripping a pipe.
The walls in the offices were lined with shoulder-height wood paneling, under the theory that wood vapors enhanced air quality, and the elevators were paneled with mahogany.
In the rear was a door that led to a room for relaxation (although rarely used for that purpose), with oversize hanging maps and a giant globe.
Stalin had eliminated private property and made himself responsible for the Soviet equivalents of Washington, Wail Street, and Hollywood No^emher/Decemher 2017 SS Sttphtn Kotkin all rolled into one^ and all rolled into one person.
Rumors of various health problems had circulated abroad, and the use of foreign doctors had long ^o been discontinued.
The household staff had stopped bringing his meals from the Kremlin canteen, cooking them in his apartment instead and, in his presence, tasting from the plates.
Members of the French Grande Arm«—which included many Protestants and Catholics from Germany, Italy, and Poland—had defecated in the Kremlin’s Orthodox churches and taken potshots at the holy icons.
After cunning Russian resistance starved the occupiers, a recreating Napoleon had ordered the Kremlin blown to pieces.
Hitler essentially controlled all of Europe from the English Channel to the Soviet border; only Sw,reden and Switzerland remained neutral, and both were cooperating with Nazi Germany economically.
Stalin was strictly observing the non^gression pact that Germany and the Soviet Union had signed in August 1939.
At that time, Hitler, who had decided to swallow Poland by force, needed to keep the Soviet Union out of a possible anti-German coalition with France and the United Kingdom.
Stalin’s apprenticeship in high-slakes diplomacy had shown him to be cunning but also opportunistic, avaricious, obdurate.
This had worked, until Germany— aided by the cornucopia of Soviet raw materials—conquered France in the summer of1940, and Germany was freed up to turn its troops toward the Soviet Union.
The two geopolitical and ideological rivals, as a result of their shared aggrandizement, had acquired a common border.
Now, after half a year of contradictory secret reports about a possible German invasion of the Soviet Union, intelligence warnings of an imminent titanic war were coming from everywhere.
In Moscow, German embassy personnel were evacuating, taking with them oil paintings, antique rugs, and silver.
But Stalin had allowed Lavrenti Beria, the feared head of the secret police, to imprison Poskryobyshev’s beloved wife as a “Trotskyite” in 1939.
On Stalin’s instructions, at around 2:00 pm, he phoned General Ivan Tyulenev, head of the Moscow Military District.
In Berlin, however, the Soviet ambassador to Germany, after months of equivocation, finally averred that Germany’s actions signaled an imminent invasion.
Of course, warnings of impending war were even splashed across the front pages of newspapers ail over the world.
Novemher/December 2017 59 Sttphtn Kotkin READY OR NOT, HERE I COME Colonel Georgy Zakharov, a decorated fighter pilot, had been ordered to conduct a full daylight reconnaissance of the border region on the German side, and he reported that the Wehrmacht was poised to invade.
Stalin knew that Germany was underestimating this massive force out of prejudice as well as ignorance, so he had arranged German visits to Soviet aviation and tank factories, and even allowed German planes nearly unimpeded reconnaissance of Soviet troop concentrations, airfields, naval bases, and fuel and ammunition depots.
Because the so-called Wnter War between the Soviet Union and Finland, waged in 1939-40, had exposed Soviet military weaknesses not just to Hitler but also to Stalin.
Similarly, the most advanced Soviet warplanes made up just one-quarter of the air force.
Out of 659,000 Soviet officers, only around half had completed military school, while one in four had the bare minimum , and one in eight had no military education whatsoever.
The discussion apparently revolved No^emher/Decemher 2017 61 Sttphtn Kotkin around recent developments pointing toward war and Stalin's dread of provocations that might incite it.
To be sore, Stalin had allowed covert strategic redeployments to the western border from the interior.
But he would not permit the assumption of combat positions, which he feared would only play into the hands of hawks in the German military who craved war and were scheming to force Hider’s hand.
Soviet commanders could be liquidated by their own side if their forces returned any German fire.
In the Litde Comer, Kuznetsov, Safonov, Timoshenko, Voroshilov, and Voznesensky were dismissed at 8:15, Malenkov was dismissed five minutes later.
Since 1686 NYU's Graduate School has prepared g^erations of global leaders.
The Program In International Relations continues this tradition offering a rigorous, multidisciplinary study of contemporary International affairs.
Arthur L Carter Journalism Institute, School of Law, Stern School of Business, and Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, students In the M.A. program have access to a range of degree options with various technical and regional specializations.
M.A. students also have the opportunity to study at NYU's Washington, DC center end other locations In NYU's expansive global network.
Whereas Molotov and Beria parroted Stalin’s denials that Hitler was going to attack, the two pea^t-born commanders could see that Germany t j r j was coiled to invade.
Still, when Stalin bebefthat Germany insisted otherwise, they presumed that could not attack Russia he possessed superior information and defeating the insight.
Stalin had himself tried to eng^e Hitler even as he waited for the blackmail demands he expected Hitler to issue.
Evidently, Stalin expected Germany to demand Ukraine, the Caucasian oil fields, and unimpeded transit for the Wehrmacht through Soviet territory to engage the British in the Near East and India, A cunning No^emher/Decemher 2017 63 despot could have publicly declared his willingness to join the hostilities against the United Kingdom, exacting revenge against the great power he most reviled and, crucially, robbing Hitler of his argument that the British were holding out against Germany in anticipation of eventual Soviet assistance.
Instead of acting cunningly, Stalin clung to his belief that Gennany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom, even though the British did not have an army on the continent and were neither defending territory there nor in a position to invade from there.
Failing that, Stalin further assumed that even if hostilities broke out, the Germans would need at least two more weeks to fully mobilize their main invasion force, allowing him time to mobilize, too.
Stalin had 64 FOREIGN AFFAIRS him summon the German ambassador, Friedrich Werner von der Schulenbui^ to the Imperial Senate for a meeting at 9:30 pm.
In desperation, Schulenbiug had sent his embassy counselor to Berlin to try one last time, but this had failed as well.
Suddenly, around 10:00 PM, amid the still suffocating heat, the winds gushed, billowing November/December 2017 Suphtn Kotkin the curtains at open windows.
Still, the document made clear that the military was to prepare for war while doing everything possible to avoid it.
More self-controll"" Pavlov was overheard saying on the phone about reports of German actions.
Hitler’s adjutant Nicolaus von Below noticed that the fiihrer was “increasingly nervous and restless.
The two walked up and down Hitler’s drawing room for quite a while, finalizing the timing and content of Hitler’s war proclamation for the next day, which would focus on ""the salvation of Europe” and the intolerable danger of waiting any longer.
Russian rulers launching forced modernizations to overcome or at least manage the asymmetry of a country that considered itself a providential power with a special mission in the world but chat substantially lagged behind the other great powers.
The urgent quest for a strong state had culminated, once more, in personal rule.
Stalin’s regime No^emher/Decemher 2017 67 Sunken Kotkin HitleT turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for. defined the terms of public thought and individual identity, and Stalin himself personified the passions and dreams of a socialist modernity and Soviet might.
Stalin’s regime promised not merely statist modernization but also the transcendence of private property and markets, of class antagonisms and existential alienation—a renewal of the social whole rent by the bourgeoisie, a quest for social justice on a global scale.
In administration, it constituted a crusade for planning and control that ended up generating a proliferation of improvised ill^alities, a perverse drive for order, and a system in which propaganda and myths about ""the system” were the most systematized part.
The fanatical hypercentralization was often self-defeating, but the cult of the parry’s and especially Stalin’s infallibility proved to be the most dangerous flaw of Stalin’s fallible rule.
By inclination, Stalin was a Russian nationalist in the imperial sense, and anti-Westemism was the core impulse of this long-standing RussianEurasian political culture.
Initially, the ambitious Soviet quest to match the West had actually increased the country’s dependency on Western technology and know-how.
Geopolitically, however, whereas tsarist Russia had concluded foreign alliances for its security, the Soviet Union mosdy sought, or could manage, only nonaggression pacts.
Stalin insisted on calling fascism “reactionary"" a supposed way for the bou^eoisie to preserve the old world.
But Hider turned out to be 6S FOREIGN AFFAIRS See the atteched card for your speciaf gift rate.
A lifelong Germanophile, Stalin appears to have been mesmerized by the might and daring of Germany’s parallel totalitarian regime.
For a time, he recovered his personal and political equilibrium in his miraculous pact with Hitler, which deflected the German war machine, delivered a bounty of German industrial tools, enabled the conquest and Sovietization of tsarist borderlands, and reinserted the Soviet Union into the role of arbitrating world affairs.
This generated unbear^le tension in Stalin’s life and rule, yet he stubbornly refused to come to grips with the new realities, and not solely out of greed for German technology.
To be sure, in the immediate term, he thought in terms of domination of the European continent , which required Lebemraum —living space—in the east.
But in the lo nger term, he fo resaw dominatio n of the world , which would require a blue-water fleet, bases rimming the Atlantic, and a colonial empire in the tropics for raw materials.
That was incompatible with the continued existence of the British Empire, at least in the form it took at that time.
Hitler thus put himself in front of a stark choice of either agreeing to deepen the pact with Stalin and taking on the entire British Empire, which would mean conceding at least a partial Soviet sphere in the Balkans and on the Black Sea—on top of the Soviet sphere in the Baltics—or, alternatively, freeing himself from the infuriating dependency on Moscow and taking on No^emher/Decemher 2017 69 Sttphtn Kotkin the British later.
Hiller did not possess the air or naval capabilities or the depth of resources to prevail militarily over the United Kingdom; he did have the land forces to attempt to smash the Soviet Union.
A commitment to a prolonged contest for supremacy with the British, whom Hitler expected to be aided more and more by the vast resources of the United States, made quick annihilation of the Soviet Union an absolutely necessary prelude.
It envisioned the subdivision and exploitation of Soviet territories, as well as a pincer movement against the Suez Canal and British positions in the Middle East; the conquest of Gibraltar, northwestern Africa, and the Spanish and Portuguese Atlantic islands, to eliminate the British in the Mediterranean; and the building of 70 FOREIGN AFFAIRS When Stalin Faced Hitler coastal bases in West and possibly East Africa.
THE WISDOM OF BISMARCK Hitler cannot be explained in terms of his social origins or his early life and influences, a point that is no less applicable to Stalin.
But Stalin's policy resembled British appeasement in that he was driven by a blinding desire to avoid war at ail costs.
Neither his fearsome resolve nor his supreme cunning—which had enabled him to vanquish his rivals and spiritually crush his inner circle—was in evidence in 1941.
In the end, however, the question of who most miscalculated is not a simple one.
But Bismarck had built his chancellorship on avoiding conflict with Russia, When a bust of Bismarck was transferred from the old Reich Chancellery to Hider's new Reich Chancellery, it had broken off at the neck.
It can now learn to live with a nuclear North Korea, Doing so will not be risk free, however.
DANGER OP DEATH The international relations scholar Robert Litwak has described the current standoff with North Korea as *the Cuban missile crisis in slow motion,"" and several pundits, politicians, and academics have repeated that analogy.
That fear was why Khrushchev Novemher/December 2017 73 Seott D Sagan was so alarmed when a United States U-2 spy plane accidentally flew into Soviet airspace during the crisis.
TONE-DEPCON Trump’s poor decision-making process highlights another disturbing contrast with the Cuban missile crisis.
Together with his subsequent refusal to retaliate with an air strike after an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba, Kennedy's approach reflected the best kind of cautious crisis man^ement.
To some listeners, it just suggests chat Washington is considering limited military options.
But then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates quickly added that “because North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are oif.
But preventive war—starting a war to prevent another country from taking future action or acquiring a dangerous capability—is rarely justified and a^uably contrary to the UN Charter.
If senior military leaders believe at any time that Trump is impaired, they have a duty to contact Mattis, who should then call for an eme^ency cabinet meeting to determine whether Trump is “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office"" and thus whether to invoke the 2Sth Amendment.
Novemher/December 2017 77 Seotl D Sagan Consider the complaint expressed by General Joseph Dunford, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at the Aspen Security Forum in July that ""many people have talked about the military options with words such as 'unimaginable.
Moreover, Kim may well have ordered his generals to launch ail available weapons of mass destruction at the enemy if he is killed in a first strike—as did Saddam before the 1990-91 Gulf War.
Moreover, even a limited 78 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Economics for the Common Ooo^ ^ I eOKOHAf^AM LHow to Dr Iniemaii' _ Ui.
Standard of Living since the Civil War Robert J, Gordon rape S205 'Jean Trote is that rare exceptior. a htobel laureate who bdieites he has a soaal responability to talk dearty and responsibly about the tDpis on the minds of noneconorrssts.
This is an exceptxxul book, tt ^tows the value of oreful economic diinidng on topics from if>efTiployTTtertto global warirung.'' ^^ivier Blandiaid. former Chief Economist of the Internabonal r^netary Fund 'AlexanderThurston has written the definitive history of B(^o Haram.
By weaving a complex tapestry of politics zand r^igion. he explains the peculiarity and patency of one of the worid^ most lethal |ihadist insuigencies.
Connecting the past to the future, this is a history diet is unashamed to teadi us vital lessons.” —leremy Adelman, coauthor of i^rfds Together; \M)rictApan ‘International law has long struggled to be more than Just one foregn poficy Justrfkation among others In this thoughtful book.
OatesNotes This is a book well word) reading—a magisten^ combination of deep tedinolo^^ fvstory. vivid portraits of daily life over the past six generabems and careful economic an^ysis.' ^aul Knj^nan.
This ,. .will be an essential reference work for all those who are concerned with the future of a new United Nations, —BoutrosBoutros-Ghali, 6th Secrttary-Gentral oftha UN ... lucidly and Incelligendy presents a sweeping series of new, innovative ideas designed to reform the United Nations’ structure and performance.
A weapon of that size detonated over Seoul would kill 362,000j over San Francisco, the number would be 323,000.
According to a detailed study published in 2012 Novemher/December 2017 79 Seotl D Sagan by the Nautilus Institute^ a think tank based in California, North Korea has thousands of conventional artillery pieces along the demilitarized zone that by themselves could inflict some 64,000 fatalities in Seoul on the first day of a war.
Finally, there are a number of nuclear power plants near Busan that could be damaged, spreading radioactive materials, in an attackAll told, one million people could die on the first day of a second Korean war.
ACCIDENTAL WAR Even if the Uruted States forswore preventive conventional or nuclear strikes, the danger of an accidental war caused by the mutual fear of a surprise attack would remain.
The right to nuclear preemptive attack is by no means the United States monopoly"") In such a tense environment, one government’s preemptive-war plan can look a lot like a first-strike plan to its enemies.
There are few, if any, military targets in North Korea that the United States could not destroy with advanced conventional Novemher/December 2017 81 Seotl D Sagan weapons in a long war.
In 1947, the American diplomat Geoige Kennan outlined a strategy for the “patient but firm and vigilant containment"" of the Soviet Union.
Singapore has transformed itself many times to adapt to the changing global economic landscape.
In Just two generations, the tiny city-state has developed into one of the world's richest and most technologically advanced economies.
While they continue to be relevant, global changes and curreht circumstances also offer us new opportunities,* said Chan Chun Sing, Mii^ister in the Prime Minister's Office, who IS also Seaetary-Gerwral of the National Trades Union Congress and a member of the Future Economy Coundl, which maintains labor competitiveness and steers its industries to adjust to global shifa Having limited resources and bound by larger countries, Singapore realized early It had td surmount those geographical challenges.
Today, Its basic strategies remain the same* invest heavily in human capital, remain open and connected to the world, and provide a stable and transparent business envlroismenl *Given that we are facing technological disruptions and have attained a certain level of economic development, there are new areas that Singapore can leverage, such as the digital revolution,* Chan sad.
Singapore has |oined a global trend In developing urban solutions In line Its Smart Nation movement.
This goes beyond the air, land, and sea linla that we have invested and will continue to Invest ln,*the minister said.
To achieve this, Singapore uses education to transfdnn its workforce and Industries.
Speed of delivery and relevance to industry are some things to bear In mind.
Other countries may be talking about the same things, so how do we distinguish oursetvesT'Chan said Execution has always been Singapore^ strength 'We have always had a true tripartite system.
Government labor and businesses execute strategies as a closely knit unit That is what will put us In gcod standing,* the minister said 'This new wave of technological changes actually favors Oty-staies like ours.
OpportunKies In and Out of Singapore With just over five million people, Singaporean companies are in a constant search for overseas markets But thanto to state-run International Enterprise Singapore, companies get support in terms of due diligence, market intelligence, and lead generation *1E Singapore helped Identify what was noise and what were real opportunities.
If not for them, we would have kept banging on doors that would not open,* recalled MeNln Tan.
Managing Director of Cyclect Group, an Integrated construction, engineering constnjctlon and project management company present in eight countries, Like Cyclect, specialist medical services provider Singapore OAG Is looking Into regional expansion following jts IPO In 2015.
We did that 10 grow strategically* SOG subsequently acquired a well-known aesthetic medical group to add to its mainstream obstetrics and gynecology pillar.
Our members regularly have opportuhities to engage with top government officials and discuss areas either the government or the private sector needs assistance with.
The dialogue allows us to bridge the gap and facilitate swift solutions to challenges as they arise,* Mclnerney added 'AmCham Singapore Is on the cusp of its 4Sth anniversary.
Throughout, we've cultivated close vvorking relationships with buisness and government leaders, it's built around a mutual commitment to growing the economy and enhancing business relationships in Singapore and the region.
As we look ahead, we are going to continue doing exactly that,* she also said.
As coBypeinen fatM ta keep iv yrltii dunpbyp cemiliaitf bi the 1970s, RtentimliitahertiaAliire, laiKtooesemas and oartMi sappie wide ibe dty-$tatf laaved away fiBin agiioilwe.
Mwnmagad by the second ganmiiafl.WnuM adjnsQ to baslnessiaadri B SBSOIt its busitess.
H has partnered wttli ooH caarscs b«i« and abroad B lyaieiQi) tber ^wiyds aed yvsit INe pobTK health via laasqulto onM piadacts.
Hart are penny ompaliCM and gaBrtolont battimishiohiyai^ and SByalkrvehne, yvbkh better fits my cenpany an.
The teams have helped customers uryderstand market entry soalegies, industry dyryamics and to navigate the compleHities of dvryg business in ASEAN,'Wee etplairyed Immigration solutions and visa consultancy company, One Visa, is one key player in belong connect foreign companies and talented individuab to Singapixe.
Established in 2010, One Visa has grown significantly to become a leading immigration service provider in Singapore 'One Visa is one of only a few visa consultancy companies that have the capability to advise and offer the hill spectrum of immigration services in Singapore We have been very focused on knowing where we an move people, while consbrentiy addiryg new value aryd excelleryce to our dients' experience,' said founder and Managing Director Cheng Kiryg Heng.
We can make their next move effortless,' Cheng added One Visa plarys to establish further globally and is looking at new parmerships with migradon agents in the United States and Canada.
For commodities trading Sponsored Repoat company Rhodium Resources Pte.
Ltd, being located In Singapore may have been more important that Just understarxding Asia and navi* gadr^ the market 'Few financial centers in the world have an understand* ing of commodhy trade and finance Finance is our specialty.
But In Sir>gapore, where we do not have alternatives or (he luxury of a base resource, we ter>d to be a trading hub' said Director Cheam Hir>g Lee.
And if there is good fndusthalizalion, ff the country also builds the right in^structure, we will have a successful outcome.
Over time, that has given us a very steady rate of growth,' said Group CEO Tan Chong Ueng While Singapore's Changi Airport is consistently nam^ one of the best airports In the world, it has also remained an important air cargo hub fn the region.
Wrth connections to more than 3BQ cides around the world, Changi plays an tmportant role In global trade and tourism.
At the end of this year, Changi Airport Is expected to ^en iQ new Terminal 4, which will add another 16 mppa to Changi's capacity, Changi's current capacity is 66 mppa, and with T4, Changi's total handling capacity will be 82 m^^a.
LU. has growii from a small enterpHse Into a billlQr dollar mulQ* national.
Oieani attributes Rhodlwii^ success to jMeemptive insiglittbat allows them to anttdpate and avoid devastating relbads and to their aptitude to initovale that prloritlZB the needs of customers and opltalues on Singapore^ h* nandal bade structure.
Oieam pointed out that lew financial centres in the wsdd fidly understand (ornmocftty Trade and considered trade fnance a spedalty.
The company Gdrf aho expressed hb wbh to explore more opportunities In the United States in bifrartructwe and double Rhodium^ business.
Rhodium has offices In Hong Konrt Australia, Dubai and London and has a partnoshtp with Amerlon global asset management firm Daktree.i wwwjhodtommMne.oftR i RhattUA iMaurcei CEO aid Managing Director (h4M Hague DOB connects businesses to opportunities in Asia W ith the rise of Intraand inter*regior>al trade In Asia, United Overseas Bank Is well positioned to connect businesses to opportunities in Asia.
Created in 1935 to serve the needs of the overseas Gimese merchant community In Singapore, UOB has e^^anded its presence across Asia in line with the regional growth ambitions of its clients, today, UOB is one of the world's strongest banks and has an integrated network across 19 countries and teinrories, from which it helps clients TO identify and to seize o^ortunhies.
Over the last eight decades, the bank^ experience and local presence have given it a firsthand understanding of what it takes to build a sustainable business fn the region.
In 2011, JOE set up a dedicated unit to help businesses plan and execute their regional expansion strategies.
Its Foreign Direct Investment Advisory team was initially based in Singapore, It has since been building an ecosystem of partners able to support Its dients, IrKluding government agencies, trade and investment associations and professional services providers such as legaL audit and accounting firms across the region.
More than 40 percent of these business flows were directed through Singapore, reinforcing the nation's strategic importance as an international business center and launchpad to the regioa ■ www.i/9bgro<ip.eem SUOdVPHIS SINGA^Ae Getting smarter and greener A s Singapore strives to become a smart naSon, ^ country's business sector proceeds iull steam towards full (figitabaDon 'Oigrtalsalion pushes us to leima^ne barring and the cuslomef ^mey.
DBS aims id r\jn like a 22XO[>-Ferson startup dw err^races tedmolo^cal transfermaOon,'saHd R^idi Gupta, CEO cf DBS, named lAtorld's Best Cigrtal BankbyEuromcney in201d.
Di^talization h^ped another banking giant • CQC arpand is gec9faphicai leadt and better mderstand customer p refe r en ces and iTer>ds.
Singapore's global competitor Sslar aner^ fm Sun Elrark sms laany appertwitlcs for fellow *siiart* (eraaalH amitd the world Mlh to pienetrAg infoittves aed Mtented tedinelegiei, Sun Hectric hulK a platfem that alloen open access to solar cnirgr ky (omecSii MineD and rooftop m«rs.
Smilunreuslyr w*'*e bMO hnevaDve and ralBume^feolsed Despite dMlIcnpcs to mpleswiting eor iviovatlefi, Stn Beclik helps dues adept dean etwi^* said Sun Becttk<E0 HatThewPetoso.
Tbh makes for a really posKhe fiture for the eoergy sectw aod healthier OOes,"" PelM added.
Sm 0ecir*c is ventiiir^ beyend the couniry Id brng solar povi«r to lool commurtides fhom building looftops. he company wen a government grant three years ago afisr taking part n a fscofcfconcept eaerdse baded by stateowned teal estate compsry JTC Corporadoa 'Now.
Sm Electric is evporting its patented isdinolG^es arvd sdtviafB tools to a wide range of srrWGtyand grd iniiialMS globally, scaling signrliantly from otf Singapore base It5 an evdong ivTie.'aid CEO Matthew Peloso Surbana Jureng, or« of Asa's largest infrasmicture and urban development (xnsullandes. balso ^ger ID share <C ejipemse ”We want to impart what we lave learned, buid susiairable dties, and shape ccmminties,* aid Group CEO iAbng Heang Bob.
Meanwhile, Wendell Trading CoTT^ny has helped Singapore maintain its reputaocn as one of Asia^ greenest places.
CPIdrvally started as a dsirfoutor of fertilit ers arvd aghojlture dverruols, the company has dveryhed iG adhrittes to indude de^rdopment and rraintenarvs of gardervs and golf ccursei ""We want to contribute bo the susianabtfty of larvdscapes globdly.
S ingapore Invests heavily In Its schools, aware that human capital ks the country's most valuable resource and that education is the best way to keep Its workforce relevant In a ^st changing world To prepare Its students for the ever-evolving global marketplace, the government emphasizes skills building and versatility.
Singapore's polyted^nlc Institutes play an Important role In this mission by offenng Industiy-speciftc programs which give students ar> alternative pathway towards productive and meaningful employment *SBngdp(ye is changing.
We are also now concerned with how student interns can help with Innovations that can transform enterprises.* said Soh Wal Wah, CEO and Principal of Singapore Polytechnic , the first polytechnic insti^on in the country.
Founded 63 years ago, SP remains ve^ global-minded and Is looking to explore partnerships In the United States for research and cdlabordtion.
Uearwhile, as a university of applied learning, Singapore Institute of Technology provides practical education wherein students are taught to apply their knowledge in real-life contexts.
New Delhi’s New Role Alyssa Ayres T he country with the world's third-latest military by personnel strength, fifth-latest defense budget, and seventh-largest economy isn’t a member of the UN Security Council.
It isn't even a member of the G-7, the exclusive club of major industrialized economies.
It is India, a country long regarded as an emerging power rather than a major global player.
In fairness, for years, this assessment was not off the mark, and India's reality did not match up to its vaunted potential.
Its infrastructure is in need of major investment—to the tune of $1. trillion over a decade, according to India’s finance minister.
Discrimination among India's famously diverse population persists, whether on the basis of gender, caste, religion, or region.
Because of these challenges, and because the country has been kept on the margins of the global institutions central to United States diplomacy, India's impressive economic power and defense capabilities have often gone unnoticed.
A more confident India has already begun to shape the global agenda on climate change, clean energy, and worker mobility.
And spurred by China’s increasingly assertive regional posture, India has ramped up its own military capacity.
India has long chafed at the feet that despite its size and its democracy, the world does not see it as a major power.
Unlike China, it does not ALYSSA AYRES is Senior Fellow for India, Pakistan, and South Aala at the Council on Foreign Relationa and the author of the forthcoming book Our Time Has Come; How India U Making Its Place in Che World {Oxford Univeralty Press.18), from which this essay Is adapted.
Novemher/December 2017 Alyssa Ayres have a coveted permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
Considering India’s growing economy and enhanced military capabilities, Indian leaders are pushing for their country’s “due place in global councils,” as former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh put it.
Under the current prime minister, Narendra Modi, India has begun to see itself as a “leading power,” laying overt claim to a new, more central place in the world.
As India leaves behind some of its old defensiveness on the world stage, a vestige of its nonaligned worldview, it is time for United States policy to evolve, as well.
Relations between the United States and India have come a long way from the days in which the diplomat and historian Dennis Kux could write of the two as “estranged democracies,"" and both countries now talk of being ’’strategic partners”—a relationship of cooperation, but not a formal alliance.
United States President Donald Trump has not yet fully articulated his plans for relations with India, although he did remark in June that they have “never looked brighter,” and in a departure from the Washington playbook, he has explicitly asked India to do more on economic development in Afghanistan.
As the president and his team grapple with India’s rise, they should re conceptualize the U.S.-Indian relationship to better manage differences with a power that prizes policy independence above all.
And they must address the inequity of India’s exclusion from major institutions of global governance by championing Indian membership and giving New Delhi a long-overdue place at the table.
The country remains fiercely protective of its policy independence, shuns formal alliances, and remains ever willing to break global consensus, as it has done most famously on trade negotiations.
It can be a close defense partner, but not in the familiar template of most United States alliances.
India wants an improved trade and economic relationship, but it will not be easily persuaded by United States entreaties for increased market access.
Still, Democratic and Republican administrations alike have prioritized foiging closer ties with New Delhi, rightly regarding a tighter relationship as a vote for the importance of democracy and a bet on shared prosperity and stability in Asia.
PROSPERITY AND POWER As with China, the economy has been at the center of India’s global transformation.
United States government projections anticipate that India will be the world's third-largest economy by 2029, lagging behind only China and the United States.
A slowdown in China and contractions in Brazil and Russia have increased India’s share of global GDP as measured by purchasing power India has begun to see itself as a 'leadingpower,** parity, which the International Monetary laying overt claim to a Fund projects will exceed eight place in the world. percent by 2020—above that of Japan in 1995 and that of China in 2000.
India’s sheer size and its youthful demographics offer the prospect of enormous economic growth.
According to UN estimates, India will overtake China as the world’s most populous country sometime around 2024, and it will do so with a significantly younger population.
India's laig;e working-age population will continue to grow until 2050, while Japan, China, and western Europe age.
By then, Japan's median age is expected to stand at 53 years, China’s at nearly 50, and western Europe’s at 47.
India surpassed China as the world’s largest market for motorcycles and scooters in 2016, but it has also become a global hub for automobile manufacturing, producing Novemher/December 2017 85 Alyssa Ayres nearly one in three small cars sold worldwide.
India does not yet come to mind as an automotive powerhouse, but Ford, Hyundai, Maruti Suzuki, and Tata are all making cars there.
Collectively, the Indian automotive industry built only slightly fewer automobiles in 2016 than South Korea and more than Mexico, both major car-producing nations.
Although India needs to do much more to develop its manufacturing base, its advances in the auto industry represent an about-face from just IS years ago.
Increasingly, India is translating its economic might into military power.
It already counts itself as part of a select club of countries with advanced defense technology, including a nuclear weapons program.
With its sights set on primacy in the Indian Ocean, New Delhi is strengthening its defense ties with countries across the region and building a blue-water navy.
According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, India now has a force strength of nearly 1. million troops on active duty and nearly 1. million reservists.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that India became the world's fifth-largest military spender in 2016, ahead of France and the United Kingdom.
Now the world’s top importer of military equipment for the last five years, India has accelerated its procurements from United States companies from essentially zero to more than $15 billion worth over the past decade.
But even as defense ties with the United States grow, India is not going to end its long-standing relationship with Russia, and recognizing that is part of working with New Delhi.
Indeed, Russia remains a major defense supplier for India, as are France and Israel; India is simply diversifying its strategic bets by doing business with multiple partners.
India is also increasingly producing its own advanced defense technologies, instead of importing them.
Although it recently replaced its aging aircraft carrier in a much-delayed deal with Russia in 2013, it now has a second carrier under construction, developed and built at home, although it may not be ready for as long as a decade.
India has a third carrier scheduled for construction, also to be made domestically, and it has plans to add at least three nuclear-powered submarines to its fleet.
In fact, in a major departure from the past, the country has begun to export military equipment to other countries in the region.
ANEW SWAGGER A more confident India, eager to shape, rather than simply react to, global events, has already made its presence felt diplomatically.
In the long-running multilateral climate negotiations, India moved, in less than a decade, from playing defense to taking the lead in setting the global climate agenda.
For years, India had refused to acquiesce to proposals to cap carbon emissions.
Indians considered it deeply unfair that the developed West was looking for cuts from developing India, a country with a historically small contribution to climate change, low per capita emissions, and large future development needs.
Along with FranQois HoUande, then France’s president, Modi announced a new international solar power alliance to be headquartered in India, with a focus on promoting the rapid deployment of solar energy and cutting the costs of financing and development.
The Paris agreement showcased a different style of Indian diplomacy—this was not the India that helped scuttle the World Trade Organization's Doha negotiations in 2008 but a new, problem-solving India.
On defense and security, India has strengthened its capacity over the past decade to such an extent that United States secretaries of defense now routinely refer to India as a net provider of regional security.
India’s maritime ambitions, especially its goal of primacy in the Indian Ocean, are a response to China's more assertive presence across South Asia.
Beijing's intensified infrastructure development assistance to Bangladesh, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, and, especially, Pakistan—as well as a new military base in Djibouti—have expanded China’s Indian Ocean reach.
In 2015, New Delhi quietly reached an agreement with the Seychelles to host its first overseas military base.
That same year, India took the lead in rescuing nearly 1,000 foreign citizens from 41 countries stranded in Yemen, including Americans.
And when Japan joined India and the United States that year as a Novemher/December 2017 87 permanent participant in the annual Malabar naval exercises, India was able to showcase its warships, planes, and submarines beside the two most powerful democracies in the Asia-Pacific region.
While deepening its ties with the West, New Delhi has also shown a determination to invest in alternative international organizations over the course of the past decade.
India does not seek to overturn the global order; rather, it merely wants such institutions as the UN Security Council, the AsiaPacific Economic Cooperation , the World Bank, the IMF, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, and others to expand to accommodate it.
But as reform of these oi^anizations drags on, New Delhi has put some of its eggs in other baskets.
Take the brics, comprising Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
In less than a decade, the group has become an important diplomatic forum and has accomplished more chan most observers expected.
And in 2014, they agreed to form the brics Contingent Reserve Arrangement, an alternative to IMF support in times of economic crisis.
India also supported the Chinese-led creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and it is now the bank's secondbiggest contributor of capital.
In 2017, India also joined the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and it maintains an active presence in other institutions far outside the United States' orbit, such as the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia.
Although New Delhi's top priority remains a seat commensurate with its size and heft within the 88 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Will India Start Acting Like a Global Potoerf traditional global o^anizations still dominated by the West, India has shown that it is also willing to help build other arenas in order to have a greater voice.
India will likely continue to maintain this diverse array of relationships even as it strengthens its ties with the United States; regardless, granting New Delhi the place it deserves in major Western international forums would help, rather than hinder, United States interests.
At a time when international coordination has become far more complex, the increase in new organizations creates “forum-shopping"" opportunities, as the political scientist Daniel Drezner and others have argued.
More forums and more options make it harder to get things done internationally—and also decrease Washington’s influence.
A SEAT AT THE TABLE Successive United States administrations have viewed the relationship with India as one of the United States’ great strategic opportunities, offering a chance to overcome historical differences and strengthen ties with a fast-growing market, a stable pillar in a region of turmoil, and a la^e country that can provide a balance of power across Asia and a bulwark against Chinese dominance.
The George W Bush administration sought to reframe the U.S.-Indian relationship by striking a 2005 deal concerning civilian nuclear cooperation, bridging what had been a 30-year divide on nonproliferation.
The Obama administration continued the momentum, with various efforts to expand defense, economic, and diplomatic cooperation.
Indian officials walked a tightrope, saying little publicly about it beyond an anodyne tweet from a Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson (""We are closely watching fast evolving situation and hope for a peaceful resolution’’) rather than clearly condemning Russia’s violation of Ukrainian sovereignty.
On questions of grand strat^y, India’s desire to be recognized as a major global power includes an indelible commitment to its own ideas of autonomy.
Although New Delhi has shifted over the years from reflexive nonalignment to a recent philosophy of “strategic autonomy"" to the present Indian government’s vision of “the world is one family"" , the connecting thread remains policy independence.
But that sense of independence can sometimes clash with the United States’ tendency to believe that its partners and allies should support it across the board.
Novemher/December 2017 89 Alyssa Ayres Given the size of India's economy^ it is past time for the country to be brought into agenda-setting institutions.
The U,S. government’s designation of India last year as a “major defense partner""—a status created and accorded only to India, as a means to facilitate advanced defense cooperation—illustrates the unique situation and marks the beginning of a new way to think through this relationship.
Even though New Delhi seeks deeper ties, induding obtaining United States technology, Indians do not want to sign themselves up for every U.S.led initiative around the world.
There is a difference between being ""natural "" allies,"" in the words of former Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, and the extensive commitments of a formal alliance.
New Delhi seeks the rhetorical flourish of the former without the restrictive expectations of the latter.
Given that United States and Indian interests are converging across Asia, military ties between the two countries will no doubt deepen.
But as they do, United States policymakers will have to manage their expectations and not be disappointed when India, say, improves ties with Iran.
In order to ward off frustrations with India’s inevitable departures from United States preferences, the United States should frame its relationship with India differently, conceiving of it more as a joint venture in business than a traditional alliance.
That would mean insulating shared initiatives from areas of disagreement, such as policy toward Iran or ties with Russia.
On economics, too, Washington at times differs sharply with New Delhi, despite a commitment on both sides to expanding bilateral trade.
Indeed, India has never hesitated to break global consensus to protect its perceived economic interests.
A decade ago, New Delhi and Beijing made common cause to protect their agricultural sectors, leading to the July 2008 stalemate that ended the Doha round of international trade negotiations.
Then, in 2014, India backed out of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which sought to cut red tape, despite having previously agreed to it.
More recently, India’s powerful information technology sector has raised trade in services to the very cop of India’s economic negotiating agenda, since one way to provide information technology 90 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Will India Start Acting Like a Global Potoerf services is to perform work on location—including in another country.
New Delhi is pushing other countries to accept greater numbers of Indian temporary workers while remaining resistant to opening its own market further to goods and services.
In 2016, India filed a formal dispute against the United States in the World Trade Organization over increases in visa fees that India claimed would hit its information technology workers especially hard; the outcome will set a precedent for managing worker mobility across the globe.
Despite these disagreements, there is ample room for progress on the economic relationship.
India’s global ambitions rest on sustained economic growth, and for that, India needs to maintain ongoing reforms.
While only India’s own political process will determine the trajectory of those efforts, the United States can and should do a better job of including India in the international networks conducive to economic growth and job creation.
Historically, decades of self-sufficiency and a relatively small economy locked India out of productive economic institutions such as apec, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development , and the International Energy Agency —all bodies that set standards and provide a meaningful place for cooperation on trade, development, and economic policy.
Given the size of India’s economy, it is past time for the country to be brought into such agenda-setting institutions.
An apec missing Asia’s third-largest economy lacks legitimacy and makes little economic sense.
Washington should support Indian membership, something it has so far refrained from doing.
The same argument holds for the oecd, especially because India has emerged as a major donor of development aid across South Asia and Africa.
In recent years, the oecd has created a category of states called ""key partners”—a group that includes India, along with Brazil, China, and Indonesia—which it consults but does not count as members.
Locking India out of the oecd also keeps it out of the iea, for arcane historical reasons, thus excluding one of the world’s largest energy consumers.
If the G-7 is to remain a central economic-agendasetting institution for the world’s leading democracies, at some point, it, too, will have a hard time rationalizing its exclusion of India given the rapidly growing size of the Indian economy.
Concerns that bringing India into the fold will disrupt consensus in these economic institutions are overblown, since these are not binding negotiating forums.
If anything, giving India a place at the table will help pull it into a cohort of countries already committed to economic openness and transparency.
Washington should seek to make good on its promise of working toward permanent membership for India “in a reformed and expanded"" Security Council, as President Barack Obama pledged before the Indian Parliament in 2010.
Promoting India's membership could present challenges to many United States positions, but the perspective Indian diplomats bring on some of the world’s most intractable problems deserves to be heard in the same room as the perspectives from China, France, Russia, and the United Kingdom.
Unfortunately, the UN Security Council has not budged on the issue of expansion since Obama first voiced support for Indian inclusion.
Reform has been held hostage to competing demands from other deserving countries—such as Brazil, Germany, and Japan— not to mention a lack of consensus on the size of expansion and whether new permanent members should have veto powers.
Even if the UN remains plagued by inertia, there are many other forums where India could make a contribution, with a litde help from Washington.
The United States must do a better job of normalizing the reality of India's rise and overtly emphasizing the country's importance to United States national interests and to the world, just as Washington assumes the importance of so many of its close European partners.
For a month, Houthi rebels, who had taken Sanaa in late 2014, had been holding him under house arrest.
By the time the guards noticed that he was gone, Hadi had reached the relative safety of the southern port of Aden.
A month later, as Houthi forces advanced south, he fled again, this time to Riyadh, where he called on Saudi Arabia to intervene in Yemen’s civil war.
Within days, a Saudi-led coalition of Arab states began a campaign of air strikes against Houthi targets that rapidly became a siege of the entire country.
Cut off from imports, and under a ceaseless Saudi bombardment, Yemen has turned into one of the worst humanitarian crises of modern times.
Seven million Yemenis live in areas that are close to famine, nearly two million children are suffering from acute malnutrition, and an outbreak of cholera has infected over 600,000 people.
The conflict in Yemen is often described as an outgrowth of the Shiite-Sunni rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia, as Iran has supplied weapons and military advisers to the Houthis.
But this misunderstands both the origins of the war and the reason why Saudi Arabia intervened.
And Saudi Arabia intervened not to counter Iranian expansionism but to secure its southern border against the Houthi threat.
As a result, only an internal Yemeni political settlement can end the war, although Saudi Arabia, the United States, and international humanitarian organizations can do much to improve the situation in the meantime.
THE SHADOW OF THE PAST The modern state of Yemen was born in 1962, when revolutionaries, many of whom had absorbed contemporary ideas of nationalism at foreign universities, deposed Imam Muhammad al-Badr and created the Yemen Arab Republic, or North Yemen.
For the next 40 years, the foreign-educated elite who had sparked the revolution occupied some of the most important positions in the new republic, serving as presidents, prime ministers, cabinet ministers, and chief executives.
They based their legitimacy on the roles they had played during the revolution and its aftermath, achieving an almost mythic status in the national imagination.
It empowered Yemen’s growing urban population and ended the dominance of those families—known as ""sayyids"" — who could trace their lineage back to the Prophet Muhammad.
And it sent Yemen's northern tribes, which had supported the deposed Badr, into the political wilderness.
Shutoff from government funding, their region stagnated and their problems festered.
After North and South Yemen unified, in 1990, discrimination against the northern tribes gave rise to a protest movement in the north, led in part by the Houthi family, one of the most prominent sayyid dynasties in northern Yemen.
Then, in 2004, during early clashes between northern tribes and the government, the Yemeni military killed Hussein Badreddin al-Houthi, one of the leaders of the movement.
His death marked the beginning of the northern tribes’ armed insurgency and gave the rebels their name.
For the next seven years, sporadic fighting continued, with neither side gaining a meaningful advantage.
At the same time as the government was fighting the Houthis in the north, its authority in the rest of the country was fading.
The greatest challenge for a revolutionary state is maintaining its legitimacy after the founders have died, and half a century after the revolution, few of Yemen's original leaders remained.
But from that point on, the Yemeni state created by the revolution effectively disappeared.
The passing of Yemen’s revolutionary generation created not only a crisis of national identity but also one of governance.
Once, Yemeni students who had obtained degrees abroad took pride in returning home as future leaders.
But over the last ten years, much of the educated elite has left the country, citing worsening government corruption and ineptitude and a lack of domestic employment opportunities.
Political appointments are now granted on the basis of tribal membership rather than training or experience, and technocrats have gradually given way to the beneficiaries of nepotism.
As the central government’s legitimacy declined over the last decade, a political void opened.
Beginning in 2009, extremist groups, including al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, emerged to fill the gap.
But it was the northern Houthi movement, already organized and opposed to the central government, that was positioned to take the fullest advantage of the derelict republic.
November/December 2017 95 Asher Orkaby REVOLUTIONS The Houthis’ chance came in early 2011, when revolts in places such as Egypt and Tunisia inspired months of mass protests against the corrupt, autocratic government in Sanaa.
That February, Abdul-Malik al-Houthi, a northern rebel leader, declared his support for the antigovernment demonstrations and sent thousands of his followers to join the rallies in the capital.
Some of the most powerful images of the uprising were those of tribesmen in traditional robes demonstrating alongside members of the urban youth movement.
Fifty years earlier, these two groups had fought each other for control of Yemen; in 2011, they marched together against a common enemy, Saleh.
In early 2013, the government and opposition groups began a national dialogue conference that culminated in 2014 with a plan, backed by Hadi, to write a new constitution and divide Yemen into six provinces.
Yet the Houthi opposition rejected the deal, as it would have further weakened the power of the northern tribes.
Throughout 2014, antigovernment protests, many of them led by Houthis, continued to rage.
In September, Houthi forces captured Sanaa, and then in early 2015, they dissolved parliament, forced Hadi to resign, and installed a revolutionary committee to replace the Yemeni government.
Ever since Saudi Arabia was founded, in 1932, its leaders have worried about the security of the country’s southern border with Yemen.
In 1934, Saudi Arabia fought its first war against the Kingdom of Yemen to secure that border.
Under the treaty that ended the war, Saudi Arabia annexed three Yemeni border provinces that it had occupied during the fighting.
Since then, Saudi foreign policy toward Yemen has been driven by the need to maintain a weak central government in Sanaa that does not threaten Saudi security.
Each time a popular movement or a strong central authority has looked as chough it were appearing in Yemen, the Saudi government has responded with military action and financial support for pro-Saudi groups.
In 2009 and 2010, cross-border skirmishes between Houthi fighters and 96 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Yemtn’i Humanitarian Nightmare Saudi forces caused the first Saudi casualties along the Saudi-Yemeni border since the 1960s.
After taking Sanaa in 2014, the Houthi leadership openly called for war with Saudi Arabia, using demands for the return of the three border provinces as a rallying cry for the movement.
SAUDI ARABIA STEPS IN As a result, when Hadi requested Saudi help, Riyadh was only too happy to oblige.
In March 2015, Saudi Arabia and a coalition of Arab nations from the Gulf Cooperation Council launched a military campaign to push back the Houthis and restore the government.
Saudi Arabia presented the intervention as a response to the threat of Iranian expansionism, arguing that the Houthis were effectively an Iranian proxy.
Yet Saudi rhetoric has grossly misrepresented Iran's role in the conflict.
Although some small arms and money have flowed from Iran to the Houthis, the amounts are not la^e, and there is no real Houihi-lranian alliance.
The northern tribes do not share Iran's desire to challenge Israel and the United States, and they began positioning themselves as an alternative to Yemen's central government long before receiving any Iranian help.
The true target of the Saudi campaign was not Iran but the Houthis themselves.
The intervention, which began as a series of air strikes against Houthi military targets, has morphed into an attempt to destroy Yemen's economic infrastructure in order to turn public opinion away from the Houthi movement and its anti-Saudi stance.
Hospitals, factories, water mains, sewage facilities, bridges, and roads have all been demolished in bombing raids.
The Saudi coalition, with help from the United States, has blockaded Yemen's ports and rendered it dangerous for civilian aircraft to fly over the country, making it difficult for aid agencies or businesses to bring goods into Sanaa's airport and for wounded Yemenis to go abroad for treatment.
For many Yemenis, buying food or medicine is now difficult or impossible.
According to the UN, two-thirds of Yemen's 28 million people face food shortages and do not have access to clean water.
Seven million of them live in areas on the brink of famine, and nearly two million Yemeni children are acutely malnourished.
Without working public services, rubbish and sewage have piled up on the streets and leached into drinking wells.
Since April, cholera, Novemher/December 2017 97 Aiher Orkahy which spreads in contaminated water, has infected over 600,000 people, killing more than 2,000.
The UN Human Rights Council, Amnesty International, and other humanitarian organizations have condemned Saudi Arabia’s human rights violations in Yemen.
The Houthis' rise was the special adviser , rr j' prevention ot genocide, has realization of Saudi called on the Security Council to invesleaders''worst fears. tigate possible Saudi crimes against . » «■ a ^ humanity.
Yet by portraying its intervention as a conflict with Iran, Saudi Arabia seems to have convinced much of the world, especially the United States, to ignore the deliberate targeting of Yemeni civilians.
The practical response to the crisis from international aid organizations has been ineffective.
In July, the World Health Organization announced that it was suspending its cholera vaccine program in Yemen indefinitely.
The who may well have been right, but it and other international organizations have missed opportunities to help resolve the wider conflict.
Because the international community has officially recognized only the Yemeni government in exile and given the Houthi government scant diplomatic attention, neutral humanitarian organizations are among the few groups chat can mediate the conflict without political restraints.
In the 1960s, the government of the new Ye men Arab Republic fought a six-year civil war with northern tribes loyal to the deposed leader Badr.
Back then, as today the northern tribes were not officially recognized by foreign governments, so the International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN were the only groups that had access to them.
The UN opened a direct line of communication with their leaders, legitimizing their position in the conflict and encouraging them to participate in a national peace conference.
And the Red Cross facilitated several prisoner exchanges, introducing aspects of the Geneva Convention to an area of the world where belligerents had traditionally beheaded captives rather than swapped them.
During the current war, the Red Cross and the UN can repeat chat strategy.
They should both address the humanitarian crisis and provide 98 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Yemtn’i Humanitarian Nightmare the Houthi tribes with an international platform from which to negotiate with the government in exile.
The UN could also send peacekeepers to secure Saudi Arabia's southern border, alleviating one of the main drivers of the conflict.
That tactic worked from 1963 to 1964, when UN personnel patrolled a demilitarized zone between Saudi Arabia and Yemen and mediated cross-border disputes.
A similar peacekeeping presence today would give Riyadh enough confidence in the security of the border to cease its aerial campaign and lift its naval blockade, ending the immediate humanitarian crisis.
WASHINGTON'S ROLE Although the United States is not involved in the fighting in Yemen, it has supported the Saudi-led coalition in several ways.
The United States military trains Saudi forces and offers its bases to Saudi warplanes for refueling.
And the United States has sold Saudi Arabia billions of dollars' worth of weapons, many of which have been used in Yemen.
That means that the United States is well positioned to improve the situation on the ground.
Washington should threaten to withdraw its military support in order to pressure Saudi Arabia to end hostilities and accept an international peacekeeping force along the SaudiYemeni border.
With a buffer against immediate territorial incursions, Saudi Arabia might be more willing to allow Yemenis to adopt their own political solution, even if the Houthi leadership played a significant role in the ensuing government.
Any negotiations between the United States government and the Houthis would meet serious opposition in the United States.
United States officials have pointed to this slogan as proof of the movement’s anti-American stance and, since the expression is based on an Iranian revolutionary catch phrase, as evidence of Houthi-Iranian cooperation.
The Houthis are one of the few groups in the Middle East that has little intention or ability to confront the United States or Israel.
And far from being aligned with extremists, the Houthi movement has repeatedly clashed with the Islamic State and al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
It is Saudi Arabia that has long supported Sunni Islamist groups in Yemen.
MoreNovemher/December 2017 99 Aiher Orkahy over, Yemen’s northern tribes are willing to accept foreign assistance no matter who gives it.
Diiring the 1960s, they even received secret military aid from Israel in their civil war against the new republic.
Abdul-Malik al-Houthi and the rest of the movement’s leadership, however, need a crash course in modern diplomacy.
Members of the Houthi family have dismissed the group’s anti-American slogan as mere words, arguing that it does not reflect actual policy.
The Houthi leadership needs to distance the Yemeni conflict from the divisions that characterize the rest of the region.
A PATH TO PEACE The United States and international organizations should realize that focusing on tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia only distracts from finding a local political settlement to end the fighting.
So far, peace talks led by Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, the UN*s special envoy for Yemen, have missed both of these points and attempted to solve the crisis by demanding Houthi withdrawal and the reinstatement of the deposed republican government.
The north, the home of the Houthi movement, contains the great majority of the Shiite population and is dominated by powerful tribal alliances.
The south of the country, a British colony from 1839 to 1967 and thereafter an Arab communist state until Yemeni unification, is primarily Sunni, with a weak tribal structure that has been eroded by over a century of imperial dominion and then decades of secular communist ideology.
Finally, Yemen’s eastern region, known as Hadramawi, is inhabited by a sparse Hadrami population that has traditionally enjoyed significant independence.
None of these regions can or should exercise complete control over the other two.
Yet nor would breaking Yemen up into three separate nations solve the problem.
As well as keeping the peace within Yemen, the absence of a strong central state would allay Saudi concerns over regional stability.
The greatest threat to Yemen's future, however, is not Saudi Arabia, Iran, or even a renewed civil war, but rather a growing water shortage that threatens the country’s major cities, According to projections from the UN, Yemen's major urban areas could run out of water as soon as 2018, a consequence of inefficient irrigation and a growing population.
Saudi Arabia has long promised funds to repair Yemen's damaged infrastructure after the war.
That money should be used to move major urban populations to areas with more water and invest in massive desalination projects.
If foreign governments and the on act soon to reduce Yemen’s suffering and accept that the civil war needs a local solution, then Yemen can still recover and even add a measure of stability to a volatile region.
On virtually every major foreign problem— North Korea’s belligerence, Iran’s nuclear aspirations, Russia's aggression, the Islamic State’s brutality—the United States government has turned to some form of sanctions as an answer.
Obama used them more than any other president in recent history, and Trump, in his first eight months in office, oversaw significant expansions of United States sanctions against North Korea, Venezuela, and, despite his misgivings, Russia.
Some United States sanctions aim to stigmatize foreign leaders and human rights abusers, such as those against North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, and the Russian officials responsible for killing the lawyer Sergei Magnitsky.
Others are designed to deny terrorists, drug traffickers, nuclear proliferators, and other bad actors the money and tools they need to wreak havoc.
The prime example is the sanctions that pressured Iran to sign the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, under which it agreed to stringent limitations on its nuclear program.
For all the popularity of sanctions, however, the system for applying them remains underdeveloped.
United States officials almost never design EDWARD FISHMAN is a FeUowatthe Atiantic Council.
From 201S to 2017, he served m an adviser on Europe and Eurasia and the lead sanctions expert on the Rollcy Planning Staff at the United States Department of State.
These shortcomings make sanctions less effective in the present, and they will do even more harm in the future.
As governments around the world race to hone their own economic warfare capabilities while finding clever ways to insulate themselves from the effects of United States sanctions, Washington risks falling behind in an area in which it has long enjoyed primacy.
So it’s well past time for the United States government to modernize its favorite foreign policy tool.
SMARTER AND SMARTER Sanctions have been Washington's foreign policy tool of choice throughout the post-Cold War period.
As the specter of great-power war receded, policymakers came to see sanctions as an efficient means of advancing United States interests without resorting to military force.
But the explosion of sanctions programs during the Clinton administration led to a backlash among experts.
In the late 1990s and early years of this century, their reputation hit rock bottom.
In particular, the UN Security Council’s strict embargo against commerce with Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq was seen as depriving ordinary civilians while doing little to pressure those in power.
Waning international support for these sanctions inspired United States Secretary of State Colin Powell to propose a new approach.
Dubbed ""smart sanctions,” it aimed to move beyond embargoes by tai^eting leaders and influencers directly.
But beginning around 2006, as Washington shifted its focus to sanctions against Iran, it became clear that this approach was not up to the task of curbing the country’s nuclear program.
It would take pressure on the Iranian economy, chiefly the financial and enei^ sectors, to do that.
So sanctions experts in the State Department and the Treasury Department aimed higher, crafting measures that would damage Iran’s economy without placing imdue burdens on its civilians or destabilizing global markets.
The resulting sanctions severed Iran’s largest banks from the global financial S 3 ^tem, denied its maritime shipping fleet access to insurance and repairs, and gradually reduced the regime’s oil revenues.
Meanwhile, broad exceptions to sanctions granted ordinary Iranians access to food, medicine, and cell phones from abroad.
That’s because it is banks and companies that perform the first line of sanctions implementation, and it is impossible to know exactly how they will man^e this task.
In some cases, they simply decide to cease doing business with entire countries for fear of violating sanctions, making the effect of the measures more draconian than intended.
That is what has happened with Somalia, where remittances have been impeded after United States banks decided to end their relationships with companies United States officials almost never design sanctions until crises are already under way. transmitting money to the country.
In other cases, sanctions end up being weaker than intended, as the private sector grows accustomed to complying right up to the boundary of legality and illicit actors find workarounds.
The United States possesses two principal assets to handle this inevitable uncertainty.
The first is the sheer size and reach of its economy , which gives it a fairly wide margin for error.
The second is the flexibility of United States legal authorities, which permit the Treasury Department to issue licenses, update sanctions lists, and pursue other course corrections with relative ease.
Both factors help explain the success of United States sanctions against Russia, the largest economic power the United States has ever sanctioned.
But perhaps the most unique element of this particular sanctions program is that, from the start, it has been a collaborative project between the United States and Europe.
Given the many links between the Russian and European economies, getting the Eu’s buy-in was essential.
After all, if Russia could replace all its lost business with the United States by turning to Europe, the sanctions would be toothless, leaving United States companies as the only losers.
Unlike ordinary sanctions, which shut their targets out of the United States economy altogether, these focus primarily on blocking Russia's state-owned enterprises from raising capital in Western financial markets and on hindering its energy companies’ efforts to develop Arctic, deep-water, and shale oil projects.
The United States and the EU designed the sanctions this way to put pressure on Russia while limiting the risk to markets posed by going after a major player in the global economy.
But owing to the outsize roles played by Western banks and oil companies in global finance and energy, the sanctions have managed to squeeze Russia's economy while causing little financial blowback in the United States or Europe.
In the six months after the first round of sanctions on key sectors of Russia’s economy were enacted, in July 2014, the ruble lost more than half its value.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that sanctions initially reduced Russian gdp by 1. to 1. percent and will cost the country up to nine percent of gdp over approximately five years.
The drop in world oil prices that began in 2014 no doubt remains a crucial factor behind Russia’s economic fall, but sanctions have held back the country’s recovery, curbing investment, hampering access to credit, and stalling the development of energy projects.
But they have helped deter it from taking more drastic measures, such as conquering a wider swath of eastern Ukraine, using its military forces to secure a land bridge to Crimea, or overthrowing the democratically elected government in Kiev.
It is impossible to prove a counterfactual, but it strains credulity that Moscow would have abstained from all these actions had it believed it could get away with them scot-free.
And in the spring of 2015, after several rounds of sanctions and clear signals from the West that tougher ones were in the offing, Moscow abandoned the so-called Novorossiya project, which envisioned Russia swallowing up nearly half of Ukraine's territory.
WHEN TO SANCTION Despite these recent successes, sanctions are no panacea.
In some cases, they are best suited to a supporting role—a means of constraining an adversary's capacity for mischief, for instance, as opposed to a solution to an intractable problem.
The United States should be wary of using them capriciously, as doing so would allow adversaries to adapt to its tactics, decrease allies’ appetite for cooperation, and encourage foreign corporations to reduce their exposure to the United States economy.
Before turning to sanctions to address a problem, policymakers should ask themselves four questions.
Sanctions will sway a country's political leaders only if their economy relies substantially on foreign trade or access to international financial markets.
Such is the case with sanctions against Cuba, which have been in place since 1960 to little effect.
The same dynamic was also at work with the embargo against Iran initially imposed by the Reagan administration in 1987.
All governments, even autocracies, care to some degree about their people’s livelihoods, as plunging living standards can spark political unrest.
But in general, the more politically active a target’s population is, the more likely sanctions are to work106 FOREIGN AFFAIRS Even Smarter Sanctions Take Iran.
After the government’s election rigging in 2009 led to mass protests—and after escalating Western sanctions caused a sharp economic decline—Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, assented to the election of Hassan Rouhani in 2013.
Rouhani had campaigned on the promise of freeing Iran from sanctions, and without his election, the nuclear deal almost certainly would not have happened.
Sanctions can work in a similar way with Russia, another autocracy that holds stage-managed elections.
Putin’s popularity spiked after the 2014 annexation of Crimea, but as a full economic recovery remains far from sight, discontent is brewing and seems likely to grow.
If not, then a ta^et country will likely try to wait them out, hoping that interest groups and opposition parties in the West will seize on the domestic costs of sanctions and force Washington or Brussels to throw in the towel.
The experience with Russia shows how sanctions can turn into a race against time.
For the last several years, Russia has sought to free itself from sanctions not by giving the West what it wants—the restoration of Ukraine’s international borders—but by trying to break the West's resolve.
By setting up a process in which member states must unanimously agree to extend sanctions against Russia every six months, the EU has made itself a frequent target, with Moscow currying favor with incumbent leaders, such as Hungary’s Viktor Orban, and boosting aspiring ones, such as France’s Marine Le Pen.
But still, EU sanctions would be far more effective if they didn't require a semiannual vote of confidence.
Even the harshest sanctions are unlikely to result in total capitulation, and it is foolhardy to expect any leader to commit political suicide in order to get sanctions lifted.
Kim has made his nuclear program a centerpiece of his domestic legitimacy, and so the political costs of agreeing to denuclearize have outweighed the economic benefits of doing so.
For sanctions to change a country’s behavior, they must allow leaders on the receiving end to save face while acceding to United States demands.
IF YOU WANT PEACE, PREPARE FOR ECONOMIC WAR In March 2016, the United States secretary of the treasury, Jacob Lew, struck a memorable note of caution in a speech on sanctions.
Lew argued, the more other countries will wean themselves off dependency on the United States financial system—and reduce their vulnerability to United States sanctions.
In just the last two years, China has threatened sanctions against United States companies involved in arms sales to Taiwan, Russia has responded to Turkey’s shooting down of a Russian attack aircraft with restrictions on tourism and food imports, and Saudi Arabia and other Arab states have imposed a slew of economic penalties on Qatar.
At a time when states are trying to challenge the liberal world order without triggering great-power war, rising economic combat has become inevitable.
And that’s to say nothing of the political impetus for more and more sanctions in Washington; supporting them is one of the easiest ways for politicians to burnish their national security credentials.
Although sanctions have some record of success in persuading adversaries to reverse troublesome steps they’ve already taken—such as in the Iran nuclear negotiations—it remains far easier to prevent future actions.
So the goal should be to establish sanctions as the United States’ most potent deterrent in the gray zone between war and peace, where so much of today^s international jostling takes place.
The first step is to build a permanent sanctions contingency-planning process within the United States government.
Just as the United States military draws up detailed plans for wars it might someday have to fight, United States officials in the State Department, the Treasury, and other agencies should create and constantly update off-the-shelf plans to impose sanctions rapidly if needed.
To practice these plans and signal the government’s readiness to use them, they should routinely perform military-style exercises that simulate crises in which sanctions play a central role in the response.
The United States government should also bolster its defenses against other countries’ sanctions.
That means prioritizing the collection of intelligence on adversaries’ blueprints for economic warfare in addition to their military plans.
It also means identifying vulnerabilities in the United States economy and quietly working with private companies to rectify them.
Some vital American-made products, including aircraft and pharmaceuticak, depend on components from countries that may one day sanction the United States, and so the federal government should team up with their manufacturers to identify potential alternative suppliers in advance.
Indeed, effective offensive and defensive planning will require more regular consultation between sanctions policymakers and private-sector leaders.
The United States has traditionally shunned the types of close ties between business and government that are so prevalent elsewhere, but it is worth making an exception for national security.
In a similar vein, when building the teams that fashion sanctions, the State Department and the Treasury Department should draw on not just the usual diplomats and lawyers but also experienced professionals from the financial, energy, and technology sectors.
Industry expertise is critical for the United States government to construct sanctions programs that are forceful yet don’t backfire on the United States or its allies.
And it is especially important when deploying sanctions against larger economies, because the risk of financial contagion is higher in such cases.
Despite the tantalizing prospect of widespread international support, the UN Security Council is not the right forum for these discussions, since the differences among its five permanent members tend to result in watered-down sanctions.
In fact, a cardinal weakness of the United States campaign to pressure North Korea has been its reliance on the UN Security Council, a legacy of a program that has historically been geared more toward frustrating the country’s efforts to obtain nuclear missile components than economic coercion.
By giving China and Russia a veto over sanctions decisions, and by entrusting them to police violations within their borders, the United States has left itself with fewer options on North Korea than it has had in the case of Iran or Russia.
It has also exposed itself to the vexing possibility that Beijing and Moscow will claim the moral high ground for agreeing to Security Council resolutions while surreptitiously continuing to aid Pyongyang.
In most cases, United States interests are best served by negotiating coercive economic sanctions with like-minded allies in the EU and the G-7, while focusing efforts in the UN on less divisive sanctions, such as those that stigmatize bad actors and stem weapons proliferation and illicit finance.
The United States government should also invite allies to participate in sanctions contingency planning and exercises, and it should work with them to use sanctions for collective defense.
A reasonable strategy for deterring future Russian interference in foreign elections, for example, would entail a joint eu-nato declaration affirming that such meddling will be treated as an attack against all and result in strong multilateral sanctions.
Economic warfare is a reality of the international environment, and perfecting the art of it will be essential for the United States to deter the incremental interventions favored by its adversaries.
That doesn’t mean crises will go away; the United States will always find it difficult to check aggression and defend its interests in such hot spots as the South China Sea, the Persian Gulf, and Russia's periphery.
Seeking to stabilize fragile states, the United States has adopted this approach in nearly every region of the world over the last 70 years.
Fragile states jeopardize United States interests, but large-scale interventions are costly and unpopular.
By outsourcing regional security in places where United States interests are not immediately threatened, Washington can promote stability without shouldering most of the burden itself.
And heading off threats before they metastasize means that the United States can keep its eye on more sophisticated rivals such as China and Russia.
Among United States policymakers, this approach enjoys widespread popularity.
Novemher/December 2017 HI Mara Karlin ing weak states cheaply and quickly is more alluring than ever.
But history shows that building militaries in weak states is not the panacea the United States national security community imagines it to be.
As examples that span the globe have demonstrated, in practice, American efforts to build up local security forces are an oversold halfway measure that is rarely cheap and often falls short of the desired outcome.
For decades, the United States has poured countless billions into foreign security forces—to the tune of nearly $20 billion per year these days.
Sometimes, the problem is one of execution, and the United States can improve the way it conceives of and carries out military assistance.
Often, however, the problems run deeper, and the United States must recognbe that the game is simply not worth the candle.
NOT ENOUGH STRINGS ATTACHED The biggest problem with Washington’s efforts to build foreign militaries is its reluctance to weigh in on higher-order questions of mission, organizational structure, and personnel—issues that profoundly affect a military’s edacity but are often considered too sensitive to touch.
Instead, both parties tend to focus exclusively on training and equipment, thus undercutting the effectiveness of United States assistance.
Such narrow-mindedness hampered United States support for South Vietnam, which began in earnest after the French withdrawal from Vietnam in 1954.
Ngo Dinh Diem, South Vietnam’s president from 1955 to 1963, sought to orient his military toward external threats, even though internal defense against communists should have been the primary concern, as many United States officials knew.
Yet even after receiving nearly half a billion dollars in United States military aid between 1956 and 1960, Diem reorganized the South Vietnamese military according to his preferences, preparing it for a conventional external conflict with North Vietnam and leaving it ill equipped for the growing communist insurgency at home.
To make matters worse, the military’s leadership remained weak, its chain of command confusing, and its method of promotion based on loyalty rather than merit.
Something similar happened in El Salvador, where the Carter and Reagan administrations supported the country's military in its fight against left-wing guerrillas.
Despite United States officials' preference for a more humane approach to the rebels, the El Salvadorian military spearheaded an extremely violent counterinsurgency campaign characterized by death squads and civilian massacres.
Although the military did prevent the guerrillas from taking over the state, more than 75,000 civilians died in the protracted conflict, mostly at the hands of government forces.
And El Salvador today remains a fragile state with one of the world's highest homicide rates.
In Yemen, from 2007 to 2011, the United States government disbursed more than $500 million to assist the country’s military in its fight against a mix of domestic insurgents and al Qaeda affiliates.
In its narrow focus on counterterrorism, however, the United States failed to fully appreciate that Yemen's security challenges were only one of many problems facing the country.
Its president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, had filled the military with friends and family members who grew rich while nearly everyone else in the country suffered from poverty, hunger, and unemployment.
Moreover, Saleh used the United States funds and equipment intended for counterterrorism to enrich his family and bolster his personal security detail.
Pentagon officials admitted that they had lost track of millions of dollars’ worth of military equipment and could not guarantee that United States weapons would not fall into the wrong hands.
United States efforts to bmld Mali’s military have fizzled out for similar reasons.
As a result, most of the force collapsed in 2012, after a U.S.-trained officer staged a military coup and leaders of elite units defected, taking valuable United States materiel with them.
Although the situation is different in Afghanistan and Iraq— namely, the United States has put American boots on the ground— similar problems have emerged.
In both countries, the United States has spent billions of dollars to build militaries composed of hundreds of thousands of troops.
But it has largely sidestepped bi^er-picture questions about these forces’ mission, structure, and leadership in favor of a focus on training and equipment.
Small wonder, then, that both militaries remain plagued by problems with recruitment, discipline, leadership, motivation, and corruption.
Despite receiving some $60 billion in aid since 2001, Afghanistan’s military has suffe red fro m chro nic problems with mo rale and desertion, especially in regions of intense conflict, such as Helmand Province.
And in Iraq, during the battle for Mosul against the Islamic State (or IS is) that began in 2014, whole swaths of the Iraqi military deserted en masse, leaving behind U.S.-supplied equipment for is is to capture.
The current fight against is is has been more successful, with the U.S.trained Iraqi Counter Terrorism Service playing a key role in the liberation of Mosul in July 2017.
But credit for success in the broader fight against the terrorist group also goes to the numerous Iranianbacked Shiite militias that have fought alongside—and often in place of—the Iraqi military.
TRYING TO KEEP THE CUSTOMER SATISFIED One might expect that Washington's tendency to avoid raising hotbutton issues with its partners would placate them, but that is rarely the case.
Almost always, partner states are disappointed by the quantity, quality, and timing of the assistance they receive.
Because these countries are living with the threat every day, they usually want help as quickly as possible.
But the United States system is not designed to work so fast, even in high-priority cases.
That was true of the $1 billion-plus United States program to build Lebanon’s military after 2005, when Syrian forces withdrew from the country.
Despite a consensus in Washington that Lebanon needed urgent help to exert control over its territory after almost 30 years of occupation, it took over a year for any military assistance to materialize.
United States Special Forces training Iraqi filters, December 2026 and upward of 18 months for vital equipment—including vehicles, light arms, sniper rifles, and night-vision devices—to arrive.
Frustrated by these delays, the Lebanese did not shy away from criticizing United States assistance and even sought additional help from Russia.
But even under the best of circumstances, United States partners are rarely satisfied.
In 2007, when the Lebanese military faced down Fatah alIslam, an al Qaeda-affiliated group that had taken over a Palestinian refugee camp, the United States dispatched planeloads of materiel to the frontlines in just a few weeks.
This disappointment resulted in uncertainty about United States seriousness and staying power and made the Lebanese less amenable to United States guidance.
A HOUSE DIVIDED Another problem with United States military assistance concerns divisions on the American side.
Washington does not always come to a consensus on the parameters and purpose of its help.
This confusion undermines a program’s efficacy and can result in unmitigated disaster.
The man the Pentagon put in charge of assisting the South Vietnamese military from 1955 to 1960 was Lieutenant General Samuel Wiliams, a commander who had received a battlefield demotion during World War II due to incompetence.
At a time when there were more than enough problems among its Vietnamese allies, Washington was needlessly undermining its own efforts.
In the wake of Israel’s 1982 invasion of the country, the Reagan administration dispatched United States troops to serve in a multinational peacekeeping force and to professionalize Lebanon’s military.
But Washington failed to establish a consensus on the purpose of its involvement.
What began as a 30-day mission to oversee the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation Organization from Beirut turned into a vague and open-ended commitment to support Lebanese stability and security.
Senior United States policymakers disagreed sharply over the scope of the United States role in Lebanon—in particular, the extent to which the United States should directly support Lebanon's military in combat operations.
Although officially speaking, the United States government was invested in the stability and security of the Lebanese state, one senior U S. policymaker broke ranks and encouraged the commander of the armed forces to lead a military coup.
This disunity laid the groundwork not only for a convoluted program but ako for the deaths of hundreds of United States military and diplomatic personnel.
Two spectacular attacks in 1983 on the United States embassy and marine barracks in Beirut illustrated that at least some actors saw the United States as a combatant in the conflict, despite efforts to characterize itself as playing a supporting role.
By early 1984, portions of the Lebanese military had melted away amid increased violence, and the United States withdrew from Lebanon, having failed to make the state more stable or secure.
THREE'S COMPANY A final problem with assistance programs concerns the impact of antagonistic external actors.
When Washington partners with foreign militaries, it too often fails to grapple with the third parties intent on exploiting a country’s weakness.
In Lebanon, for example, United States efforts to build up the military in the 1980s were thwarted by all manner of foreign proxies and governments.
Iran flooded the country with hundreds of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps personnel to establish Hezbollah, a group whose original purpose was to fight the Israeli occupation.
Israel intimidated senior Lebanese political figures by parking tanks outside their homes.
By refusing to work with Lebanon’s fledgling government and empowering its opponents, Israel, Syria, and Iran undercut United States efforts to help Lebanon's military strengthen the state.
External meddling also poses a threat to United States objectives in Iraq, where Iranian-backed militias and politicians feed sectarian tensions.
Countering Tehran in Baghdad is admittedly complicated, given Iran’s help in the fight against isis, but if left unchecked, continued Iranian interference will undermine Iraqi sovereignty, posing further problems as Iraq’s government struggles to achieve political reconciliation among the country’s Shiites, Sunnis, and Kurds.
With isis routed from Mosul, the United States should help Iraq meaningfully incorporate the Iranianbacked militias into the Iraqi military.
In Afghanistan, likewise, Pakistan’s support for the Afghan Taliban has weakened the government in Kabul and inhibited national reconciliation.
United States efforts to pressure Pakistan— including through drone strikes within the country's borders—should be redoubled to stop the country from serving as a safe haven.
BETTER BUILDING History is not replete only with tales of failure, however.
Under certain circumstances, the United States has succeeded in reforming foreign militaries.
In 1946, communist insurgents began waging war against the Greek government.
Concerned about growing Soviet influence around the world, the administration of President Harry Truman quickly undertook a $300 million effort to strengthen the Greek economy and military.
Crucially, the United States deeply involved itself in all aspects of Greek military affairs.
State Department officials even drafted the Greek government’s initial request for aid.
United States officials worked closely with Greece to reorganize the Hellenic Army’s structure to align with the mission of defending the government against communist guerillas rather than foreign armies.
And they made sure that capable military leaders were appointed to the right positions.
The architect of the United States effort, General James Van Fleet, was himself a capable and charismatic leader committed to keeping Athens and Washington on the same page.
Under Van Fleet’s leadership, United States advisers trained and equipped the Greek forces, provided tactical and strategic advice, planned operations to rout guerilla fighters, and made organizational and personnel changes.
Van Fleet and his team oversaw a complete overhaul of military personnel, appointing a new chief of staff and compelling all of the Hellenic Army’s lieutenant generals except one to resign.
They then facilitated the promotion and placement of eight major generak and encouraged the removal of division and corps commanders who were reluctant or incapable of supporting the broader strategy.
In Washington, senior national security officials regularly assessed the program to ensure its purpose was clear, making necessary adjustments as the situation evolved.
They held serious debates about the appropriate role for the United States military, including when and if the United States should consider becoming a co-combatant in Greece’s civil war.
And Truman responded promptly and decisively to signs of division among those administering the program.
When a clash between Lincoln MacVeagh, the United States ambassador to Greece, and Dwight Griswold, who was in charge of the United States aid program in the country, proved insurmountable, the president removed MacVeagh.
The most intense disagreements with the Greeks centered on the size of the Hellenic Army, which Athens wanted to increase beyond what the United States thought necessary for internal defense.
United States officials finally threatened to withdraw United States support.
When Yugoslavia diminished its support for the communist insurgents as part of an effort to reposition itself away from the Soviet Union, the Greek military, thanks to the reforms instituted at the behest of Washington, was able to extend its control over the country.
By 1949, thanks to United States support and training, government forces had defeated the guerillas, and the Greek state prevailed in one of the first proxy conflicts of the Cold War.
TO BUILD OR NOT TO BUILD Past experience offers two key lessons for United States officials as they seek to strengthen the security sectors of weak states.
First, like all statebuilding endeavors, these are political, not technical, exercises.
Instead of focusing narrowly on training and equipment, United States policymakers responsible for implementing such programs must address the purpose and scope of the United States role and the mission, leadership, and oiganizational structure of the partner’s military.
In Saudi Arabia, for example, the United States military is running a handful of programs to train and equip the country’s armed forces, but it stays for away from sensitive issues, in line with Saudi preferences.
The United States should align these disjointed programs, assess the broader purpose of United States support, and use the findings to meaningfully engage on crucial but sensitive matters.
To be sure, increasing United States involvement in the details of a foreign country’s military is rife with colonial undertones and therefore might be difficult to digest.
To minimize pushback, United States officials should watch how they communicate and avoid creating the perception that they are bullying those they seek to assist.
Recent efforts to condition military aid to Pakistan on the country’s cracking down on the militants within its borders, for example, are a good first step.
The second lesson for policymakers is that they cannot afford to ignore the destabilizing potential of third parties that pose a serious challenge to a newly equipped military.
When and where possible, the United States should marshal its tools to limit external meddling.
A partner state may refuse to discuss those crucial, higher-order questions, motivated by some combination of distrust, a desire to pursue a different agenda, uncertainty about the American commitment, and the belief that it will receive United States aid no matter what.
For example, officials in Egypt, one of the top recipients of United States military aid, appear to believe that Washington will continue to provide assistance in order to maintain the country’s peace treaty with Israel regardless, which explains their reluctance to reform their corrupt military.
Nigerian officials, likewise, seem to have calculated that the United States will help with their fight against Boko Haram despite the military’s egregious human rights violations, and so they have refused to discuss changes to the Nigerian military’s outdated defense strategy and inefficient organ national structure.
In other cases, improving an assistance program may be unworkable because the United States is unwilling to crack down on external actors, whose support it needs for higher-priority issues.
In Syria, for example, where the United States supports a range of Syrian opposition forces, it may make sense for the United States to give up on trying to get Russia to lessen its meddling in the civil war and instead prioritize making progress on broader European security affairs.
In such scenarios, policymakers need to make a clear-eyed assessment about the goals and likely outcomes of United States military assistance.
Limited train-and-equip programs can serve useful purposes, such as providing intelligence, professionalizing the military to make the force more respected, en^ling some tactical and operational cooperation on mutually agreed threats, and giving United States personnel valuable experience working with foreign forces.
Alternatively, policymakers may conclude that the costs outweigh the benefits.
In those cases, better to submit to reality and deal with the problem some other way than throw good money after bad.
The British people ignored the advice of the leaders of all their major political parties and of virtually all experts.
George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, told voters that leaving would wreck the British economy.
United States President Barack Obama warned that it would reduce the United Kingdom’s influence on the world stage.
Financial markets, many pollsters, and political pundits all anticipated that voters would heed the elites* advice.
And yet they decided not to, setting off a process ANAND MENON es Director of the UK in a Changing Europe inltlatfVB. based at King's College London, and the author, with Geoffrey Evans, of Brwdtand British Po//h’cs.
Follow him on Twitter (3anandMenon1. destined to transform the country’s politics, economy, and society.
No wonder, then, that the referendum has generated a rash of books seeking to explain, or at least describe, what happened.
The pace of academic publishing means that most of those that have already appeared are quick and dirty accounts by journalists or politicians and their advisers.
Unleashing Demons, by Craig Oliver, who worked as Prime Minister David Cameron’s director of communications, and All Out War, by the journalist Tim Shipman.
Oliver has drawn heavily on his diaries to produce an accoimt of one part of the Remain side, whereas Shipman offers an exhaustive history of the campaign as a whole.
But both are elite histories, focusing on the words and deeds of political leaders rather than the details of the ground operations or the reasons why over 33 million people voted the way they did.
Cameron’s team made huge errors when it came to immigration policy, messaging, and the decision to hold the referendum in the first place.
The EU*s principle of free movement, however, made this promise impossible to keep.
By suggesdng that control over EU migration was attainable, Cameron had created expectations he could not meet.
By February 2016, his attempt to renegotiate immigration with the EU had turned into a political disaster.
Although he won the ability to restrict access to some benefits for EU migrants for the first four years after they arrived in the United Kingdom, the deal fell far short of Euroskepdcs' demands.
He had. in effect, taken no for an answer, Shipman, who has clearly spoken at length to almost everyone who matters, explains how, early on, the Leave campaign rect^ized the importance of immigration.
After the release of official figures at the end of May showing that net immigration had risen the previous year, the campaign targeted the issue mercilessly.
Shipman also shows how Cameron^s tendency to put the fate of the Conservative Parry over that of the country led him into several blunders, beginning with the decision to hold a referendum in the first place.
Doing so certainly helped him defy the odds and win the 2015 elecdon, but in the end, it proved a shortsighted move.
As a Cameron loyalist, Oliver is understandably less willing to concede that party unity trumped the national interest.
During the campaign itself, as Shipman details, Cameroffs desire to maintain Conservative unity decisively shaped his tacdcs.
Confronted with opponents who relished provoking intra-Conservative fights.
Linking senior Tory defectors to If KIP as “crazy, righrwing nutters"" would have proved “terminal"" for Leave’s hopes, he suggested.
In the run-up to the referendum, Corbyn supported staying in the EU, but Shipman provides excruciating detail about just how reluctant his team was to cooperate with the official Remain campaign.
No account of the campaign would be complete without considering the media.
Before Joining government, he held several roles at the corporation, including as editor of the flagship 6 PM and 10 PM news programs.
As he notes, the corporation tied itself in knots as it struggled to appear balanced.
Presented with competing claims, the BBC often did not question the validity of one or the other but attempted to solve the problem by simply giving both sides equal airtime.
For example, although expert opinion overwhelmingly held that leaving the EU would harm the British economy, the BBC routinely put one of the few Brexit-supporting economists alongside a pro-Remain voice without mentioning that a clear preponderance of economists backed Remain.
As Oliver recounts, although the Remain camp managed to pressure the BBC to reflect expert opinion more accurately on its flagship radio and TV programs, it had less success at shaping the rest of the corporation’s coverage.
That hurt them badly because although much of the British establishment listens to a few major broadcasts—the Today program on BBC Radio 4 and Nev)sni^i on BBC Two—a majority of the public does not.
Having called an unnecessary referendum, it misunderstood its own people and lost despite a^uing that defeat would have dire consequences.
It was also the result of a growing disoste for politicians, experts, and the United Kingdom's economic system.
In the years before the vote, the country witnessed a sustained decline in trust in politicians.
It was, for example, a Conservative-led coalition that legalized same-sex marriage in 2014.
The Cameron government exacerbated this rising distrust and detachment.
In the vi^e of the financial crisis, it pursued policies of austerity that disproportionately hit the vrorst-off in society.
But its absence from Oliver*s account—the word “austerity"" appears nowhere—is particularly galling.
After all, the government Oliver served in from 2011 onward played a crucial part in alienating the people who turned out to poke the political establishment in the eye.
During the referendum campaign, these trends combined to mobilize several disparate groups in support of Brexit.
Almost three million people who did not vote in the 2015 election turned out in 2016.
Those who held conservative social values were far more likely to vote Leave.
FALLOUT Despite the centrality of economics to the Brexit campaign, its immediate effects were political.
As a result, imder May, the civil service has spent much of the last year analyzing how Brexit might affect the United Kingdom and how it should approach negotiations with the EU before the country leaves the union on March 29, 2019.
TKis implies caking the country out of the EU*s single market and customs union, which together embody the shared rules and regulatory standards and the absence of internal customs checks that make the market across the EU resemble that of a single country.
But a hard Brexit is not the only way of interpreting the referendum outcome.
Another, for instance, is ""the Norway option "" which would see the United Kingdom remain within the single market even after leaving the Eir.
Whatever kind of Brexit the government decides to adopt, the United Kingdom seems set for a turbulent few years.
Inflation is on the rise, partly driven by the devaluation of the pound that immediately followed the referendum.
Economists estimate that a hard Brexit would lead to a 40 percent reduction in trade with the EU, the United ECingdom's largest trading partner.
The British economy will have to adapt as some export industries decline and firms, especially in the manufacturing and service sectors, consider relocadng to a country within the Eu’s single market and customs union.
It will need to organize new customs arrangements, enact new regulations and policies in such areas as agriculture and Immigradon, and set up new regulators to replace Elf bodies.
For the next several years, it is hard to see how the government will be able to do much apart from operationalizing Brexit.
Senior civil servants leak damaging stories about their political bosses to the press.
A growing number of people seem to take this instability as a sign that the result of rhe referendum may be overturned.
Those whose hubris and willingness to put party before country brought the United Kingdom to this juncture, however, are all thriving.
Cameron has hit the international speaker circuit and, between jaunts, is writing his memoirs in a designer garden shed that cost him 25,000 pounds.
Osborne, the architect of the austerity that impoverished and alienated so many, vi^s hired as the editor of the influential London Evening Standard, despite his complete lack of journalistic experience.
As for Oliver himself, he was knighted for his achievements and now makes a living working for a high-end consultancy firm providing advice on Brexit.
T he term “IsUmism’* and its watered-down equivalent, '^political Islam,” sprang into widespread use after the Iranian Revolution of 1979 and soon became permanent fixtures of contemporary political discourse.
These movements promoted sharia through modern forms of popular mobilization— for example, creating branches specifically for young people, women, and workers.
The Gtobsi Appeal of Istunic State. different steps of inidadon, and a modern polidcaJ party, where an advisory council appoints a leader who oversees technical committees devoted to particular policy areas.
The first and most famous Islamist group was the Muslim Brotherhood, which was founded in Egypt in 192S and later established branches throughout the Arab world.
Over time, similar organizations cropped up elsewhere in the Sunni Muslim world.
But the Shiite Iranian clergy and miUiants who took part in the overthrow of the shah of Iran in 1979 helped define political Islam in the public imagination—possibly because they were the first Islamists to control a modern slate.
Their rise helped popularize the term ‘^Islamist” in the media, academia, and government.
Hamid and William McCants, two prominent American experts on the subject, is how it sharpens the debate over political Islam by identifying what they call “mainstream Islamists.
Hamid and McCants’ definition leaves out movements, such as the South Asiabased Tablighi Jamaat, that seek to re-Islamize society through proselytizing rather than politics.
It also excludes extremist groups, such as al Qaeda, that advocate and practice violent jihad.
But the book’s focus on mainstream Islamists is warranted, because although terrorist groups generate headlines, more moderate groups enjoy far deeper and broader support in the Muslim world—and thus pose a more profound long-term challenge to secular states of all kinds.
In the here and now, they seek accommodation with existing institutions and build support by setting up charities that fill the gap left by poor governance in much of the Muslim world.
They do not overtly contest the legitimacy of secular governments but instead try to iniluence them; they enter into the electoral arena when allowed to do so and are open to joining political coalitions.
They reject the practice of ial^r and do not promote armed insurrections— except against Israel.
And although they accuse Western powers of neocolonialism and “cultural aggression,’* they always keep the door open to contacts and negotiation.
But far from clarifying the nature and trajectory of Lslamism, these shocks have seemed to only fiirther muddy the water.
As Hamid and McCants write, ""After decades speculating on what Islamists would do when they came to power, analysts, academics— and Islamists themselves—finally have an answer.
ESSENCE To illuminate the subject, the contributors to Rethinking Political Islam wisely sec aside theoretical debates about Islamist ideology and examine the practices and policies of Islamist parties in recent years.
The book devotes chapters to developments in nine countries in the Middle East, North Africa, and Asia.
After the 2010-11 revolutions, Islamists won elections in Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia, whereas in Libya, Syria, and Yemen, they were immediately embroiled in messy civil wars.
No uprisings took place in Jordan or Kuwait, but Islamist parties in both places— which have a long tradition of participadng in elections and working within existing institutions—were nonetheless energized by the upheavals elsewhere.
Despite this variety, analyses of political Islam in these places tend to fall into two categories.
The first might be called “the contextualist view,"" which holds that the policies and practices of Islamist movements are driven less by ideology than by events and sees such groups as reactive and adaptive.
So, for example, the harsh repression faced by the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in the 1960s produced a more cautious approach &om the movement’s leadership, coupled with radicalization on its fringes.
In turn, the political opportunities supplied by the 2010-11 revolts led the group to enter into the electoral game, as the political scientist Steven Brooke notes in his contribution to Rethinking Ik}litieal Islam.
And tbeir use of religious rhetoric is often little more than “Muslimspeak"" (in the words of the French political scientist Francois Burgat)—a way to express a unique identity and articulate grievances, especially against the West.
A corollary to this argument is the idea—extolled by cridcs of Islamism but also some of its adherents—that Islamic theology recognizes no separadon between religion and politics, and therefore an authentic Islamist cannot renounce his ideological agenda in favor of a more pragmatic or democratic approach.
In recent years, however, mainstream Islamists have frequently done just that.
They did so in the wake of victory, as in Tunisia, and defeat, as in Egypt.
Egyptian and Tunisian Islamists realized that their consdtuents cared far less about, say, the role of Islam in the consdturion than jobs, food, and housing.
At first, the government headed by Mohamed Morsi, who had previously served as a senior leader of the Muslim Brotherhood. appeared willing to work within the conftnes of existing institutions—indeed, that willingness is part of what got the Islamists elected.
But when Morsi increased his own authority and failed to deliver economic growth and security, public support for his government plummeted, and most Egyptians welcomed the return of military rule after Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the defense minister, took power in a coup in 2013.
Meanvdiile, clerical institudons, such as Cairo’s Al-Azhar Unrversity, did not endorse the Islamists.
And even secularist parries, such as Tunisia's Nidaa Tounes, often promoted some Islamic norms to reinforce their cultural authendcity.
In Southeast Asia, as the polidcal scientist Joseph Chinyong Liow shows in his chapter, almost all polidcal pardes and figures have incorporated re-lslamizarion into their platforms, undermining the Islamist brand.
The aftermath of the Arab revolts of 2010—11 have not supplied a clear verdict in the debate between the contexrualist and essentialist camps.
After winning a parliamentary plurality in 2011, the party spent years debating— with itself and its opponents—the text of a new constitution.
The result was perhaps the most secular foundational document of any Arab state, one that even protects ""freedom of conscience""— that is, the right to hold or not hold any religious belieft and the freedom to change religions.
That is a more expansive right than ""freedom of religion,” which would allow non-Muslims to practice their faith but not allow them to convert Muslims to it and would ignore atheists and other secular-minded people.
As the international relations scholar Peter MandaviUe notes in his chapter, Ennahda’s volimtary abandonment of governing power showed that old fears of “one man, one vote, one time” are often unfounded.
Meanwhile, in Egypt in 2013, it was not the Islamists who put an end to democratic rule but a strange alliance of military leaders, secularists, and Salaftsts.
In any case, Morsi did not have the means to resist Sisi’s coup, as demonstrated by the overwhelmingly peaceful and completely fudJe reaction of Morsi’s supporters, nearly one thousand of whom were massacred by the army after occupying a public square in Cairo.
MOSQUE AND STATE Ultimately, the contributors to Rethinking f^litical Islam are interested in going beyond the long-running, fa miliar debates about the sincerity of Islamists.
These scholars seek to understand what It will mean for religious parties to transform from fringe actors con£ned to the opposition into genuine political players.
Ennahda ""no longer accepts the label of’Islamism’—a concept that has been disfigured in recent years by radical extremists—as a description of its approach,” Ghannouchi wrote in this magazine.
The answer—still controversial for many members—is that although the movement {harakat) and the party are now formally separate, the goal of the party’s participation in politics is to protect the movement from politics.
The approach is akin to the Western liberal concept of the separadon of church and state—although closer to the American conception of shielding religion from state interference than to the French idea of proteedng the state from religion.
That represents a profound change, no less than the redefining of religion to refer more narrowly to a set of beliefs and practices that exist in the framework of a secular society.
Ennahda has recognized that although Tunisian society may be culturally Muslim, it is not destined to become ideologically Islamic, Ghannouchi glossed this move by declaring that Ennahda had become *‘a party of Muslim democrats,"" intentionally inviting comparisons to the Christian democratic parties of Europe.
From the mid-1940s until the mid-1970s, Christian democratic parties found ways to secularize what had been primarily religious values in order to better reach out to an ever more secular electorate.
In predominantly Protestant and Catholic countries alike, such parties promoted values drawn from the social doctrine of the church on issues related to the family, cooperation between workers and businesses, and social security.
But even though these parties still survive (and even thrive in Germany], there is no Christian democradc social movement equivalent to the ones that Ennahda and other Islamist groups see as crucial to their missions.
In countries such as Germany, Christian democrats have a hizb but no harakat.
And although Catholic social movements operate in European countries such as Italy, they do not identify with political parties.
It seems unlikely that the secularizadon of Islamic politics will be accompanied by a drift avi^y from traditional values in Muslim countries, at least in the foreseeable future.
That phrase comes from a well-known chant, or nashid, popularized during the trials of members of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in the 1960s.
It is an expression of the idea that, in their ideological purity and refusal to accommodate secular norms and institutions, jihadists represent the only true Islamists—and, perhaps, the only true Muslims.
The danger is that if mainstream Islamists purchase inclusion in the secular state at the price of separating their political goals from their reEgious and social ones , or suffer exclusion from the state owing to their own overreach and a repressive backlash against it , young Muslims seeking “authentic"" religious and political identides might look elsewhere.
Drawing on an unprecedented amount of historical economic data from 20 countries, Piketty showed that wealth concentration had returned to a peak not seen since the early twentieth century.
Today in the United States, the top one percent of households earn around 20 percent of the nation’s income, a dramatic change from the middle of the twentieth century, when income was spread more evenly MELISSA 8.
Follow her on Twitter (Skearney.melissa. and the top one percent’s share hovered at around ten percent.
Piketty predicted that without corrective action, the trend toward ever more concentrated income and wealth would continue, and so he called for a global tax on wealth.
Like much of the popular commentary about inequality, Pikecty’s book rested on an implicit moral claim—chat wealth concentration beyond a certain degree violates the inherent sense of fairness on which a just society depends.
But antipathy toward inequality alone cannot drive a policy agenda that will create a more egalitarian society.
Critics of inequality need a compelling, evidencebased explanation for how and why the concentration of income and wealth at the top is problematic.
In After Piket^, three left-of-center economists—Heather Boushey, J Bradford DeLong, and Marshall Steinbaum— have curated an impressive set of essays responding to Piketty’s work and taking a few steps coward answering those questions.
Among them are deep dives into the assumptions underlying Piketty’s predictions, historical accounts of the role of slavery and gender in capitalist systems, and considerations of the relationship between concentrated wealth and political power.
The essays put Ehketty’s arguments into a broad historical and intellectual context and highlight some noteworthy omissions that call into question his book’s most dire predictions.
The result is an intellectual excursion of a kind rarely oifered by modem economics.
The contributors tend to look backward to history or inward to economic models, which is a natural way to respond to a book that is fundamentally historical and theoretical.
But to more fully answer the questions Piketty’s book raised and to start crafting policies to tackle growing inetfuality economists and policymakers need to know much more than they currently do about the causes and consequences of today*s concentradon of wealth at the top.
To reduce extreme inequality’s threat to economic security and upward mobUity, the United States needs policies that enhance the skills and opportunities of the disadvantaged.
Washington must pursue tax reform and changes to corporate-governance rules that will create more shared prosperity.
But policymakers also need to avoid steps that would impede innovation and productivity THE TOP OF THE HEAP In the past four decades, studies of rising inequality in the United States have typically focused on the bottom 90 percent of earners.
Economists have produced rigorous evidence demonstrating how trends in technology, trade, unionization, and minimum wages have shaped the fortunes of those Americans.
Global labor-market forces have pushed up the demand for highly skilled workers and have led to steadily increasing wages for those with a college educadon.
The same forces have led to declining or stagnant wages for those with lower levels of education.
And a decline in unionizadon rates and the fall in the real value of the minimum wage have exacerbated the downward pressures on middleand low-wage workers.
Less well understood are the causes of the tremendous surge in income among extremely high earners, meaning the upper 1.0, 0.1, and 0.01 percent.
From a policymaking point of view, the most important quesdon Is how much of the ultrarich’s income reflects activity, such as technological innovadon, that beneiits the broader economy.
The more of it that does, the greater the potendai economic costs of raising taxes on the highestincome individuals.
If, in contrast, the income of the hipest earners is produced by pursuits that are less broadly beneficial, such as high-frequency stock market trading, then higher taxes at the top would pose fewer economic costs.
Either way, there are likely compelling reasons to raise the top income tax rates—as a way of funding public services and investing in infrastructure, for example.
But policymakers would be able to make better decisions about “soaking the rich” if they had a clearer sense of the tradeoffs involved.
One of the most interesdng facts uncovered by Piketty and others is that compared with the richest people and families in the early 1900s, when large fortunes often came from inherited assets, today’s superrlch are acquiring a larger share of their income in the form of earnings.
About 60 percent of the Income of the top one percent in the United States today is labor Income.
In their contribution to the book, the economists Laura Tyson and Michael Spence highlight the role of technological developments in creating substantial economic rewards for those who possess specific skills and in reducing the employment security of less skilled workers.
But Tyson and Spence also note that markets are imperfect and that compensation packages are not determined solely by market value.
They point to a growing body of research indicating that income generated by patents and intellectual property protections and by the market power of brand names flows primarily to upper-level management and the owners of capital.
In contrast, in Piketty’s view, the primary factors driving the rise in executive pay at the top are not technology or imperfect markets but eroded social norms, questionable corporategovernance practices, and declining union power.
Tyson and Spence favor more research to weigh the relative impact of market forces and institutional factors but argue that either explanation provides a strong rationale for increasing the marginal income tax rate for top earners in an effort to combat income inequality.
TWO FOR ME Another essential set of questions about inequality centers on whether wealth concentration negadvely affects economic Novemher/December 2017 13S Melissa 5.
In his contribution to After Pikeity, Mark Zandi, the chief economist at Moody*s Analytics, oudines a number of ways in which it might.
One such potential negative effect is reduced aggregate consumer spending.
Since lower-income households have a higher propensity to spend out of their earnings than do higher-income ones, the more wealth held by high-income households, the less overall spending the economy might see.
Another potential problem is that wealthy Americans tend to vote for lower taxes; increased wealth concentration, then, could lead to harmful reductions in government spending on public goods such as education and infrastructure.
Nevertheless, Zandi cautions that the link between income inequality and aggregate United States economic growth is relatively weak.
Even if the income of top earners reflects genuinely worthwhile contributions to society and does not impede economic growth, today's extreme inequality does threaten social cohesion. 1 used to contend that economists and policymakers need not worry about inequality and should instead focus on reducing poverty and expanding opportunity.
But after years of researching the topic, IVe come to believe that policymakers cannot achieve those goals without directly addressing inequality.
In the winner-take-all economy of the contemporary United States, the gap between the top and the bottom has grown so large that it undermines any reasonable notion of equal opportunity.
As inequality has increased, the country has witnessed a fraying of communities and institutions and deepening divisions along socioeconomic lines.
Children from high-income homes are pulling further and further ahead of their less advantaged peers in terms of education, which means it is far less likely that children born into middleor low-income homes will experience upward economic mobility.
Americans celebrate “rags to riches"" stories, but the data indicate that the United States has less social mobility chan most European countries.
Social mobility in the United States is not yet on the decline, but if current trends continue, it will be soon.
Inequality also harms American society by encouraging negative perceptions of the economy and one’s prospects for upward mobility.
If Americans view the system as rigged against them and see economic success as out of reach, they might give up on the celebrated American ideals of hard work and meritocracy.
Research I have conducted with the economist Phillip Levine shows that young men are more likely to drop out of high school if they live in places with higher levels of income inequality, all else being equal.
This is consistent with evidence produced by psychologists showing that beliefs about inequality negatively affect people’s expectations of social mobility.
The alarmingly low rates of labor-force participation among young Americans and those of prime working age might also be driven, at least in part, by a sense of malaise shaped by today’s high levels of income inequality.
In 1964, percent of such prime-age men with a college degree or more participated in the work force, as did 97 percent of those with a high school degree or less.
By 2015, the rate for college-educated workers had fallen only slightly, to 94 percent, but the rate among less educated men had plummeted to just 83 percent.
This drop reflects market forces and technological change, to be sure, but it also su^ests shiiung social norms and attitudes.
HIGH AND NOT SO MIGHTY A growing body of evidence now indicates that inequality in the United States threatens to create intergenerational poverty traps, greatly reduce social mobility, and marginaliae entire swaths of the population.
Piketty proposed that greater wealth inequality will increase the demand for egalitarian policy responses.
But it also means that the wealt)^, with their deeperthan-ever pockets, will be even better able to block such changes.
Beyond that observation, Piketty doesnY have much to say about the politics of ioecjuality in the United States or elsewhere.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS Assistant Editor Foreign A^irs is looking for Assistant Editors to join our editorial team.
The Assistant Editor position is a full-time paid job offering exceptional training in serious Journalism, Previous Assistant Editors have included recent graduates from undergraduate and mascer*s programs.
Candidates should have a serious interest in international relations, a flair for writing, and a facility with the English langu^e.
Many of the volume’s contributors assume that no matter what policy remedies for extreme inetjualiry emerge, wealthy elites will marshal their considerable influence to maintain their position and privileges.
But they do not explore those potential policies at great length, nor do they consider the precise mechanisms that would shape pushback from the elites.
Afier Piketty would also have beneBted from more discussion about whether recent political events challenge the notion that elites can overcome a wave of support for more redistribution of wealth.
In 2016, the Brexit vote and the American presidential election revealed the strength of populist and nationalist sentiments among voters who gleefully rejected the elite classes in both the United Kingdom and the United States.
Even in the wake of such surprising outcomes, the political economy models described in After Piketty tend to associate rising wealth concentration with growing political power of the elite—not the rise of populism.
The watershed political events of 2016 call those models into question; in both the United Kingdom and the United States, elites saw their preferred choices lose out.
When it comes to the problem of income and wealth inequality in the United States, there are no silver bullets.
The best evidence suggests that the United States could have a more progressive federal income tax code without incurring substantia) economic costs.
Tax reform should focus on expanding the tax base by closing loopholes and eliminating regressive features such as the mortgage-interest tax deduction, which benefits only highincome homeowners, and the carriedinterest loophole, which benehts only those involved in private-equity finance.
The federal government should take the additional revenue such steps would generate and invest it in programs that would increase the country’s economic potential.
That would include improvements to public infrastructure, expanded access to high-quality childcare and preschool programs, and more spending on programs that assist economically disadvantaged youth.
Government commitments to public universities and community colleges must be strengthened.
At the same time, institutions of higher education must focus on helping their students build the skills they will need to succeed in a competitive, rapidly changing labor market.
I n 2012, after the National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden released thousands of top-secret documents, the United States government scronibled to justify its far-reaching surveillance programs.
In an effort to make these daia-collection programs more transparent and legidmate, the Obama administradon established a special review group, revived a dormant privacy oversight board, and issued an executive order pledging to respect the privacy rights of noncidzens abroad.
United States technology and telecommunicadons companies—whose complicity Snowden*s documents had exposed—moved into a defensive crouch.
In order to maintain their internadonal customer base, they sought to explain away their past cooperadon and distanced themselves from the government.
From 2009 to 20tl. she served as Counsel to the Assistant Attorney General for National Sec urity at the United States Department of iustke. telephony metadata program, the nsa’s bulk collection of the phone numbers of incoming and outgoing calls, which can be used to draw a map of a personas associadons.
The British, with their own set of sophisdcated intelligence capabilides, have been grappling with many of the same concerns.
In the fall of 2016, Parliament passed the Investigatory Pdwcts Act—which opponents call “the snoopers charter,"" but which defenders portray as an overdue piece of legisladon that sets the parameters on what the government can do when it comes to surveillance.
As with most controversies, there is an element of truth to both sides of the debate.
For the first rime in the United Kingdom*s history, warrants to intercept communications are subject to judicial review; previously, the executive branch could execute these on its own say-so.
Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones’ comprehensive new book, We Know All About You, puts these contemporary debates over surveillance—which he defines as “spying on a mass scale""—in historical and comparative context.
Jeffreys-Jones ably tells the story of surveillance in the United States and the United Kingdom from its beginnings in the eighteenth century to today.
As Jeffreys-Jones details, surveillance is the prerogative not just of governments.
It is something that was developed, relied on, and institutionalized by private actors as well.
In the American South before the Civil War, plantation owners hired white men to monitor the movements of slaves and collect intelligence about possible uprisings.
With the rise of manufacturing, private companies turned to surveillance as a imion-busting tactic.
Jeffreys-Jones tells chilling stories of United States and British companies hiring private detecdves to spy on workers and keep tabs on labor organizers.
In the 1950s, Hollywood studios feciliuted McCarthyism by informing government investigators of alleged Communist subversives, ruining the careers of coundess screenwriters, directors, and actors.
But although Jeffreys-Jones documents a great deal of damage inflicted by private actors, it’s a stretch to claim that private surveillance causes more harm than government snooping.
After all, only the state can use information gained through surveillance to incarcerate people or even lawfully kill them.
What really matters is the fact of public and private surveillance, the risk of abuse by both the government and the private sector, and the interplay between the two.
Indeed, the decisions of the private sector have an enormous impact on the scope of government surveillance.
Every day, companies make choices about what to collect, where to store data, whether and what to encrypt, and how, whether, and when to accede to or resist the government’s demands for information.
These decisions, in turn, shape what information is available for the government to collect.
Moreover, as Jeffreys-Jones shows, the revolving door between the public and private sectors allows the two sides to trade techniques.
In the late nineteenth century, for example, Ralph Van Deman, a United States Army officer stationed in the Philippines, developed an indexing and classification system that United States commanders could use to identify insurgents in the field.
After leaving government, he used his skills to keep tabs on union workers on behalf of California industrialists, sometimes sending confederates into union meetings to spy on workers and report back.
Then there is the story of William Reginald Hall, a British intelligence oiBcer who ran a code-breaking unit in World War I After being booted from government, he created a group that became known as the Economic League.
A powerftil and murky association of industrialists, the Economic League tracked and blacklisted union activists on behalf of the private sector.
Jeffreys-Jones also reminds readers of the ebb and flow of public-private partnerships.
In 1919, Western Union inidalJy refused to grant permission to the Black Chamber—the United States government's code-breaking agency and the predecessor to the NS A— to access sought-after telegraph messages as they crossed the Adantic Ocean, By the end of the year, however, the government had sufBdendy laid out its case, and Western Union and other telegraph services assented to the surveillance scheme.
Project SHAMROCK lasted for decades; the NSA shut it down only after the Church Committee exposed it in the 1970s.
RISK AND REWARD Jeffreys-Jones does a good job cataloging government and private-sector surveillance.
What’s missing from his account, however, is an assessment of what kind of surveillance is justified and what kind is not and how to make that determination in an increasingly digitized and interconnected world— one in which just about all of a person’s movements, interactions, and interests are known to the cell phone providers, social media companies, and search engines that make modern life possible.
To be fair, these kind of normative judgments are not the goal of his book.
Rather, it was intended to ensure that the government’s searching and seizing is ’Reasonable""—a pragmatic and malleable concept that takes into account both the government’s need for information to fight crime and provide security and the risks of overreach.
Put simply, sometimes government surveillance is reasonable, and sometimes it is not.
Drawing the iine between what is and what is not reasonable is the hard part.
The NSA can collect data only for the purposes of gathering “foreign intelligence information,” and the general targeting procedures must be approved by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, a special panel of federal judges.
But the specific decisions of who and what to target are left to the executive branch and require little more than a finding that the target is a foreign national who possesses sought-after intelligence.
The government has argued that the program has helped protect the United States from various terrorist threats, a claim supported by two independent review groups set up by the Obama administration.
Ordinarily, after all, the government can intercept the communications of United States citizens and residents only when authorities have a warrant based on probable cause.
The upcoming reauthorization debate provides a chance to reform this program, and there are a number of options on the table.
Some argue that all searches of U.S citizens* and residents* information must be supported by a warrant based on probable cause.
Others claim that only searches of actual content require that protecdon, whereas searches of metadata (such as the '‘to” and ""from** lines on e-mails) can be accessed without judicial approval.
Still others contend that the PBt’s wairandess querying of databases is dne so long as the invesdgadons concern national security or espionage rather than other crimes.
In my view, the FBI should, at a minimum, be required to get a warrant based on probable cause when searching the data of United States citizens and residents in the course of a criminal invesdgation, regardless of the type of crime being investigated.
After all, that is what invesdgators would have to do if they were seeking that information directly from the suspect or irom the private entity that manages the suspect’s data.
The law should put in place some emergency excepdons, but the default rule should be that investigators need a warrant when seeking the content of a United States person’s communications.
If the government wants metadata, it should have to document a reasonable suspicion.
Wherever one comes down on these issues, the interests on both sides need to be taken into account.
Intelligence and law enforcement agencies need to access information to keep people safe.
But at the same time, as the United States* founders wisely recognized, there is a real risk that security will trump all other concerns.
That*s why procedural and substantive safeguards are needed to ensure that government surveillance remains reasonable.
Although companies do not have the authority to incarcerate people, they can, as Jeffreys-Jones documents, use information to wreak havoc on individuals’ lives.
And as everything from televisions to thermostats stores digital data, the amount of personal information private companies have access to will only grow.
Their decisions about what to retain, access, and share will increasingly influence how much both the private sector and the government know about all of us.
And so one is left with a lot of hard questions about how to respect privacy, provide security, and protect against abuse in the modem, digitally connected world.
In focusing on the threat to privacy and the history of abuse, Jeffreys-Jones’ book highlights one set of critical concerns to take into account.
Rather, they are intended to form part of a broader strategy to confront a variety of international threats.
Neumann argues that they have decreased not so much as a result of financial measures but largely thanks to military action against the group’s oil infrastructure and cash depots and the loss of its territory in Iraq and Syria.
What he fails to appreciate is that private-sector financial data, gleaned by finance ministries and shared with the United States military and United States bw enforcement agencies, have helped idendfy financial targets for those military strikes.
Today, banks run financial intelligence units, which in several cases have provided “chat missing piece of the puzzle to identify someone here or abroad who is planning or supporting plans to attack our interests,” as Gerald Roberts, then the section chief of the Terrorist Financing Operations Section of the FBI’s Counterterrorism Division, told a forum at the Washington Institute for Near East Balicy in 2015.
Neumann also wrongly assumes that sanctions make up the bulk of measures to counter terrorist financing and that the best way to measure their impact is to tally up the number of entities designated or the amount of funds frozen.
Not every terrorist fonder that comes across the United States government’s radar is sanctioned; in many cases, it is more useful to share that information with partner governments and allow them to act.
Although governments aim to freeze terrorists’ funds, they know that they will never bankrupt terrorism, because, as Neumann notes, terrorists have too many ways to raise, move, launder, and access funds.
At the least, denying terrorists easy access to financial tools forces them to use more costly and less reliable means of fundraising, making their lives far more difficulr.
In 2006, for example, the jihadist militant group Abu Sayyaf was reportedly unable to carry out plans to bomb targets in Manila due to a lack of funds.
And in 2007, following the outing of several of al Qaeda’s deep-pocketed donors and the ways in which the group used charities to move its funds, Mustafa Abu al-Yazid, al Qaeda’s finance chief, lamented the group’s money problems in a propaganda video, arguing that the primary need for jihad in Afghanistan was financial, “There are hundreds wishing to carry out martyrdom-seeking operations, but they can't find the funds to equip themselves,"" he said.
Following the money allows governments to map out the links between known terrorist operatives and supporters and to identify new ones.
Indeed, financial intelligence has provided valuable information in several high-profile investigations.
In 2006, authorities in the United Kingdom helped thwart a plot to blow up several aircraft with liquid explosives by tracking large transfers of money disguised as earthquake relief from a British-based Islamic charity to the three suspected bombers.
And in 2007, financial intelligence contributed to the arrest of three al Qaeda affiliates who were plotting attacks in Germany, Neumann insists that financial measures are particulariy ineffective at preventing the kinds of cheap, self-funded attacks that have recendy become common in Europe.
But such attacks often cost more than meets the eye, and because even the cheapest attack b not free, when terrorists are frozen out of their bank accounts, they have to resort to rbkier tactics.
Consider the case of Ismail Issa, an ISIS operadve arrested while traveling from Germany to Syria in 2012.
The group had sent him with cash to shop for supplies rather than wiring money to an operative already in the country, because it had become too difiicult for isis members to transfer money without it being picked up by the authorities.
In many cases, the jihadists had grown so worried that their transacdons were being monitored that they were too scared to collect the funds.
Neumann argues that in the age of tsis, the ways terrorists finance their operations simply don’t lend themselves to the traditional tools used to fight terrorist financing.
He suggests that governments rely too heavily on UN Security Council resolutions, for example.
But those resolutions demonstrate international resolve and can provide cover for local officials to act when it would otherwise be too politically risky.
In the Persian Gulf, for example, some of al Qaeda’s funders have family or tribal ties to governments and ruling families, so international backing has been necessary for officials to move against them.
But the group’s ability to take territory was a function not of any particular financial prowess but of the breakdown of the rule of law in parts of Syria and northwestern Iraq.
As Neumann notes, terrorist organizations are in some ways better resourced than they were before 9/11.
But that is a result not of the failure of efforts to crack down on terrorist financing but of the proliferation of ungoverned places.
These trends call for governments to work even harder to understand terrorists’ financial structures and to design sophisticated ways of countering them, Neumann is right to highlight the heavy burden that r^ulations designed to combat money laundering and terrorist financing place on financial institutions.
He is also correct that governments need to do a better job of balancing competing priorities, such as delivering humanitarian aid while preventing terrorists from abusing charities to raise, launder, and move money.
But the solution is not to throw the baby out with the bath water MATTHEW LEVITT is Director of the Stoin Program or) Countorterrorism and Intelligence st the Washington Inetitute for Near East Policy.
Prom 2008 to 2007, he served as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis at the United States Treasury Department.
KATHERINE BAUER is Blumenstein-Katz Family Fellow at the Washington Institute.
From 2011 to 2013. she served as Assistant Director In the Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes at the United States Treasury OepartmanL Money Talks Danielle Camner Lindholm and Celina B Realuyo P eter Neumann paints an incomplete picture of the ways in which the United States and its partners have used financial tools to fight terrorism, crime, and corruption since 9/11.
He underesdmates the vital role of financial intelligence in detecting, analyzing, and dismantling dangerous networks.
And he overlooks important progress in cooperation among countries, United States government agencies, and the private sector.
Although measures to coimter terrorist financing will not by themselves eradicate terrorism, they play a significant role.
Terrorist organizations have to recruit and train fighters, buy weapons and equipment, bribe corrupt officials, wage propaganda campaigns, and plan and carry out operations.
These activities cost money, so understanding how groups raise, store, move, and spend that money has helped bring terrorists to justice and deter others from harboring them or funding or joining their organizations.
The ways in which terrorists finance their operations have certainly changed since 9/11, but the strategy that the Bush administration developed in response to the 9/11 attacks remains relevant.
Neumann also discounts the notable deterrent effect that sanctions have had on potential terrorist financers.
A1 Qaeda operatives from Afghanistan to Iraq, including al Qaeda in Iraq’s late leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, have complained about increased difficulty in raising funds, financing terrorist operations. paying foreign fighters, and supporting their networks.
In recent years, the boundary between terrorist groups and other organized criminal networks has blurred, as terrorist organizadons such as Hezbollah, the al Qaeda-aligned Haqqani network in Afghanistan, and isis have grown more reliant on crime to generate revenue.
As a result, officials combating terrorism have turned to financial tools originally designed to fight internadonal crime.
S coalition, for example, has worked with the private sector to use its anti-smuggling experience to prevent ists from selling the antiquides it loots COUNCILon.
FOREIGN RELATIONS Franklin Williams Internship TJir Coumii tjn F iU'iiiuotu £> ulenied uidrvUiualsfor Ihchnmidin Willmms hiWruMfi The FrankJin Williams Incerivhip. named after ihe lire Ambasudor Franklin H Williams, 'ue^cabli&hed for undergraduate and graduate siu Jenia whu bave a ^teriuus iniere^t In incernaiioiuJ relaiiiicu.
He waa alw a Direcctir of the Cuoncil on Foreign Relaoun^, where he made special efforia tu eccmirage the iJonuDaiiuD uf black Americans n) membership, Tbe C^ounci I will wlec t one indiv idual each term to work in the CIouncil'K New ^'ork City beadquartera.
Tbe intern will work tUvielv with a Program Director or Fellow in either i1\e Siudjes or the Meetings Program and will he invtdved with program courdination. subvcaniive and buaineM writing, research, and budget management.
The selected intern will be required to nioke a commitment of at least 12 hours per week, and will be paid 5 1U on boor. 10 apply for this iruernthip, please send a resume and cover letter intluding the semetier, days, and times avaJable to work to the Internship Cuiyrdinaior in the IHiinun Resources OfEce at the address listed below.
Banks and other private-sector organizations have adopted crime-fighting analytic tools and techniques to better identify bad actors and trends in terrorist financing.
They then report suspicious activity to government agencies, which fuse that information with law enforcement and intelligence data.
Neumann also points to the high costs that efforts to counter terrorist financing have imposed on the private sector, but a great deal of progress has already been made on that front.
Governments have begun to work more closely with financial institutions to mitigate the costs of regulations on the financial sector, while gathering as much data as possible.
Groups such as the Association of Certified Financial Crime Specialists, the Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists, and the Financial Intelligence and Information Sharing Working Group regularly bring together banking executives and government experts to share information on the most recent trends in terrorist financing and money laundering.
And initiatives such as the annual Public-Private Analytic Exchange Program, convened by the United States Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the United States Department of Homeland Security, encourage cooperation on such issues as virtual currencies and methods of money laundering.
The public and private sectors are further working together to better understand how innovations in financial technology, such as Bitcoin, blockchain, mobile banking, and machine learning, will affect future legal and illegal financial fiows.
As these examples demonstrate, Neumann is wrong to suggest that efforts to counter terrorist financing have failed.
It would be a grave mistake for industry, law enforcement, intelligence agencies, and the international community to give up this crucial tool.
DANIELLE CAMNER LINDHOLM b Managing Director of Roaring Fork Strategies and Co'Chair of the American Bar Association's National Security Committee.
From 2002ta 2006, she served as Director of Counterterrorism Pitwnce Programs at the United States State Department.
Cashing In Jodi Vittori eter Neumann is right to point out that efforts to counter terrorist financing focus too much on the international banking sector and to call for a more comprehensive approach.
But he is wrong to imply that controls on the international financial system have failed to curb terrorism.
It is true that these measures do little to prevent imminent attacks, but the ability to track terrorists and their asscNziated networks through the financial system forms an important pan of investigations after the fact.
And these measures act as a usefiil deterrent to potential funders of tenorism and throw sand in the wheels of large terrorist organizations.
And the same financial requirements also help mitigate other international threats, such as corruption and organized crime.
Unfortunately, the Trump administration has gone in the wrong direction on this issue.
Since January, the U.S, government has rolled back important transparency and accountability mechanisms, many of which were designed to tackle other global problems but which also affect terrorist financing.
In February, President Donald Trump signed legisladon that sent a Securities and Exchange Commission rule on oil, gas, and mining transparency back to the drawing board.
This will limit the transparency of the flows of money from oil, gas. and mining firms to governments, making it easier for corrupt politicians and their cronies to use the cash to illicidy fund anything from extravagant lifestyles to terrorism.
The SEC has also watered down an important regulation requiring United States companies to assess whether minerals bought through certain supply chains are funding conflict or human rights abuses.
And the United States Department of the Interior has refused to take the steps needed for the United States to become a full member of the Ebctractive Industries Transparency Ini dative.
Although none of these steps alone would end terrorist financing, enhancing transparency is crucial to hampering all manner of illicit financial activides.
If the United States is serious about preventing terrorist financing, it should work to replace the current international focus on specific areas or threats with a broader approach, combining the various transparency, accountability, and due-diligence mechanisms that cover a wide range of businesses, including banking, trade in some natural resources, and wildlife trafficking.
The goal should be to minimize the ability of terrorists and criminals to easily acquire or move money or goods, regardless of the sectors in which they operate.
Doing so will require governments, the private sector, law enforcement, and civil society to balance the need for risk assessment, due diligence, and transparency against the need for privacy and practicality, while minimizing the effects of rules and regulations on legitimate trade and financial flows, Neumann is right that the war on terrorist financing has not lived up to its promises, but it has done some good.
If the international community stops focusing on just a few issues, such as banks and cash, and instead concentrates on stitching the various transparency and accountability mechanisms together and filling the gaps between them, then it will be far more successful.
Neumann Replies A s my critics write, efforts to counter terrorist financing have certainly had some successes.
But these respondents fail to address the more fundamental questions that my article raised.
Although several of my critics worked on these issues as government officials, none of them offers any systematic data to show that the current strategy works.
This epitomizes the entire approach, which has relied on the instinctive appeal of following the money, while remaining sufficiently obscure to escape the scrutiny to which other parts of the war on terrorism have, eventually, been subjected.
There has been virtually no public debate over combating terrorist financing, nor is there any academic literature on the subject beyond case studies of individual groups and terrorists.
Discussions, where they exist, revolve around anecdotes, making it difficult to test wider assumptions and judge the effectiveness of the overall approach.
After my article was published, several current and former intelligence officials contacted me to echo my conclusions.
He insisted that financial intelligence—the use of financial information to track suspects or establish connections between known and unknown terrorists—could be “Valuable” and “‘evidentially helpful,"" especially after an attack.
But along with others who contacted me, he made it clear that financial intelligence, as he understood it, had little to do with the massive efforts to find needles in haystacks that constitute much of the fight against terrorist financing.
Finally, the current strategy offers no answer to the rise of cheap attacks.
Banks and other financial Institutions cannot monitor every $100 transaction or notice every time someone with a potentially suspicious background rents a truck.
Yet because countering terrorist financing remains the job of treasuries and finance ministries, governments will keep looking in the wrong places.
B eginning in the second half of the twentieth century, people in the United States and around the world started talking about freedom and justice in strikingly new ways.
The UN’s 1948 adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the starting point for what VA^uld become a revolution in global political culture.
In a multitude of small steps, symbolic moments, breakthroughs, and setbacks during the postwar decades, ideas about human rights v^ve themselves into narratives about the United States’ ideotiry and role in the worldSensibilities in Africa, Asia, and Europe also changed dramatically.
But Bradley’s arresting account of the rise of a global human rights imagination makes its most profound statements on the subject of the United States’ changing—and, unfortunately, declining—position within thi^ evolving moral landscape.
In recent decades, historians and pundits have not been kind to Woodrow Wilson.
He is remembered at home for his paternalistic liberalism and complicity in racial injustice and abroad for his naive idealism.
But this groundbreaking book by Throntveit, a young historian, tells a different and more sympathetic story; it is an extraordinary effort to recover and illuminate the thinking behind Wilson’s internationalist vision.
Throntveit argues that Wilson was not actually a “Wilsonian,"" if that term implies imposing American-style democracy on other countries.
What Wilson actually sought was the gradual and collective development of a system of global governance geared toward the promotion of justice and peaceful change.
It was a vision, Throntveit maintains, that was deeply influenced by the American wing of the philosophical school of pragmatism, particularly the ideas of William James.
Wilson’s views were also shaped by the Anglo-American progressive tradition and its many public intellectuals, including Jane Addams.
B, Du Bois, John Dewey, Herbert Croly, and Walter Lippmann, Wilson’s thinking was certainly eclectic, with ideas drawn from British constitutional theorists, the American founders, and Christian ethicists.
Lipscy provides the most elegant and systematic explanation yet for these diverse and shifting choices.
His key insight is that policy areas differ in their propensity to create competition between institutions.
In some areas, such as the management of financial crises, all states want global surveillance of the situation, so it makes sense to concentrate capabilities in a single institution—and the costs for dissatisfied rising states of creating new institutions would be prohibitively high, anyway.
But other policy areas, such as foreign aid and infrastructure lending, reward competition over cooperation, creating more opportunities for rising states to strike out on their own.
The prevailing wisdom among policymakers and pundits is that credibility counts.
No such consensus exists, however, among political scientists, many of whom argue that Washington’s credibility in the eyes of an adversary will be overwhelmingly shaped by the adversary’s reading of current United States interests and capabilities, and not by past actions.
Harvey and Mitton join this debate with a detailed study of the Obama administration’s response to Syria’s use of chemical weapons in 2013.
After Syria crossed United States President Barack Obama’s publicly stated redline by using such weapons against civilians and rebels.
Russia brokered an agreement in which Syria gave up its chemical stockpiles but avoided United States military action.
Harvey and Mitton argue that Washington’s ’’reputation for resolve”—earned by the use of United States military force in similar circumstances in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Iraq—influenced Russian and Syrian calculations.
The authors do not settle the debate about whether Obama harmed that reputation by declining to use military force to punish Syria.
But they drive home the fact that credibility ultimately depends on the imperfect perceptions of leaders and their real-time calculations of risks and probabilities.
L in, a former chief economist of the World Bank, and Monga, the chief economist of the African Development Bank, bring to bear their considerable scholariy credentials and practical know-how in this iconoclastic treatment of economic development in poor countries.
The authors quarrel with the conventional wisdom about what is necessary for successful development.
Instead of hawking a one-siae-fits-all formula, they urge countries to find a niche in the worid economy by taking a pragmatic approach tailored to their financial resources, labor markets, and types of government.
That said, Lin and Monga tend to &vor the creation of industrial or export zones, outfitted with infrastructure and unburdened by red tape—but also offered no protection from market forces.
They have no ideological objection to an active role for government, which is often necessary, but they are wary of restrictions and regulations that allow only some players to profit.
Robert McNamara was best known as the “whiz kid” secretary of defense under United States Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson and as one of the main architects of United States (and, by extension.
But as the death toll from the mounted and public opposition increased.
McNamara left (or was perhaps pushed out of) the Pentagon and took the helm at the World Bank, where he served until 1981.
This useful book describes McNamara's tenure during a turbulent period that saw the partial breakdown of the postwar international monetary system, two major increases in world oil prices, and China's entry into the international Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Sharma analyzes the positive and negative aspects of McNamara's enduring legacy at the bank, including his focus on reducing poverty and his insistence on rigorous quantitative analysis of both client countries and the bank’s own performance.
The size of the grants could be affected by various factors, such as the recipient's age and level of need, and could be conditioned on grantees meeting certain behavioral requirements, such as preventing truancy in their school-age children.
Van Parijs and Vanderborght, however, prefer a universal, unconditional cash grant—as does Standing.
Van Parijs and Vanderborght's book is more scholarly than Standing's and explores the history of basic-income schemes going all the way back to sateenth-century Antwerp, Standing, for his part, usefully examines present-day pilot projects in Finland, the Netherlands, and the Canadian province of Ontario.
Both books summarize the existing empirical research on basic incomes and the various ideological and pracdcal objections that economists have put forth.
And both books address the question of how rich and poor countries could finance basic-income schemes.
In India, for example, a basic income that would lift millions out of extreme poverty could be comfortably financed by eliminating numerous subsidies, such as those for electricity and gasoline, that mainly benefit higher-income families.
Finally, both books emphasize how a basic income would bring about not only economic benefits but also greater freedom of choice for individuals; evidence suggests that most recipients would make good decisions about how to spend the money.
Puzzlingly, however, neither book discusses the potential impact that a basic income might have on birthrates—possibly positive for countries with declining populations but possibly negadve in the many more countries where populadons continue to rise.
In 2010, the chief executive of a rapidly growing Japanese e-commerce firm, Rakuten, mandated that all of the company’s 10,000 employees, most of whom were Japanese, start using English to communicate within the firm, both in speech and in writing.
Neeley followed the implementadon of this radical change over the course of five years.
She weaves her observations of Rakuten into a larger story about language education in Japan, which is a crucial pan of the 'Abenomics” agenda of the country's prime minister, Shinzo Abe, The result is an interesting and informative book full of practical lessons for any internationally ambitious organization.
Neeley points out that although language reflects culture and influences behavior, it does not determine them.
Indeed, she reports that one consequence of the universal use of English at Rakuten was the reinforcement of traditional Japanese customs throughout the £rm, especially Japanese-style hospitality, thanks to clearer shared expectations.
As aesthetically pleasing and occasionally useful as such theoretical constructs may be, human life does not conform to them, tn particular, they fail to accoimt for the crises chat all too frequently plague modem economies.
The authors reveal the complex set of relations among bin Laden’s many wives and children, the disagreements within al Qaeda (most of its senior figures opposed the 9/11 plan), and the challenge posed to the organization by the brutal sectarianism of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of its affiliate in Iraq.
The books sheds considerable light on the question of whether senior Pakistani officials knew that bin Laden was hiding in their country.
Perhaps the book’s most fascinating sections explain how a large group of senior al Qaeda figures and bin Laden family members found unlikely refuge in Iran after the 9/11 attacks.
They were both guests and hostages, providing Iran with some immunity from al Qaeda attacks and representing potential bargaining chips—ultimately never cashed in—during negotiations with the United States.
Sageman sets out to explain why people with radical political agendas rum to violence.
He covers the French Revolution, the development of terrorism in tsarist Russia, the radical nationalist movement in the Balkans that helped trigger World War I, and anarchist violence in the United States during the early twentieth century.
Although the book touches on mob violence and indiscriminate killing, Sageman mosdy examines eiforts to assassinate significant political figures.
His sharp focus on the perpetrators of such acts illuminates their motives and circumstances but does not contribute much to Sageman’s main goal of developing a general theory of why some people become killers.
One thing that comes throu^ quite clearly, however, is the role of political repression in radicalizing those who might otherwise have eschewed violence.
The rapid development of the Internet has created a new form of conflict, one that is often touted as transformational.
Almost every online transaction, however routine and innocent, has the potential to become part of an unseen maneuver to cause mischief, steal mon^, bring down vital infrastructure, or subvert a government.
But it is difficult CO t^kp the measure of cyberconflict, because it is now part of every other form of conflict; it affects everything while deciding very little on its own, at least thus hi.
One merit of Klimburg’s book Is his description of the many layers of the Internet, their vulnerabilities, and the governance problems they pose, although the book's profusion of acronyms can be overwhelming.
The essential portrait of cyberspace that emeiges is of a stateless global good being ruthlessly exploited by states, especially for the purpose of reshaping the way people think; some of the strongest sections focus on Russia, an innovator in such activity.
Perkovich and Levite’s volume explores the issue of cyberconflict through analogies to conventional forms of violence—a potentially misleading approach, as the editors acknowledge, but one they nonetheless successfully adopt CO explore what is genuinely distinctive about the digital domain.
They have assembled a firsc-rate cast of contributors CO investigate the cyberspace dimension of areas such as nonlethal weapons, drones, preemption, surprise attacks, and economic warfare.
In overt warfare, the effects of digital tools have become much clearer in recent years.
The real difficulty now lies in sorting out what is taking place in covert forms of conflict, where cyberartacks are easy to mount but hard to attribute co any particular actor.
Washington’s tentative reaction to Moscow’s alleged interference in the 2016 United States presidential election.
Given the steady flood of books about strategy, it is remarkable how few there are about tactics.
Friedman has filled that gap with a short, sharp piece of analysis that highlights the physical, mental, and moral dimensions of conflict and explores important concepts such as “the culminating point of victory,"" the term Oausewitz used to describe the point when the attacker had achieved the maximum possible.
Friedman enlivens a potentially dull subject, using plenty of historical examples to illustrate his points.
In so doing, he demonstrates that some core lessons are timeless— the advantage of combined arms, the importance of having the right mix of mass and firepower—even though their application must incorporate the latest technologies.
Although he shows how war fighters can win tactical victories, he is well aware chat in the broader strategic context, these may not be sufiicient to win a war.
CO m/advertis e B'UAIL; ewal 5 b 9 cfr.org TEL; 212.434,9526 Employment and Internship Opportunities WWW, fore ign aifai ra.
Green saw Bannon as an important figure early on and began to track his career long before other journalists.
As a result, Green had the material and access to produce a deeply researched and sharply observed account of a political figure and a movement that took most of the country by surprise.
Many seasoned observers thought that Trump had rendered himself unelectable by embracing and peddling ""birther"" conspiracy theories regarding President Barack Obama's nadonal origins.
Bannon. however, understood that Trump had forged a bond with a significant Republican constituency that could win him the COP nomination and put him on the road to the White House.
Although Bannon's tenure as Trump’s chief strategist in the White House was brief and mostly unsuccessfiil, it is unlikely that his influence in United States politics will fade quietly away.
Readers will find no better guide to Bannon’s vision than this gripping and sometimes appalling account.
America,' Lowed Thomas and the Invention ofTkoentieth-Century Journalism BY MITCHELL STEPHENS, St.
E Lawrence, helping to transform the British archaeologist and military officer into ""Lawrence of Arabia"" in the public imagination during Worid War I Thomas remained a dominant presence in the United States media vrell into the 1970s, but he might be the most famous twentieth-century media figure whom hardly anyone under 40 has heard of.
He nimbly adapted to the shifting conditions in the media industry, moving from radio to newsreels and finally to television.
Stephens suggests that today’s media environment is less hospitable to the kind of journalism Thomas practiced.
The mass audiences of the networks have broken up, and Thomas’ trademark travelogues would have less appeal in the age of jet travel.
DeLauro, a Democrat who has served as the United States Representative for Connecticut’s Third District since 1991, grew up in the rough and rumble of New Haven politics.
Out of that experience DeLauro developed a concern for the underdog and a commitment to retail politics.
In The Least Among Us, which combines backward-looking memoir with forward-facing prescriptions, DeLauro argues chat, with inequality growing and newly arrived immigrants stru^ling in United States cities, old-school Democratic politics has much to offer.
Should the Democrats recapture the House of Representatives in 2018, DeLauro’s mix of sharp intelligence, skilled partisan instincts, and long-term legislative experience will make her a key player.
Readers who want to know how the winds might shift in Washington could do worse than to learn how DeLauro understands politics.
With cities and college campuses around the United States engaged in bitter debates over the fate of memorials to the Confederacy and its leaders, Stahr’s timely biography of Edwin Stanton, who served as President Abraham Lincoln’s secretary of war, brings an important reminder of just how wrenching and transformational the Civil War was.
Stanton was responsible for the recruitment, supply, and coordination of the unprecedented military machine that the Union assembled during the war, and also played a critical role in the suppression of Confederate sympathizers and antidraft activists in the North, which led to thousands of arrests and trials by military commission.
A longtime Democrat, Stanton would go on to forge close links with the Radical Republican faction, and in the shocking days following Lincoln’s assassination and the attempted assassination of Secretary of State William Seward, Stanton was the virtual ruler of the United States.
In 1868, President Andrew Johnson demanded Stanton’s resignation after Stanton sided with Republicans who wanted to take a harder line on Reconstruction in the South, That dispute led to Johnson’s impeachment and trial.
Few Americans have been at the center of so many consequential political storms; this long and thorough account sheds new light on some of the most important events in the history of the United States.
Many commentators on both the leit and the right insist that powerfiiJ ofiicials in international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund and the EU dominate global finance.
Yet such institutions rarely act independently, instead, just like domestic political institutions, they are arenas of political conflict.
Henning analyzes the European financial crisis of the last decade, focusing on seven debt-restructuring programs that pitted creditors against debtor nations.
He explores why oversight of such programs lies with the so-called troika formed by the European Central Bank, the European Commission, and the IMF— a cumbersome arrangement chat increases complexity, reduces efficiency, and undermines European integration.
The reason, Henning argues, is that parliaments in powerful creditor countries, notably Germany, will only approve institutional arrangements designed to do their bidding to the greatest extent possible.
Ironically given the widespread belief that the EU suffers from a ""democratic deficit,"" creditors rejected on EU-based solution—a proposed European Monetary Fund—because it would have diluted their power and restricted the imposed austerity that benefits them.
The estimated 14 million Roma people— ""gypsies,” in old-fashioned parlance— compose Europe hidden minority.
This book introduces readers to their plight, focusing especially on legal remedies for human rights violations.
Like African Americans, the Roma suffer from a legacy of slavery, discrimination, and economic marginalization.
Yet over the past century, the Roma have not benefited from the type of broad legal revolution that has improved the lot of minorities in the United States.
Governments, especially in eastern Europe, continue to slight the Roma, often informally, in the provision of housing, education, and employment and frequently fail to protect them from violence and violations of family rights, including the unjustified forcible removal of children.
Although a significant literature on Roma rights exists in Europe, this book seeks to bring the Roma’s plight to the attendon of Americans, Insofar as policies toward the Roma have improved, it is largely because western European countries use the Eir to impose policy changes on eastern European governments.
The authors blame the Roma’s continued second-class status in Europe on a weak social and governmental commitment to the cause of equality, but they also note that the Roma have failed to organize effectively.
But some Europessimists sincerely believe that Europe's travails reflect an epochal transformation in Western societies.
So argues Krastev, an uncommonly literate, reflective, and engaging observer of European affairs who is also a trained philosopher with a penchant for grand historical visions.
He argues that in the wake of Franco-Cerman reconciliation, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the stagnadon of the European economic model, the movement for further European integradon lacks big ideas to push it forward.
Moreover, Krastev believes that the refugee crisis poses a genuine threat to European idendty by spawning populism, which in turn threatens Europe's esoblished political compromises, cultural cosmopolitanism, commitment to human rights, and social solidarity.
Still, a realisdc analysis of these crises might suggest a more sanguine conclusion.
European governments have worked together to cut third-country immigration by more than 80 percent.
And although economic malaise maybe the most serious of all the crises, the eurozone seems to be stable and recovering for the moment.
Although it has ten million citizens, a strategic locadon, and a crisis-prone economy, Portugal receives little international academic or media attention.
Lochery has written a useful introduction to an underappreciated corner of Europe, tracing the country's history from the fall of authoritarian rule in the so-called Carnation Revolution of 1974 to the present.
It recounts how Portugal established democracy, a tale that involves United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger's curious intervention in Portuguese domesdc politics to bolster moderates against Communists.
Lochery also narrates Portugal's joining the EU in 1986 and the 2004 elevation of a Portuguese politician, Jose Manuel Barroso, to head the European Commission.
Short chapters on recent years focus on the political fallout of the financial crisis, which posed as dire a threat to Portuguese democracy as communism had a quarter century earlier.
Yet the collection of admirable studies presented by Dominguez and his esteemed Cuban collaborators manages to convey a compelling, if depressing, portrait of Cuban society.
Universal health and education have produced worthy outcomes, but their quality is visibly deteriorating, and efforts at reform have fallen short.
Although good data are scarce, it is clear that socioeconomic inequalities are widening along gender, ethnic, and geographic lines.
Cuba's highly centralized bureaucracy and tightly planned economy, both of which rest on ideological foundations resistant to reform, have repeatedly frustrated attempts to decentralize decision-making and increase democratic participation.
Even these erudite authors struggle to recognize that renewed economic growth and higher labor productivity will require sacrificing some egalitarian social ideals.
Voces de cambio en el sector no estatal cubano supports a similar conclusion.
Nevertheless, their findings are valuable and generally confirm what other smallsample studies have uncovered.
Despite the many obstacles conironting Cuban entrepreneurs, most report a high level of satisfaction and are earning handsome returns and reinvesting for future growth.
The Cuban private sector has added jobs, generated tax revenues, and improved the quality of services.
Yet in recent months, Cuban authorities have criticized small businesses for earning ’'excessive” profits and for allegedly engaging in illicit practices that, they charge, undermine socialist ideals.
Officials would do better to digest the many well-founded recommendations in Voces de cambio and further encourage the productive capacities of the Cuban people.
The thrill master DeMille visited Cuba with Yale Educational Travel in 2015, just long enough to enrich his fast-paced, entertaining novel The Cuban Affair with some vivid local color.
His handsome protagonist is a wry, jaded United States Army veteran of the war in Afghanistan who owns a fishing charter boat in Key West.
Die-hard anti-Castro Cuban Americans hire his ship, The Maine , to sneak into Cuba to recover property records squirreled away long ago by a fastidious banker fleeing the revolution.
DeMille sympathetically conveys the profound sense of loss of dispossessed elites, even as his world-weary veteran concludes that the Cuban American hard-liners had “such a big hard-on for screwing the Castro brothers that they couldn’t see straight,"" and muses that those hidden property titles are worth little more than Confederate war bonds.ie Cuban Affiir features an amusing take on the Yale tour group, unsavory spies , and a climactic firefight on the high seas.
Burbach, who passed away in 2015, was a self-styled “utopian intellectual vagabond"" who had fled his Midwestern origins to struggle alongside left-wing comrades striving to remake their worlds, most intensely in Chile during the AUende years, in the early 1970s, and in Sandinista Nicaragua, in the 1980s.
Burbach was an erudite student of progressive political theory who enjoyed deep connections to major figures on the Latin American left, and his emotive memoir takes an unusually profound dive into the revolutionary movements of the late twentieth century, their lofty aspirations, euphoric victories, costly illusions, and tragic confrontations.
Despite political and romantic setbacks, and injuries he endured in a swimming accident in 1989 that confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life, Burbach persisted in his uncompromising commitment to radical research and activist engagement.
Home—So Dlffrent, So Appealing Los Angeles County Museum of Art , 2017.
Forty-two Latino and Latin American artists present a mostly grim view of low-income urban life and reduced opportunity, whether in the shantytowns of Bogota and Buenos Aires or the housing projects of the Bronx.
But the overwhelming, strident political commentary is disturbingly pessimistic.
Ugly slums brutalize vulnerable children, loudly flapping buzzards loom over heaps of trash, jarring inequalities separate the prosperous from the impoverished.
Latino immigrants to the United States confront class divisions, bogus patriotism, and long, wrenching jail sentences.
New singlefamily housing developments in Mexico and the United States alike appear as bleak, dehumanized wastelands of consumerism.
In these artists’ eyes, the American dream is an illusion, and there is no exit from the Western Hemisphere’s social nightmares.
M cMahon has produced a detailed, tough-minded study of what happened when a swarm of nongovernmental organizations rushed into Bosnia and Kosovo in the wake of conflicts during the 1990s, She argues that, despite their good intentions and hard work, their actual contribution to postconflict peace building was largely insignifrcant—or even counterproductive.
Rather than generate local initiative, create community, strengthen civil society, or foster democracy, they left locals despairing of change, cynical, and disdainful of the NGO model.
International groups and the governments and global institutions that supported them had the money, but their aims did not match the reality on the ground.
Making matters worse, they relied on self-serving measures of success and disregarded the insights and preferences of their local counterparts.
Those counterparts soon figured out that to get ftinding, they had to design their programs according to international priorities rather than genuine local needs.
Bust followed boom as failure and exhaustion set in; international NGOs moved on, and local NGOs withered.
Many within the NGO community now understand these problems, but McMahon fears that too many incentives exist to leave things as they are.
In this immensely ambitious, careful, and data-rich study, Fop-Eleches and Tucker do not merely explore the historical legacy of communism in eastern Europe; they also tackle the far more difficult problem of distinguishing its impact from that of other factors.
But Pop-EIeches and Tucker succeed in that task by applying a highly refined theoretical model to their large data sets.
Those trying to pin down with greater precision the legacy of communism now have a model to emulate.
Kyrgyzstan was once seen as one of the post-Soviet states best positioned to build democracy and foster a market economy.
It is now mired in corruption, political dysfunction, and economic stagnation.
Pelkmans paints an earthy portrait of how people in one Kyrgyz city, a former mining town of 20,000 inhabitants, have coped.
Half of them have fledThose who stayed have adopted a variety of credos to help them understand their new world.
Initially, many hewed to oeoliberalism, which promised a future of democracy and prospering markets.
When those dreams failed to materialize, people drifted to alternatives, including nationalism and religion, with conservative Islam (ushered in by Tablighi Jamaat, a proselytizing group rhar encourages personal piety), Pentecostal Christianity, and shamanistic spiritual healing all enjoying a surge in popularity.
Pelkmans focuses on the swift cycle in which these belief systems gained purchase over people and generated enthusiasm and energy, which then deflated when prophets failed and outcomes disappointed.
He is interested in not merely the force of ideas but also what determines their influence, durability, and decline.
A lack of reliably enforceable property rights discourages investment and burdens the Russian economy.
This problem attracts intense scrutiny from those studying and promoting economic reform.
Normally, scholars draw a sharp correlation between secure property rights and the strength and integrity of political and legal institutions.
Most analysts assume that if those institutions are weak or corrupt, people and groups struggling to protect their property will resort to criminal or corrupt means.
Gans-Morse, employing survey data and extensive interviews, turns that assumption upside down.
Despite lagging efforts to improve Russian courts and state bureaucracies, a great many disputes over ownership and contracts are settled by legal means.
This trend, however, has advanced unevenly, and the level of engagement with the legal system often depends on the size of the firms involved, the nature of their products, and the character of the markets in which they operate.
The immediacy of the threat from contemporary terrorism might make it difficult to view the phenomenon through the lens of nineteenth-century Russian literature, but Paryk makes a stimulating case that the essence of today*s violence originates there.
The seditious emodons that would later inspire political terror, she suggests, first appeared in Aleksandr Radis hchev's 1790 Journey From St.
It then gestated in the work of authors such as Turgenev and Dostoyevsky (and, even more boldly, in that of their less famous but more radical counterparts.
Sergei Nechaev and Nikolai Chernyshevsky), who depicted revolutionary zeal and its terrorist strain.
Although Patyk draws on the works of many authors to subtly tease out the symbiosis between words and deeds, her central focus is Dostoyevsky’s three great novels Crime and Punishment, Demons, and The Brothers Karamazov, which gave terrorism literary form well before it became a fixture of modem polidcs.
The main characters are the residents of the House of Government, an immense edifice in Moscow, completed in 1931, that housed the Soviet elite.
He traces their lives, often in their own words, from youthful idealism and ardent revoludonary fervor to disillusionment and prosaic surrender to pragmadsm— and, for a vast portion of the protagonists, exile or death during Stalin’s terror.
The book’s depth (not to mention its length) invites the reader to luxuriate in it, chapter by chapter, rather than simply plowing through.
T his important collection follows an earlier edited volume that Elbadawi and Makdisi put together prior to the Arab uprisings of 2010—11.
For decades, the region’s autocracies defied predictions that growing wealth, rising levels of education, and the development of middle classes would lead to democratic transitions.
In their contribution to the book, Elbadawi and Makdisi persuasively argued that the deficit derived irom a combination of war and the wealth afforded autocrats by natural resources.
The uprisings briefly raised the possibility that the deficit would be overcome.
Elbadawi and Makdisi conclude that the process of democratic transition that began in 2011 will resume at some point and that Islamist fundamentalism will not emerge as the dominant political paradigm in the medium or long term.
The other contributors, all Arab academics, generally make similar arguments in useful sketches of particular countries, including Egypt, Lebanon, and Syria.
The trouble is that, outside Tunisia, there is not much empirical evidence to support such optimism.
Iran pledged to eliminate its stockpiles of uranium, drastically limit its enrichment activities, and allow inspections of its nuclear facilities.
Farsi did not participate in the negotiations but has interviewed just about everyone who did.
His book captures the ebb and flow of the process—indeed, its psychology.
The United States saw sanctions as a way to force Iran to negotiate; Iran saw enrichment as a way to force the United States to negotiate.
There is no doubt in Farsi’s mind that the only alternative to the deal was war, which was United States President Barack Obama’s position, as well.
Further sanctions would not have produced regime change in Tehran, Farsi contends.
He also does not believe that Iran—a big, diverse, proud nation—could be isolated indefinitely.
The Trump administration may think otherwise, but Parsi presents a convincing argument that normalization with Iran, although not inevitable, is possible.
RaEq Hariri was twice Lebanon's prime minister, first from 1992 to 1998 and again from 2000 to 2004.
Hariri was assassinated in a massive blast in Beirut in 2005 that killed dozens of people and that a UN special tribunal has blamed on members of the Shiite militia Hezbollah.
Baumann focuses on Hariri’s economic reforms, spedfrcally his program of acquiring undervalued property in Beirut and redeveloping it and his pegging of the Lebanese pound to the United States dollar.
He argues that such policies exploited the state’s power to engineer a huge transfer of wealth from ordinary Lebanese to oligarchs such as Hariri himself, many of them based in Gulf Arab states.
The Gulf-based oligarchs, for example, did not need Lebanon to make their fortunes, which were more directly affected by oil prices than by the Beirut property market.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's leader since 2003, has had an impact on the republic arguably equal to that of its transformational founder, Kemal Ataturk.
Turkey’s economy has boomed imder Erdogan; its middle class has tripled in size during his rule and now includes around 40 percent of the population.
But Cagaptay sees Erdogan as a deeply flawed figure who threatens Turkey’s democracy.
Erdogan, whose politics are shaped by an uneasy mix of Islamism and constitutional secularism, consolidated a center-right coalition of pro-market and Islamist supporters that has never quite exceeded 50 percent of the electorate.
At first, Erdogan was aided by Fethullah Gulen, an influential cleric with many followers in the security establishment.
In 2016, a failed coup allegedly organized by Gulenists gave Erdogan a pretext to purge the government, academia, and the media of not only Gulenists but also liberals and Kurds.
She declines to give a definitive judgment but hints that the commitment to democracy may be more opportunistic than doctrinal.
Wolf stresses, however, that Tunisia’s political culture is rooted in a history of reform, and Ennahda likes to cast itself as the inheritor of the reformist mantle.
After decades of repression, Ennahda began to operate legally only in 2011, when a broad-based revolt drove President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali from power.
Since then, the party has grappled with issues such as the tension between civil and religious law and the question of whether Muslims and non-Muslims should be considered equal under the law.
Aside from a lack of internal consensus on such questions, Ennahda’s main weakness, Wolf contends, is its failure to put forward an explicit economic philosophy.
E ven as China’s power increases, the country does not always get what it wants from its regional neighbors.
Goh and her contributors explore the complex interplay of pressure and resistance in China’s relations with Myanmar, North Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam, as well as China’s role in regional issues such as dam building, monetary policy, and human rights.
These interesting essays go beyond the standard chronology of diplomatic interactions to probe factors that ampliiy or impede Chinese influence.
China’s neighbors may cooperate for economic gain, or to manage troublesome borders, or simply because they share China’s preferences.
But they also fear Chinese dominance and tend to side with India, Japan, and especially the United States whenever those powers are available.
Corruption may make it easier for China to gain access to local decisionmakers, but it can also generate scandal.
Proand anti-China factions often form in these countries, and Beijing’s gains can be reversed because of shifu in public opinion or leadership.
The anthropological perspective on Chinese family life adopted by the contributors to rhi^ volume reveals a great deal of interesting variation— across the urban-rural divide; according to region, class, and sexual orieniadon; and even just by personality and circumstance.
The Chinese family is changing under the impact of many forces, including marketiaation, urbanization, reduced family size, consumerism, and loosening sexual mores.
There is more personal choice in marriage, families are smaller, and elders today rely less on their children to take care of them than in the past.
Daughters are more valued than they used to be, because the housing and gifts that must be purchased to marry off a son are more expensive, and because daughters are more likely than sons to help their parents in old age.
Between what the editors of this volume call ""the two axes of patriarclty,” the power of elders has weakened more than the dominance of males.
Making innovative use of police and court archives dating from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Ransmeier shows that Chinese families often bought and sold family members.
Still others indentured children to work as servants or purchased children, women, and disabled people to serve as beggars, laborers, or prostitutes or to be sold on the international ""coolie"" market.
For every buyer, there was a seller, usually driven by need—except in cases where traiftckers snatched people off the street Modernizing officials outlawed some but not all of these practices; many forms of buying and selling were covered by a veneer of kinship.
China today still suffers from widespread human trafficking, Ransmeier’s richly detailed stories of individual cases show how societies can come to accept the trade in people as a normal kind of business.
This 12-chapter documentary series, reported by the former css Asia correspondent Mike Chinoy, surveys the history of the United States media’s reporting on China.
It includes contentious episodes such as the Time reporter Theodore White’s struggle with the publisher Henry Luce over how to portray the Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek during World War II and Bloomberg News’ 2013 decision to fire the reporter Michael Forsythe because, Forsythe says, his research into the wealth of Chinese elites had angered the Chinese regime, threatening the expansion of Bloomberg’s business in China.
As China followed a twisting path from war to Maoist revolution to its present state of prosperity and assertiveness, American correspondents faced ever-changing challenges.
Still, wave after wave of reporters understood the importance of the story and covered it with remarkable insight.
More than two centuries of peace, stretching from the early 160Os to the mid-180Os, left Japanese samurai more skilled in martial arcs than in martial action.
Jaundrilfs impressively researched study traces the origin of the modern Japanese military to the 1840s, when one martial arts teacher introduced a more westernized style of musketry and artillery training based on the Dutch example.
But the West’s relentless encroachment, together with LDternal battles between modernizing reformers and conservative feudal lords, kepi up the pressure to create more effective fighting units.
Soon after reformists took power in the 1868 Meiji Restoration, the new regime adopted a universal conscription law, breaking the link between service in the military and social status and consolidating the Idea of amass citizenry.
By 1894, Japan was poised to defeat Qing China and win control of Korea and Taiwan.
The U.S.-led Allied occupation of Japan after World War II is considered a strategic success because it pbced a formerly militaristic, aggressive enemy firmly on the road to democracy, prosperity, and an alliance with the United States.
Barnes shows chat the planning for the occupation started as early as 1939.
It was far from obvious in advance whether or how Japan would be defeated or what to do if it was.
One faction, led by some of the United States State Department’s leading Asia experts, held that the Japanese were culturally impervious to Western worldviews and inherently aggressive, and so Japan had to be reduced to impotence to make the world safe.
The other view was chat Japan’s aggression had been stimulated by resource insecurity, and so integrating the country into open global markets would be the key to peace.
Barnes’ engaging intellectual and social history of the planners provides a fresh window into the origins of today’s liberal international order.
The author places much of the blame for Pakistan’s everworsening intolerance on a series of military men turned politicians who fostered sectarian oppression in pursuit of political gain.
Her prime villain is Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, who took power in a coup in 1977 and ruled until 1988 and who instituted a vague law against ’‘blasphemy"" that is still widely used to persecute innocent people.
The American authors of this valuable study benefited from their collaboration with a number of scholars at Chinese universities and think tanks.
They set out to demonstrate that even within China’s dosed regime, it is possible to advance transparency and public participation, often through small experiments that are subsequently scaled up.
Why would an authoritarian party permit such changes^ That Is the puzzle of the book’s title.
According to the authors, the central state does so to reduce corruption and improve compliance with its policies at the local level.
The authors skillfully blend the latest statistics on corruption with illuminating case studies to argue that enlisting the Chinese public to monitor the bureaucracy would yield better results than continuing the current heavy-handed crackdown that targets corrupt individuals one at a time.
This short, accessible biography provides an excellent introduction to his life and to the country that he ruled.
Bom in 1922, he was identified as a promising pupil in a Catholic mission school and later became one of the first Tanzanians to earn a college degree.
That distinction, along with his keen grasp of political tactics and his talent for rhetoric, thrust him into a leadership position in the bu^oning nationalist movement.
Nicknamed Mwalimu , Nyerere earned a reputation for being a thoughtful and visionary socialist whose high degree of personal integrity was not matched by many other African heads of state at the time.
Bjerk’s balanced biography lauds Nyerere’s accomplishments (most notably the steps he took to reduce ethnic and racial divisions within Tanzania) but also makes clear that the Nyerere regime committed human rights violations, tolerated a good deal of corruption, and implemented disastrous economic policies that left the country bankrupt by the mid-1980s.
He walks the reader through a complex story of uneven state building and civil war that begins in the nineteenth century and extends to the present.
To explain the variation in political outcomes in the region, Clapham turns to geography.
He contrasts the region’s highlands, where relatively high population density and fertile soil have produced agricultural surpluses that can finance a viable state such as Ethiopia, with the lowlands, in which pastoralism dominates and has undermined the establishment of state authority in Somalia.
The book deftly describes how Ethiopia has emerged from recent crises with a stable government (albeit one led by military rulers) and ambidons to become Africa’s first “developmental state,"" fostering growth with major infrastructure projects chat have the potential to dramatically change the region.
Decade after decade, extremists continue to exploit the continent’s dire poverty and underperforming, illegitimate regimes.
The names and the rhetoric change, but the essential qualities stay the same.
The African continent's generally woeful infrastructure has long acted as a brake on economic growth and poverty alleviation in the region.
Cheaper and more reliable electric power would allow manufacturing sectors to expand.
This collection of essays by economists associated with the African Development Bank suggests ways to achieve those outcomes.
The authors estimate that the region's governments currendy spend less than half of the $93 billion a year they need to on infrastructure investment and maintenance.
The difticulty in bridging this funding gap stems not just from a lack of money but also from a paucity of proposals for well-deftned, bankable projects.
Robinson argues that African countries’ responses to the hiv/aids crisis have been largely determined by their previous experiences in implementing familyplanning programs.
Based on careful case studies of Malawi, Nigeria, and Senegal, she documents how the same local nongovernmental organizations and technocrats that had gained experience and developed working reladonships with international family-planning organizations, such as Family Health International and the International Planned Parenthood Federation, were typically the same actors who spearheaded efforts to combat hiv/aids.
Preventing pregnancies and preventing the spread of Hiv require the same ability to intervene in intimate relations and influence sexual practices, Robinson convincingly demonstrates that the effectiveness of a given familyplanning program depended on whether the political conditions allowed for the development of relatively strong nonstate actors with links to transnational agencies.
Against conventional wisdom, this fine study conveys an abiding optimism about the ability of large international aid organizations to help smaller local groups build skills in one area and then apply them to other challenges.
I am delighted to see Senator Tim Kaine (’A New Truman Doctrine,"" Ju]y/ August 2017) describe a bold new foreign policy strategy that balances greatness and goodness.
BCaine highlights the rising influence of nonstate actors but seems to consider only their destructive power.
Of course, the United States must find, defend against, and hold accountable those who seek to harm the country and its allies.
But a new strategy should also seek to identify and empower those nonstate actors working to improve lives and reduce suffering.
More rime and money should go to the Malala Yousafzais, Nelson Mondelas, and Vaclav Havels of the world than to heads of state and CEOs.
Kaine righdy highlights the role of the United States in addressing natural and man-made crises.
He mentions the failures in Rwanda and Syria as proof that failure can come from crimes of omission, not just those of commission.
Kaine’s new strategy should adopt or adapt R2P—as many United States allies have done— to address genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity.
Taiwan has one of the world’s best universal health-care systems, which offers reasonably priced, high-quality care, with a coverage rate of 99 percent of the population and short waiting times.
Taiwan could do a lot to help the WHO speed up the expansion of health coverage, and many countries could benefit from Taiwan’s know-how and medical expertise.
During the Ebola and mers outbreaks in 2015, for example, Taiwan joined forces with the United States to hold training courses for medical personnel in Asia.
It also donated funding and medical equipment to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to fight Ebola.
The WHO should adhere to its principles, convey its professional concerns honestly to its members, and reiuse to succumb to political pressure to exclude anyone.
Canadian pLUkaDon Mail-Mail ft 157212L Perindlcals posoge paid in New YV>rk.
From dae CO date, we persut cenain caraTuUy acnesaed companies to send our aiibscsiben cofoRoadon about produco orservkes that we belienwillbeof ioteresi. (£ yew prefer lux to receive such iaformalion. please (mntaaiuaiibaYYmpa, PL,adilnaa isdiotad above.
A site license to ForeignAffairs.cora is your instiiucion's gateway m the best analysis of today's events and isstiea, k also includes access to the full 90*year online archive tn give users a comprehensive history of modern global affairs.
Foreign Affairs Brain Trust We asked dozens of experts whether they agreed or disagreed that the United States should sigiuficastly reduce its military invotvemeal io Afghanistan.
CONFIDENCE LEVELS Mara Karlin Associate Professor of the Practice of Strategic Studies.
Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies “The opporTuolty costs of a longer, wider, open^eoded commitment to A^hanistan have grown too profound to ignore.
CONFIDENCE LEVEL E Michael Kugelman Senior Associate for South Asia, Wilson Center ""Significant^ reducing the United States military’s iovolvement could imperil ao Ai^an security fbrcea aaining misaion that has made major progress in recent yeara.
The School of Global Policy and Strategy at UC San Diego attracts recent college graduates and accomplished professionals with its world-renowned expertise In the Pacific region and innovative science and technology policy research.
Meneqing Direeler and Head of Wealth and Estate Planning Jeff oversees ell weelOt and estate planning for Wilmington Trust Company and has peitleuler expertise In adueaUng clients on the use of Delaware trusts.
He Is part of a seasoned team of professionals who exemplify Wilmington Trust's H4*year heritage of successfully advising clients.
The itale of Delaware provides special advaalages to busleess owaers who create a personal trust tor estate plaaaiog, asset proteclioQ, or eooddefitlallty purposes While not all of these advantages are unique to the state, luiliTifig tools with a trust located kc Delaware adbrds a busicess owner other beoefits this irust'frlendly state has to offer.
Directed trusts offer control Establishing a crust with a directed trustee feature allows a business owner to designate one or more advisors to make investment decisions for the trust that holds the business as Us main asset.
Delaware was among the first states to allow an asset protection trust, which enables a busicess owner to remain a beneficiary and have the trust a&seIs protected from creditor claims Quiet trust provisions offer confidentiality.
In Delaware, trusts can contain ‘quiet* provisions tailored to a business owner’s requirements.
A business owner IN 1997 WILNINOrON TBUII HELPED EUr DELAWARE’S ^UaST ASSET EEOTECTJOH IHimt law into practice can Instruct the trustee to keep the trust confidential until a milestone is reached.
For insight Into bows Delaware Erast could M3tk to meet )oar specific goals, visit wilmLttgtoolrust.coaL/ debware advantage.
T RibarU)rBfDofUi nrMeenfrdiflBnolinMMitineflevjDildUDonlDtBteialeofaiv finandal|iMudor»YiQL ItibaftlcKKnolifeslorEd «t Iderdedb provide Ilntfdd.ui;,le9al, X£i)iiiilirg.tfWersMenllcnQlliUv^ lf prolnslcitd advR b rieeded ibe imke d ynir orofsfloodl Sihhix ilHiAl M Israwd b tbemarliairig luine tor m offering d Mftf bit depotf and lo» pnxksas ifiwiMK • Ar KfTfDK'lisnd * W Mi dmhlH • fin lau Wllmpgiai Trust c a legBreredlenn rwlL Mllmlngiiyi Inal CorporaDon q a wfKtf owned BttHlarY cf AT Bank Corporatm Mirrdngien Tita Company, wning h Dela*4e oniy.
