We are excited to bring to you an article from the Library Director Carolynn Volz concerning the new library renovations that will take place in 2012.
An artist’s rendition of the Fort Myers library is on the cover of this issue.
There is also a lot of buzz in our society concerning the place of books, or perhaps more accurately, the preferred format of books.
With this in mind, I thought it would be interesting to look at an incident in recent history concerning the potential power of the published word to influence world events.
The Naples campus library enjoyed participating in the Florida Libraries Snapshot Day last November, and we’ve included some pictures of that event.
This way all the materials remain available, and can be brought to the Ft.
For Phase II we will be moving into temporary quarters in the new classroom building in midFebruary.
We will have the equivalent of four classrooms on the third floor to use for library space and a group office.
This will be our library location until about August 15th, when the renovation of our old location is completed.
Our space will increase to include the entire first floor of the West Wing in the main building.
Computer workstations around the floor will increase from 18 to at least 35.
There will be furniture and white boards on wheels that can be reconfigured according to the needs of the students.
More improvements are better lighting, more color, a variety of seating choices and study areas, a multi-purpose conference room, a reception desk, and a workroom.
We will have two computer classrooms for computer stations, and one classroom area set up with tables and chairs for a study area.
Riva and our student worker Yara will be located in the middle of this area and available to everyone.
We expect to have business as usual, and look forward to all our old regulars plus many new ones joining us every day.
The four librarians, however, will all be sharing one classroom space for six months.
Perhaps a study on the confining of diverse librarians into one small space would be a good research project for a psychology student.
I’m not too sure how it’s going to work, but there should be some good stories along the way.
Myers library project, an upgrading of the Naples library will take place.
There will be new paint and carpeting, less shelving, and a more open feeling.
All of this will go a long way in creating a place of study that better fits the needs of our students.
This work will be completed by the end of 2012, and will take place while keeping the library open, we hope.
We had three focus groups of wonderful students who really spoke up about their dreams for our library.
Then we worked with three marketing classes that drew design plans for us.
Some of the librarians attended workshops and joined in online forums to find best practices for library design Administration listened to our problems regarding lack of space to serve our growing student population, and gave us the support we needed.
The architects listened to our dreams and plans and drew up a perfect design.
The library needs, dreams and plans are all coming together with the whole Hodges family caring and collaborating.
Most importantly, we will never have to turn students away just because we can’t seat them in the library.
It is great to be part of this exciting venture, and we appreciate your leadership.
I could be bold and say she saved our nation from World War III, but let me be safer and write that, at the very least, she significantly contributed to that noble end.
As a librarian, the idea that a book helped steer a nation from disaster has great appeal.
Wertheim pursued a dangerous assignment covering the Spanish Civil War in 1937, already raging since mid-1936.
She passionately embraced and wrote for the cause of the Spanish Loyalists, who were struggling against the Nationalists under General Francisco Franco.
The later victory by the Nationalists spelled the end of her idealistic illusions, she would recount.
This heartbreaking event appears to have opened for her a new view of the world and its history, where the irrational sometimes triumphs, and sweeping mistakes are committed by governments.
Kennedy had been a history and government major at Harvard, and had previously studied the Great War.
However, the writing by Tuchman was not just a dramatic retelling of the outbreak.
Tuchman wove throughout the narrative convincing threads of political miscalculation and misunderstanding.
Tuchman portrayed the outbreak of the Great War, not as an inevitable slide of events, but the result of human decisions, many of which could have been more tempered and adept.
Therein lay the tragedy – that such a terrible and violent cataclysm that swept over 20 million soldiers and civilians from the earth could have been prevented, but for the actions of a handful of politicians – actions that were severely tainted with miscalculation and misunderstanding.
As a Harvard student, this thesis would have probably been interesting, but now as an American president during the Cold War, Kennedy was profoundly moved.
He made it his avowed aim not to be the president who led the United States into World War III, if at all possible.
He recommended to top military leaders that The Guns of August be required reading for all Armed Forces officers over the rank Barbara Tuchman of major.
The U2 spy plane flyovers were spotting these missile sites in progress, and the range of these missiles covered most of the United States.
What is important to note here is that the President enshrouded himself with the Tuchman thesis during the whole conflict.
Nor would there be a path of miscalculation and misunderstanding descending to war on his watch.
His skillful negotiations with the enigmatic Nikita Khrushchev and his long emergency meetings with his advisers and military leaders (including his brother Robert) revealed a passionate man on a mission – to get those missiles out of Cuba, and to prevent a nuclear war while doing so.
That Kennedy would have pursued those two aims without Tuchman’s influence is without doubt.
However, during the Crisis, Kennedy hearkened back to The Guns of August in conversations with his advisory team.
The Kennedy Administration’s military quarantine around Cuba succeeded, and the Soviets withdrew the missiles.
By all accounts, the prospects were grave, and military action seemed imminent.
Today we rightfully look back with generous praise for the President, Robert Kennedy, and the other advisers.
However, Barbara Tuchman’s presence was keenly felt in that somber conference room as well.
Though the Spanish Civil War ended wrongly, in her thinking, Tuchman published a book in 1962 that deftly put her hands on the steering wheel of American history, and the end result was right this time.
Florida Libraries Snapshot Day in Naples November 2, 2011 at the Naples Campus 7 8 a r t o n Wh Riva spotlight It is a pleasure to introduce Riva Wharton, Library Associate in the Fort Myers Library.
Project ALFA is a federal grant that promotes Universal Access primarily in libraries, but will carry over to all facilities and programs.
When she graduates, she will have a Master’s in Library Science with an emphasis on Universal Access for the blind, deaf and physically challenged.
Technological tools are stressed, web page design, and hopefully the ability to become proactive instead of reactive is taught.
The library is really excited about this as they are expecting returning veterans to become a larger part of the student body.
Riva’s training in the program will be beneficial for the Hodges’s Veteran’s Department and she is planning on working closely with them.
She worked with migrant workers, ESL, the homeless and those who slipped through the educational cracks.
She likes to sew, but has disciplinary problems with her dog that keeps grabbing the fabric as she is running it through the feeder of the machine.
She and Dale have become expert screen repairers, again, with this loving animal charging through screens and doors after cats, armadillos, raccoons or any other creature that dares to venture onto the property.
She is looking forward to the new challenges the new building will bring, and remains optimistic the changes will be positive.
The new study rooms, user friendly facility and updated technology will keep Hodges current with other 21st century universities.
The books on the shelves in Fort Myers were sent to the Naples Library, where the librarians integrated both collections together.
Barb Hawkes and Jeanine Brady participated in the WorldCat Navigator Webinar.
Carolynn Volz attended the regional meeting for the ICUF Libraries at Indian River Community College in November.
Gayle Haring attended the Charleston Conference for academic librarians in November.
Gerald Franz taught several Center for Lifelong Learning classes in Naples, including on the Berlin Wall and on the Lusitania.
Jay Dela Cruz put together a new look for the library portal page, and the other librarians contributed their input.
