After formulating his plan, he went to Fidel Castro, to seek approval to put intermediate range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
He was able to convince Castro that if he had intermediate range nuclear missiles on his own country, he would be better suited to prepare for a second strike against his country.
So from there, the USSR deployed several intermediate range nuclear range missiles to Cuba, one of many actions, which brought the world closer to nuclear war.
On October 14th 1962, during a regular reconnaissance mission by a U 2 reconnaissance aircraft through Cuba, pictures were taken of several intermediate range nuclear missiles, known as SS-4's.
These pictures then, after a 1 day period in which they were interpreted, were sent directly to Washington, where on October 16th 1962, with his breakfast, President Kennedy started ""some of the most stressful days"" of his life.
The stress was overwhelming in the tones of the voices of Kennedy's advisors, as the possible scenarios began to unfold.
This idea of such a large strike radius must have been shocking to all of the advisors who had not heard the exact distances, as you can hear in the tone of their voices.
There was an extremely high level of stress for President Kennedy after only approximately four hours of knowing that there were nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the stress for him only escalated from there.
Throughout the day of the 16th President Kennedy and his advisors look for various possible plans of action, working out the various possible consequences and effects each will have.
Some of Kennedy's advisors were pushing for war, and a more decisive plan of attack, such as McNamara.
Others, like Robert F Kennedy, and Charles Bohlen, another of President Kennedy's advisors, urged President Kennedy to try as many peaceful political maneuvers as possible before any strike against Cuba.
These two sides pulled at Kennedy, and attempted to convince him of their own beliefs throughout the day.
By the end of the night, President Kennedy and his advisors decide to move some of the military to bases in the South Eastern United States.
Throughout the following days, the President juggles his campaign schedule and this crisis, as to not alert the public, or Cuba, of his knowledge of the impending threat.
On October 18th, the President confronted the Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
According to him, Khrushchev was against offensive training of any nation, and he believed that this policy should also be true with the United States.
This twisting of the truth was quite transparent for President Kennedy, as the president already knew that the USSR had placed nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Although Gromyko may have thought he had convinced the United States of the Soviet policy of not training or aiding other nations in performing offensive actions, he did not.
After the meeting, the President and his advisors met again, for 5 hours to decide on a plan of action.
Prior to this, two possibilities written down, with many various opinions on these possibilities, and different ways to implement the strategies.
Again, there were two main sides pulling at President Kennedy, one telling him to have a ""surgical air strike"", and the other telling him to first prompt Khrushchev with a letter, and the use of a blockade.
Although there are no transcripts of these conversations, there was some heated argument between McNamara and Bolin, who had very different opinions.
McNamara was for a stronger, surgical air strike, the more aggressive plan.
Bolin was interested in the more obvious plan to send a letter to Khrushchev, and then use a blockade.
Finally, after the 5 hours, a quarantine around Cuba was agreed upon by the advisors and President Kennedy, and naval planning begun.
The next day, Sunday, October 21st, President Kennedy spoke on the phone to Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
In this conversation, we can see how serious and scary this situation was for both parties.
Although only the President's transcript is available, we can see that he is worried about the possibility of this escalating to a third world war, yet again, showing the escalating stress that the president was under.
He speaks of attempting to stop a third world war from occurring; however the United States ""cannot accept his actions"" no matter what the effects will be.
The role of ExComm was to meet on a daily basis to discuss the crisis and advise President Kennedy of a plan of action.
This was used to keep the President up to date, and possibly lower his incredible stress levels, as President Kennedy 'always felt calmer after discussing the problems at hand' according to McNamara.
During the day, he decides to address the nation in a television address, which he writes his speech for.
President Kennedy told the United States of the nuclear missiles they found evidence of in Cuba.
He told the country that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had, through Gromyko, told President Kennedy that the Soviet government would not aid in any offensive actions by another country, an obvious lie, and proof of the USSR's attempt at deception of the United States.
He also explained that a ""strict quarantine"" on all military ships would be put in place to stop the addition of new nuclear missiles, warheads, or any other product, which may be construed as offensive.
During this explanation, President Kennedy's 'stress started to show itself,' because of the anxiety created while waiting for a response from Khrushchev.
The naval fleet had a confrontation with some Soviet submarines, luckily however, the Soviet submarines halted before reaching the quarantine.
President Kennedy responded that the blame for this crisis was the movement of offensive weapons into Cuba, and because of this, until they found a more peaceful resolution, he urged Khrushchev not to have his ships break the quarantine.
Khrushchev, yet again says that he will not abide by the demands of a quarantine, however the movements of his ships says otherwise, as none had broken the quarantine.
This was yet another negative event for the President, as he had hoped Khrushchev would accept the terms of the quarantine.
President Kennedy yet again urged Khrushchev that he was not trying to do anything other than restore peace to the region.
Then, on the night of October 26th, 1962 and the morning of the 27th, two letters arrived from Nikita Khrushchev.
Within a few hours of the first letters arrival, in the early morning of the next day, via ""back channel,"" or secret, communications a letter, which fully contradicted the first, arrived.
President Kennedy decided to follow the Second letter, which called for a more peaceful resolution, asking the United States only to close their base in Turkey.
Through those 13 days in October, from October 15th to October 28th, President Kennedy got hit with one problem after another.
These burdens he had to carry caused a great deal of stress for him, and yet, after those 13 days he was still able to settle the crisis without the creation of a 3rd world war.
Due to this ability to overcome stress and bring his country to peace overcoming all the odds, President Kennedy exemplified heroism.
To find more information on the Bay of Pigs, the first strike by the United States on Cuba, see Bay Of Pigs Declassified-History Undercover, ; or Bay of Pigs, Victor Andre Triay, Robert McNamara, interviewed in Fog of War, The, Sony Classics, 2004.
