Reconnaissance photos taken on October 15th showed missile bases being built by the Soviets in Cuba, 90 miles away from the coast of the United States.
President Kennedy ordered a quarantine around Cuba and in the ensuing days both sides ramped up for a possible military engagement.
United States military forces stood at the ready, while Soviet forces in Cuba had orders to use nuclear weapons if the United States invaded Cuba.
Negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Kruschev continued in hopes of a nonviolent resolution.
After much deliberation, on October 28th, the Soviet Union agreed to remove all missiles in Cuba in exchange for the United Sates removing all missiles in Turkey.
The outcome of the crisis forever altered the course of the Cold War as both sides saw just how close they had come to a nuclear conflict.
The foreign policy between the two changed from confrontation to coexistence.
In this lesson students will examine several primary documents from the thirteen­day crisis and will analyze the differences in policy objectives were between the Cuban, Soviet and United States leaders.
Marshal evidence of antecedent circumstances and contemporary factors contributing to problems and alternative courses of action.
Thirteen days in October 1962 was one of the most intense periods in American and Soviet history.
The United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war.
The Cold War policy of containment was tested 90 miles from the Florida coast on the island of Cuba where the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles.
The United States had for several decades had weapons that threatened major Soviet cities from Italy and Turkey.
Soviet nuclear weapons had long suffered from inadequate delivery systems and long distances.
Under­estimating Soviet nuclear power in Cuba, President John F Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara engaged in brinksmanship, challenging the Soviet military with a naval blockade and threatening to invade Cuba.
After the crisis, both Soviet and American leaders realized, in full horror, how close they had come to nuclear apocalypse.
The confrontation between the United States and Cuba began during Eisenhower’s administration.
During Eisenhower’s administration, the dictator of Cuba was Batista who was friendly with the United States.
As Castro gained power, the relationship between the United States and Cuba worsened.
Kennedy won the 1960 election and became president of the United States in 1961.
Kennedy defeated Republican candidate Richard Nixon in part because Kennedy played up a so­called “missile gap”, claiming that Republicans under Eisenhower had let the Soviet Union get a missile advantage over the United States.
The United States had far more missiles and nuclear bombs than the Soviet Union, but it established Kennedy’s credentials as a candidate who would not back down to a communist threat.
This was done in secret against the wishes of Castro and a few of Khrushchev’s advisers.
The secrecy was a miscalculation that ultimately hurt Khrushchev because he offered no public explanation to the world for installing missiles in Cuba, and this caused suspicion.
From October 16, 1962 to October 22, 1962, Kennedy formed the Executive Committee that met every day to decide how to handle the situation.
The Executive Committee had to make a decision before the missiles became fully operational.
During the decision­making process, the political and strategic implications needed to be considered.
They considered that Soviet missiles alongside a communist Cuba would violate the American Monroe Doctrine, an assertion of American predominance in Latin and South America.
They considered the Cuban missiles 5 Mark J White, Missiles in Cuba Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis , 34­40.
The hawks wanted an air strike on the missile installations and to follow with an invasion if necessary.
The doves wanted a naval blockade which would embargo military shipments to Cuba.
Kennedy decided on the naval quarantine because it would give the Soviets a way to back down and save face.
On October 22, 1962, Kennedy delivered a speech to the nation and world about the naval quarantine and the crisis in Cuba.
From October 23, 1962 to October 28, 1962, letters of correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev were sent day by day as the crisis unfolded.
On Wednesday, October 24,1962, the United States Navy stopped a number of Soviet ships dead in the water.
Other ships were allowed to pass that did not contain military supplies.
On Thursday, October 25, 1962, Adlai Stevenson showed photographs to the United Nations Security Council after an argument about the existence of the missile sites with Soviet UN Ambassador Zorin.
On October 26, 1962, Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy offered a possible settlement.
On October 26, 1962, Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev convinced that the United States would invade Cuba and that he should respond with a nuclear strike against the United States.
Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy about the “double standard in American 11 Ball, The Past Has Another Pattern Memoirs, 289.
Kennedy’s response ignored the request and accepted the no­invasion pledge in return for the removal of the missiles from Cuba under United Nations’ inspection.
The Jupiters were removed from Turkey, but at a later date and secretly.
Even though the crisis subsided in November 1962, its effects were evident in the change in foreign policy.
According to Richard Lebow, “Cuba unquestionably had an effect on Soviet policy toward the United States.
A hot line between the Soviet premier and American president was established for crisis communication.
In order to control arms, the Limited Test Ban Treaty limited testing to the underground only.
Although the treaty limited where countries could test nuclear weapons, this did not limit the number of nuclear weapons.
According to Garthoff, there were two lessons – 18 White, Missiles in Cuba Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis, 134­135.
The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated,” Diplomatic History 14 : 490.
The first lesson learned was that nuclear war was too risky to seriously risk.
The second lesson not learned was it would not take many nuclear bombs to annihilate the enemy.
So, despite arms­control agreements and a new spirit of diplomacy that emerged from the Cuban missile crisis, the two superpowers continued for the next 25 years to stock pile a massive number of weapons, weapons that were costly, menacing and unnecessary.
Never again, however, would Soviet or American leaders go again to the brink of nuclear war.
The crisis evoked miscalculations and misperceptions frightened Soviet and American leaders into the realization that a change in policy was the only way to avert a nuclear war.
Not only a change in policy, but also a change in the relationship of the three countries to a certain extent occurred.
The evolution of the relationship between Kennedy and Khrushchev went from a reaction­response to one of coexistence with open communication.
Garthoff, Raymond L A Journey Through The Cold War A Memoir of Containment and 24 Ibid., 183.
White, Mark J Missiles in Cuba Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis.
Vocabulary ICBMs­ any supersonic missile that has a range of at least 3500 nautical mi. and follows a ballistic trajectory after a powered, guided launching.
Try to structure the discussion to pay special attention to the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961.
After allowing students sufficient time to examine the missile range, pose the following lead questions.
RS #10 is an instructional sheet and RS #11 is a blank sheet for student completion.
Review the directions to the “Mapping an Event” sheets, answering any student posed questions.
If audio is unavailable students can take turns reading the speech aloud.
Lead a class discussion on the policy choices confronting the United States and Soviet leaders.
Ask student to evaluate Kennedy’s decision to establish a naval blockade.
Primary Source Annotations Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space.
Fidel Castro’s confrontational proposal includes concern about either an air attack or an invasion by the United States.
Students will place the letter in the organizer under during the crisis to establish confrontation.
Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev, October 22, 1962.
His explanation references past diplomacy and a reminder of the responsibilities and commitment of the United States.
The United States will stand firm intending to remove the threat with minimal action.
Students may use references to Berlin and Vienna to place in the organizer under before the crisis.
Students use President Kennedy’s action to place in the organizer under during the crisis.
Students should be looking for examples of reaction­response in the confrontation between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
This is a letter to Nikita Khrushchev from President Kennedy about observing the terms of the quarantine and discussion within the Security Council.
Students will place the letter under during the crisis to establish confrontation.
Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 24, 1962.
Nikita Khrushchev accuses President Kennedy of providing an ultimatum and violating freedom of the seas.
Nikita Khrushchev instructs his ships to follow international protocol.
Students will place this letter under during the crisis establishing confrontation.
The idea of the quarantine as an ultimatum and violating international law.
President Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba, so it removed the threat to Cuba and Soviet assistance no longer needed.
Nikita Khrushchev mentioned the violation of Cuban and Soviet air space.
Students will place the letter under after the crisis and note the concerns of Nikita Khrushchev in obtaining a peaceful coexistence and a settlement on the crisis.
President Kennedy addressed the violation of Soviet air space, but not the Cuban air space or U­2 missions.
The telegram mentions the beginning of talks for a nuclear test ban as well as future communication.
Students should place the telegram under after the crisis with the idea of a peaceful coexistence.
President Kennedy is seeking a détente with open communication and arms control.
Students will place the commencement address under after the crisis focusing on open communication and a comprehensive test ban treaty as well as the Peace Corps.
After the crisis, the United States and the Soviet Union move toward peaceful coexistence.
The photos are the first images shown to President Kennedy on the morning of October 16, 1962.
There are three circles which show the range of nuclear missiles in relation to Latin America as well as most of the United States.
Students will use the map to infer the political and strategic implications of Soviet missiles ninety miles from the coast of the United States.
