Genera Batista was a dictator, corrupt and unpopular but the Americans provided military and economic support because he was opposed to Communism 8 of 34 Fidel Castro In 1959 after a three year guerrilla campaign, Castro overthrew Batista.
USSR lied about Cuban missiles, would be a sign of weakness 19 of 34 Surgical Air Attack Would destroy the missiles before they could be used.
Destruction of all sites could not be guaranteed, Attack would kill Soviets and USSR would respond, An attack without without warning was immoral 20 of 34 INvasion Would get rid of missiles and Castro, American forces were trained.
Would guarantee a response, either to protect Cuba or in Soviet Sphere of influence 21 of 34 Diplomatic Pressure To get UN to intervene and negotiate.
If the USA had to back down it would seem weak 22 of 34 Blockade Would show the USA was serious without being a direct act of war, would put the burden on Khrushchev.
At 10.32 am they stop or turn around 27 of 34 Friday 26 October Khrushchev sends Kennedy a letter saying the missiles are defensive and that if the USA promises it will not attack then they could withdraw the missiles 28 of 34 Saturday 27 October Khrushchev sends a second letter saying the conditions for removing Cuba is the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey, an American plane is shot down and the pilot is killed.
Kennedy delays an attack and accepts the first terms 29 of 34 Sunday 28 October Khrushchev agrees to remove the weapons 30 of 34 Outcomes for USA Kennedy had proved himself and was seen to have made Khrushchev back down, stood up to people in his own government.
Khrushchev was forced to back down, Made no difference to the missile gap, 1964 Khrushchev forced from power 32 of 34 Outcomes for Cuba Stay Communist and heavily armed, Kept control of American companies and other economic resources.
Was upset by the agreement but needed USSR support 33 of 34 Outcomes for Cold War Helped thaw relations, both leaders saw how close they'd got to a nuclear war and a phone link was set up.
Tweet Combine this resource with othersUse this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.cmd.push { googletag.defineSlot.addService); }); googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); }); Other cards in this set Card 2 Front USA Allies Back USSR was powerful and so the USA needed allies, NATO in 1949, South-East Asia Treaty Organisation in 1954 and the Central Treaty Organisation in 1955.
