Although some key United States ofªcials, notably Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone, had disagreed about the merits of the Brazilian proposal, the administration had tentatively decided to endorse it in light of evident tensions in Havana between Castro and pro-Soviet old-line Communists.
As it turned out, however, Castro politely deºected the Brazilian initiative, and the matter had proceeded no further as of mid-October 1962 when American U-2 reconnaissance planes suddenly discovered that the Soviet Union was secretly installing nuclearcapable missiles in Cuba.
On the afternoon of 16 October, shortly after photographic evidence of the still-secret missile emplacement was presented to Kennedy, the ad hoc group of senior United States ofªcials that would become known as the Excomm (Executive Committee) gathered in the Cabinet Room to consider what to do.
In effect, Rusk was resuscitating the idea presented by the Brazilian foreign minister, San Tiago Dantas, the previous spring, albeit this time under far more urgent circumstances.
Rather than going through the Brazilians, however, Rusk proposed communicating the message via the Canadian ambassador in Havana or the Cuban representative at the United Nations .2 Rusk’s passing suggestion attracted little attention amid the Excomm’s far more extensive consideration of other options, particularly an air strike against the missile bases, a blockade of Cuba, or the diplomatic alternative of an approach to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Although Rusk put the odds of success at “one chance in a hundred, possibly,” he maintained that 1.
The literature on the Cuban missile crisis occasionally mentions, but does not seriously explore, this option.
He then asked Martin to outline the contents of the oral message that would be conveyed through a third party to Castro.
Martin explained that the message would indicate that the United States knew about the missile bases and would then point out the implications for United States security.
It would characterize the deployments as a “breach” of Castro’s past promises, not only because the missiles were ground-to-ground weapons but also because they “obviously” were Soviet-controlled.
Unless Castro responded positively by then, “not only by statements— privately or publicly—but by action,” the United States would be “compelled” to act to remove the threat posed by the missiles.
The message also would wipe out the potential military advantages of a surprise attack on the missile bases, an option then favored by many Excomm members.
On 17 October, several senior advisers, such as UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, and CIA Director McCone submitted memoranda that ºeetingly noted the possibility of sending an emissary or demand to Cuba seeking the removal of the missiles.
Stevenson urged Kennedy to send personal emissaries to Khrushchev and Castro, while Dillon and McCone urged a demand to Castro to begin the removal of the weapons, followed by air strikes if the ultimatum were rejected.
By that evening the alternative of a message to Castro seemed to have vanished from serious consideration.
At the end of the meeting, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy summarized the major options as an ultimatum to Khrushchev , a limited air strike without warning, a political warning followed by a naval blockade, a large-scale military strike after political preparations, or a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
But on the afternoon of the 21st, the day before Kennedy spoke, the NSC decided to delete the reference.
Moreover, no approach to the Canadians took place at this stage of the crisis, despite Rusk’s initial suggestion of using the Canadian embassy in Havana as a communications channel.
Intriguingly, by the morning of 22 October Rusk seems to have modiªed his thinking to view the Brazilians, not the Canadians, as the most suitable channel for a secret direct approach to Castro.
During an Oval Ofªce discussion shortly before noon that day, as Kennedy and a small group of aides polished a draft address for Stevenson to deliver to the UN, the president noted the possibility of recognizing a Cuban 8.
What precisely had caused the secretary of state to shift from the Canadians to the Brazilians as a potential intermediary is unclear, though one may note that Luís Bastian Pinto, the Brazilian ambassador to Cuba, had visited Washington only a few weeks earlier and had evidently impressed State Department ofªcials as a serious diplomat and reliable anti-Communist.
Ofªcials in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs considered the Brazilian envoy to Havana both “effective” and “one of the few people who could have quick access to Castro”—perhaps qualiªcations that, upon further reºection, they believed the Canadian embassy lacked.
Although Rusk certainly would have preferred not to rely on the Brazilians (with whom Washington had repeatedly disagreed regarding Cuba), United States ofªcials respected the professionalism of Brazil’s diplomats.
Nevertheless, over the next few days as the confrontation with the Soviet Union burst into public view and rapidly intensiªed, Rusk and his associates apparently took no action to pursue the Brazilian approach to Castro.
In Kennedy’s view, however, grave problems seemed to accompany either alternative.
The public phase of the crisis tested Brazilian-American relations at a particularly difªcult juncture.
After the apparently successful visit of Brazilian President João Goulart to Washington in April, United States ofªcials, including Kennedy, had grown increasingly exasperated with the Brazilian leader.
Over the summer they had authorized both covert CIA support to Goulart’s political opponents and a quiet beeªng up of military contacts in Brazil (including the assignment of Vernon Walters as military attaché) to lay the groundwork for possible support of a coup to prevent the country from falling into Communist hands.
In September and early October, even as political debate about United States policy toward Cuba intensiªed, Washington also was anxiously monitoring the acute political crisis in Brazil, as Goulart staged a controversial cabinet reshufºing amid rumors of coups, counter-coups, and even possible civil war in the run-up to parliamentary elections on 7 October.
They debated whether to cancel Kennedy’s upcoming visit to Brazil, scheduled for November 1962, and how seriously to take warnings from both 15.
The Brazilians even suspected that Rusk was maneuvering to gain a hemispheric imprimatur for a subregional OAS military alliance of Central American and Caribbean countries which would lay the groundwork for a military strike against Castro.
See also memoranda to Rusk from Bureau of Intelligence and Research Director Roger Hilsman, esp.
All quotations from Brazilian sources are my unofªcial translations from Portuguese.
Once Kennedy decided to reveal the discovery of the Soviet missiles and his plans to institute a “quarantine” around the island in his televised address on 22 October, the administration sought to win support throughout the hemisphere, beginning with a rapid vote at the OAS endorsing the blockade.
Given the recent strains, United States ofªcials were pleasantly surprised when Goulart initially expressed total support for Washington after he was informed by Gordon of the contents of Kennedy’s speech shortly before it was delivered.
To brief Goulart, Gordon had made the ªrst of what would be almost daily journeys during the crisis to the president’s ofªcial residence in Rio de Janeiro, the hilltop Palacio das Laranjeiras.
On hearing a rough translation (rendered into Portuguese with the aid of the newly-arrived Vernon Walters), Goulart appeared “visibly shocked” by the discovery of the Soviet missiles.
Gordon reported that Goulart went so far as to express surprise at the “mildness” of Kennedy’s announcement.
The Brazilian president suggested that “even stronger language” be included to condemn Soviet leaders (“who are always harshly threatening others”) and erroneously believed that a blockade against arms deliveries was already in place.
Goulart also expressed “intense” interest in seeing the intelligence photographs from aerial reconnaissance ºights over Cuba.
Given the strength of leftist opinion in Brazil, he argued, solid proof would be “critical” to his ability to back Washington ªrmly.
On 18 October, Kennedy had surmised that Brazil (along with Mexico, Chile, and “probably” Ecuador) would vote against an OAS resolution supporting a United States blockade of Cuba.
One of those phone calls came from Roberto Campos, the Brazilian ambassador to the United States, who had been trying to reach Goulart for hours.
In addition to attending a State Department brieªng for Latin American ambassadors on the discovery of the missiles and the plans to convene the OAS Council the next day to seek support for a “quarantine,” the Brazilian envoy had received a special summons to the White House to see Rusk, who was conferring with Kennedy.
Rusk gave Campos an urgent appeal of “major gravity,” in the president’s name, to deliver to Goulart, declaring that the crisis was a “vital question” for Washington and that a unanimous OAS endorsement of the blockade was crucial to hopes for forcing the removal of the missiles, which would not only threaten the United States but give Fidel Castro the “power of blackmail” over Latin America.
Rusk asked worriedly whether Brazilian opinion would grasp “the gravity of the prob22.
A less cordial U.S.-Brazilian encounter took place that same Monday evening between Celso Furtado, Goulart’s leftist planning minister, and United States Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon, who were in Mexico City to attend an inter-American development conference.
Learning of Kennedy’s speech, Dillon cut short his visit to return to Washington, but not before a courtesy call on Furtado that degenerated into a shouting match.
The United States record, by contrast, makes clear Dillon’s strong impression of Furtado’s obtuseness, parochialism, and anti-Americanism.
Filled with “extreme anguish and apprehension,” Campos had returned to the embassy and after several fruitless hours ªnally got the president on the line well after midnight, Rio time.
After hearing Campos’s account of the situation and Kennedy’s request, Goulart asked how great the danger of nuclear war would be if the Soviet Union tried to break the blockade.
Campos assured him that a Soviet attack was improbable in light of United States nuclear superiority.
More probable, he argued, was a “tactical retreat” and possible counterstrike in a theater in which the Kremlin enjoyed the strategic advantage, such as Berlin, Turkey, or Iran.
Consequently, they hoped the Kennedy administration would tone down the language and strictures of the proposals it was going to present the next day before the OAS in Washington.
The Brazilians also hoped that a provision might be included calling for UN inspectors to visit Cuba “to verify existence or non-existence of offensive build-up” prior to adopting the full complement of sanctions in addition to the “quarantine” that the United States desired.
Unbeknownst to Gordon , Brazil itself moved quickly to seek a solution along these lines.
A positive answer from Havana, the Brazilians hoped, would provide them (and the Mexicans, their long-time collaborators in resisting tough United States actions against Cuba) with ammunition to resist an OAS call for military action or other extreme measures until an investigative mission could report its ªndings.
Hermes noted that when Cuba’s ambassador in Rio de Janeiro was asked point-blank by a senior Brazilian Foreign Ministry ofªcial whether missile bases existed in Cuba, the envoy responded negatively and agreed that UN inspections to verify their absence would be an “excellent” idea.
In a further hopeful sign, when Brazil’s UN delegate, former foreign minister Afonso Arinos, transmitted the idea of an investigatory commission to the Cuban representative, Mario García Incháustegui on the afternoon of the 23rd in an informal conversation before the Security Council met, the Cuban stressed that he lacked instructions but expressed a positive “personal” reaction if the establishment of a commission would force Washington to suspend its naval blockade of the island.
In a press conference two days later, on 25 October, the envoy reportedly asserted that “Cuba will permit a commission of UN or of any country whatever to visit its territory and prove there do not exist nuclear arms or much less platforms erected to destroy U.S.”—a statement whose “obvious inconsistency” with Havana’s ofªcial position United States ofªcials were at a loss to explain.
The senior BFM ofªcial, Carlos Bernardes, speculated that such statements had contributed to the Cuban diplomat’s arrest when he returned to the island in early November.
Hints of Brazil’s efforts to distance itself from Washington surfaced after the vote when the government issued a public statement that same night opposing any use of force that violated the territorial integrity of another country and jeopardized world peace.
Rumors also began to circulate suggesting—falsely, as the declassiªed Foreign Ministry instructions show30—that Penna Marinho had exceeded or violated ofªcial instructions by voting in support of the quarantine resolution.
Evidently García Incháustegui’s comments were unauthorized, contradicting the prevailing militant atmosphere in Havana, and such comments may have contributed to his replacement a week later by Carlos Lechuga.
POL.— CUBA—novembro a dezembro de 1962/” (hereinafter, “ANEXO Secreto—Cuba—Nov.–Dec.
In conversation with Bastian Pinto, Cuban Foreign Minister Raul Roa repeated the ºat denial of the presence of offensive weapons on the island as late as 25 October, statements which surely did not enhance Havana’s credibility in Rio.
The second telegram reafªrmed the ªrst’s instruction to vote in favor of the arms embargo but added that Penna Marinho should abstain on the second paragraph, authorizing the use of force, pending the results of the UN investigation Brazil backed.
This sentence was sanitized from one declassiªed version of this memorandum.
Goulart and Hermes privately expressed support and understanding for United States actions while publicly stressing the virtues of non-intervention and the desirability of ªnding a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
United States ofªcials were especially miffed by Goulart’s “fence-straddling” on the OAS vote, and they scorned his efforts to please all sides as not only unfortunate and misguided but also unnecessary, given that Brazilian public opinion and news media “overwhelmingly” backed Washington.
By Thursday, 25 October, Goulart had decided to take a more direct role in the crisis.
One step involved a secret letter to Kennedy, ostensibly in response to the United States president’s appeal to him (and other Latin American leaders) for support in responding to the Soviet missile deployments.
Much to the irritation of Kennedy and his advisers, the Brazilian president expressed considerable ambivalence about the quarantine.
Goulart underscored the need to avoid nuclear conºict and to refrain from violating national sovereignty and 33.
He seemed to chide Kennedy for taking ªrm action—a sharp departure from his comments to Gordon on the night of Kennedy’s 22 October speech.
The letter implored Kennedy to eschew military measures against Cuba that might aggravate the situation.
After enumerating a few speciªc examples of what, in his view, were OAS actions against Cuba that contradicted the organization’s purposes, he warned that such a tendency would alienate Latin American public opinion.
Goulart closed the letter by alluding to the news he had received earlier in the day that Kennedy intended to cancel his planned return trip to Brazil the following month, supposedly because of his need to stay in Washington to deal with the Cuban situation.
The Brazilian leader wistfully observed that he had hoped to develop these considerations personally to the American president “during happy occasion of your visit to Brazil.
Whatever the intention may have been, Goulart’s letter must have con36.
Hilsman also sensed Goulart’s pique at Kennedy’s postponement of the trip.
Hilsman also believed that Goulart, prodded by his “more extreme advisers,” was seeking to ensure left-wing and ultranationalist backing for an anticipated January 1963 plebiscite to return to a presidential system.
In addition, the Brazilian president, Hilsman wrote, wanted to inoculate himself from domestic condemnation for uncritically supporting Washington in the event of military action against Cuba, a step that would spur mass protests in Brazil.
Conversely, Goulart wanted to deºect criticism if Kennedy eventually backed down and accepted the missiles, suffering a hemispheric loss in prestige.
The CIA reached that conclusion by the early morning of 25 October when it reported to the Excomm the interception of a message to the Brazilian ambassador in Havana (evidently the appeal from two days earlier described above) “suggest Goulart hopes UN inspection of Cuba would afford an acceptable compromise” to end the crisis.
In another diplomatic initiative, Brazil’s UN representatives began to 38.
It represented a possible means of extricating the United States from the immediate crisis, and it would advance a concept that had already garnered wide support in the international community, particularly in the nonaligned movement with which Brazil was trying to develop closer relations.
The proposal also dovetailed well with the idea of somehow “neutralizing” Cuba and shielding it from the Cold War—an objective that Goulart knew would be popular in Brazil—and, if successful, would elevate Brazil’s international standing.
According to Brazilian documents, one reason for Goulart’s optimism in putting forward the proposal was a hint of support from Moscow.
One of Khrushchev’s top aides, Frol Kozlov, had endorsed the concept in a lunch with the Brazilian ambassador, Vasco Leitão da Cunha, who had formerly been the envoy to Cuba.
He pointed out that in the event of a Security Council veto, Brazil could “lead the pro-denuclearization movement, certainly [including] all of Latin America and the neutralist world” (with the possible exception of Egypt given Gamel Abd al-Nasser’s nuclear program), in the General Assembly.
According to the minutes of the 26 October Excomm meeting, the Brazilian UN representative ªrst made the proposal in a speech to the UN General Assembly on 20 September 1962, and it was subsequently submitted to the First Committee as draft resolution A/C.1/L/312.
He began circulating it, in the guise of a “suggestion,” to US, Soviet, and other diplomats.
Normally, Washington had rejected proposals for a nuclear weapons–free zone in Europe (an idea put forth most prominently in Polish Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki’s eponymous plan in the late 1950s), but Rusk now showed a degree of enthusiasm in presenting what he called this “very interesting possibility” to the Excomm on Thursday morning, 25 October.
Kennedy, for his part, seemed less impressed and merely asked a few clarifying questions before curtly moving on to other business .46 Even before United States ofªcials learned of Goulart’s new diplomatic ventures, they were already reconsidering the possibility of a direct approach to Castro to see whether he might be willing to expel the Soviet troops and their missiles in exchange for a United States non-invasion pledge and Cuba’s reentry into hemispheric organizations.
Point out to him that just as the Soviets lied to us, they lied to the Cuban people; they are not going to bail him out.
There is only one course open to him—to expel the Soviets and their weapons, and make his peace with the OAS under their terms.
The message, they believed, would exploit what was presumed to be the Cubans’ “growing awareness” of Latin American opposition to the missile installation and the Soviet Union’s unwillingness to risk war on Havana’s behalf.
The ofªcials recommended that the message even imply, or perhaps state directly, that the United States would be willing to help Castro evacuate Soviet military forces or overcome resistance by them or by old-line Communists who would oppose any sudden rapprochement with Washington.
The paper noted that “if the Castro Government considers that it has no freedom to act because of the presence of Soviet technicians, we would be prepared to undertake to deal with this problem.
We would have to give some assurances, regardless of whether we intended to 50.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the relationship between our quarantine and Soviet-Cuban relations.
The Cubans, who would not be able to survive in political isolation, must henceforth rely entirely on the Soviets.
He suggested that we might ask the Brazilian Ambassador in Havana to tell Castro that there was little for Cuba in being tied permanently to the Soviet Union.
An appeal might be made to Castro to step aside so that a new government might break this complete dependence from here on out on the Soviet Union.
Brazil sees itself as a peacemaker in the Cuban situation, proposing that the UN undertake denuclearization of Latin America.
Rio feels this would permit Cuba and the Soviet Union to save face, thus diminishing the danger of direct confrontation.
The Brazilian Ambassador in Washington cabled his foreign ministry that “according to reports” USSR Deputy Foreign Minister Frol Kozlov supported this idea.
State Department ofªcials supported the Brazilian denuclearization plan at the UN, but it drew mixed reviews, especially from the military, during an extended discussion in the Excomm on the morning of the 26th.
Unfortunately, no transcript of Rusk’s comments exists, because Kennedy did not turn on the taping system until he later entered the room.
They also worried that if the zone were extended to Africa, it would provoke French opposition in light of Paris’s nuclear-testing facilities in the Sahara.
Rusk conceded that the proposal might “hinder the transit by air of nuclear weapons in Latin America” and bar the storage of nuclear warheads in the Canal Zone, but he suggested that Puerto Rico might be exempted and that, if necessary, the United States could allow the French to test their nuclear weapons at American facilities if a deal for a nuclear weapons–free zone encompassed Africa as well as Latin America.
Rusk argued that, despite these problems, it would be “wise” to back the Brazilian plan because a nuclear weapons–free zone represented a “face-saving” means for Moscow to withdraw the missiles.
If Moscow refused to accept the proposal, its rejection would be on the record before Washington resorted to military action against Cuba.
Presidential speechwriter Theodore Sorensen also expressed interest, noting that an endorsement of the plan by the OAS would legitimate U.S. military action to destroy the missiles if Cuba refused to go along.
The crisis had raised the basic issue of whether the United States was willing, in the ªnal analysis, to live with the Castro regime—a concession that the president and others in his administration remained loath to make.
Although scholars have disputed whether Kennedy was in fact moving toward some form of military action against Cuba even before the discovery of the missiles in mid-October,58 there is no question that the administration had been stepping up the “Mongoose” sabotage operations.
As recently as late September, Rusk had told Latin American foreign ministers that although the United States did not inherently object to Cuba’s internal social and economic system, Castro’s ties with Moscow 56.
The foregoing discussion of the Brazilian denuclearization plan’s military implications was deleted from the minutes when they were declassiªed in 1988.
Excomm transcript, 26 October 1962, 10m., in May and Zelikow, eds., Kennedy Tapes, 456.
The implication was that a “guarantee” for Cuba would be a reasonable concession if it brought the removal of the missiles without a war.
Rusk readily assented, noting that in the absence of some violent provocation the United States, as a signatory of the 1947 Rio Treaty as well as the UN Charter, was already formally bound to respect Cuba’s territorial integrity.
At that point, having noted a legal obstacle to a potential invasion of Cuba, Rusk raised anew the option of a direct diplomatic approach to Castro.
He gave Kennedy a draft cable he proposed to send to Gordon in Rio de Janeiro for transmission to Havana via the Brazilians.
If Castro broke with his Soviet allies (who were betraying him and endangering the revolution in any case), evicted their missiles, and disavowed the promotion of revolution in Latin America, the United States would abandon its plans to attack Cuba and would consider “many changes” in its policy toward Havana, implicitly meaning an acceptance of the continuation of socialist rule on the island and the dropping of the United States economic embargo and anti-Castro diplomatic campaign.
The world now knows without any question and in great detail the nature and size of the buildup of Soviet offensive missile capability in Cuba.
The action of the Soviet Union in using Cuban soil as sites for offensive nuclear missiles capable of striking most of the Western Hemisphere has placed the future of the Castro regime and the well-being of the Cuban people in great jeopardy.
The Soviet Union is turning around its cargo ships in face of the United States blockade which the countries of the hemisphere have authorized.
Not only is the Soviet Union failing to support Cuba on this matter, but numerous feelers have been put out by high Soviet ofªcials to allied governments for exchanges of their position in Cuba for concessions by the NATO countries in other parts of the world.
Thus you are not only being used for purposes of no interest to any Cuban, but deserted and threatened by betrayal.
It is also well known that work is proceeding rapidly to complete and make operational the offensive nuclear missile installations and to assemble the IL-28 bombers.
The threatened countries clearly cannot sit still while the threat against them is being increased in this fashion.
Castro might recall that President Kennedy has said publicly that only two issues were nonnegotiable between Castro and the U.S.—the military-political ties to the U.S.S.R. and the aggressive attitude toward the internal affairs of other Latin American countries.
This view will be shared by other members of the Inter-American system.
Of course this means giving up the offensive nuclear capability being established in Cuba and sending home Soviet military personnel, on which help can certainly be given if needed.
From such actions many changes in the relations between Cuba and the OAS countries, including the U.S., could ºow.
Time is very short for Cuba and for Castro to decide whether to devote his great leadership abilities to the service of his Cuban people or to serving as a Soviet pawn in their desperately risky struggle for world domination by force and threat of force.
If Castro tries to rationalize the presence of these missiles as due to Cuban fear of a United States invasion, Ambassador Batian should reply that he is conªdent that the OAS would not accept an invasion of Cuba once the missiles were removed and that the United States would not risk upsetting Hemispheric solidarity by invading a Cuba so clearly committed to a peaceful course.
Rusk responded, rather lamely, that it would be the Brazilians saying it, not the Americans.
Before the president could render a ªnal judgment, the proposal for a deal with Castro provoked a reprise of Rusk’s argument with CIA Director McCone the previous spring and again at the Special Group in August.
Long before these missiles were there, his link with the Soviet Union and the use of Cuba as a base for operations to communize all of Latin America was a matter of great concern to us.
The missiles aren’t there, but still this situation that has worried us so much for the last two or three years goes on.
McCone said that although it was important “to get rid of these missiles,” it was equally important “to have the Cuban people take over Cuba, and take it away from Castro.
The draft is unsigned, but a subsequent cable indicates it was drafted by Edwin M Martin.
Robert Kennedy wondered whether the United States would still be free to act against Cuba if Castro continued to send weapons to Venezuela or Colombia or if an uprising erupted on the island.
National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy and Kennedy himself cut the talk short and resolved the argument in Rusk’s favor.
The “very simple, basic structural purpose of this whole enterprise,” said Bundy, “is to get these missiles out.
Kennedy gave his approval, and at 2m. on 26 October the State Department, over Rusk’s name, transmitted the eight-point message to the U.S. embassy in Rio de Janeiro.
The cable explained that the president had concluded that “the time has come for representative of a friendly county to discuss with Castro alone RPT alone predicament in which Soviet actions have placed him,” and that Bastian Pinto seemed the best candidate for the job.
The cable instructed Gordon to stress to the Brazilians that they must handle the matter with the “greatest discretion” and that American ªngerprints on the initiative must be assiduously concealed.
Because Rusk eviexpressed his dislike of a situation involving continued control of Cuba by Castro.
For the moment, however, the secret overture to Castro was held in abeyance.
Although Rusk’s cable had instructed Gordon to pass the message to Prime Minister Hermes “as soon as possible” for transmittal to Havana, the United States envoy, for reasons that remain unclear, did not act on these instructions immediately after they reached him in the early evening of the 26th.
One possible reason for the delay was that Rusk that afternoon had been presented with a new option for a potential diplomatic channel to communicate directly with Castro, this one involving Canada.
The Canadian ambassador in Washington, Charles Ritchie, saw Rusk at 3:30 on Friday afternoon and informed him that on Thursday Cuba’s envoy to Canada had called on Foreign Minister Howard Green to declare Havana’s readiness to “ªght to death” if the Americans invaded.
In interviews, Gordon had no explanation for the delay in acting on the cable.
Lincoln Gordon, interviews, Washington, DC, 5 February 1998; and 16 January 2003.
This Canadian-Cuban episode is brieºy noted in Martin, Kennedy and Latin America, 431.
Moreover, he suggested that there “might be some advantage” in asking the Canadian ambassador in Havana to “probe the actual Cuban position,” especially if he were able to see Castro alone, perhaps during a social occasion.
Even though many United States ofªcials were annoyed at Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker for what they regarded as his grudging and halfhearted backing during the missile crisis, they apparently trusted Ottawa more than Rio de Janeiro on matters pertaining to Cuba.
As a reminder of the lingering suspicion about the Brazilian government’s inclination toward neutralism, Rusk’s cable to Gordon on Friday afternoon containing the secret message for Castro had crossed paths with a message from Gordon to Washington reporting on a conversation the previous day with San Tiago Dantas, the former foreign minister, who had “apparently regained his position as 73.
Ambassador Gordon noted that Dantas basically was returning to his “favorite theme”—an idea he had pushed at the Punta del Este conference the previous January—of “some form neutralization” of Cuba.
Under this scenario, Havana would drastically cut its armed forces and eliminate the corresponding weapons, and it would stop its subversive activities in Latin America (training guerrillas, exporting funds, broadcasting denunciations of other governments) in exchange for a formal non-invasion pledge from the rest of the hemisphere, above all the United States.
My guess is that, like Nehru, Dantas is living in dream world of own creation.
At same time, might be very useful to have GOB effort to seek such terms, which would certainly be great improvement over situation of last 12 months if accepted, while if rejected—as likely—would help educate GOB through process of frustration.
The Cuban delegate to the UN, García-Inchaustegui, informed his Soviet colleague, Valerii Zorin, that the plan had achieved “great currency” among Latin American countries, which were planning to present it to the acting UN Secretary General, U Thant.
The Brazilian envoy, Arinos, told his Cuban counterpart that the plan also represented a way for Havana to “avoid humiliation” if it were forced to give up the missile bases, but García-Inchaustegui retorted that the scheme should cover all foreign military bases, including the United States base at Guantánamo, not just nuclear weapons.
But Gordon warned Dantas that any Communist attempt to include Guantánamo would scotch the deal, and the Brazilian 74.
The KGB was telling the Soviet Presidium that the United States had rejected the idea,77 whereas Brazil’s delegate at the OAS in Washington was reporting optimistically that both United States and Soviet ofªcials were showing positive interest in the denuclearization plan as a possible way out of the crisis.
The optimism expressed by the Brazilian representative was not shared back in Rio de Janeiro.
Earlier that day, the Brazilian government had received a “quite grave forecast of the current situation” from its envoy in Washington, who warned that the crisis might soon escalate dangerously.
Ambassador Campos said that although the blockade so far had been successful in preventing further shipments of offensive arms to Cuba without resort to violence, the United States government was “gradually preparing the ground” to achieve its second aim, namely, the removal of the missile bases.
He predicted that Washington would soon issue a clear ultimatum to stop work on the installations, and, if the Soviet Union failed to heed the warning, the United States military would either bomb the sites, expand the blockade, or launch an outright invasion, sparking an unpredictable Soviet reaction.
It was even possible, he speculated, that Moscow was deliberately continuing work on the missile bases to goad the United States into an attack, an action that would give Moscow the political upper hand for action elsewhere.
Although the cable gave no precise timetable, Campos also apparently relayed to Goulart a report that the United States government had decided to take military action unless work on the missiles in Cuba halted within the next two days.
KGB ciphered telegram #30877/813 from Washington, 26 October 1962, made available by Timothy Naftali for CWIHP conference on intelligence and the Cuban missile crisis, Woodrow Wilson Center, Washington, DC, 5–7 September 1997.
Goulart alluded to this “rumor” from Campos—”that United States had given 48 hour ultimatum to Cuba to stop base construction under pain military action”—in a conversation with Gordon on Satur33 Hershberg Together with other ominous signs, Campos’s alarming cable prodded Goulart and his aides into further action.
In case to the contrary works will be suspended there would be a propitious climate for conversations of high level to follow for the Secretary General of the United Nations.
Your Excellency should immediately action Government appealing for the suspension of works on the launch platforms and assuring that this in our view is the only manner to block the opening of hostilities.
In the conversations of the leadership we will use all our inºuence the American Government the integrity and the political institutions of Cuba will be respected.
As the Brazilian Foreign Ministry dispatched this message to Havana, the Brazilian ambassador there was reporting that low-level United States reconnaissance overºights were fanning Cuban fears of a United States military assault at any moment.
Bastian Pinto urged the Brazilian leadership, in parallel with actions being taken by Yugoslavia, to contact Castro to urge a peaceful resolution to the crisis. day morning, 27 October.
In his own report of the conversation with Dorticós, which appears essentially consistent with what he told Bastian Pinto, the Yugoslav ambassador quoted the Cuban president as expecting an “inevitable” United States attack, probably that evening, and expressing an apparent readiness for previously unacceptable concessions so long as Cuba’s security were safeguarded by international guarantee.
The envoy’s cable does not cite Dorticós as having explicitly referred to neutralization as one of those potential concessions but states that the “very upset” president had said that Havana was “ready for everything”—including, the envoy inferred, “many things that were out of discussion in the near past”—so long as its security were guaranteed.
Rushing to the presidential palace Friday evening, the envoy presented the warning to Dorticós.
Castro urged the Soviet leader to use any means, including nuclear weapons, to respond to a United States attack.
Khrushchev later said that this missive from the “young and hot-headed . . . very hot-tempered” Cuban leader convinced him to take the steps needed to defuse the missile crisis before it spun out of control.
For obtaining this and other former Yugoslav Foreign Ministry records on Cuba, I thank Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimib.
A revolução Cubana e a América Latina (Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1998), 464.
By the evening of the 27th, Kennedy was growing desperate to ªnd a political solution.
Although Kennedy had vetoed a retaliatory strike against the SAM site that brought down the aircraft, the action struck some United States ofªcials as a sign that Moscow had decided to risk escalation.
Meanwhile, a hardline public letter from Khrushchev had arrived proposing a trade of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba—a proposition Washington publicly rejected as an unacceptable concession to blackmail.
As United States military forces massed in the southeastern United States and in the Caribbean around Cuba, and as aerial reconnaissance photographs indicated that construction work on the missile sites was accelerating, pressure mounted on Kennedy, especially from the JCS, to order an invasion.
Day-long discussions within the Excomm yielded a decision by Kennedy to send Khrushchev a letter that ignored the demand for a swap for the Jupiters in Turkey and agreed to a deal in which the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. non-invasion pledge.
The letter purported to embrace the terms of the lengthy message Khrushchev had sent to Kennedy late on 26 October, but the United States president and his advisers, well aware that the Soviet leader had only implied such an ar86.
Brazilian ofªcials suspected that the “delays in the delivery to Embassy of our messages, of vital importance at this moment, are deliberate,” and instructed Bastian Pinto to make an “energetic protest” to the telegraph company.
At this key moment—a moment of profound concern, anxiety, even dread—the president was ready to consider almost any gamble, no matter how implausible, that might provide an alternative to war.
Outside the Excomm’s awareness, it appears, Kennedy authorized three separate secret diplomatic initiatives that evening in a last-ditch effort to secure a political resolution to the crisis.
One of these overtures—Robert Kennedy’s meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin—has been generally known since shortly after the crisis, although fresh evidence from Russian archives has added important details.
On the one hand, Robert Kennedy warned Dobrynin that his brother was under rapidly growing pressure to authorize a military strike; on the other hand, Kennedy provided a secret oral assurance that the United States would take out the Jupiters from Turkey within four to ªve months if Khrushchev withdrew the offending Soviet missiles from Cuba.
A second secret overture to Moscow at the height of the crisis was not revealed until 1987, when Rusk recounted it in a letter to the organizers of a scholarly conference on the crisis.
The proposal urged U Thant to issue, in his own name, an appeal to Washington and Moscow calling on them, in the interests of peace, to remove their respective nuclear missiles from Turkey and Cuba.
This appeal would allow Kennedy to, in effect, accept his own proposal, but would sugarcoat the concession of a simultaneous public swap by having it appear to come from the international body.
The Albino Mission The third secret overture has been unknown until now.
At approximately 9:45m., Rio time, on 27 October, Assistant Secretary Martin telephoned 88.
Gordon then summarized the message to be passed to Castro, “emphasizing that talk must be with Fidel alone” and that the “instructions must go by courier direct to Bastian Pinto” in Havana.
He then gave Hermes the Portuguese translation of the eight-point message, which the embassy had “typed on plain paper” to conceal its origin.
After almost three years of ambivalent and even hostile United States reactions to Brazilian efforts to mediate between Washington and Havana, Gordon’s urgent midnight request to intercede with Castro was a striking departure for American foreign policy—and an equally dramatic opportunity for Brazil’s standing in the world.
Hermes naturally welcomed the opportunity to play this potentially crucial role at the height of the most acute international crisis in many years—a role that would please both the United States and friends of Castro who wished to safeguard Cuban sovereignty and security.
Successful mediation also would showcase Brazil’s “independent” posture.
After hearing Gordon’s proposition, Hermes ªrst noted that his government had already been acting intensively to prod the Cuban leadership to moderate its position.
He said he had promised the Cubans that if they agreed to remove the missile bases under UN inspection, Brazil would defend Cuba’s right to be secure against United States intervention.
Hermes informed Gordon that a few hours ago he had received from Bastian Pinto a cable indicating that Roa had conªded that the Brazilian government’s warnings and urgings had “heavily inºuenced” Havana’s decision earlier in the day to invite U Thant to Cuba to discuss the crisis.
That same day, in another sign of Brazilian diplomatic activism, Goulart had told Gordon he was considering sending Dantas to the UN to bolster Arinos’s efforts.
Warily, the United States envoy “pointed out certain essential differences, notably effort to appeal personally to Fidel to divorce himself from Soviet control, referring to our previous talks with Dantas and to evidence some months back of friction between Fidel and Russians”—a clear reference to the abortive attempt in April to capitalize on signs of a presumed split between Castro’s supporters and old-line Communists in the leadership.
Hermes responded that he understd fully, remarking that position like Tito’s was far better for Fidel than that of János Kádár or Grotewohl, and that if Fidel had any statesmanship he would be most interested. aid that Lenin in similar circumstances would remove Soviet bases and Russian military personnel forthwith.
However, the only cable from Bastian Pinto that Saturday evening located in the Brasília archives contains no such comment by Roa.
Gordon was concerned about the danger of leaks and was acutely aware of the political sensitivities at home.
Although Khrushchev’s agreement on Sunday morning to remove the missiles from Cuba under UN supervision alleviated the immediate crisis, the situation remained tense, and the secret Brazilian mediation effort went forward.
That afternoon, a furious Fidel Castro, who was outraged at Moscow for what he regarded as an ignominious retreat under United States pressure and who was even more upset that Khrushchev had agreed to take out the missiles under UN inspection without consulting or even informing Cuba, publicly issued a series of non-negotiable demands.
These “ªve points” would have required the United States to end its blockade of Cuba, to lift economic sanctions, to cease all reconnaissance ºights, to halt subversive activities and “piratical raids” being staged from United States territory , and, ªnally, to withdraw from and return to Cuba the Guantánamo Bay naval base occupied for more than half a century.
Referring “at length to the important and sympathetic role of Brazil in the present crisis,” Roa welcomed the proposed visit of Goulart’s special emis95.
The handful of United States ofªcials who had been informed of the covert diplomatic initiative anxiously awaited the outcome.
By Monday afternoon, however, even before any report of the conversation with Castro came in, Gordon received what he considered a disturbing indication that the Brazilians were not properly handling the overture.
Upon arriving at the Laranjeiras palace, the ambassador found Goulart in a celebratory mood.
Such warmly supportive comments from a leader whom Washington found increasingly mercurial and unreliable naturally gratiªed Gordon.
But he was less pleased when Goulart informed him that Albino (whom United States ofªcials regarded as “leftist” and “anti-American”100), rather than Bastian Pinto, would be having the conversation with Castro.
Excomm transcript, 29 October 1962, 10:10m., in May and Zelikow, eds., Kennedy Tapes, p.8.
As it is we can only hope for results,” which Goulart promised to report to the American “promptly” on Wednesday morning once Albino returned from Cuba.
After the meeting with Goulart, however, Gordon’s patience with the Brazilian president, and his conªdence in the Brazilians’ ability to serve as mediators for such a delicate initiative, dropped precipitously.
Former foreign minister Dantas called publicly for safeguards of Cuba’s security and sovereignty if Havana would abjure subversion in the 101.
Hermes briefed seven parliamentary parties on the government’s diplomatic approach to the Cuban situation.
After the Flower Garden ceremony, Campos writes in his memoirs, Kennedy summoned him into his private study and asked how Brazilian public opinion was reacting to the crisis.
Kennedy laughed heartily, Campos recalled, and asked one of his assistants to jot down this all-too-apt bon mot.6 However, another exchange, which Campos immediately recounted in a cable to Hermes but did not later mention in his memoirs, provoked less amusement.
Multiple accounts of the conversation that ensued have now surfaced—from U.S., Brazilian, Russian, and even Yugoslav sources.
Following the talk, which lasted more than an hour, Goulart’s envoy sent a cable to Brazil containing a terse account now available from the Foreign Ministry archives in Brasília.
Albino’s telegram is consistent with, but far less detailed than, the version given by Hermes to Gordon in Rio de Janeiro two days later quoting from his own “full notes” of a sealed letter from Albino to Goulart reporting on the conversation.
Gordon immediately relayed this account to Washington,112 and two weeks later he was shown Albino’s original fourteen-page handwritten text.
Another, far terser account was given by Castro to the Soviet ambassador in Havana, Aleksandr Alekseev, who relayed it to Moscow on 31 October in a telegram that has since been released by the Russian Foreign Ministry archive.
Mysteriously, Alekseev’s cable reports that Castro had identiªed “da Cunha, a Brazilian general,” as the one who relayed the personal message from Goulart.
Unfortunately, a summer 2000 trip to the Brazilian archives failed to settle the matter deªnitively.
But there also appeared to be a gap from 29 October to 5 November in his dispatches from Moscow—conceivably time enough, if barely, to undertake an urgent secret mission to Cuba to assist the Brazilian mediation effort.
In meetings with U Thant (who arrived in Havana the next morning on a Brazilian plane), Castro was “in a bitter mood” and angrily denounced proposals for international inspections of the dismantling of the Soviet nuclear missile installations as violations of Cuba’s sovereignty.
In Havana, on 30 October, U Thant saw Albino Silva and Bastian Pinto in addition to other foreign diplomats.
As he and Hermes conversed in Rio de Janeiro, Albino, who apparently did not have any further meetings with Castro, was being seen off at Havana airport by Foreign Minister Roa.
In a message for transmittal to Goulart (similar to one being sent to the leaders of nonaligned countries), Roa sought Brazil’s support in the UN for Castro’s ªve points, including the deal-breaking Guantánamo demand, as a basis for any negotiations to resolve the crisis.2 The Brazilians’ accounts given to the Yugoslav ambassador generally accord with that relayed by Hermes to Gordon, but they offer additional insights.
According to the Yugoslav documents, Albino had urged Castro to follow the example of Yugoslavia and non-alignment as the only plausible escape from Cuba’s predicament.
Albino insisted that despite taking a tough stand on Guantánamo and inspection, Castro had been “very honest to him and grateful” for Brazil’s initiative.
The general predicted that his mission would succeed in persuading Castro to adopt Brazil’s suggestions.
However, under Goulart’s leadership, dependent as he is upon leftist and ultranationalist advisers, these policies might well carry Brazil toward an aggressively neutralist role in internationalist affairs and in the hemisphere.9 The British ambassador to Brazil, Sir Geoffrey Wallinger, also linked the two Brazilian diplomatic initiatives.
In an allusion to Brazil’s diplomatic ambitions, Wallinger noted that a breakthrough with a “recalcitrant Castro” would remove the obstacle to a U.S.-Soviet settlement, help safeguard the Cuban leader’s own regime, and pave the way toward broader acceptance of Brazil’s scheme for the denuclearization of Latin America.
A breakthrough, he added, would also give a boost to the concept of inspections in general, thereby enabling Moscow and Washington to overcome one of the main stumbling blocks to a nuclear 127.
Wallinger stressed the role of internal Brazilian politics in the whole affair.
On 4 November, Gordon confronted Prime Minister Hermes about the Brazilian government’s handling of the missile crisis in general and the Albino mission in particular.
Wallinger reasonably but incorrectly inferred that Khrushchev’s 28 October agreement to withdraw Soviet missiles had “provided the opportunity they were seeking” to “take some more positive stand, without seeming to abandon their ‘independent’‘ foreign policy,” by dispatching the special mission to Havana.
I said our idea had been quiet confrontation of Castro by Ambassador Bastian Pinto, who was already acquainted with him, in effort to explore Castro reaction to clear statement of dangers and disadvantages of Cuban ties with USSR and possibility of better alternatives for them.
Instead, GOB had given maximum publicity to sending of special emissary, with newspaper stories about mediation of a type which could well add to Castro prestige and perhaps fortify his intransigence.
I pointed out that GOB had shared with us strong support of idea of UN inspection, but had not yet publicly criticized Castro’s refusal to accept it.
I also found boasting of Goulart and Albino about success of mission quite perplexing, only explainable as design to mislead Brazilian public opinion, since in fact mission seemed a failure.
Hermes’s awareness of United States displeasure helps explains why the day after this conversation he curtly vetoed a proposal by the Brazil’s OAS delegate to publicize the Albino mission, which he complained had “not had the desired repercussions” in Washington.
In response, Hermes expressed conªdence that all three issues could be resolved.
He said that Khrushchev’s emissary, Anastas Mikoyan, who had just arrived in Havana, would induce Castro to accept “some form international veriªcation,” if necessary by promising extra Soviet economic aid to Cuba.
Hermes claimed that inspection of Cuba could be accomplished through some multilateral scheme, either to monitor a non-invasion pledge or as part of the proposed Latin America denuclearization plan.
Hermes described the Albino mission “as only ªrst step in continuing diplomatic effort which he hoped we would support,” although he did not specify what the next steps might be.
My overall impression was that Hermes is ingenuous and not overly intelligent, ignorant Cold War realities, and unhappily trying reconcile recent events with romantic that Castro mere Socialist reformer who may have key to what Latin America needs.
As old-fashioned academic Socialist himself, ªnds it hard to believe that United States objection to Castro is not simply Capitalist aversion to Socialism.
Behind the scenes in early November, the Brazilians inspired an attempt by U Thant to promote a compromise inspection formula whereby ambassadors from neutral countries stationed in Havana—such as Brazil, Mexico, Switzerland, Sweden, India, and perhaps others—would serve on a commission to verify the dismantling and departure of the Soviet missiles.
Such a move, it was hoped, would circumvent the Cuban government’s adamant refusal to allow a formal UN inspection committee.
Arinos ªrst advanced the idea informally to Cuba’s new UN ambassador, Carlos Lechuga (who gave a cautiously positive response), and then suggested it to Thant on 6 November, letting him circulate the proposal as his own to enhance its prospects.
U Thant immediately did so, modifying it to suggest that ªve Latin American ambassadors carry out the inspection.
At an Excomm meeting on 7 November, Rusk called the idea “a help but it is not complete,” and sent instructions requesting that the plan be beefed up to include, among other provisions, technical support, full freedom of action for the envoys, and the requirement that the Cubans not learn that the United States had proposed these stricter terms.
Gordon softened his judgment of the Albino mission later in the month, after Goulart showed him Albino’s 14-page handwritten report of his conversation with Castro.
Albino had put “more relative emphasis” on accepting UN observers and “less on detaching from Soviets” than Washington might have preferred and in general had taken a “perhaps more cordial” tone than Bastian Pinto would have.
But he did present the “main points” of the United States secret démarche.
He mentioned that an effort was under way “to sell the idea of choosing any ªve Ambassadors,” but the results were not yet known.
Two days later it became clear that the follow-on effort had been unsuccessful.
On 14 November, in response to a message from U Thant on 12 November urging acceptance of inspections by a mixed delegation of Third World ambassadors, Castro rejected any unilateral inspection as an intolerable infringement of Cuba’s sovereignty.
Khrushchev himself had had “no objections” to the use of neutral ambassadors as inspectors “because we had no doubt about their good will toward Cuba,” but, to Khrushchev’s annoyance, Castro vetoed the idea.
The issue was soon superseded, in any case, by the U.S.-Soviet arrangement to have the departure of the missiles monitored by United States surveillance planes.
Brazil labored far more aggressively to push its other diplomatic endeavor at the UN, the Latin American denuclearization plan, which, Brazilian leaders claimed, could allow the Soviet missiles to be removed and an inspection regime to be set up that would prevent reintroduction of the weapons.
Despite the Kennedy administration’s disappointment with Brazil’s handling of the mediation mission to Havana, United States ofªcials gave a cautiously positive response to the denuclearization effort, especially after the draft resolution was modiªed to take account of United States concerns such as the transit of nuclear weapons through the Panama Canal.
The Kennedy administration even decided to rely on Brazil to assess Cuba’s reaction to the proposal.
Rusk said that this should be done even before all the details of the proposal were worked out, adding, in an echo of the United States role in the Albino gambit, that the “Brazilians should un140.
Not surprisingly, the Poles expressed strong private support to the Brazilians for raising a concept similar to the Rapacki Plan (and for attempting mediation, though warning that Castro’s “rigidity” constituted the main obstacle).146 As before, however, Havana derailed the plan.
In a speech on 29 October the Cuban delegate at the UN declared that Cuba was “very much in favor” of the “very correct” idea of “denuclearized or atom-free” zones, but he insisted that the concept should cover the entire planet.
Despite this problem, Bastian Pinto sounded an optimistic note after a conversation with Cuban Foreign Minister Roa on 9 November.
Bastian Pinto said that Roa had even “clearly insinuated” a willingness to drop the Guantánamo demand.
Kennedy was referring here to Soviet concerns about U.S. nuclear bases in Turkey and elsewhere along its own periphery as well as to the ongoing negotiations aimed at a veriªable nuclear test ban.9 144.
The amendments not only included the extension of the scheme to Puerto Rico and the Panama Canal Zone but also required the elimination of all military bases in Latin America, a demand that “evidently” covered Guantánamo.
Although Roa instructed Lechuga to use “genteel and explanatory arguments and language” when informing Brazil, the tone could not disguise the signiªcance of the Cuban reservations.
On 14 November, the day before Kennedy wrote to Khrushchev endorsing the Brazilian plan, Roa presented the fatal amendments to Bastian Pinto.
Despite “extending s goodwill” to the denuclearization concept, he listed all the revisions demanded by Cuba, essentially rendering the proposal a dead letter.
Bastian Pinto found it difªcult to comprehend why Castro repeatedly, if politely, spurned Brazil’s appeals and suggestions.
Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges (Washington: Government Printing Ofªce, 1996), 215.
For the text of the Brazilian proposal (a revision of a text originally submitted in September), see Draft UN Resolution A/C.1/L.312.
Quotations from this and all other Cuban documents, unless otherwise noted, are the present author’s unofªcial translations from the original Spanish.
Khrushchev, who had been receiving daily reports from Ambassador Alekseev in Havana, made no mention of the Brazilian idea when responding to Kennedy on 20 November.
That same day, Roa sent a cable to Lechuga at the UN instructing him to coordinate with the Soviet delegation regarding the Brazilian proposal.
The foreign minister once again stressed that Lechuga must “insist with Arinos on the inclusion of our points of view,” including the amendments that were unacceptable to Washington.
He saw the concept of a denuclearized Latin America as a means to ensure against a repetition of the missile crisis.
When Mikoyan passed through Washington at the end of November on his way back to Moscow from Cuba, Rusk prodded him to reconsider the idea.
The reference to the tactical nuclear weapons is blacked out in the facsimile of the Cuban document.
However, the Cubans provided a copy to the Soviet delegation, which immediately transmitted it to Moscow.
A Russian translation of the document was among the items contributed by Sergo Mikoyan for scholarly use at the October 2002 missile crisis conference in Havana.
My thanks to Svetlana Savranskaya for locating and translating the document.
This decision scuttled the proposal, and the Soviet Union and its East European allies quickly followed suit.
United States ofªcials similarly informed the Brazilians that they, too, would have to abstain given Havana’s refusal to go along.
Reluctantly, Brazil formally withdrew the resolution in mid-December without a vote, although Washington blamed Havana, not Rio de Janeiro, for its demise.
U.S.-Brazilian Ties after the Crisis By the time the denuclearization proposal was retracted, U.S-Brazilian ties had deteriorated sharply compared to the brief high point during the missile crisis.
The Kennedy administration began, more seriously than before, to consider supporting a military coup, especially after a series of alarming cables from Gordon sparked concern that Goulart was ºirting with an economic, political, and even military 159.
First, as Michael Weis notes, “the crisis reduced Kennedy’s obsession with the island and increased the importance of relations with Brazil.
On 11 December, the Excomm, which was originally formed to handle the missile crisis, reviewed policy toward Brazil and decided “to seek to change the political and economic orientation” of Goulart’s government.
The president had relied on Robert Kennedy many times over the past two years when sensitive questions arose about Cuba, such as the intensiªcation of Mongoose and the back-channel diplomacy with Dobrynin during the missile crisis.
After hurriedly making arrangements, the younger Kennedy ºew to Brasília and met Goulart at the Palacio de la Alvorada on 17 December.
The three-hour conversation merely reinforced the United States administration’s growing belief in the futility of collaborating with Goulart.
Robert Kennedy came away convinced that Goulart was a “Brazilian Jimmy Hoffa” who would hand Brazil over to Communism unless stopped—an impression that he undoubtedly conveyed to President 168.
United States ofªcials were heartened by Goulart’s overthrow, and, as Rusk told Gordon, they were not going to let themselves “be paralyzed by theoretical niceties” if forced to choose between a military takeover and a Communist-dominated government.6 Although Brazil’s various attempts to pursue an “independent” foreign policy were not the only reason for the growing antagonism between Washington and Rio de Janeiro, United States ofªcials soon came to believe that Goulart was espousing a form of neutralism that bordered on appeasement of Communism and the Soviet bloc.
When Brazil repeatedly tested the limits of U.S. tolerance—for example, by siding at least tentatively with the nonaligned movement , by establishing economic and political ties with the Eastern bloc, and by playing a more prominent diplomatic role on high-proªle international issues such as disarmament—the Kennedy administration became increasingly worried about a country that it considered a vital ally in its own sphere of inºuence.
This was true in large measure because as far back as late 1959 United States ofªcials had concluded that it would be impossible to live with Fidel Castro’s regime and were intent on getting rid of the Communist government in Cuba rather than reaching an accommodation.
That was the case in 1960, when Eisenhower and his administration politely turned down Brazil’s repeated offers of mediation and “good ofªces” to help resolve the U.S.-Cuban dispute.
It remained so during the ªrst year of the Kennedy administration in 1961, when Brazil’s attempt to devise a “Finlandization” neutrality formula for Cuba, its good-ofªces gambit alongside Mexico and Ecuador, and then its brokering of the conversation between Che Guevara and Richard Goodwin, all led nowhere.
The same position apparently still held in the spring of 1962, when Rusk, despite having cautiously given a green light to Dantas to ªnd out whether Castro would be willing to split with Moscow in exchange for being welcomed back into the hemisphere’s good graces, was still inclined to seek Castro’s “disposal” afterward—an outcome that, if achieved, would have double-crossed both Castro and the Brazilian government.
Only under profound duress, at the height of the Cuban missile crisis, did the Kennedy administration genuinely embrace Brazil’s readiness to serve as a channel to Castro.
The Albino mission to Havana at the height of the crisis constituted a minor mystery at the time.
Even within the United States government, some senior ofªcials were puzzled.
Even though changes in the situation and Brazil’s handling of the mission did mean that the message was not conveyed precisely as Washington had intended, the basic proposal unquestionably was implemented.
The historiography of the Cuban missile crisis has been equally misleading in its references to Brazil.
Contrary to the implications of assertions in 1997 and 2001 by Ernest May and Philip Zelikow that the United States plan on 27 October for Brazilian mediation was “overtaken by the events” of the 179.
De martí a Fidel, the most detailed account, correctly notes the United States role behind the Albino Silva mission but erroneously dates the midnight conversation between Gordon and Hermes Lima to the night of Friday, 26 October, whereas contemporaneous documentation indicates that it instead occurred—after an unexplained delay—the following night.
Moreover, at this critical juncture in U.S.-Brazilian relations, Goulart’s handling of the matter, especially his decision to entrust the mission to Albino rather than Bastian Pinto (the preferred United States intermediary), further darkened the Kennedy administration’s impression of the Brazilian president and his inconsistent behavior during the crisis as a whole.
At a scholarly conference in Havana in October 2002, I gave Fidel Castro the text of the message approved by Kennedy forty years earlier for transmittal to the Cuban leader on the evening of 27 October.
Castro had not previously known about the intended communication, but he recalled, “That day we were ªghting,” ªring at low-level United States reconnaissance ºights and preparing to resist an American invasion.
In the event, the Albino mission that reached Havana on 29 October, after Khrushchev had decided to remove the missiles, made no lasting impression on Castro—who, after all, had no idea that the Brazilian’s sudden visit had actually been instigated by Washington and that the visit there might conceivably have led to the US-Cuban dialogue that Castro had long desired.
Nonetheless, the odds seem remote that even if Castro had known of 183.
Apparently, the grounds simply did not exist on either side for fruitful or even mutually respectful negotiations.
Its attempt to mediate and its denuclearization proposal both came to naught, in large measure because of Castro’s hard line.
In that respect, the crisis and its aftermath may indeed have served to “educate GOB [Government of Brazil] through process of frustration,” as Gordon had anticipated.
On the other hand, Brazilian diplomats claimed that the crisis vindicated their longstanding and ultimately futile efforts to mediate the U.S.-Cuban confrontation before it reached a boiling point.
This would explain Kennedy’s preference in 1963—even as his administration was still pursuing covert operations, assassination plots, and serious contingency planning for military action against Castro—to rely mostly on United States channels to communicate secretly and unofªcially with Havana and to begin, gingerly, to explore possibilities for improving U.S.-Cuban relations.
Subsequent United States administrations engaged in similar direct contacts, even in the absence of normal diplomatic relations.
The contacts became even more frequent after the establishment of “interests sections” in the Cuban and American capitals in the late 1970s.
Even during periods of acute tension between Washington and Havana, a sporadic direct dialogue has been held behind the scenes.
The acrimony between Washington and Havana at the time was too entrenched.
Despite the very real tension that erupted between Havana and Moscow in 1962, Castro represented the more militant and uncompromising party in that dispute.
The Cuban leader’s bellicosity hardly made it likely that he would have suddenly veered toward the “bourgeois” Latin American governments, not to mention the United States.
A ªrm conclusion requires additional research in U.S., Brazilian, and still-closed Cuban archives.
This article, however, seeks to provide one piece of a murky history of secret U.S.-Cuban diplomacy during the Castro era.
The article also is intended to highlight the link between the missile crisis and the quieter crisis in US-Brazilian ties, the most signiªcant and perilous relationship that Washington conducted in Latin America during this stretch of the Cold War.
Acknowledgments I hope to provide fuller acknowledgments in a forthcoming book on the U.S.Brazilian-Cuban triangular relationship.
Almeida) in Washington, and the staff of the Brazilian Foreign Ministry archives in Brasília ; the Norwegian 188.
