Yet the handsome young face, gaze set firmly on the future, has lived on through generations.
In today's imagination Ché remains a mythical, romantic hero -an uncompromising revolutionary, selfless, dedicated, incorruptible, ready to die for his beliefs.
Determined Nature Ernesto Guevara de la Serna grew up in the shelter of provincial aristocracy in Argentina.
His personality was not forged in easy privilege, but by the fierce battle he waged against acute asthma.
Restless Traveler In 1948 Guevara went to Buenos Aires to study medicine.
Restless by nature, he left his native land in 1952 on an eight-month journey of discovery and awakening.
As he made his way north through South America, Guevara witnessed injustices that filled him with indignation.
One year later, having completed his medical degree, he left Argentina for good.
He had spent five weeks in Bolivia and nine months in Guatemala, where he witnessed the overthrow of reformist president Jacobo Arbenz by a CIA-backed military coup.
By then he was a convinced Marxist, and ardent admirer of the Soviet Union.
Married to a Guatemalan woman, Hilda Galea, he intended to name his first son Vladimir.
But despite his lofty ideals, Ché was little more than a drifter, a wandering photographer, an underpaid medical researcher -a rebel in search of a cause.
A Comrade Guevara discovered that cause in late summer 1955, when he was introduced to a daring exiled Cuban rebel leader committed to freeing his country from a dictator.
The rebel's name was Fidel Castro, and he was planning to return to his native Cuba and take up arms.
He was one of the few survivors of Castro's disastrous Granma landing, which the Cuban army had spotted.
Ché Guevara made his way to the remote Sierra Maestra, where he joined Castro and seventeen other Granma survivors — the men who would form the core leadership of revolutionary Cuba.
He earned Castro's confidence and was the first rebel to be given the rank of comandante.
Marching on Santa Clara in late 1958, his column derailed an armored train filled with dictator Fulgencio Batista's troops and took over the city.
Guevara's triumph would be the final blow in the rebel military campaign against Batista.
Cuban Leader By January 1959, Guevara, along with the Castro brothers, was recognized as one of the three most powerful leaders of the Cuban revolution.
He became a Cuban citizen, divorced Hilda Galea, married a beautiful Cuban woman, Aleida March, and began a new family.
Oversaw Prisons Guevara's first assignment was to oversee executions at an infamous prison, La Cabaña.
Many individuals imprisoned at La Cabaña, including human rights activist Armando Valladares, allege that Guevara took a personal interest in the interrogation, torture, and execution of political prisoners.
Author Guevara recorded the two years he spent in overthrowing Batista's regime in a detailed account entitled Pasajes de la Guerra Revolucionaria, which came out in 1963.
An English translation, Reminiscences of the Cuban Revolutionary War, was issued five years later.
Popular But Ineffective Lacking any managerial training, Ché was nevertheless named head of Cuba's central bank.
He called for the diversification of the Cuban economy, and for the elimination of what he called material incentives.
He worked endlessly at his ministry job, in construction, and even cutting sugar cane.
His good looks, acerbic humor and willingness to point out the revolution's shortcomings earned him the affection of many Cubans.
Critic of the Soviets Guevara became disillusioned with the Soviet Union, attacking Moscow in every international forum.
After Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev removed nuclear missiles from Cuba during the 1962 Missile Crisis, Guevara questioned Moscow's commitment to international socialism.
He was also critical of Soviet insistence that Cuba continue to specialize in sugar.
Era of World Revolution Ché's reputation outside of Cuba, among leftist intellectuals and the radical youth that called itself ""the new left,"" grew by leaps and bounds.
Then, in October 1965, he revealed the contents a letter he had kept secret.
The London Timesreported him in Addis Ababa and Dar es Salaam; eyewitnesses spotted him in Vietnam.
But Ché was deep in the African Congo, fighting a futile war and barely escaping with his life.
Soon, though, Ché decided to return to his native Argentina to bring about revolution.
It was Fidel who suggested that Ché go instead to Bolivia, and try ignite a continental revolution.
Legend and Liability By the late 1960s, Cuba was increasingly absorbed into the Soviet sphere, and Ché was becoming a liability.
Unable to ignite successful guerrilla movements, he offended Moscow at every turn.
In Bolivia Guevara's guerrilla group, numbering about 120, were well equipped and scored a number of early successes.
The United States government located the group and sent CIA operatives into Bolivia.
Moreover, Guevara was being hunted by a U.S.-trained elite battalion of Bolivian Rangers skilled in jungle warfare.
By September, he was suffering from acute asthma, weakened by dysentery, and surrounded by the Bolivian Rangers.
Fidel knew where he was,"" journalist Georgie Anne Geyer, who investigated Ché's death, has concluded.
Although Castro would deny any possibility of rescuing Guevara, biographer Jorge Castañeda authoritatively concluded, ""Fidel did not send Ché to his death in Bolivia.
Death of a Revolutionary The Bolivian Rangers captured Ché Guevara on October 8, 1967, at a ravine called El Yuro.
His body was photographed on a stone slab in a small hut for the whole world to see.
Icon A photograph taken by Alberto Korda in March 1960 soon became one of the century's most recognizable images.
