In 1983, a number of veterans of the Kennedy Administration were brought together to look back and reflect on the affair, and in their minds these questions had very clear answers.
On the other hand, there have always been those who maintained that America’s “overwhelming strategic superiority,” or simply the American willingness to risk nuclear war, had a good deal to do with the course that the The author wishes to acknowledge an extraordinary debt of gratitude to John Mearsheimer for all the help he gave with this article.
Arthur Singer for allowing me to view the videotapes of these discussions.
International Security, Summer 1985 0162-2889/85/0137-27 $02.50/1 0 1985 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bernard Brodie, for example, took it for granted that America’s “nuclear superiority” had been crucial in 1962.
These debates, however, have always had a rather abstract and speculative character.
The problem will be approached here by examining three schools of thought-about the crisis, and about the political utility of nuclear forces in general.
There is first the thesis that nuclear weapons played no political role at all in 1962-that is, that their sole function was to deter their use by others.
The reasons are several, but it is mostly that neither side threatens the other with total war.
Some of the most interesting material---extracts from the transcript of two secretly taped meetings held at the White House on October 16, and the minutes of two ExCom meetings held on October 27-is reproduced below.
But the recently declassified material represents only a small portion of the Kennedy Library’s holdings on the crisis.
And there are important, but still unavailable, sources in other archives, and in private hands as well-for example, the extensive, almost verbatim notes that Paul Nitze took of meetings during the crisis.
A second major school of thought argues that nuclear weapons did matter, because the risk of nuclear war was bound to affect political behavior.
On the other hand, there is the notion that risk is not simply an inescapable fact of life.
The level of risk is instead seen as something that can be deliberately and consciously manipulated.
O A third school of thought claims that it was the balance of nuclear capabilities, and not the balance of resolve or conventional capabilities, that proved decisive.
This interpretation is not logically inconsistent with the approach that emphasizes risk, since a government’s ability to manipulate risk might depend largely on the military power at its disposal.
Taylor here denied that America’s ”strategic superiority” played a meaningful role in the crisis.
Note also his comments on the role of nuclear forces in the missile crisis in Gregg Herken, Counsels of War , p.7.
This claim is generally based on the notion that nuclear weapons are ”unusable” weapons-that they are good only for deterring their use by others.
The effect of this line of argument, therefore, is to emphasize the importance of conventional forces-that is, of America’s conventional predominance in the Caribbean.
But if war could come without such a deliberate and conscious decision on the part of either the President or his Soviet counterpart, then the risk of war would be real and would therefore inevitably affect political behavior.
First, McNamara, for example, in the postmortem he gave to a Congressional committee in February 1963, demonstrated a clear grasp of the logic of escalation-that is, of how one’s actions could set off a chain of events over which one could exercise only limited control.
Even those who base claims about the irrelevance of the nuclear balance on the argument that no rational government would ever deliberately start a nuclear war have frequently argued along these lines.
The case of Secretary McNamara is again particularly interesting in this connection.
But by October 27-that is, after the CIA had reported that some of the missiles on 12.
United States Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, “Department of Defense Appropriations for 1964,” February 6, 1963, 31.
In other words, even he, who was quite conservative in this regard, was willing by this point to accept what by his own reckoning was a serious risk of nuclear war. l4 Finally, there is the point that the specter of nuclear war was deliberately manipulated to support American objectives in the crisis.
The United States, he argued, should recognize that possibility “by trying to deter it, which means we probably should alert SAC, probably put on an airborne alert, perhaps take other s-, alert measures.
Note that McNamara’s assumption was that nuclear preparations would serve to deter Soviet responses in general; that is, the implied nuclear threat was not directed simply at the possibility that the U.S.S.R. might consider using its nuclear forces.
October 16 transcripts, 11, 10; see also Dillon’s remarks, ibid., I, 27.
The same kind of point might be made about the effect of American military preparations during the Berlin crisis the previous year.
These deterrent threats, by reducing the probability of any direct Soviet retaliation, would thus increase America’s freedom of action in Cuba.
But this was a deadly game, played reluctantly and without any trace of enthusiasm.
Political necessitythe logic of the confrontational situation-prevailed over the government’s horror of nuclear war and led it to adopt tactics of this sort.
The Balance of Resolve The specter of nuclear war influenced both Soviet and American policy.
The fear of a Soviet countermove against Berlin weighed heavily on American policy during the crisis.
The Soviets would be deterred from moving against the city (even though their forces in the Caribbean might already have been attacked); but the Americans presumably would not be deterred by the same threat of war from following through with their policy of defending the city.
It was taken for granted that the same risk would have unequal effects.
The situation in the Caribbean was the mirror image of the situation around Berlin.
The Americans had conventional predominance, but (given that the missiles had already been put in) the United States was the power that was threatening to alter an existing situation.
If the nuclear threat had perfectly symmetrical effects, American power should have been as stalemated around Cuba as Soviet power was around Berlin.
This put pressure on the Soviets to head off that invasion and accept terms.
The Americans, for similar reasons, were also under pressure to settle the crisis before matters came to a head.
One way to test this issue is to examine the case of the Jupiter-that is, the question of an arrangement involving the withdrawal of the American Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for a withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy, according to his close adviser Theodore Sorensen, was “quite amazed” when Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon (who had also served under Eisenhower) told him during the crisis that “everyone knows that those Jupiter missiles aren’t much good anyway.
In fact, there were from the outset very precise assurances to the contrary.
United States Congress, ”Department of Defense Appropriations for 1964,” 57; see also 74.
And within the space of a few months, the Jupiters were in fact dismantled.
There are two ways in which the documents throw some light on this issue.
First of all, the Executive Committee minutes published here show very clearly that at the peak of the crisis, on October 27, with an invasion of Cuba imminent, President Kennedy was in fact the strongest advocate of a trade in that high policymaking group.
Repeatedly, he returned to the theme that some kind of trade involving the Jupiters would eventually be necessary.
What he plainly wanted was to get the Russians to stop working on the missile sites in Cuba and maybe also make the missiles there inoperable; this would then be followed by a negotiation involving the missiles in Turkey.
To Move a Nation , 203; repeated in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 519, and Allison, Essence of Decision, 226.
In view of the President’s attitude about a trade and the more hostile attitude of his advisers, what all this implies is that the settlement that emerged after the assurances were given to Dobrynin should probably be understood as the conflation of a negotiation-as an ”imposed negotiated solution,” so to speak.
If ultimately the issue came down to whether America was willing to withdraw the ”worthless” Jupiter missiles from Turkey, then, no matter what the strategic balance was, the President was not going to dig in his heels and risk a nuclear holocaust over that.
Kennedy’s eagerness for something like a political settlement was therefore rooted not in a conviction that nuclear forces were politically impotent, but rather in the notion that the main obstacle to a solution was too trivial to warrant any serious risk of nuclear war.
The same logic, however, implies that his attitude about the kind of risk worth running might have been very different if the political issues at stake had been viewed as basic-as in fact they had been during the Berlin crisis the previous year.
In fact the new evidence about the final settlement supports the idea that the basic situation was not one of simple parity.
The American Side Political concerns therefore played an important role in determining the kind of risk the American government was willing to take on.
In theory, the strategic balance could have played a role by influencing either American policy or Soviet policy or both.
This section will be concerned mainly with how the Americans might have been affected; the Soviet side will be examined in the next section.
Actually, there is no evidence that President Kennedy and his advisers counted missiles, bombers, and warheads, and decided on that basis to take a tough line.
The veterans of the crisis have often denied that any calculation of that sort had been made, and there is no reason to dispute them on this point.Few assumed at the time that the strategic balance in itself meant that the U.S.S.R. would almost automatically back down; and there is no evidence at all in the documents that anyone believed that the United States could face a war with confidence because of its vast nuclear power.
In fact, one of the most striking things about the October 16 transcript is that no one even touched on the issue of what exactly would happen if the 25.
But one does come away from the transcript with the sense that even rough calculations of this sort were not terribly important.
No one discussed what American counterforce capabilities were-that is, how well the United States might be able to “limit damage” in the event of an all-out war.
It was as though all the key concepts associated with the administration’s formal nuclear strategy, as set out for example just a few months earlier in McNamara’s famous Ann Arbor speech-in fact, the whole idea of controlled and discriminate general war-in the final analysis counted for very little.
People were in fact concerned with the problem of whether the deployment of missiles in Cuba would make an important difference in military terms.
The positions taken on this question reflect, in a rather crude and imperfect way to be sure, basic attitudes about the significance of shifts in the strategic balance.
They thus can function as something of a surrogate for more direct notions about the role of the nuclear balance.
It is sometimes claimed that the general belief among high administration officials was that the deployment would not count for much from a strictly military point of view.
But there is nothing at all in the Sorensen document that even remotely deals with this question.
The larger the force, the more the Soviets would be able, in the words of the CIA assessment, “to blunt a retaliatory attack,’” and thus to threaten the United States with a odd that Sorensen in this document takes megatonnage as the basic index of strategic powerand this a couple of years after the total megatonnage of the American nuclear arsenal had begun its long and dramatic decline.
The Kennedy Administration, in fact, wanted other things besides sheer destructive power from its strategic forces.
Indeed, the issue of the military significance of missiles in Cuba had been around ever since the administration had begun to worry about a possible deployment during the summer.
Neither President Kennedy nor anyone else at the meeting, however, seemed much concerned with how such a deployment would affect the vulnerability of America's strategic forces.
But Kennedy did seem concerned that the initial deployment might be followed by a more massive one.
He in fact linked this point to McNamara's argument about how the United States could not contemplate military action against the island once the missiles there were operational.
It provided a straightforward rationale for the American decision to resist the deployment of the missiles, sparing the President from any need to resolve the perplexing issues of nuclear strategy.
It is unclear whether such a study was ever written; an attempt to locate it via the Freedom of Information Act proved unsuccessful.
Since one of the basic differences between bombers and missiles relates to warning time, this quotation suggests that by this point Kennedy was concerned with how the missiles might affect Soviet first strike capabilities.
Ibid., 11, 32. international Security 152I most important people in the Kennedy Administration found it hard to take such notions seriously.
As a result, the nuclear strategy of ”controlled response” never really cut very deep under Kennedy37;and a certain ambivalence about these basic issues was very characteristic of that administation’s approach to military policy.
What is striking here is the sense that peace was hanging on a thread, that it did not take much to touch off a nuclear holocaust-attitudes that would have been inconceivable if the sense was that the Soviets were simply outgunned and would have to back down, or even if the assumption was just that they were desperately anxious to avoid war and would draw back in a simple test of will.
General David Burchinal, the Director of Plans on the Air Staff in 1962, later recalled how during the crisis an American U-2 spy plane had gotten lost and turned up over Soviet territory.
McNamara, he said, “turned absolutely white and yelled hysterically, ’This means war with the Soviet Union.
It is now well known that the influence of declaratory strategy on actual planning for general war is much slighter than many people used to assume.
Note in this connection the testimony, for example, of Air Force General Bruce K Holloway.
With regard to the air strike option, Taylor and McNamara argued on October 16 that it was crucial to take out every target that might have any nuclear capability.
Our recommendation would be to get complete intelligence, get all the photography we need, the next two or three days, no, no hurry in our book.
One point was that if military action was to be undertaken, it had to be done quickly, before the missile sites became operational.
Military power is viewed primarily as a way of affecting an enemy‘s capabilities rather than as a means of influencing his will.
And this is based on the notion that once the ball starts rolling, things may very well become uncontrollable; the enemy cannot be counted on to behave rationally and control his own behavior.
But it was precisely this set of assumptions that was attacked by Rusk and Bundy.
There were great political advantages to limiting the attack to the missile sites; there was no reason to assume that the Soviets would retaliate with whatever they had left, since such behavior would be suicidal for them.
The deterrent effect in 1962 seems real enough, even if in the final analysis the presence of operational missiles would not in itself have been sufficient to prevent an American attack on Cuba.
While the evidence on this point is not very strong, it does seem that a sense for the danger of attacking Cuba after nuclear weapons were deployed there had a somewhat broader base than uncertainty about Soviet command and control.
This was not “a perfect solution by any means,” and he said he did not want to argue for it; but if this alternative did not seem very acceptable, “wait until you work on the others.
But it is also important to remember that its fear of escalation did not drive the threshold of acceptable risk down to zero.
On both the air strike and the blockade, McNamara’s initial views were not accepted.
The blockade did in fact eventually function as a political instrument-that is, as a ”first step,” raising the prospect of further, more extreme steps if a settlement was not reached.
The Soviet Side There were two possible ways in which the strategic balance could have influenced the course of the crisis: through its effect on American policy or through its effect on Soviet behavior.
They would be challenged on the high seas regardless of flag, and they’d be searched, and if they had anything that falls under war materiel they will be turned around or they will be sunk.
And, there was control in detail, so there was a phone from the Secretary of Defense’s office right to the deck of the damn destroyer on patrol in this blockade.
Full steam ahead and right through the damn blockade and right on into Havana.
So, they just looked at each other, these people who were now learning to ‘manage crises’ and run wars.
So the next ship comes along and he’s Lebanese-he’s flying a Lebanese flag.
But a strong, although somewhat speculative, case can be made that Soviet policy was very much influenced by the strategic balance.
This case rests on a study of what was going on in the area of military preparations during the crisis.
One of the most striking features of the Cuban missile crisis, in fact, is an extraordinary asymmetry in the area of general war preparations.
On October 22, President Kennedy announced the presence of the missiles and the measures the United States was taking to force their removal, and every day, from that point on, the Central Intelligence Agency prepared a memorandum outlining the military measures the Soviet Union was taking in response.
The first order of business at each morning ExCom meeting was a briefing by the CIA Director, John McCone, essentially summarizing the latest intelligence memorandum.
The same point was made in the October 25 memorandum; and still on October 27, at the climax of the crisis, the CIA said it simply had not been able to detect any ”significant redeployment” of Soviet forces.
But the point that Burchinal stressed was that ”all these moves were signals the Soviets could see and we knew they could see them.
They are an indication of resolve, a hint of what one might actually do, a means perhaps of preventing the enemy from making certain countermoves and thus of preemptively increasing one’s own freedom of action.
It is clear that these bargaining advantages of preparing for war were understood at the time.But if taking these measures can have such effects, it is even clearer that a refusal to make serious preparations during a confrontation, when one’s adversary has put his strategic forces on full alert, can have important political effects.
It is a question here not just of the Soviets’ reluctance to declare an official alert of their own.
This might be explained by the specific character of what an alert might have meant in the Soviet system.
For instance, the Soviets might have been unable for technical reasons to hold their strategic force on alert for more than a short period of time, and therefore might have been reluctant to place their forces on alert unless they were certain a war was coming.The more important point is that the Soviets evidently did nothing, even in the way of major ad hoc measures , to reduce the vulnerability of their strategic forces.
Khrushchev had tried over the past few years to extract political advantages by brandishing the specter of nuclear war.
If anything, he had tended to overestimate the bluff value of nuclear weapons, and to overlook the ways in which the tactic of exploiting the nuclear threat could backfire.
The Soviet missile guidance system evidently used gyroscopes with metal ball bearings that would fail if they were subject to continuing stress-that is, if the missile were held ready for launch over a prolonged period.
It is reasonable to suppose that their view of the United States had a good deal to do with the choices they made.
For they saw a country whose whole way of thinking about nuclear issues had focused on the question of how much an advantage there might be to getting in the first blow; where responsible officials, from the President on down, had stressed how the United States would not rule out the option of striking first in certain circumstances; and where the logic of preemptive action-of semi-unintended war, resulting from the fear of surprise attack-was very widely recognized.
The important volume on Soviet Military Strategy , edited by Marshal Sokolovskii, shows just how sensitive the Soviets were at this time to the American emphasis on the logic of preemption.
It is considered to be the final and only means of avoiding disaster.”‘j2 It is clear that the Soviet authors understood some of the basic arguments American strategists were making during the period; official doctrine, and the capabilities with which it was linked, would naturally be viewed in this context.
The most disturbing thing here, from their point of view, would be the notion of “damage limitation” and the American counterforce capabilities that supported it.
Kennedy’s remarks were originally made in an interview with Stewart Alsop, ”Kennedy’sGrand Strategy,” Saturday Evening Post, March 31, 1962, 14.
Indeed, the famous remark of Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov to John McCloy shortly after the crisis-”You Americans will never be able to do this to us again”-suggests that the Soviets drew back because of a relative, but remediable, weakness, and obviously their conventional inferiority in the Caribbean was not what Kuznetsov had in mind.
But however the asymmetry in military preparations is to be explained, the important thing to note is that people in Washington were aware of it during the crisis.
There is also the related question, about which there has been so much conjecture, of the connection between the Cuban missile crisis and the development of Soviet strategic capabilities after 1962.
It is hard to believe there is no connection at all, but it is still too early for firm conclusions on this subject.
It is already clear that some people close to the crisis did in fact draw these sorts of inferences.
General Burchinal, for example, later stressed that Khrushchev “never alerted a bomber or changed his own military posture one bit.
We had a gun at his head and he didn’t move a muscle”; and Burchinal implied that this issue was discussed at the time with his civilian superiorsffiOne would like to see how the arguments were played out and what effect they had on policy.
In any event, the mere fact of asymmetry does not seem consistent with the picture that Bundy painted in 1969.
It suggests in itself that the nuclear situation was not one of simple “stalemate” in 1962.
America’s ”superiority” apparently did not have much of a direct effect on American policy during the crisis-or at least this is what the limited evidence now available seems to indicate.
There is first the argument that nuclear forces simply neutralized each other-that nuclear forces were ”unusable,” and that because they were militarily useless, they could not be harnessed to any political purpose, beyond simply deterring their use by others.
Of all the arguments considered here, this is the most difficult to sustain.
It is obvious that the fear of nuclear war affected both Soviet and American behavior in the crisis; and indeed these fears were consciously manipulated, most notably by the American 66.
It was sufficient, as Brodie pointed out in a 1963 talk on the crisis, that the government was able simply to “threaten the next in a series of moves” that seemed to tend in the direction of general war.
But the threshold of acceptable risk could vary, and nuclear anxieties in fact did not have an equal effect on both sides.
The balance was not so completely lopsided that the crisis was ended by a total Soviet capitulation.
Nor, on the other hand, was the final arrangement a bargain negotiated between equals.
The balance was unequal, but not so unequal that it makes sense to view the crisis as a simple ”contest” with a clear victor.
It would therefore be a bit too extreme to view the crisis as a ”competition in risk-taking” a la Thomas Schelling.
Both for foreign policy reasons-the Soviet deployment was in direct defiance of an American warning-and for reasons of domestic politics as well, the administration knew that it could not sit this one out.
But no one wanted to keep upping the ante, to keep outbidding the Soviets in ”resolve,” as the way of triumphing in the confrontation.
As for the argument about the strategic balance, the evidence at this point suggests that it did not have an important direct influence on American policy.
The American ability to “limit damage” by destroying an enemy’s strategic forces did not seem, in American eyes, to carry much political weight.
Political, Military, and Economic Strategies in the Decade Ahead , 646.
The ironic thing is that they probably took American ideas about ""damage limitation"" and ""discriminate and controlled general war,"" and the capabilities with which they were linked, far more seriously than the Americans did.
And this was in spite of the fact that just a few months earlier, after the Ann Arbor speech, they had contemptuously dismissed the McNamara strategy as absurd.
It really does seem that ""we had a gun to their head and they didn't move a muscle''-that their failure to make any preparations for general war was linked to a fear of provoking American preemptive action.
And this meant that it was more essential than it otherwise might have been to head off an invasion of Cuba through a political settlement.
The danger of provoking an American preemptive strike tended to rule out countermeasures-or even the serious threat of countermeasures, around Berlin or elsewhere-that would significantly increase the risk of war.
The effect therefore was to tie their hands, to limit their freedom of maneuver, and thus to increase their incentive to settle the crisis quickly.
The historical analysis of the Cuban missile crisis is still in its infancy.
The new documents on the crisis, as revealing as they are, represent just the tip of the iceberg.
It is only as more material is released that the full meaning of the crisis can begin to unfold.
It is one of the best ways w e have of bringing the problem of the political utility of nuclear forces into focus-of going beyond speculation and reaching some solid conclusions about one of the most basic problems of the nuclear age.
