The major confrontation began when the United States discovered Nikata Khrushchev, the Soviet premier had secretly installed Soviet missiles that were carrying nuclear weapons from Cuba.
When President John F Kennedy discovered the plot, there was a standoff of several days as the United States imposed a naval blockade of Cuba and the United States demanded the USSR to remove the missiles immediately.
The United States were fearful that Fidel Castro, Cuba's revolutionary leader, would establish a Communist regime so they also applied economic pressure and cut off all trade between the United States and Cuba.
Castro responded by becoming closer to USSR and Russia helped Cuba by offering trade opportunities.
This was to ease the effects of America's trade block with Cuba which began two years earlier.
The Cold War was a diplomatic, military and economic struggle between capitalist and Communist countries.
In September of 1962, President John F Kennedy warned the Soviets that ""the gravest of issues would arise"" are weapons were found.
In October, United States spy planes showed photographs of Soviet missile installations under construction in Cuba.
The United States said to Cuba if the weapons were not dismantled and removed, that they would invade.
The Soviet diplomat denied that there were any offense missiles being built in Cuba.
The Soviet Union saw this Communisation as a vital part of it's defensive system.
United States also removed some of its own missiles from Turkey to appease the Soviets.
All of these reasons influenced President Kennedy's decision of blockading Cuba.
The book I chose was the Exploring Lewis and Clark by Thomas P Slaughter ... 4 pages 1 Apr/2012 0.0The Great Exhibition of 1851 ... of Prince Albert, built by Joseph Paxton and regularly visited by Queen Victoria, the Crystal Palace ... 7 pages 1 Nov/2012 0.0Pre-Clovis Theory ... and the sea level rose again, American continents were now cut off from the rest of the world ... 7 pages 28 Oct/2001 0.0John Winthrop ... and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
