Due to electronic rights, some t Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed.
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
The publisher reserves the right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
For valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.
Michelle Forbes Marketing Manager: Valerie Hartman Content Project Manager: Cathy Brooks Art Director: Sarah Cole Manufacturing Planner: Fola Orekoya IP Analyst: Alexandra Ricciardi IP Project Manager: Farah Fard For product information and technology assistance, contact us at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706 For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all requests online atwww.cengage.com/permissions.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
Understanding world politics requires up-to-date information and analysis.
In a constantly changing world, it is imperative for our students to develop the intellectual skills to be better global citizens and to effectively analyze key events and issues in international affairs.
Trend and Transformation provides the tools necessary for understanding world affairs, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments on institutions, countries, and individuals across the globe.
World Politics aims to put both change and continuity into perspective.
The key theories for understanding international relations—realism, liberalism, constructivism, as well as feminist and Marxist interpretations—frame the investigation.
At the same time, this book presents all the complexities of world politics, as well as the necessary analytic tools to make sense of a wide range of substantive issues, from war to global finance to human rights.
Moreover, our enhanced video resource program, provided in partnership with the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs , further highlights current international trends and transformations by applying World Politics' key terms and concepts in real-world applications.
Trend and Transformation continues to change in response to unfolding events around our world.
Since publication of the 2014-2015 edition, numerous changes have taken place in international relations.
To provide students with the most current information, the entire text of this 2016-2017 edition has been revised to incorporate the latest global events and scholarly research.
IX • Updated discussions of conflict and cooperation around the world, including the prospect of a resurgent Russia and an increasingly powerful China, thawing relations between Cuba and the United States, terrorist groups such as Boko Haram and ISIS/ISIL, and international bodies such as the United Nations, International Court of Justice, and the International Criminal Court.
MindTap™ As an instructor, MindTap is here to simplify your workload, organize and immediately grade your students' assignments, and enable you to customize your course as you see fit.
Through deep-seated integration with your Learning Management System, grades are easily exported and analytics are pulled with just the click of a button.
MindTapprovides you with a platform to easily add in current events videos and RSS feeds from national or local news sources.
Students can access the KnowNow International Relations Blog for weekly updated news coverage and pedagogy.
We thank you for using this book to help introduce your students to world politics.
Our hope is that it helps students to critically analyze and understand global affairs—and to better assess the possibilities for the global future and its potential impact on their own lives.
In a constantly changing world, it is important to be able to effectively analyze key events and issues in international affairs, and to critically assess different viewpoints concerning these issues.
By providing you with the leading ideas and the latest information available.
Trend and Transformation offers the tools necessary for understanding world affairs, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments on institutions, countries, and individuals across the globe.
World Politics strives to help you become an informed global citizen and establish a foundation for life-long learning about international affairs.
World Politics alms to put both change and continuity into perspective.
You will learn about key theories and worldviews for understanding international relations, and examine some of the most prominent issues in global politics, including war, terrorism, world trade, global finance, demographic trends, environmental degradation, and human rights.
As a student, the benefits of using MindTap with this book are endless.
The accessibility of current events coupled with interactive media makes the content fun and engaging.
On your computer, phone, or tablet, MindTap is there when you need it, giving you easy access to flashcards, quizzes, readings, and assignments.
Trend and Transformation to be an invaluable resource as you seek to learn more about global affairs.
Whether the study of world politics is one among many interests that you are exploring as you earn your degree or a keen passion that may lead you to play an active role in shaping our world, this book is designed to provide you a comprehensive coverage of the trends and transformations that characterize international relations.
It is our hope that as you conclude reading World Politics you will be as fascinated as we are with the complex dynamics of global interactions, and feel compelled to continue to observe, critically analyze, and address the challenges and opportunities that we share as members of a global community.
Access your World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition resources by visiting www.cengagebrain.com/shop/isbn/ 9781305504875.
You can also purchase the book's resources here separately through the “Study Tools” tab.
Access your World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition resources via www.cengage.com/login.
Log in using your Cengage Learning single sign-on user name password, or create a new instructor account by clicking on “New Faculty User” and following the instructions.
MindTap guides students through the course curriculum via an innovative Learning Path Navigator where they will complete reading assignments, challenge themselves with focus activities, and engage with interactive quizzes.
Through a variety of gradable activities, MindTap provides students with opportunities to check themselves for where they need extra help, as well as allowing faculty to measure and assess student progress.
Integration with programs like YouTube and Google Drive enables instructors to add and remove content of their choosing with ease, keeping their course current while tracking global events through RSS feeds.
The Test Bank, offered in Blackboard, Moodle, Desire2Learn, Canvas, and Angel formats, contains Learning Objective-specific multiple-choice and essay questions for each chapter.
Import the Test Bank into your LMS to edit and manage questions and to create tests.
The Instructor’s Manual contains chapter-specific Learning Objectives, an outline, key terms with definitions, and a chapter summary.
Additionally, the Instructor's Manual features a critical thinking question, lecture-launching suggestion, and an in-class activity for each Learning Objective.
The Microsoft® PowerPoint® presentations are ready-to-use, visual outlines of each chapter.
These presentations are easily customized for your lectures and offered along with chapter-specific Microsoft® PowerPoint® Image Slides and JPEG Image Libraries.
The Test Bank for World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition, contains Learning Objective-specific multiple-choice and essay questions for each chapter.
We are thankful for the constructive comments, advice, and data provided by an array of scholars and colleagues.
The always helpful and accommodating project manager AnupriyaTyagi with Cenveoand Photo Researcher Swarnadivya Chokkalingam with Lumina Datamatics made valuable contributions to this book.
Product Team Manager Carolyn Merrill and Senior Content Developer Rebecca Green, who exercised extraordinary professionalism in guiding the process that brought this edition into print, as well as Managing Content Developer Megan Garvey, who helped see the book through the production process, assisted by the project management of Cathy Brooks.
Gratitude is also expressed to the always instructive advice of Valerie Hartman, Cengage's skilled Political Science Marketing Manager.
She is a past vice provost for undergraduate programs, department chair, and undergraduate coordinator and has served nationally as a facilitator for leadership development in higher education.
International Studies Quarterly, Foreign Policy Analysis, International Interactions, and International Studies Perspectives.
She has published articles on United States foreign policy decision making, with a particular focus on the determinants and consequences of United States arms transfers and foreign aid.
Her work has also examined the significance of human rights concerns in global political and economic interactions.
CHARLES WILLIAM KEGLEY is a past president of the International Studies Association and has been serving the past two decades on the Board of Trustees of the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs.
He is also a recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award of the Foreign Policy Analysis Section of the International Studies Association.
A founding partner of Kegley International, Inc. , he has authored more than fifty scholarly books and over one hundred articles in journals.
Due t Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
May Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not n t be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.
Bay^ • ' 40“W Qaqortoq Dawson 'Gjoa , Haven Whitehorse 'Rankin 0 Inlet Hudson Juneau Arviat, Kuujjuaq ,Fort Nelson Happy Valley-' Goose Bay Churchill Fort McMurray Prince George ,Chisasibi Edmonton Sydney Charlottetown • Fredericton • Moncton . ec* *• •Halifax St.
Virginia Beach *^^0/7SOc D 1 'Seattle 60“W Portland Toronto, Salt Lake' •Sacramento City 'San Jose •Fresno Las Vegas* Los Angeles • San Diego, ,PI Tijuana 'Mexicali San Francisco' St.
VINCENT BARBADOS ^Managua ^_ ,,, GRENADA COSTA RICA Panama City f i^TRINIDAD & TOBAGO ^GUYANA VENEZUEI ‘i ^Georgetown f® @ Paramaribo Galapagos ^ Islands FRENCH GUIANA SURINAME Equator 0° PACIFIC OCEAN PERU Lima® ^kej'iticaca ^ La Paz BOLIVIA ^Brasilia PARAGUAY ^Asuncion y de Janeiro 5ao Paulo Santiago® ARGENTINA ®„ URUGUAY ^Montevideo Falkland Islands Cape Horn 80°W 60°W XXI AFRICA Baghdad ' T • IjvTripoh Canary Is.
It opens a window on the many unfolding trends, some of them moving in contrary directions.
Chapter 1 looks at our perceptions of global events and realities, explains how they can lead to distorted understandings, and suggests ways to move beyond the limited scope of those views.
Chapter 2 continues with an overview of the realist, liberal, and constructivist theoretical traditions that scholars and policy makers use most often to interpret world politics, and also considers the feminist and Marxist critiques of these mainstream traditions.
Chapter 3 further strengthens your understanding of world politics by introducing three ways of looking at international decision-making processes by transnational actors.
A WORLD WITHOUT BORDERS Reflecting on his space shuttle experience, astronaut Sultan bin Salman Ai-Saud remarked that “the first day or so we all pointed to our countries.
As viewed from outer space, planet Earth looks as If It has continents without borders.
As viewed from newspaper headlines, however, world politics looks much different.
Here Ukrainians participate in a ""Dignity March"" in Kiev on Sunday, February 22, 2015, to commemorate the death of protesters who took part in an uprising that toppled the country's pro-Russian leader in 2014.
Hostilities between the pro-Western government and the pro-Russian rebels reflect conflict over enduring global issues of sovereignty, territorial integrity, and geopolitical power.
Learning Objectives 1-1 Describe the core difficulty of investigating human phenomena such as international relations.
Due Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
It is the human being's capacity for struggling against being overwhelmed which is remarkable and exhilarating ."" —Lorraine Hansberry, American author I magine yourself returning home from a two-week vacation on a tropical island where you had no access to the news.
The trip gave you a well-deserved break before starting a new school term, but now you are curious about what has happened while you were away.
Fighting and heavy casualties persist, with record numbers of people forcibly displaced and seeking refuge in neighboring countries.
The civil war in Syria continues, with A1 Qaeda, the militant group Islamic State , and other insurgent groups committing grave atrocities as they take control of territory across the country.
A historic deal was reached between Iran and other major world powers after nearly ten years of diplomacy that commits Iran to curbing its nuclear program in return for sanctions relief As you ride home from the airport, you hear a radio broadcast about economic conditions around the world.
The situation in Greece is dire with the economic crisis having reached the scale of the United States Great Depression of the 1930s.
It faces austerity measures to address rampant debt and poor public finance, and questions abound as to ramifications for Greece and the European Union should the country not recover and its economy collapse.
The extent of the debt crisis in Puerto Rico has also come to light, to the tune of $72 billion owed to creditors.
Ghina’s economic growth is slowing, and there are concerns about the slide in total trade and the Ghinese stock market.
However many of the effects of the Great Recession are fading, and the IMF expects global economic growth to accelerate in the coming year.
You hope that conditions improve before you graduate and enter the job market.
Shortly after arriving home, you connect to the Internet and read that popular social media companies are debating how to maintain global platforms that embrace free expression yet prevent savvy militant groups from using them to advance gruesome terrorist propaganda and recruit new members.
There is also coverage of violence by drug cartels in Mexico, and the escape of a drug lord from a maximum security prison.
The United Nations announced that rich and poor countries have agreed upon new international development goals that will end poverty and hunger, ensure universal access to quality education, secure gender equality, and advance environmental sustainability.
With all of the conflict and hardship in the world, it is encouraging that people can work together to improve the human condition.
You also hear that in light of the warming of relations between the United States and Guba, a popular cruise company is looking at providing trips to the island nation.
A Discovering World Politics The CSS Point world politics The study of how global actors' activities entail the exercise of infiuenoe to achieve and defend their goals and ideals, and how it affects the world at large.
The events identified record what actually occurred during the month of July 2015.
Undoubtedly, many individuals experienced fear and confusion during this period.
Putting this information about unfolding events together, you cannot help but be reminded that international affairs matter and events around the world powerfully affect your circumstances and future.
The “news” you received is not really new, because it echoes many old stories from the past about the growing sea of turmoil sweeping the contemporary world.
Nevertheless, the temptation to wish that this depressing, chaotic world would just go away is overwhelming.
If only the unstable world would stand still long enough for a sense of predictability and order to prevail_Alas, that does not appear likely.
You cannot escape the world or control its turbulence, and you cannot single-handedly alter its character.
If we are to live adaptively amid the fierce winds of global change, then we must face the challenge of discovering the dynamic properties of world politics.
Because world events increasingly influence every person, all can benefit from investigating how the global system works and how changes are remaking our political and economic lives.
The whole purpose of edueation is to turn mirrors into windows. —Sydney J Harris, American political journalist 11 THE CHALLENGE OF INVESTIGATING INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS To best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s more than 7 billion people, it is critical that we perceive our times accurately.
Yet interpreting the world in which we now live and anticipating what lies ahead for the globe’s future—and yours—presents formidable challenges.
In part, it is because the study of international relations requires taking into account every factor that influences human behavior.
This is a task that seminal scientist Albert Einstein believed is extremely challenging.
A purpose of this book is to help you question your preexisting beliefs about world affairs and about the world stage’s many actors.
To that end, we ask you to evaluate rival perspectives on global issues, even if they differ from your current images.
Indeed, we expose you to prevailing schools of thought that you may find unconvincing, and possibly offensive.
Many other people make these views the bedrock of their interpretations of the world around them, and these viewpoints accordingly enjoy a popular following.
For this reason, the text describes some visions of world politics with which even your authors may not agree so that you may weigh the wisdom or foolishness of contending perspectives.
The interpretive challenge, then, is to observe unfolding global realities objectively, in order to describe and explain them accurately.
To appreciate how our images of reality shape our expectations, we begin with a brief introduction to the role that subjective images play in understanding world politics.
This is followed by a set of analytic tools that this book uses to help you overcome perceptual obstacles to understanding world politics and to empower you to more capably interpret the forces of change and continuity that affect our world.
Although you may not have attempted to explicitly define your perceptions about the world in your subconscious, we all hold mental images of world politics.
Without questioning whether the ways they have organized their perceptions are accurate, many people simply assume seeing is believing.
This principle has great importance for the investigation of international relations, where, depending on one's perspective, people can vary greatly on how they view international events, actors, and issues.
To appreciate the controversies that can result when different people (with different perspectives) see different realities, even though they are looking at the same thing, consider something as basic as objectively viewing the location and size of the world’s continents.
In turn, the accuracy of their rival maps matters politically because they shape how people view what is important.
Each depicts the distribution of the Earth’s land surfaces and territory but portrays a different image.
Each is a model of reality, an abstraction that highlights some features of the globe while ignoring others.
Consider the role that politics, history, culture, and racism, among others, might play.
In contrast to most geographic representations, it draws attention to the less developed countries of the Global South, where more than three-quarters of the world's population lives today.
ORTHOGRAPHIC PROJECTION The orthographic projection, centering on the mid-Atlantic, conveys some sense of the curvature of the Earth by using rounded edges.
Most of us—political leaders included—look for information that reinforces our preexisting beliefs about the world, assimilate new data into familiar images, mistakenly equate what we believe with what we know, and ignore information that contradicts our expectations.
In addition, we rely on learned habits for viewing new information and making judgments, because these “schema” guide our perceptions and help us organize information.
The absentminded professor, the shady lawyer, and the kindly grandmother are examples of “stock” images that many of us have created about certain types of people.
Although the professors, lawyers, and grandmothers that we meet may bear only a superficial resemblance to these stereotypical images, when we know little about someone, our expectations will be shaped by presumed similarities to these characters.
Many factors shape our images, including how we were socialized as children, traumatic events we experience that shape our personality and psychological needs, exposure to the ideas of people whose expertise we respect, and the opinions about world affairs expressed by our frequent associates such as close friends and coworkers.
Accordingly, we try to keep that image consistent with other beliefs and, through a psychological process known as cognitive dissonance, reject information that contradicts that image of the world.
The Impact of Perceptions on World Politics We must be careful not to assume automatically that what applies to individuals applies to entire countries, and we should not equate the beliefs of leaders, such as heads of state, with the beliefs of the people under their authority.
Still, leaders have extraordinary influence, and their images of historical circumstances often predispose them to behave in particular ways toward others, regardless of “objective” facts.
For instance, the loss of 26 million Soviet lives in the “Great Patriotic War” reinforced a long-standing fear of foreign invasion, which caused a generation of Soviet policy makers to perceive United States defensive moves with suspicion and often alarm.
Similarly, the founders of the United States viewed eighteenth-century European power politics and its repetitive wars as corrupt, contributing to two seemingly contradictory tendencies later evident in United States foreign policy.
The first is America’s impulse to isolate itself (its disposition to withdraw from world affairs), and the other is its determination to reform the world in its own image whenever global circumstances become highly threatening.
Each side saw its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as hostile, and both sides erroneously assumed that their counterpart would clearly interpret the intentions of their own policy initiatives.
For example, in rivalries such as Christianity’s with Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages, Israel’s and Palestine’s since the birth of the sovereign state of Israel in 1948, and the United States’ with AI Qaeda today, both sides demonize the image of their adversary while perceiving themselves as virtuous.
Further complicating matters, the mirror images held by rivals tend to be self-confirming.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ mirror images The tendency of states and people in competitive interaction to perceive each other similariy—to see others the same hostiie way others see them. enduring rivalries Protonged competition fueled by deep-seated mutual hatred that leads opposed actors to feud and fight over a long period of time without resolution of their conflict. and/or eChapter.
France and Belgium have banned full-facial veils in public places, and Spain, Italy, and Muslim-majority Turkey have some limitations on where they may be worn.
In July 2014 the European Court of Human Rights upheld the French law banning such clothing, providing support for fhe French government’s argument that such laws do not prevent the free exercise of religion in a place of worship, but that the face plays an imporfant role in social inferaction within secular society and hidden identity creates a potential security risk.
In Canada, however, a federal courf took a different approach in February 2015 when it ruled in favor of a nafive Pakistani woman who challenged the Canadian prohibition against wearing clothing that obscures the face during citizenship ceremonies.
Touching off a firestorm of debate within that country, the finding supported her argument that wearing a full-facial veil is an expression of her Muslim faifh and cultural values.
Perceptions clearly vary on whether such coverings are repressive or liberating, and whether legislation banning the clothing is a victory for democracy or a blow for individual freedom.
Some women say they choose to wear the concealing garments to protect their femininity and express their devotion to God.
Some argue that such coverings enable them to move about in public anonymously, shielded from sexual pressure, and so actually allow considerable personal freedom.
Others decry the practice and point to cases where women are forced to wear such garments or face violent repercussions such as disfigurement, beatings, or death.
In this context, the practice induces fearful obedience, denies individual choice, and silences the voices of women.
Such was evidenf in February 2015 when Al Khansa, an all-female policing unif of the Islamic State, poured acid on the faces of fifteen Iraqi women because they were not properly covered.
There are no sure-fire solutions to ensure accurate observations, no ways to guarantee that we have constructed an impartial view of international relations.
However, a number of tools can improve our ability to interpret world politics.
As you undertake an intellectual journey of discovery, a set of intellectual roadmaps provides guidance for your interpretation and understanding of past, present, and future world politics.
The belief that one’s own view of reality is the only reality is the most dangerous of all delusions. —Paul Watzlawick, Austrian psychologist Introducing Terminology A primary goal of this text is to introduce you to the vocabulary used by scholars, policy makers, and the “attentive public” who routinely observe international affairs.
You need to be literate and informed about the shared meaning of common words used worldwide to discuss and debate world politics and foreign policy.
These words are the kind of vocabulary you are likely to encounter long after your formal collegiate education has ended.
Nonetheless, you need to know their meaning to engage in effective analysis and well-informed debate with other scholars, practitioners, and attentive observers of global politics.
State sovereignty A state’s supreme authority to manage internal affairs and foreign relations.
State An independent legal entity with a government exercising exclusive control over the territory and population it governs. nation A collectivity whose people see themselves as members of the same group because they share the same ethnicity, culture, or language.
To guide you in identifying these terms, as you may already have noticed, certain words are printed in boldface italics in the text, and a broad definition is provided in the margin.
When a word is used again in a different chapter, it will be highlighted at least once in italics, although the marginal definition will not be repeated.
In all cases, the primary definition will appear in the Glossary at the end of book with a notation of the chapter in which it was first introduced.
Distinguishing the Primary Transnational Actors The world is a stage, and in the drama there are many players.
It is important to identify and classify the major categories of actors who take part in international engagements.
The actions of each transnational actor —individually, collectively, and with various degrees of influence—shape the trends that are transforming world politics.
The essential building-block units, of course, are individual people—over 7 billion of us.
Every day, whether each of us chooses to litter, light a cigarette, or parent a child, we affect some small measure of how trends in the world will unfold.
All of these groups combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate power of each group.
Such groups often compete with one another because they frequently have divergent interests and goals.
For most periods of world history, the prime actors were groupings of religions, tribes whose members shared ethnic origins, and empires or expansionist centers of power.
When they came into contact, they sometimes collaborated with each other for mutual benefit; more often they competed for and fought over valued resources.
The more than 8000 years of recorded international relations history between and among these groups provided the precedent for the formation of todays system of interactions.
A state is a legal entity that enjoys a permanent population, a well-defined territory, and a government capable of exercising sovereignty.
The history of world politics since 1648 has largely been a chronicle of interactions among states, which remain the dominant political organizations in the world.
However, the supremacy of the state has been severely challenged in recent years by nonstate actors.
Increasingly, global affairs are influenced by intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations.
Intergovernmental organizations , which transcend national boundaries and whose members are states, carry out independent foreign policies and therefore can be considered global actors in their own right.
Purposively created by states to solve shared problems, IGOs include global organizations such as the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , and derive their authority from the will of their membership.
IGOs are characterized by permanence and institutional organization, and they vary widely in their size and purpose.
Nongovernmental organizations , whose members are private individuals and groups, are another principal type of nonstate actor.
NGOs are diverse in scope and purpose and seek to push their own agendas and exert global influence on an array of issues, such as environmental protection, disarmament, and human rights.
Amnesty International, the World Wildlife Federation, and Doctors Without Borders are all NGOs that work to bring about change in the world and influence international decision making.
Yet although many NGOs are seen in a positive light, others, such as terrorist groups and international drug cartels, are seen as ominous nonstate actors.
In thinking about world politics and its future, we will probe all of these “units” or categories of actors.
But you should keep in mind that all actors (individuals, states, and nonstate organizations) are simultaneously active today, and their importance and power depend on the trend or issue under consideration.
Doing this will help you think like an international relations scholar.
MAJOR FACTORS SHAPING FOREIGN POLICY OECISIONS AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS The factors the phenomenon we are trying to explain.
Most events and developments in world politics are influenced simultaneously by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of causal linkages.
World Politics provides an analytic set of categories to help make interpretive sense of the multiple causes that explain why international events and circumstances occur.
This analytic distinction conforms to a widespread scholarly consensus that international events or developments can best be analyzed and understood by first separating the multiple pieces of the puzzle into different categories or levels.
To predict which forces will dominate the future, we also must recognize that many influences are operating at the same time.
If interacting forces converge. that affect states' foreign policies and the decisions of all other global actors can be categorized at three basic levels.
At the global level are structural features of the international system such as the prevalence of civil wars and the extent of trade interdependence.
At the individual level are the characteristics of leaders— their personal beliefs, values, and personality.
All three levels simultaneously affect decisions, but their relative weight usually depends on the issues and circumstances at the time of decision. however, their combined effects can accelerate the pace of change in world politics, moving it in directions otherwise not possible.
The individual level of analysis refers to the personal characteristics of human beings, including those responsible for making important decisions on behalf of state and nonstate actors, as well as ordinary citizens whose behavior has important political consequences.
At this level, for example, we may properly locate the impact of individuals’ perceptions on their political attitudes, beliefs, and behavior.
Protectionist trade policies by an importing country increase the costs to consumers of clothing and cars and reduce the standard of living of citizens in the manufacturing states.
Distinguishing Change, Continuities, and Cycles After having identified factors from different levels of analysis that may combine to produce some outcome, it is useful to place them in a chronological sequence.
Similarly, to explain why something happened in world politics, we must determine how various factors at the individual, state, and global system levels fit together in a configuration that unfolds over time.
Thus, to understand the dramatic changes in world politics today and to predict how they will shape the future, it is important to view them in the context of a long-term perspective that examines how transnational patterns of interaction have changed and how some of their fundamental characteristics have resisted change.
The countries of the world are drawing closer levels of analysis The different aspects of and agents in international affairs that may be stressed in interpreting and explaining giobai phenomena, depending on whether the analyst chooses to focus on “wholes” (the complete global system and large collectivities) or on “parts” (individual states or people). individual level of analysis An analytical approach that emphasizes the psychological and perceptual variables motivating people, such as those who make foreign policy decisions on behalf of states and other global actors.
To predict which forces will dominate the future, we must recognize that no trend stands alone, and that different trends may produce stability by limiting the impact of any one disruptive force.
It appears that world politics is now going through a transition period.
World Wars I and II and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink the premises underlying their interests, purposes, and priorities.
Yet it is equally important to look for the possibility of continuity amidst apparent transformation.
Decades-old flash points also persist, including the conflicts between India and Pakistan, North Korea and the United States, and Israel and militants in southern Lebanon and the Palestinian territories.
Headlines are not trend lines, and a trend does not necessarily signal transformation.
Given the enduring continuities that persist even alongside rapid changes, it is dangerous to assume that a major transformation in world politics is under way.
Stanley Hoffmann argues that we can identify a new global system when we have a new answer to one of the following three questions.
Although states remain a fixture of the international system, supranational institutions and nongovernmental actors are prominent.
In the realm of international trade, the World Trade Organization has been adjudicating trade disputes since 1995 and wields substantial influence over the policies of many individual states.
The United Nations plays a prominent role in conflict resolution throughout the world, with peacekeepers engaged in sixteen ongoing operations as of July 2015.
Transnational terrorist movements, such as the Islamic extremist group Boko Haram, commit widespread human rights atrocities.
At the same time, in its role as the first permanent treaty-based global court, the International Criminal Court has successfully prosecuted political leaders for human rights violations.
Although geopolitical struggles remain in many areas, territorial conquest is no longer states’ predominant foreign policy goal.
Rather, many key issues on the global agenda, including environmental, health, and financial crises, are transnational threats that require a collective response from countries and other global actors.
As the 2008 Global Financial Crisis spread , the G-20—a grouping of the world’s twenty largest economies—called for international dialogue and common efforts to promote financial stability.
Epidemics, such as Ebola, underscore the critical need for timely and well-coordinated international responses to major threats to global health on the part of international organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and states.
The proliferation of weapons technology has profoundly altered the damage enemies can inflict on one another.
Some view the world through a macro political lens, meaning they look at international affairs from a “bird’s eye view” and explain the behavior of world actors based on their relative position within the global system.
World Politics will accordingly inspect the values, interests, and capabilities of the individual actors affected by these global trends; the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances and how these interactions shape the ultimate trajectories of global trends; and the major macro trends in world politics that set the boundaries for action.
This analytic approach looks at the dynamic interplay of actors and their environment as well as how the actors respond and seek to influence each other’s behavior.
This approach has the advantage of taking into account the interplay of proximate and remote explanatory factors at the individual, state, and global levels of analysis while avoiding dwelling on particular countries, individuals, or transitory events whose long-term significance is likely to decrease.
The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center's Twin Towers on 9/11 is widely regarded as a revolutionary date in world history, producing a sea of change in world politics.
Time will tell whether this event will rank alongside the birth of the nuclear age on August 6,1945, when the United States bombed Hiroshima, or the November 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall, which signaled the end of the Cold War, as events that truly changed the world.
Alternatively, a rising China may pose a new challenge that will displace 9/11 as a transformative phenomenon in world politics. /ed.
Take full advantage of all of your opportunities to study and learn about the global community.
MindTap MindTap is a fully online, highly personalized learning experience built upon Cengage Learning content.
MindTap combines student learning tools—readings, multimedia, activities, and assessments—into a singular Learning Path that guides students through the course.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos Global System Great Powers Anarchy World Politics Enduring Rivalries Actor Power State Nongovernmental Organizations Additional Videos Kupchan, Charles.
As you begin your study of trend and transformation in world politics, your challenge is to interpret theoretically the meaning of a changing world.
Learning Objectives 2-1 Identify how theories are defined, and articulate why they are important in world politics.
You face the task of both defining the aspects of international affairs most worthy of attention and explaining the reasons for their priority.
You must be careful because your interpretations will necessarily depend on your assumptions about international realities that your citizens might find questionable.
The effort to explain the world, predict new global problems, and persuade others to support a policy to deal with them is bound to result in controversy because even reasonable people often see reality differently.
When leaders face these kinds of intellectual challenges, they can benefit from drawing on various theories of world politics.
A theory is a set of conclusions derived from assumptions and evidence about some phenomenon, including its character, causes, probable consequences, and ethical implications.
Til THEORIES AND CHANGE IN WORLD POLITICS Theories of international relations specify the conditions under which relationships between two or more factors exist, and explain the reasons for such linkages.
Choosing which theory to use is an important task, because each one rests on different assumptions about the nature of international politics, advances different claims about causes, and offers a different set of foreign policy recommendations.
The reason is primarily that the world is constantly changing, and no single theory has proven capable of making international events understandable for every global circumstance.
In any given era, a paradigm, or dominant way of looking at a particular subject such as international relations, influences judgments regarding which characteristics of www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ngage Learning.
Over time, paradigms are modified or abandoned as their assertions fail to mirror the prevailing patterns of international behavior.
These paradigms, or “a set of assumptions, concepts, values, and practices that comprise a view of reality” (Harrison, 2006, 17), tend eventually to be revised in order to explain new developments.
Yet theories are not merely passive agents for explaining historical events.
As they inform the worldviews of policy leaders, theoretical perspectives can play a key role in influencing policy choices.
Helps policy makers assess issues they face by facilitating their ability to discern patterns and focus on important causal factors.
Provides a framework for conceptualizing strategies and policy responses.
Facilitates critical assessment so that policy makers reach accurate conclusions about the successes and failures of a policy.
For example, the insights of realist theory , particularly the importance of balance of power, drove United States President Nixon’s decision to establish diplomatic relations with China in 1971.
Along realist lines, Nixon overlooked his profound ideological differences with China’s government and sought to establish relations based on common strategic interests, particularly, countering the power of the Soviet Union.
More recently, liberal ideas about the spread of democracy, combined with a realist emphasis on military power and disdain for international institutions, shaped the neoconservative approach to foreign policy and were pivotal in the United States decision to go to war against Iraq in 2003.
As British economist John Maynard Keynes famously argued, “The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood.
Simply put, the relationship between theory and historical events is interactive—theories both influence, and are influenced by, events and behaviors in world politics.
Moreover, the chapter broadens coverage of the range of contemporary international theorizing by also introducing you to the feminist and Marxist critiques of world politics and the theoretical lens that each provide for understanding international interactions.
Critical reflection on practice is a requirement of the relationship between theory and practice.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ neoconservative A political movement in the United States calling for the use of military and economic power in foreign policy to bring freedom and democracy to other countries. and/or eChapter. ts restrictions require it.
Realism is the oldest of the prevailing schools of thought and has a long and distinguished history dating back to Thucydides’s writings about the Peloponnesian War in ancient Greece.
Other influential figures who contributed to realist thought include sixteenth-century Italian philosopher Niccolo Machiavelli and seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes.
Realism deserves careful examination because its worldview continues to guide much understanding of international politics.
Realism, as applied to contemporary international politics, views the state as the most important actor on the world stage because it answers to no higher political authority.
States are sovereign; they have supreme power over their territory and populace, and no other actor stands above them to wield legitimacy and coercive capability and govern the global system.
Emphasizing the absence of a higher authority to which states can turn for protection and resolve disputes, realists depict world politics as a ceaseless, repetitive struggle for power where the strong dominate the weak.
Because each state is ultimately responsible for its own survival and feels uncertain about its neighbors’ intentions, realism claims that prudent political leaders build strong armies and allies to enhance national security.
In other words, international anarchy leads even well-intentioned leaders to practice self-help, increase their own military strength, and opportunistically align with others to deter potential enemies.
Realist theory, however, does not preclude the possibility that rival powers will cooperate on arms control or on other security issues of common interest.
Rather, it simply asserts cooperation will be rare because states worry about the unequal distribution of relative gains, or the unequal distribution of benefits from cooperation, and the possibility that the other side will cheat on agreements.
Embedded in this “philosophy of necessity” is a distinction between private morality, which guides the behavior of ordinary people in their daily lives, and raison d’etat , which governs the conduct of leaders responsible for the security and survival of the state.
Actions that are dictated by national interest must be carried out no matter how repugnant in the light of private morality.
The Evolution of Realism We have seen how the intellectual roots of realism reach back to ancient Greece.
Discussions of “power politics” abound in the Arthashastra, an Indian treatise on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE by Kautilya, as well as in works written by Han Fei and Shang Yang in ancient China.
This formed the foundation of what became a growing body of modern realist thinking that accepts the drive for power over others as necessary and wise statecraft.
The onset of rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, the expansion of the Cold War into a wider struggle between East and West, and the periodic crises that threatened to erupt into global violence all supported the realists’ emphasis on the inevitability of conflict, the poor prospects for cooperation, and the divergence of national interests among incorrigibly selfish, power-seeking states.
Neorealism (often called “structural realism”) understands human identity, motivation, and behavior as being driven by the environment in which actors are situated.
Although there are common themes throughout realist thought, different variants of realism emphasize certain features.
Although both are structural realist theories, the two perspectives differ with regard to the underlying motivation for state behavior and conflict.
The Limitations of Realist Thought However persuasive the realists’ image of the essential properties of international politics, their policy recommendations suffered from a lack of precision in the way they used such key terms as power and national interest.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights defensive realism k variant of realist theory that emphasizes the preservation of power, as opposed to the expansion of power, as an actor’s primary security objective. offensive realism A variant of realist theory that stresses that, in an anarchical international system, states should always look for opportunities to gain more power. id/or eChapter. restrictions require it.
Even the policy recommendations that purportedly flowed from its logic were often conflicting.
For instance, it could not explain the creation of new commercial and political institutions in Western Europe in the 1950s and 1960s, where the cooperative pursuit of mutual advantage led Europeans away from the unbridled power politics that had brought them incessant warfare since the birth of the nation-state some three centuries earlier.
Others began to worry about realism’s tendency to disregard ethical principles and the material and social costs some of its policy prescriptions imposed, such as hindered economic growth resulting from unrestrained military expenditures.
Placing great emphasis on military security and national self-interest, his statement comes amid speculation about the possibility of a unilateral Israeli military strike in response to Iran’s continuing pursuit of a nuclear program.
Liberalism warrants our attention because it speaks to issues realism disregards, including the impact of domestic politics on state behavior, the implications of economic interdependence, and the role of global norms and institutions in promoting international cooperation. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
There are several distinct schools of thought within the liberal tradition, and drawing broad conclusions from such a diverse body of theory runs the risk of misrepresenting the position of any single author.
Politics at the global level, then, becomes more a struggle for consensus and mutual gain than a struggle for power and prestige.
Reforming those conditions, liberals argue, will enhance the prospects for peace.
Another element common to various strands of liberal thought is an emphasis on undertaking political reforms to establish stable democracies.
A second command strand in liberal theorizing is an emphasis on free trade.
The idea that commerce can reduce conflict has roots in the work of Immanuel Kant, Charles de Secondat Montesquieu, Adam Smith, Jean-Jacque Rousseau, and various Enlightenment thinkers.
Finally, the third commonality in liberalism is an advocacy of global institutions.
Fiberals recommend replacing cutthroat, balance-of-power politics with organizations based on the principle that a threat to peace anywhere is a common threat to everyone.
They see foreign policy as unfolding in a nascent global society populated by actors who recognize the cost of conflict, share significant interests, and can realize those interests by using institutions to mediate disputes whenever misconceptions, wounded sensibilities, or aroused national passions threaten peaceful relations.
Realists counter, however, that “neither globalization nor international institutions impose genuine constraints on great powers, simply because states have sufficient power to interpret sovereignty” and participate in global institutions only to the extent that it suits their own national interest.
The Evolution of Liberalism In the wake of World War I, contemporary liberal theory rose to prominence.
Not only had the war involved more participants over a wider geographic area than any previous war, but modern science and technology made it a war of machinery.
Old weapons were improved and produced in greater quantities; new and far more deadly weapons were rapidly developed and deployed.
Believing that another horrific war would erupt if states resumed practicing power politics, liberals set out to reform the global system.
International regime Embodies the norms, principles, rules, and institutions around which global expectations unite regarding a specific international problem. neoliberalism The “new"" liberal theoretical perspective that accounts for the way international institutions promote global change, cooperation, peace, and prosperity through collective programs for reforms.
A third group of liberal thinkers followed the biblical ideal that states should beat their swords into plowshares and sought disarmament as a means of avoiding war.
Their efforts were illustrated between 1921 and 1922 by the Washington Naval Conference, which tried to curtail maritime competition among the United States, Great Britain, Japan, France, and Italy by placing limits on battleships.
States were becoming increasingly interdependent; that is, they were mutually dependent on, sensitive about, and vulnerable to one another in ways that were not captured by realist theory.
When a body of norms fosters shared expectations that guide a regularized pattern of cooperation on a specific issue, we call it an international regime.
Various types of regimes have been devised to govern behavior in trade and monetary affairs, as well as to manage access to common resources such as fisheries and river water.
In particular, neoliberalism focuses on the ways in which influences such as democratic governance, liberal commercial enterprise, international law and organization, collective security, and ethically inspired statecraft can improve life on our planet.
Because they perceive change in global conditions as progressing over time through cooperative efforts, neoliberal theorists maintain that the ideas and ideals of the liberal legacy could describe, explain, predict, and prescribe international conduct in ways that they could not during the conflict-ridden Cold War.
The expansion of trade, communication, information, technology, and migrant labor led Europeans to sacrifice portions of their sovereign independence to create a new political and economic union out of previously separate units.
These developments were outside of realism’s worldview, creating conditions that made the call for a theory grounded in the liberal tradition more convincing.
They charge that just like the Eeague of Nations and the PCIJ, institutions today exert minimal influence on state behavior.
International organizations cannot stop states from behaving according to balance-of-power logic, calculating how each strategic move affects their relative position in a world of relentless competition.
Critics of liberalism further contend that most studies supportive of international institutions appear in the arena of commercial, financial, and environmental affairs, not in the arena of national defense.
National survival hinges on the effective management of security issues, realists insist.
Because power-lusting states are unlikely to always see their vital interests in this light, global institutions cannot provide timely, muscular responses to aggression.
A final complaint lodged against liberalism is an alleged tendency to turn foreign policy into a moral crusade.
Although nonintervention into the internal affairs of other states has long been a cardinal principle of international law, they saw military action against Yugoslavia as a duty because human rights are an international entitlement and governments that violate them forfeit the protection of international law.
The international community has a responsibility to protect vulnerable populations and an obligation to use armed force to stop flagrant violations of human rights.
In accounting for United States military intervention in Libya in March 2011, these sentiments were reflected in President Barack Obamas declaration that the United States had a responsibility and moral obligation to respond to the violence perpetuated by Muammar al-Qaddafi’s troops.
On one hand, they deny the universal applicability of any single moral standard in a culturally pluralist world.
With intellectual roots in the twentieth-century Frankfurt School of critical social theory, contemporary scholars who have influenced the theoretical development of this perspective include Alexander Wendt, Friedrich Kratochwil, and Nicholas Onuf Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed, and of how prevailing ideas mold our beliefs about what is unchangeable and what can be reformed, enables us to see international relations in a new and critical light.
Along these lines, a complete understanding of international relations requires knowledge of the social context underlying these relations—the identities of the actors, their norms of behavior, and their social interactions within the international system.
As discussed in the previous chapter, our images and understandings of the world define and shape reality.
Though constructivists do not limit their analysis to the individual level, they view ideas, norms, and individual speech acts as shaping the global structure and stress the intersubjective quality of images—how prevailing attitudes shape perception.
For constructivists, this underscores the potential for agency as actors can reflect on their environment and seek change.
Ideas define identities, which in turn impart meaning to material capabilities and behavior.
In the years following the Cold War, new norms about sovereignty emerged, particularly with regard to the acceptability of intervention in cases of gross human rights violations.
Constructivism, like liberalism, recognizes the evolution of shared ideas as underpinning the growing legitimacy of the responsibility to protect concept, even though in practice it entails a violation of Westphalian sovereignty.
Similarly, the meaning of a concept such as “anarchy” depends on underlying shared knowledge.
Anarchy among allies, for instance, holds a different meaning than anarchy among bitter rivals.
The nature of an anarchic international system, therefore, is not a given.
Moreover, because the social structure underlying these relationships is malleable, the ideas and interests of actors may change as the nature of their interactions, and the way they understand the other actors, changes.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ constructivism 4 paradigm based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality and later respond to the meanings given to power politics; as consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve. and/or eChapter.
A prominent example of this is the European Union, which is made up of many states that fought against each other in both World War I and World War II but subsequently have been able to develop a common identity, or “we-feeling,” in the latter half of the twentieth century.
Key concepts of international relations, such as the institutions of war and slavery, may likewise change over time as the normative consensus surrounding them evolves.
As opposed to realism and liberalism, which assume that the fundamental structures of world politics are material and emphasize how objective factors such as military power and economic wealth affect international relations, constructivism sees the fundamental structures as social.
Whereas realism and liberalism assume that an actor’s preferences are given and fixed—with realism focusing on power, and liberalism on peace and prosperity—constructivism rejects rationalism and asserts that social structures shape behavior, as well as an actor’s identity and interests.
In other words, realism and liberalism “portray a world occupied by undifferentiated rational actors (i.e., selfinterested states), whose relations are structured by the balance of material power.
Realism and liberalism take interests and identities as given, whereas these concepts are the central concern for constructivism.
The Evolution of Constructivist Thought The unraveling of the Warsaw Pact, the subsequent disintegration of the Soviet Union, the rise of religious fundamentalism, and the growth of micro-nationalism through the 1990s stimulated scholarly interest in constructivist interpretations of world politics.
Constructivists attributed this to the material and individualist orientation of realism and liberalism, and argued that an explanation addressing the role of changing ideas and identities provided superior explanations for this systemic change.
Like realism and liberalism, within the constructivist perspective there are several strands of thought.
There is, however, concern that social constructivism overemphasizes the role of social structures at the expense of the purposeful agents—such as a state’s or organizations’ political leaders—whose practices help create and change these structures.
A second strand of constructivism, agent-oriented constructivism, addresses this weakness with its emphasis on individual influences on identities.
According to agent-oriented constructivism, independent actors in world politics may differ in their internal ideas or identities.
An actor can hold both domestic and international identities, which are shaped by respective dialogue at home and within the international community.
Whereas social constructivists attribute the development of these identities to repeated social practices and view most identity as a shared or collective understanding, agent-oriented constructivists suggest identities need not be universally shared and allow for individual or autonomous identity within the collectivity.
They credit the development of ideas in part to individual actors with the capacity for independent and critical thinking, making it far easier for new ideas to construct and change the international system.
Accordingly, agent-oriented constructivists point to the challenge that Mikhail Gorbachev’s “new thinking” posed to traditional Russian ideas about national security.
Shifting from belief in irreconcilable conflict between capitalism and communism to the possibility of a foreign policy rooted in shared moral and ethical principles, Gorbachev’s new thinking was reflected in a greater emphasis on political influence, diplomatic relations, and economic cooperation rather than intimidation and posturing through military power.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ social constructivism A variant of constructivism that emphasizes the role of social discourse in the development of Ideas and identities. agent-oriented constructivism A variant of constructivism that sees ideas and identities as influenced In part by independent actors. and/or eChapter. ts restrictions require it.
Due to an uneven distribution of capabilities, structural realism anticipates that some countries are better able than others to ward off zombies.
Balanceof-power politics could ensue, with human states aligning with other human states to counter the global spread of zombieism.
As a strand ot liberalism, liberal institutionalism sees a zombie outbreak as a problem that transcends national borders and threatens the global community writ large.
Therefore, prudent states seek to cooperate with one another and coordinate efforts to contain and squash the zombie threat.
Both global and regional regimes and institutions could serve as important means for facilitating communication and directing the human response.
With its emphasis on the development of norms and ideas, social constructivism envisions a number of different scenarios.
On one hand, relations between humans and zombies might best be reflected by the Hobbesian “kill or be killed” norm.
A third strand of constructivism has more recently emerged that emphasizes the sentimental or affective sources of intersubjective instability, and addresses what some see as insufficient attention by earlier constructivist efforts to the role of psychology and emotion in shaping ideas and practices used by individual actors to promote change.
Along this line of argument, constructivism supplements rather than supplants realism and liberalism.
Realists criticize constructivism for its emphasis on norms and values, and suggest that norms are simply manifestations of state or individual interests and can be superficially adopted for strategic reasons.
Although constructivism seeks to explain change, critics charge that constructivists remain unclear about what factors cause particular ideas to become dominant while others fall by the wayside.
Gonstructivists, he continues, have excessive faith in the ability of ideas that seem self-evident today to replicate and sustain themselves; however, future generations who live under different circumstances and who may think differently could easily reject these ideas.
Rather than viewing the world as a set of neutral, objective ""facts"" that could be perceived apart from the situation in which observation occurred, critical theorists saw all phenomena as being embedded within a specific sociohistorical context ascribing normative meaning to information. realist and liberal paradigms could lead to greater understanding of change in the international system.
Although the constructivist approach is increasingly viewed as a vital perspective for understanding world politics, it is still criticized for its limited attention to methodological issues.
In other words, such a pluralistic methodology would help us to consider both the material and ideational factors that shape world politics.
Of the many different challengers, two of the most significant are feminism and Marxism.
In particular, feminist theory was concerned with the gender bias inherent in both mainstream theory and the practice of international affairs, and sought to demonstrate how gendered perspectives pervade world politics.
Similar to social constructivism, the feminist critique emphasizes the role of identity in the construction of knowledge—but focuses specifically on gender identity and contends that the study of international relations draws heavily on male experiences to explain international affairs, largely dismissing the feminine dimension.
Feminism challenges the heavy reliance on such assumptions and posits that characteristics dismissed due to their “feminine” quality play an important role in international affairs as well.
Feminism notes that the basic assumptions of the mainstream theoretical literature, as well as the practice of foreign policy, are heavily colored by a masculine tradition of thought.
Soldiering is a role into which boys are socialized in school and on the playing fields.
A soldier must be a protector; he must show courage, strength, and responsibility and repress feelings of fear, vulnerability, and compassion.
Ffistorically, the role of women has been marginalized in most societies.
To understand how unequal gender relations have excluded women from foreign policy, perpetuated injustice and oppression, and shaped state interests and behavior, it is critical to purposively examine the female experience.
As we have previously discussed, traditional international relations theory—particularly neorealism—has influenced the scientific study of world politics, which attempts to explain the behavior of states in the international system by universal, objective laws.
Spike Petersen, a prominent feminist theorist, notes that there was an explicit masculine bias in the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century, with science/reasoning attributed as a “male” trait and emotion/intuition as a “female” one.
Some critics of feminism are skeptical of the historical and interpretative approach to investigating research questions.
They argue that there is a greater need for feminist scholars to develop scientifically testable hypotheses ; this would make it easier to assess competing claims and increase the validity of feminist research.
They saw peace as a feminist issue and asserted their power by holding hands and creating a 14-mile chain around the airbase with their bodies.
Not only did they see nuclear weapons as a direct threat to themselves and their children, they protested that trillions were being spent on weapons of mass destruction while so many around the world suffered from a lack of food and water, inadequate health care, and underfunded schools.
Not all women are the same or share similar life experiences, and important differences may exist that are conditioned by factors such as social class, race, and culture.
Although all feminists stress the importance of gender in studying international relations and are interested in gender emancipation, there are numerous theoretical perspectives within feminism.
Liberal feminism is a prominent category of feminist theory and draws on liberalism’s emphasis on liberty and equality.
Liberal feminists object to the marginalization and exclusion of women in international affairs.
They argue that women are just as skilled and competent as men, and they should have an equal opportunity to participate in world politics.
Furthermore, whether in positions of political, economic, or military leadership, excluding women squanders talent and means that state and organizational capabilities fall short of their full potential.
Liberal feminists call for the removal of legal and societal barriers that prevent women from full participation, and hence see the state and the international community as a possible ally for overcoming the oppression of women.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigl liberal feminism k category of feminist theory that sees men and women as equai in skiiis and capabiiities, and promotes the equai participation of women under existing political, legal, and social institutions and practices. and/or eChapter.
Standpoint feminism argues that real differences exist between men and women.
Whether biological or cultural in origin, the lives and roles of women in most societies across the world are very different from those of men, and therefore women have a unique standpoint or perspective.
For instance, women are thought to have a greater aptitude in nurturing and social interactions, and so may also have greater skill in community building and conflict resolution.
This strand of feminism urges us to examine events from the personal perspectives of the countless women who have been involved in international affairs as caregivers, grassroots activists, or participants in the informal labor force.
Women’s experiences—as citizens in countries where they have no political rights or voice, or as victims of human trafficking where they face a life of prostitution or slave labor, or as cheap and easily exploited workers in factories across the globe—provide insights that paint a very different picture of global relations than that portrayed from a masculine point of view.
Consider, for example, the phallic nature of military weapons and the use of force—the “potency” of weapons, “penetration” of targets, and the masculine “warrior”—that invokes imagery of male virility and female submissiveness.
Similarly, dichotomist constructions such as rational/ emotional, strong/weak, protector/protected convey a preference for the masculine.
Poststructural feminists are critical of these linguistic constructions and believe they have real consequences in world politics.
Poststructuralist feminists contend that women have typically been marginalized as both generators of knowledge and as subjects of knowledge, but that the spoken meaning of gender can be changed.
Postcolonial feminism argues that not only are there differences between men and women, but there are differences between women from different parts of the world.
Thus, there is not a universal approach to understanding and overcoming the subordination of women.
It is important to keep in mind that the various types of feminist theory are not mutually exclusive.
Yet regardless of the position taken on the issue of gender differences, feminist scholars are critical of traditional theoretical perspectives that ignore the ways in which gender shapes international relations.
The Marxist Critique For much of the twentieth century, socialism was the primary radical alternative to mainstream international relations theorizing.
Whereas realists emphasize state security, liberals accentuate individual freedom, and constructivists highlight ideas and identities, socialists focus on class conflict and the material interests of each class.
Socialism envisions society as optimally characterized by public ownership and control of property and resources, to the benefit of individuals living in concert with one another, on the private ownership of the means of production and permits individual choice through a free market to determine the distribution of goods and services.
There are many strands of socialist thought, and they diverge over the extent to which society should own or control property and whether society should exercise its control through a central authority or at the local level of the people.
Karl Marx, however, is widely viewed as the most prominent theorist of socialism.
He, along with his coauthor Friedrich Engels , argued that socialism emerges through the clash of social classes as opposed to the establishment of harmonious communities.
The target of his crifique was the compulsion of the wealthy great powers to subjugate foreign people by military force and to create colonies for purposes of financial exploitation.
The working class is estranged from, and lacks authority over, the products of their labor.
Instead, Marxism holds that the ruling class controls and benefits disproportionately from the surplus value generated by the subordinate working class’s labor.
Through the labor of workers, raw materials are transformed into products of greater value.
Yet workers lack bargaining power and tend to receive a fixed wage for their labor irrespective of the value added, while the owners of companies unfairly reap a greater portion of surplus value as realized through increased profits.
Marxism anticipates that class struggle will result, sometimes through violent rebellion, wherein the oppressed working class seeks power and a greater share of wealth.
Marxism has had considerable influence in countries in the Global South where there is pronounced inequality and workers endure harsh labor conditions and low wages.
Although Marx’s theory of economic exploitation focused on domestic class struggle, the antagonistic relationship between classes plays a key role in determining the characteristics of international relations.
This interaction creates a predatory international system with the core states benefiting from the subjugation of peripheral states.
Building on these ideas, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in the Soviet Union extended Marx’s analysis to the study of imperialism, which he interpreted as a stage in the development of capitalism when monopolies overtake free-market competition.
They respond by waging wars to divide the world into spheres of influence, forcing these new foreign markets to consume the surplus goods and capital.
European colonization of the Global South also was seen as a means for the capitalist ruling class to placate their own domestic working class by sharing some of the profits accrued through exploitation of laborers in the colonies.
Although Lenin’s assertions have been heavily criticized on conceptual and empirical grounds, the socialist attention to social classes and uneven development stimulated several new waves of theorizing about capitalism as a global phenomenon.
As expressed in the writings of Andre Gunder frank , Amir Samin , and others , dependency theorists claimed that much of the poverty in Asia, Africa, and Latin America stemmed from the exploitative capitalist world economy.
Within the world economy as a whole, the advantages held by core states are perpetuated through the continual accumulation of capital within the core from the periphery and semi-periphery.
With the end of the Cold War, and the concomitant failures of the Soviet regime, there are fewer advocates today for organizing society along Marxist principles.
Yet these various radical challenges to mainstream theorizing continue to enhance our understanding of world politics by highlighting the roles played by corporations, transnational religious movements, and other nonstate actors.
Yet they overemphasize economic interpretations of international events and consequently omit other potentially important explanatory factors.
Some critics of Marxism have also accused it of partaking in the theoretical simplification that it had sought to overcome and leaving key political ideas, such as revolutionary social change, ambiguous.
In fact, international relations scholar Andrew Davenport goes so far as to suggest that this is one of the major deficiencies of Marxist theorizing today.
HAVES AND HAVE-NOTS This photo of Makati in the Philippines captures the dramatic inequalities that exist in many, if not all, cities across the globe.
Each paradigmatic effort to do so in the past has ultimately lost advocates as developments in world affairs eroded its continuing relevance.
As you seek to understand changing global conditions, it is important to be humble in recognizing the limitations of our understandings of world politics and, at the same time, inquisitive about its character.
The task of interpretation is complicated because the world is complex.
Conceptually speaking, world affairs today can be likened to a disassembled jigsaw puzzle scattered on a table before us.
Much of the international community views the land as occupied territory and sees settlement construction as a breach of international law, a violation of Palestinian human rights, and an obstacle to the peace process.
Palestinians argue that such activity is an effort to preempt or undermine any agreement that provides for Palestinian sovereignty and that the presence of Jewish settlements hinders the possibility of having a viable and contiguous state.
As Israel’s staunchest ally, the United States often finds itself in a position where there is tension between its pursuit of strategic interest and its normative values and preferences.
This led to an outcry by Israel, lamenting that U.S.-lsraeli relations had suffered, in the words of Israeli ambassador to the United States Michael Oren, a “tectonic rift” and were at their lowest point in thirty-five years.
Yet, despite its disapproval of continued Israeli settlement, in January 2011 the United States actively opposed a campaign to bring the issue to the United Nations Security Council.
Critics suggested that the United States position was largely motivated by a desire to preserve its ability to strategically influence key Middle East peace issues.
So in our theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is permanendy fixed.
Recall that realism is frequently criticized for relying on ambiguous concepts, liberalism is often derided for making naive policy recommendations based on idealistic assumptions, and constructivism is charged with being a social scientific framework rather than a “real” theory.
Moreover, as the challenges mounted by feminism and the Marxist critique suggest, these three mainstream theories overlook seemingly important aspects of world politics, which limits their explanatory power.
Because we lack a single overarching theory able to account for all facets of world politics, we draw on realist, liberal, and constructivist thought in subsequent chapters.
Moreover, we supplement them with insights from feminism and the Marxist critique when these theoretical traditions can best help to interpret the topic covered.
If you tell people the world is eomplieated, you're not doing your job as a soeial seientist.
A blog that applies political theory to daily life in the form of narratives.
An interactive forum for discussion of debates in world politics with an emphasis of theoretical issues.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos Realism * Zero-sum • Neoliberalism Liberalism * Collective Security • Social Constructivism Diplomacy • International Regime • Norms Additional Videos • Betts, Richard.
He has defended his policies, depicting protestors as seeking to destabilize his government in a tough economic year.
Your employment allows you to apply your acquired knowledge to help make the world a better place.
As an international decision maker, your approach will partly depend on your preferences and priorities, but there is no sure path as to how to make foreign policy decisions that are workable, moral, and successful.
What is more, any choice you might make is certain to carry costs that compromise some values you hold dear and undermine some of the other goals you would like to pursue.
So, you now face the kind of challenge that has befuddled every decision maker who has had the power to make foreign policy decisions on behalf of the transnational actor he or she led.
Yi I FOREIGN POLICY MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS This chapter, which is based on historical experience and theories of international relations, looks at patterns of international decision making by all transnational actors—the individuals, groups, states, and organizations that play a role in world politics.
In addition, it is important to reflect on how each and every one of us—all individual people— are part of the equation.
We are all, in a sense, transnational actors capable of making free choices that contribute to the direction of trends in world politics.
Transnational Actors and Decision Processes This chapter opens a window to rival ways of describing and analyzing international decision making by transnational actors.
You will be introduced to some of the lessons that theory and history provide about the relative strengths and weaknesses of these approaches, and develop the tools to critically assess decision-making outcomes and processes.
The major theoretical schools of thought provide some insights into international decision making.
Neorealism eschews the explanatory importance of the individual level of analysis in favor of systemic explanations, whereas neoclassical realism allows for the dominance of the international system and relative material capabilities to be filtered through the state.
While some constructivists focus on shared norms at the systemic level, others focus on such forces inside the decision-making unit.
Theories of international relations offer important insights, but they have nonetheless been critiqued as not going far enough in developing conceptions of agency and incorporating internal factors.
There are, however, explanations drawn from these theories that emphasize the pivotal role of the decision-making units and provide a rich foundation for understanding policy making.
These approaches enable us to move beyond the generalities of international relations theories to better understand foreign policy decisions in specific cases.
Influences on Making Foreign Policy Decisions To structure theoretical thinking about international decision making, it is useful to think in terms of the factors or causes that influence the ways in which all transnational actors make foreign policy decisions.
Yet, although a president’s personal inclinations may influence policy decisions, all leaders are constrained by various circumstances that restrict free choice.
Thus, to get to the essence of how international decision making takes place, we must go beyond a single-factor explanation and think in terms of multiple causes.
For that, it is useful to identify the various clusters of variables that affect the choices all types of transnational actors make when they formulate a foreign policy.
The personal characteristics of the leaders heading international actors assume great importance in making international decisions as their individual values, personalities, beliefs, intelligence, and prior experiences predispose them to take certain kinds of positions on global issues.
A geographical set of conditions, for instance, can affect the behavior of a nation only as specific persons perceive and interpret these conditions.
Although changes in global conditions and actors’ collective internal characteristics may influence the costs and benefits of particular foreign policy options and stimulate the need for choice, these are mediated by leaders’ perceptions.
Therefore, in any explanation of why any international decision is made, it is imperative to take into account how leaders’ ideas and images influence the choices taken.
Every actor on the global stage is defined by its own attributes, which also act to determine the actor’s foreign policy choices.
As important as the individual decision maker is, it would be a mistake to think foreign policy leaders alone are the sole source driving international decision making.
Internal characteristics—such as wealth, military might, and public opinion—of the transnational actor making the decision heavily shape the range of choices open to the individual decision maker.
All international actors organized to take action abroad are composed of a collection of individuals.
How these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the decisions that are reached.
Global conditions provide constraints and opportunities for international decision making and color the degree to which both an actors internal attributes and individual leader preferences can account for the choices made.
The changing state of the world—everything that occurs beyond the actor—affects the decisions of international actors.
All shifts in global circumstances have an important impact upon decisions by international actors.
The view that changes of global circumstances serve as a catalyst for international decision making was captured by United States President Richard Nixon when he declared, “The world has changed.
This three-part framework encourages you to think in causal terms about categories of phenomena that explain why particular decisions are made.
Each category encompasses a large number of factors, which, together with the influences grouped in the other two categories, tell you what to observe when you construct an explanation for why a particular decision by a particular international actor was made.
Factors in the three categories serve as “inputs” that shape the policy-making process.
Moreover, these policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time [t + 3) because they exert “feedback” on these causal factors as the foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent decisions.
This decision, furthermore, exerted a painfully negative “feedback” influence on public opinion within the United States and abroad when that invasion increased the level of international terrorism it was originally designed to end.
This reaction, in turn, later [t + 3) transformed global conditions as well as attitudes within American society, which began to galvanize revisions {t + 4) of the original policy decision.
This way of tracing the determinants and consequences of international decisions provides you, the analyst, with a lens through which to view and explain the foreign policy of transnational actors in historical perspective because the model is not tied analytically to any one time period or actor.
Continuities will be obscured, causalfactors unidentified. —George W Ball, former United States undersecretary of state 3-2 MODELS OF DECISION MAKING BY TRANSNATIONAL ACTORS With the “funnel of causality” framework in mind, you are armed intellectually to probe international decision making in greater depth.
Drawing on the insights and responding to the shortcomings of the major theories of international relations, two schools of thought—rational choice and cognitive psychological approaches—have emerged that emphasize individual decision makers and the factors that shape foreign policy.
Because realists believe that every leader’s goals and corresponding approach to making foreign policy choices are the same, the decision-making processes of each actor can be studied as though each were a unitary actor —a homogeneous or monolithic unit with few or no important internal differences that affect its choices.
From this assumption can be derived the expectation that international actors can and do make decisions by rational calculations of the costs and benefits of different choices.
Ideally, the search for information will be exhaustive, and all the facts relevant to the problem will be gathered.
It requires the identification and ranking of all values (such as security and economic prosperity) in a hierarchy from most to least preferred.
For this purpose, policy makers must conduct a rigorous costbenefit analysis guided by an accurate prediction of the probable success of each option.
Those who advocated for a withdrawal of United States troops and a clear exit strategy argued that bin Laden’s death should force a reevaluation of the war, in part because the terrorist leader was found by a small special operations force in Pakistan and not by the 100,000 ground troops in Afghanistan, thus bringing into question whether the large commitment of United States resources, with the risk to the lives of American soldiers, was the most effective way to combat the terrorist threat.
Furthermore, according to critics, with bin Laden’s death the Afghans themselves should be able to take more responsibility for their own security.
The message reflected the language of deliberate rational choice to convince skeptics that the costs and benefits of all options had been carefully weighed.
Ffowever, like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, and reasonable, clear-thinking people can and often do disagree about the facts and wisdom of foreign policy goals.
And it’s This debate demonstrated that although rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met or what those rational choices look like in practice.
But he explained how difficult it is to follow these steps because each step cannot be taken in order.
Some of the barriers that make errors in foreign policy decisions so common are human, deriving from deficiencies in the intelligence, capability, and psychological needs and aspirations of foreign policy decision makers.
Reaching agreement is not easy, however, because reasonable people with different values often disagree about goals, preferences, and the probable results of alternative options.
Moreover, the available information is often inaccurate because the bureaucratic organizations that political leaders depend on for advice often screen, sort, and rearrange it.
Compounding the problem is decision makers’ susceptibility to cognitive dissonance — they are psychologically prone to block out dissonant, or inconsistent, information and perceptions about their preferred choice and to look instead for information that conforms to their preexisting beliefs to justify their choice.
Those who see themselves as “political experts” are habitually mistaken in their judgments and forecasts , and leaders are prone to place faith in their www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
Pictured here in Panama in April 2015, Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro held the first in-person meeting between leaders of their two countries in a half-century.
As so-called “behavioral international relations” research on decision making and game theory show , leaders are limited in their capacity to process information and avoid biases; preoccupied with preventing losses, leaders are also prone to “wishful thinking” and “shooting from the hip,” which frequently results in irrational decisions.
Foreign activities commonly heavily influence an actor’s internal condition.
This is why many leaders are likely to fuse the two sectors when contemplating policy decisions.
Yet critics suggest that the two-level game model does not go far enough and could be improved by incorporating insights from constructivism.
Indeed, many decisions tend to produce unintended consequences—what economists call externalities.
In the choice phase, then, decision makers rarely make value-maximizing decisions.
In the first stage, leaders use cognitive heuristics, or mental short-cuts, to simplify the decision and eliminate some options.
In the second-stage, they then assess the remaining alternatives through analytic calculation as depicted by the rational choice school of decision making.
Decision makers then evaluate the policy choices that remain through rational calculations and select the alternative that has the strongest net gain.
Despite a strong commitment in principle to make Great Britain a leading partner in the European Union, the Blair government ruled out rapid entry to the single currency and set up a series of economic tests that essentially provided cover to indefinitely put off a decision to join the Euro.
Although this theoretical perspective allows for mediating influences that compromise rationality, poliheuristic theory nonetheless sees individuals as having the capacity to make decisions via a rational choice process within certain parameters.
Constructivism challenges this fundamental premise, positing that human subjectivity and intentionality are conditioned by constantly changing contexts of meaning and thus there is necessarily ambiguity in decision making.
Nonetheless, poliheuristic theory challenges the idea that decision makers behave rationally and advances the notion that rather than making optimal policy choices, leaders instead tend to opt for “satisficing” alternatives.
Rooted in the experiments of Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who won the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics, prospect theory similarly challenges the idea of rational choice in decision making.
United States leaders, for example, are often more concerned with the loss of sovereignty and power that would result from greater authority of international organizations such as the United Nations or the International Criminal Court than they are with the gains that could be had from greater global integration and shared governance.
Another implication of prospect theory is that when leaders take risks to initiate bold new foreign policy directions, they will have great difficulty admitting and correcting those choices if they later prove mistaken.
As critics lament of George W Bush’s refusal to acknowledge decision-making failures regarding the Iraq War , leaders are prone to cling to failed policies long after their deficiencies have become apparent.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf prospect theory A socialpsychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty and risk that looks at the relationship between individual risk propensity and the perceived prospects for avoiding losses and realizing big gains. and/or eChapter.
Along these lines, experimental literature indicates that people tend to incorporate a sense of fairness into their decision making even if it is contrary to their own rational self-interest.
Yet although rational foreign policy making is more an ideal than a reality, we can still assume that policy makers aspire to rational decision-making behavior, which they may occasionally approximate.
Leaders and the style of leadership they employ shape the way in which foreign policies are made and the resulting behavior of the actors in world politics.
Leaders as Movers of World History This history-making individtmls model oi'policy decision making perceives world leaders as the people who create global changes.
Equating United States foreign policy with the Bush Doctrine in the 2000s is a recent example.
The assumptions they make about the personalities of their counterparts, consciously or unconsciously, in turn influence their own behavior.
While subsuming thousands of individual personality attributes, the categories in what is known as the Big Five Model are consistent across gender, culture, ethnicity, and time.
They provide insights Extraversion ^ • Assertiveness ■ Gregariousness ■ Excitement-Seeking ■ Warmth • Optimism •Energetic_^ Agreeableness ^ •Altruism •Trust • Compiiance • Modesty • Directness Compassion _^ Conscientiousness ^ • Self-Discipline • Deliberation • Order • Competence • Sense of Duty ^^Ambition_ y ^Emotional Stability^ • Impulsiveness •Vulnerability • Self-Consciousness • Anxiety • Hostility Depression _^ Openness ^ •To Ideas •To Values •To Feelings •To Aesthetics •To Fantasy V_ J FIGURE 3.
THE BIG FIVE PERSONALITY MARKERS The Big Five personality factors represent broad dimensions that encompass a number of facets.
People who are highly extraverted are outgoing and enjoy the company of others.
Those who are very conscientious have a preference for planned behavior, and high levels of openness reflect creativity and intellectual curiosity.
Emotional stability is linked to one's tolerance for stress and ability to regulate emotions.
In world politics, “all leaders face decision making under uncertainty.
This has implications for understanding the sources of conflict as leaders who are risk-acceptant are more likely to engage in brinksmanship and the use of force.
One of the challenges illuminated by leader-driven explanations of international decision making is that history’s movers and shakers often pursue decidedly irrational policies.
Personality likely plays a role as it affects a rational actor’s optimization process by influencing the options seen as acceptable in a particular situation.
A classic example is Adolf Hitler, whose ruthless determination to seek military conquest proved disastrous for Germany.
Realism says that survival is the paramount goal of all states and that all leaders engage in rational calculations to advance their countries’ self-advantage.
But realism cannot account for the times when leaders’ choices ultimately prove counterproductive.
Even defects in states’ foreign policy-making processes cannot easily explain such wide divergences between the decisions leaders sometimes make and what cold cost-benefit calculations would predict.
Constraints on Individual Leadership Having said that the history-making individuals model may be compelling, we must be cautious and remember that leaders are not all-powerful determinants of states’ foreign policy behavior.
The “great person” versus Zeitgeist debate is pertinent here, as constructivist theorists like to observe.
At the core of this enduring controversy is the question of whether certain times are conducive to the emergence of leaders or whether famous leaders would have an impact whenever and wherever they lived.
The history-making individuals model alone appears too simple an explanation of how transnational actors react to external challenges. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
They clearly do both, but leaders are not in complete control, and their influence is severely constrained.
The impact of leaders’ personal characteristics on foreign policy decisions generally increases when their authority and legitimacy are widely accepted or when leaders are protected from broad public criticism.
Among them are new situations that free leaders from conventional approaches to defining the situation, complex situations involving many different factors, and situations without social sanctions, which permit freedom of choice because norms defining the range of permissible options are unclear.
A leader’s political efficacy, or self-image—that person’s belief in his or her own ability to control political events—combined with the citizenry’s relative desire for leadership, will also influence the degree to which personal values and psychological needs govern decision making.
Political psychology and constructivism tell us that the same option is likely to have different value to different leaders.
In 1971, Americans took to the streets outside the White House to protest the immorality of Nixon's massive bombing of Vietnam.
His reaction to this perceived threat was to shield himself from the voice of the people, without success, as it happened.
Nixon complained that “nobody can know what it means for a president to be sitting in that White House working late at night and to have hundreds of thousands of demonstrators charging through the streets.
Earlier, on a rainy afternoon in 1962, John F Kennedy faced a similar citizen protest.
Americans had gathered in front of the White House for a “Ban the Bomb” demonstration.
His response was to send out urns of coffee and doughnuts and invite the leaders of the protest to come inside to state their case, believing that a democracy should encourage dissent and debate.
Many would protest that Kennedy alone could not be expected to eliminate nuclear weapons—that the Zeitgeist was dominated by fear of the Soviet Union and intense concern for national security.
Although they alone may not have persuaded Nixon to alter his policies in Vietnam, widespread protest and discontentment with the war, as well as America's inability to win, eventually prompted Nixon to order the gradual withdrawal of United States troops, ending American participation in the Vietnam War.
Other factors undoubtedly influence how much leaders can shape their states’ choices.
That is especially true during the “honeymoon” period routinely afforded to newly elected leaders, during which time they are relatively free of criticism and excessive pressure.
Crisis decision making is typically centralized and handled exclusively by the top leadership.
Any given decision you make you’ll wind up with a 30 to 40pereent chance that it isn’t going to work.
You have to own that and feel comfortable with the way you made the decision. —Barack Obama, United States president The Bureaucratic Politics of Foreign Policy Decision Making To make the right choices, leaders must seek information and advice, and must see that the actions their decisions generate are carried out properly.
Standard operating procedures Rules for reaching decisions about particular types of situations.
They define rules and standard operating procedures that specify how tasks are to be performed; they rely on record systems to gather and store information; they divide authority among different organizations to avoid duplication of effort; they often lead to meritocracies by hiring and promoting the most capable individuals.
The method United States policy makers used in orchestrating a response is often viewed as having nearly approximated the ideal of rational choice.
Essence of Decision (1971; see also Allison and Zelikow, 1999), he advanced what is widely known as the bureaucratic politics model.
This model of decision making highlights the constraints that organizations in policy networks place on decision makers’ choices and the “pulling and hauling” that occurs among the key participants and caucuses of aligned bureaucracies in the decision process.
Rather than being a value-maximizing process, then, policy making is itself an intensely competitive game of why “it is necessary to identify the games and players, to display the coalitions, bargains, and compromises, and to convey some feel for the confusion” . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
For example, under Presidents Nixon and Ford, Secretary of State Ffenry Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld, who headed the Department of Defense, over strategy regarding the Vietnam War; Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, repeatedly engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over the Iran hostage crisis; and under Ronald Reagan, Caspar Weinberger at Defense and George Shultz at State were famous for butting heads on most policy issues.
Such conflicts are not necessarily bad because they force each side to better explain its viewpoint, and this gives heads of state the opportunity to weigh their competing advice before making decisions.
However, battles among advisers can lead to paralysis or to rash decisions that produce poor results.
That possibility became evident in the fall of 2002, when serious divisions within George W Bush’s administration developed over the “how and why” surrounding the president’s goal to wage war against Saddam Hussein in Iraq.
In addition to their influence on the policy choices of political leaders, bureaucratic organizations possess several other characteristics that affect decision making.
One view proposes that bureaucratic agencies are parochial and that every administrative unit within an international actor’s foreign policy-making bureaucracy seeks to promote its own purposes and power.
Organizational needs, such as large staffs and budgets, come before the actor’s needs, sometimes encouraging the sacrifice of the actor’s interests to bureaucratic interests.
Characteristically, bureaucratic agencies are driven to enlarge their prerogatives and expand the conception of their mission, seeking to take on other units’ responsibilities and powers.
Moreover, in contrast to rational choice theory, which sees decisions made by a unitary actor, bureaucratic agencies and their staff may not agree with the leader’s values and priorities.
Many regarded the attacks on 9/11 as the worst intelligence failure since Pearl Harbor.
The answer at first accepted by most analysts was that Americas chaotic system of intelligence was paralyzed by the morass of cross-cutting bureaucracies.
They engaged in turf battles with one another and did not share the vital information that arguably could have identified and prevented the A1 Qaeda plot.
As the horror of 9/11 persisted, so did interest and concern about who did what to disrupt the A1 Qaeda terrorist network operation prior to September 11, 2001.
A bipartisan congressional commission was created to investigate what had gone wrong, in order to make needed corrections in the way the United States government makes decisions for national security and counterterrorism.
Instead, the commission pointed its criticism at the growing complaints about the White blouse’s inaction and pre-9/11 downplaying or ignoring of the loud and clear warnings submitted by United States intelligence bureaucracies of the true, imminent dangers of a likely terrorist attack.
Scholars often cite groupthink as a process governing policy decision making that leads to riskier choices.
This, in turn, leads to more extreme policies than likely would have been made by individuals without the pressures in peer groups.
Pictured here in a meeting with members of his cabinet and advisers, President Obama listens to Secretary of State John Kerry discuss immigration issues. on standard operating procedures and deference to precedent rather than the exploration of new options to meet new challenges.
Yet research shows that debate and criticism stimulate, rather than inhibit, ideas.
Many students, before they entered the workforce, found that the payoffs of rational choice and the pitfalls of bureaucratic politics surrounding actual practice described here were not figments of scholars’ imagination.
In classifying the determinants of international actors’ foreign policies, the levels-of-analysis framework introduced in Chapter 1 helps to describe the multiple influences on the decision-making process.
Recall that in addition to the level of the individual decision maker, the internal and global levels of analysis also influence foreign policy decisions.
Although nonstate actors have internal attributes that shape their policy decisions, here we focus on states as they are the most powerful player on the world stage, their foreign policy decisions are the most consequential, and the factors that influence their capacity to make decisions are arguably different from many of those that influence other international actors’ decisions.
To illustrate the impact of internal factors, consider how variations in states’ attributes—such as differences in military capabilities, level of economic development, and type of government—may influence different countries’ foreign policy choices.
Although most states may seek similar goals, their ability to realize them will vary according to their military capabilities.
Because military capabilities limit a state’s range of prudent policy choices, they act as a mediating factor on leaders’ national security decisions.
For instance, in the 1980s, Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafl repeatedly provoked the United States through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric and by supporting various terrorist activities.
Qaddafl was able to act as he did largely because neither bureaucratic organizations nor a mobilized public existed in Libya to constrain his personal whims.
However, Qaddafl was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom he directed his anger.
Limited military muscle compared with the United States precluded the kinds of belligerent behaviors he threatened to use.
The lesson; what states believe about their own military capabilities and those of their adversaries guide their decisions about war and peace.
Levels of productivity and prosperity also affect the foreign policies of the poor states at the bottom of the global hierarchy.
Generalizations about the economic foundations of states’ international political behavior often prove inaccurate.
Instead, leaders’ perceptions of the opportunities and constraints that their states’ economic resources provide may have a larger influence on their foreign policy choices.
But in democratic systems, those interests are likely to spread beyond the government itself Public opinion, interest groups, and the mass media are a more visible part of the policy-making process in democratic systems.
Similarly, the electoral processes in democratic societies more meaningfully frame choices than the processes in authoritarian regimes, where the real choices are made by a few elites behind closed doors.
In ancient Greece, for instance, the realist historian Thucydides observed that what happened within the Greek city-states often did more to shape their external behavior than did the interactions between the states.
He added that Greek leaders frequently concentrated their efforts on influencing the political climate within their own polities.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf constitutional democracy Government processes that allow people, through their elected representatives, to exercise power and influence the state’s policies. autocratic rule A system of authoritarian or totalitarian government in which unlimited power is concentrated in a single leader. and/or eChapter.
Democratic THE BURDEN OF FOREIGN POLICY CHOICE FOR GLOBAL LEADERSHIP The United States is called upon to provide visionary leadership for the world, and this entails a careful assessment of priorities and strategies.
President Obama declared that ""I will strengthen our common security by investing in our common humanity.
They move slowly on issues because so many disparate elements are involved in decision making.
A crisis sufficient to rouse the attention and activity of a large proportion of the population may need to erupt in order for large changes in policy to come about.
Realism anticipates that in order to protect their national interests, states should ideally conduct their foreign policies free of ideological and domestic political constraints.
Along those lines, democracies may be seen as comparatively “vt/eak” in that they rely on public support and their political power is less centralized.
Liberal theorists counter that these very constraints may be conducive to peace, as they hinder leaders from making impulsive foreign policy choices.
This tension between democratic governance and effective foreign policy making was seen within the United States in the aftermath of the U.S.-led assault on Libya on March 19, 2011.
As part of a coalition effort that was authorized by the United Nations Security Council, United States military forces participated in a series of air strikes against Libyan air defenses and government forces.
Though confronting the threat to peace and security posed by Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafi's regime was endorsed by many in the United States Congress—indeed on March 1 the Senate unanimously approved a resolution that called for the UN to impose a no-fly zone over Libya—President Obama faced a firestorm of criticism from members of both political parties who expressed outrage that he did not first seek congressional approval before committing United States military forces to the mission.
For his part, Obama countered that not only were his actions in the national interest but, as chief executive and commander in chief of the United States military, he had the power to authorize the strikes.
Obama's decision was among the latest in a long line of presidential authorizations of military action without prior congressional approval, which include Harry Truman's entrance into the Korean War and Bill Clinton's bombing of Kosovo in 1999.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Such factors as military alliances and levels of international trade sometime profoundly affect the choices of decision makers.
To recognize the influence of external factors, here we comment briefly on how two other aspects of the international environment—the global distribution of power and geostrategic position—affect international decision making.
It can be concentrated in the hands of a single state, as in the ancient Mediterranean world at the zenith of the Roman Empire, or it may be diffused among several rival states, as it was at the birth of the state system in 1648 following the Thirty Years’ War, when a handful of great power rivals possessed approximately equal strength.
As will be explained further in Chapter 4, unipolar systems have one dominant power center, bipolar systems contain two centers of power, and multipolar systems possess three or more such centers.
Polarization refers to the degree to which states cluster around the powerful.
For instance, a highly bipolarized system is one in which small and medium-sized states form alliances with one of the two dominant powers.
The growing prominence of China as an active player in world politics, and the United States’ attentiveness to developments in Asia, reflects a shift in political power across the globe.
For example, as discussed in Chapters 4 and 8, when power is concentrated in the hands of a single state in a unipolar system, it can more easily choose to use military force and intervene in the affairs of others than it would in a system characterized by a distribution of shared power, where rivals might obstruct its actions.
However, when alliances are tight military blocs, the small state members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader.
Geopolitical Factors Some of the most important influences on a state’s foreign policy behavior stem from its location vis-a-vis other states in the international system, and the geostrategic advantages that this conveys.
I I Plateaus and tablelands I I Ice caps Lowland Terrain I I Flatlands I I Rolling plains I I Hilly plains Pacific Ocean MAP 3.
GEOGRAPHIC INFLUENCES ON FOREIGN POLICY The number of neighboring states and the protection afforded by natural barriers shape how countries interact with one another.
Also note how topography, location, and other geopolitical factors may have influenced the foreign policy priorities of Great Britain, Germany, China, Finland, and states in South America—hypotheses advanced by the geopolitics approach to international politics. early history because vast oceans separated it from potential threats in Europe and Asia.
In no case, however, was isolationistic withdrawal from involvement in continental affairs a practical geostrategic option.
Later geopoliticians, such as Sir Halford Mackinder and Nicholas Spykman , argued that topography, size , climate, and distance between states, in addition to location, are powerful determinants of individual countries’ foreign policies.
The trends and transformations currently unfolding in world politics are the products of countless decisions made daily throughout the world.
Some decisions are more momentous than others, and how actors respond to one another has profound consequences for the entire drama of world politics.
Countries of the Global South are investigated in Chapter 5, followed by examination of nonstate actors in Chapter 6.
A webbased game that allows you to simulate running your own country and making policy decisions.
Blogs that provide current insights into how leading analysts view developments in the area of foreign policy.
Offers a diverse group of foreign policy viewpoints from a variety of areas, including academics, activists, policy analysts, and business leaders.
Offers a rich array of blog posts from all over the world, as well as daily news feeds.
MindTap is a fully online, highly personalized learning experience built upon Cengage Learning content.
Roles Political Efficacy Multiple Advocacy • Policy Networks • Autocratic Rule • Geopolitics • Dallek, Robert.
Chapter 4 opens by giving you an overview of the great powers—the actors with the greatest military and economic capabilities.
MARCHING FOR CHANGE People, like states and international organizations, are transnatlonai actors.
Mobiiized publics often use demonstrations to express their dissent and to draw global attention to their cause.
Shown here In Burundi in May 2015, protestors question the veracity of the electoral process and the decision by incumbent President Pierre Nkurunziza to seek a third term—In violation, according to critics, of the peace accord that ended the 1993-2003 civil war.
After the close of World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union stood at a crossroads.
The decisions that were made, and the actions that were taken, determined whether they would be allies or rivals.
Indeed, the thermonuclear standoff that became the Cold War might not have occurred had the leaders of the countries made other choices.
Pictured here are Russian President Vladimir Putin and United States President Barak Obama.
In the twenty-first century, the United States and Russia continue to influence world politics and each other.
Learning Objectives 4-1 Discuss the cyclical nature of history as portrayed by long-cycle theory.
They see an international system of competitors, with winners and losers in an ancient contest for supremacy.
Good leadership in this eentury may or may not be transformational, but it will most eertainly require a careful understanding of the context of change. —Joseph S Nye, international relations scholar and United States policy maker 4 il THE QUEST FOR WORLD LEADERSHIP Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics.
As Toynbee suggested, there is a strong probability that this historical pattern is cyclical.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ long-cycle theory ^ theory that focuses on the rise and fall of the leading global power as the central political process of the modern world system. aiid/oreChapter.
Over the past five centuries, each global war has led to the emergence of a hegemon.
Over time, as the weight of global engagement takes its toll, every previous hegemon has overextended itself As challengers have arisen, the security agreements TABLE 4.
Pakistanis burn a United States flag in an anti-American rally in protest of drone attacks in Pakistan's tribal regions.
United States Director of Central Intelligence John Brennan defended drone attacks in Pakistan, claiming that airstrikes for targeted killings protect lives and prevent potential terror attacks.
Pakistani demonstrators, however, charge that many civilians are killed, including innocent children. so carefully crafted after the last global war have come under attack.
They also take issue with the deterministic tone of the theory, which to them implies that global destiny is beyond any policy maker’s control.
It draws attention to hegemonic transitions, the rise and fall of leading states in the global system, and in so doing provokes questions about whether this long cycle can be broken.
By the time the first major European war of the twentieth century had ended, nearly 10 million people had died, three empires had crumbled, new states had been born, seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun, and the world geopolitical map had been redrawn in ways that paved the way for the rise of Adolf Ffitler in Nazi Germany.
Most popular are structural realist explanations, which hold that World War I was inadvertent, not the result of any master plan.
Structuralism Framed at the global level of analysis, strticturalism postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor that determines state behavior.
Looking at the circumstances on the eve of World War I, many historians hypothesize that the way in which the great powers were aligned against one another created an environment conducive to an armed conflict.
The great powers’ prior rearmament efforts, as well as their alliances and resulting counter-alliances, created a momentum that, along with the pressures created by the mobilization of armies and arms races, dragged European statesmen toward war.
This strength resulted in greater ambition and resentment of British preeminence.
The decline of the AustrianHungarian Empire, Germany’s only ally, heightened Germany’s fear of Russia, which can be seen in Germany’s strong reaction to the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand.
Fearing that a long war might result in an unfavorable shift in the balance of power, Germany sought a short localized war with a more favorable outcome.
Germany thus supported Austria-Ffungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia.
Although the logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear—a victorious war would bolster Austria-Hungary and hamper Russian influence—it turned out to be a serious miscalculation.
France and Russia joined forces to defend Serbia and were soon joined by Britain in an effort to oppose Germany and defend Belgian neutrality.
And that is what happened in the decade prior to Archduke Ferdinand’s assassination.
According to this structural interpretation, after Russia mobilized its armies in response to Austria’s attack on Serbia, cross-cutting alliance commitments pulled one European great power after another into the war.
With each side belittling the national character and ethnic attributes of the other, diplomatic alternatives to war become untenable.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ nationalism A mindset glorifying a particular state and the nationality group living in it, which sees the state’s interest as a supreme value. and/or eChapter. ; restrictions require it.
Prospect theory provides insights as well, as it stresses that leaders are likely to accept risk to prevent losses.
There are also questions about the rationality of decision making leading up to the start of World War I, and the history-making individuals model points to the role of the German kaiser who was responsible for many critical decisions in 1914.
Kaiser Wilhelm II had a grandiose vision of himself and often ignored the counsel of his cabinet ministers.
When he made decisions, “they were often the result of vanity and personal feelings rather than rational calculation.
Structural explanations emphasize the global distribution of power, domestic interpretations look at causal factors within states, and decision-making explanations direct attention to the calculations and goals of particular leaders.
In its wake, three multiethnic empires— the Austrian-Hungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed, and the independent states of Poland, Gzechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged in their place.
In addition, the countries of Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were born.
The emergence of communism under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin produced a change in government and ideology that would have geopolitical consequences for another seventy years.
Moreover, the war set the stage for a determined effort to build a new global system that could prevent another war; For the first time in history, broad publics and the peacemakers shared a conviction that war was a central problem in international relations.
In 1648, 1713, and 1815, the peacemakers had tried to resolve issues of the past and to construct orders that would preclude their reappearance.
TERRITORIAL CHANGES IN EUROPE FOLLOWING WORLD WAR I The map on the left shows state boundaries on the eve of war in 1914, as well as the members of the two major opposing coalitions that formed.
The map on the right shows the new borders in 1920, with the nine new states that emerged from the war.
A consequence of World War I was a pronounced distaste for war and theories of realism that justified great power competition, armaments, secret alliances, and balance-of-power politics.
Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be t 92 Great Power Relations and Rivalries The CSS Point However, once the peace conference began, parochial national interests resurfaced and undermined Wilson’s proposals as many European leaders had been offended by the pontificating American president.
Germany also lost territory in the west to France and Belgium, in the south to the new state of Czechoslovakia, and in the east to the new states of Poland and Fithuania.
Ts WORLD WAR II Germany’s defeat in World War I and its humiliation under the Treaty of Versailles did not extinguish its hegemonic aspirations.
The world’s fate depended upon the outcome of this massive effort to defeat the Axis threat.
To understand the origins of this devastating conflict, we once again examine causal factors operating at different levels of analysis.
Hitler used the fire to justify an emergency edict allowing him to suspend civil liberties and repress communists and other political adversaries.
In his 1924 hook Mein Kampfi^'Mj Struggle”), Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe.
The following year, the goals originally outlined in Mein KampfdimhtA to the top of Hitler’s foreign policy agenda.
He thoroughly ignored the Kellogg-Briand Pact, which prohibited the use of military force as a means for resolving interstate conflicts.
In 1935, he repudiated the military clauses of the Versailles Treaty; in 1936, he ordered troops into the demilitarized Rhineland; in March 1938, he annexed Austria; and in September 1938, he demanded control over the Sudetenland, a region of Gzechoslovakia containing ethnic Germans.
To address the Sudeten German question, a conference was convened in Munich.
Hitler, British prime minister Neville Ghamberlain, and leaders of France and Italy all attended.
Gonvinced that appeasement would halt further German expansionism, Ghamberlain and the others agreed to Hitler’s demands.
In the Eastern Hemisphere, Japan had grown disillusioned with Western liberalism and the Paris settlements, and it was suffering from the economic devastation of the Great Depression.
Like Germany, Japan embraced militarism as key to its global expansion.
In the might-makes-right climate that Germany’s imperialistic quest for national aggrandizement helped create, Japanese nationalists led their country on the path to imperialism and colonialism.
Japan’s invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and further forays into Ghina in 1937 were paralleled by Italy’s absorption of Abyssinia in 1935 and Albania in 1939.
Further, both Germany and Italy intervened in the 1936-1939 Spanish civil war on the side of the fascists, headed by General Francisco Franco, whereas the Soviet Union supported antifascist forces.
After Germany occupied the rest of Gzechoslovakia in March 1939, Britain and France formed an alliance to protect the next likely victim, Poland.
Now confident that Britain and France would not intervene, Hitler invaded Poland.
Within six weeks France surrendered, even though Germany’s forces were numerically inferior to those of France and its allies.
Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Ffitler’s supposed ally, in June 1941.
The United States, Great Britain, and France viewed Japan’s imperial expansion as a threat to their own interests in the region.
In an effort to hamper Japan’s ability to carry out its global ambitions, the United States embargoed the sale of strategic raw materials, such as scrap iron, steel, and oil.
Poor in natural resources, Japan saw the United States as a serious threat to its national security.
In September 1940 Japan forged the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy that pledged the three Axis powers to come to one another’s aid if attacked by another great power, such as the United States.
In response, the United States froze Japanese assets in the United States and issued demands for Japanese withdrawal.
Deciding that the eviction of the United States from the Pacific was critical to its national interest, on December 7th of that same year, Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Harbor.
Following this attack, Germany quickly declared war on the United States.
The Japanese assault and the German challenge ended United States aloofness and isolationism, enabling President Franklin Roosevelt to forge a coalition with Britain and the Soviet Union to oppose the fascists.
The post-World War I global system was precarious because the number of sovereign states increased at the same time as the number of great powers declined.
In 1914, Europe had only twenty-two key states, but by 1921 the number had nearly doubled.
In this depressed global environment, heightened by deteriorating economic circumstances at home, Germany and Japan sought solutions abroad through imperialism.
During the Nuremberg Trials after World War 11, when Nazi officials were prosecuted for war crimes committed during the Holocaust, senior Nazi Hermann Goering reflected on the Nazi propaganda success.
Domestically, German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders both to regain provinces previously lost in wars to others and to absorb Germans living in Austria, Gzechoslovakia, and Poland.
The rise oi fascism —the Nazi regime’s ideology championing the flag, the fatherland, nationalism, imperialism, and anti-Semitism—animated this renewed imperialistic push and preached an extreme version of realism that stressed power politics to justify the forceful expansion of the German state and other Axis powers that were aligned with Germany.
The war would not have been possible without Adolf Hitler and his plans to conquer the world.
Professing the superiority of Germans as a “master race” along with virulent anti-Semitism and anticommunism.
THE RISE OF HITLER AND GERMAN NATIONALISM Constructivism emphasizes the role of ideas and identities in shaping world politics.
Adolf Hitler persuaded the German people of the need to persecute the Jews and expand German borders through armament and aggression.
He constructed and cultivated a widespread perception in Germany that, in his words, ""an evil exists that threatens every man, woman and child of this great nation.
Pictured here on April 20,1941, Hitler (far right) confers with senior Nazi leaders. ideology The broad vision of the Thousand-Year Reich was ... of a vastly expanded—and continually expanding—German core, extending deep into Russia, with a number of vassal states and regions, including France, the Low Countries, Scandinavia, central Europe, and the Balkans, that would provide resources and labor for the core.
German occupation policies during the war, whereby conquered nations were reduced to satellites, satrapies, and reservoirs of slave labor.
The Print Collector/Alamy 96 Great Power Relations and Rivalries The CSS Point were the practical application of Hitler’s conception of the new world order.
By August of that same year, the United States atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced Japan to end its war of conquest.
Germany itself was divided into occupation zones that eventually provided the basis for its partition into Cold War-era East and West Germany.
In the Far East, the Soviet Union took the four Kurile Islands from Japan—or the “Northern Territories,” as Japan calls them—and Korea was divided into Soviet and United States occupation zones at the Thirty-Eighth Parallel.
Morocco Algeria yTuoisia OSSA baton In <Mr Franca SovMl annejabont Fnncti ocoipabon Sovwlmiusnca | | SraaiBnaai vz Sowrat OccvpaMn Zonas [ | Brttsri occupnon r~1 0 S occapanon nnac I I omar Wastam ttataa. liies I I NMbai stales lronCiinain Europe in 1943 Europe in 1945 Soviet Union Atlantic Ocean Union of Soviet Socialist Republics |__| Une«t Gefman rule |__J Am mWaiY ocoipilon Sraalar Carman Aacti AMadnrrttory AMoccupnd I I Ptauirai poanrs Black Turkey Cyprvs Atlantic Ocean I 1 I I I I 1 I I il MAP 4.
WORLD WAR II REDRAWS THE MAP OF EUROPE The map on the left shows the height of German expansion in 1943, when it occupied Europe from the Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea to the gates of Moscow in the Soviet Union.
The “Big Three” leaders—^Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin—met at the Yalta Conference s February 1945 to design a new world order.
But the vague compromises they reached concealed the differences percolating below the surface.
Following Germany’s unconditional surrender in May, the Big Three (with the United States now represented by Harry Truman) met again in July 1945 at Potsdam.
The ""Big Three"" (Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin) meet at Yalta as victorious great power allies to establish rules for all states to follow in the post-World War II global order, but that cooperation would soon be The meeting ended without agreement, and the replaced by bitter competition, facade of Allied unity began to disintegrate.
Thus, as Alexis de Tocqueville had foreseen in 1835, the Americans and Russians now held in their hands the destinies of half of humankind.
Thus, perhaps the most important product of World War II was the transformation it caused, after a short interlude, in the distribution of global power from multipolarity to bipolarity.
In what, after 1949, became known as the Cold War, Washington and Moscow used the fledgling United Nations to pursue their competition with each other rather than to keep the peace.
As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Gold War and its lessons still cast dark shadows over todays geostrategic landscape.
The United States should take the lead in running the world in the way that the world ought to be run.
Cold War —Harry S Truman, United States president 4 4 THE COLD WAR The second great war of the twentieth century, without parallel in the number of participants and destruction, brought about a global system dominated by two superpowers whose nuclear weapons radically changed the role that threats of warfare would play in world politics.
Circumstances gave each superpower reasons to fear and to struggle against the other’s potential global leadership, and encouraged both competitors to carve out and establish a wide sphere of influence, or specified areas of the globe.
Moreover, according to the domino theory, which suggested that communism was inherently driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was inherently expansionistic.
As a result, ideological incompatibility may have ruled out compromise as an option.
From this constructivist perspective, conflicting interests were secondary to misunderstandings and ideologies.
Additional factors, beyond those rooted in divergent interests, ideologies, and images, undoubtedly combined to produce this explosive Soviet-American hegemonic rivalry.
To sort out the relative causal influence of the various factors, we must evaluate how, once it erupted after the 1945-1948 gestation period, the Cold War changed over its forty-four-year duration.
At this critical juncture, George F Kennan, then a diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent Washington his famous “long telegram” assessing the sources of Soviet conduct.
Published in 1947 by the influential Foreign Affairs journal, and signed as “X” to conceal his identity, Kennan argued that Soviet leaders would forever feel insecure about their political ability to maintain power against forces both within Soviet society and in the outside world.
Their insecurity would lead to an active—and perhaps aggressive— Soviet foreign policy.
President Harry S Truman made Kennan’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy.
Eventually known as the Truman Doctrine, this statement defined the strategy the United States would pursue for the next forty years, over Kennan’s objections.
They included the communist coup d’etat in Czechoslovakia in 1948, the Soviet blockade of West Berlin in June of that year, the communist rise to power on the Chinese mainland in 1949, the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, the Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950, and the on-again, off-again Taiwan Strait crises.
Even so, the Soviet Union sought, however cautiously, to increase its power in places where opportunities appeared to exist.
From Coexistence to Detente, 1963-1978 The growing threat of mutual destruction, in conjunction with the approaching parity of American and Soviet military capabilities, made coexistence or nonexistence appear to be the only alternatives.
Coached by his national security adviser, Flenry A Kissinger, President Nixon initiated a new approach to Soviet relations that in 1969 he officially labeled detente.
Along these lines, the objective of the United States linkage strategy ' np.,?, to shape superpower relations and lessen incentives for war through the continuation of mutually rewarding exchanges.
Visits, cultural exchanges, trade agreements, arms control talks, and joint technological ventures replaced threats, warnings, and confrontations.
KEY EVENTS IN THE COLD WAR EVOLUTION OF THE U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONSHIP, 1947-1991 The evolution of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Cold War displays a series of shifts between periods of conflict and cooperation.
The arms race resumed feverishly, often at the expense of addressing domestic economic problems.
The new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, summarized the alarming state of superpower relations in 1985 by fretting that “he situation is very complex, very tense.
Instead, prospects for a more constructive phase improved greatly following Gorbachev’s advocacy of “new thinking” in order to achieve rapprochement, or reconciliation, of the rival states’ interests.
The former signifies greater openness and individual freedom, and the latter refers to the nomic systems.
Embracing these principles, Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to a market economy, and proclaimed his desire to end the Gold War contest.
The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support of the Gastro regime in Guba, withdrew from Afghanistan, and announced unilateral reductions in military spending.
In 1989, the Berlin Wall came down, and by 1991 the Gold War had truly ended when the Soviet Union dissolved, accepted capitalist free-market principles, and initiated democratic reforms.
To nearly everyone’s astonishment, the Soviet Union acquiesced in the defeat of communism, the reunification of Germany, and the disintegration of its east European bloc of allies, the Warsaw Pact.
The conclusion of the enduring rivalry between East and West, and with it the end of the seventy-year ideological dispute, was a history-transforming event in which liberalism seemed to triumph.
The “sustained efforts to build a far-flung system of multilateral institutions, alliances, trade agreements, and political partnerships ... helped draw countries into the United States’ orbit.
U.S.-SOVIET DETENTE Pictured here, President Richard Nixon, one of the architects of the United States linkage strategy along with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, shakes hands with Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev after signing the first Strategic Arms Limitations Talks treaty.
Indeed, the unanticipated outcome undermined confidence in the adequacy of conventional realist theories that argued that no great power would ever accept the loss of position to another hegemonic rival without a fight.
The transformations ... would not have begun were it not for him.”—James A Baker III, United States secretary of state “Reagan’s ‘tough’ policy and intensified arms race communists to ‘give up.’ sheer nonsense.
The [communist hard-line] conservatives and reactionaries were given predominant influence.”—Georgi Arbatov, director of the USSR’s Institute for the USA and Canada Studies 1 State) Economic Mismanagement Grassroots Movements Ideas and Ideals 1 “Soviet militarism, in harness ' with communism, destroyed the Soviet economy and thus has■ tened the self-destruction of the Soviet empire.”—Fred Charles Ikle, United States deputy secretary of “It was man who ended the Cold War in case you didn’t notice.
Containment focused first and foremost on preventing Moscow from seizing the key centers of industrial power that lay near its borders, while eschewing attempts to ‘roll back’ Com■ ' munism with military force.”— Stephan Walt, political scientist “The changes wrought by thousands of people serving in the trenches [throughout the world] were at least partially responsible [for ending the Cold War].”—David Cortright, political scientist “The acute phase of the fall of communism started outside of the Soviet Union and spread to the Soviet Union itself.
In accepting the decay of their empire, Russian leaders made perhaps the most dramatic peaceful retreat from power in history.
Ts THE POST-COLD WAR ERA Rapid, unanticipated changes in world politics create uncertainty about the global future.
As time passed, however, other great powers began to vie for increased influence and visibility in world politics.
This renewed contest has fueled debate as to whether multipolarity better describes the emerging distribution of power today.
With the end of the Cold War, the United States stood alone at the summit of the international hierarchy.
It remains the only country with the military, economic, and cultural assets to be a decisive player in any part of the world it chooses.
Its military is not just stronger than anybody else’s; it is stronger than everybody else’s, with defense expenditures in 2015 larger than those of nearly all other countries combined.
With less than 5 percent of the global population, the United States accounts for over a fifth of global income and almost one-third of the entire world’s combined spending on research and development.
This is why America’s unique superpower position atop the global pyramid of power seemingly allows it to www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
Characterizing United States foreign policy at the start of the century, the emphasis of the Bush Doctrine on self-interested unilateralism led to a surge of anti-Americanism between 2003 and 2008 that “seemed to be the reaction, more than to controversial foreign policy decisions, to their unchecked elaboration and unilateral implementation.
Although the United States may hold an unrivaled position in the world today, in the long run, unipolarity is not likely to endure.
Former United States Defense Secretary Robert Gates expressed concerns that the United States force structure is likely out of scale to existing threats.
Yet it is not only the financial cost of expansive military commitments itself that has some worried about Americas ability to sustain its predominant position in the international system; the United States’ predominance in the world has been further eroded by the financial crisis of 2008, which originated in the United States and spread throughout the global financial system.
Although the United States continues to rank at the top in terms of the size of its military, other indicators signal a relative decline.
They conclude that the United States is slowly eroding the foundation of its superpower status.
Foreseeing a world characterized by the “rise of the rest,” realist political journalist Fareed Zakaria attributes transformative significance to the economic growth experienced by countries throughout the globe during the post-Cold War period, and the subsequent economic challenges posed by what many perceive as the worst downturn since the Great Depression; uni-multipolar k global system in which there is a single dominant power, but the settlement of key international issues always requires action by the dominant power in combination with that of other great powers.
There is growing recognition that the distribution of power in the international system is shifting to what political scientist Samuel Fluntington has described as uni-multipolar.
According to this perspective, although the United States continues to be the only superpower, other states are not easily dominated.
Although United States involvement remains critical in addressing key international issues, resolution of transnational problems also requires action by some combination of other major states.
The vulnerability of the United States to non-Westphalian threats demanded a rethinking of how security was conceptualized and rendered operational.
At the same time, with China's meteoric rise on the international stage, many wonder about the future of China's role in the international system.
Some suggest that the world will eventually fall under China's leadership.
China's continued military growth, coupled with its expanding economy, also signal global aspirations.
What is certain, though, is that China as a global power is not likely to fade away any time soon.
Perhaps the United States and China will follow a path different from that of past global power struggles.
As Flarvard law professor Noah Feldman notes, “The world's major power and its leading challenger are economically interdependent to an unprecedented degree.
There are growing limits on American domination, and the “shift in economic and political power has important implications for the world order.
There is a deepening sense that shifts in the global distribution of power are under way.
The shape of global power is decidedly pyramidal—^with the United States alone at the top, a second tier of major countries (China, Japan, India, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Brazil), and several tiers descending below.
As Map 4. shows, when we take into account multiple dimensions of what it means to be prosperous, the United States remains in the top tier with many of its Western allies—though it is no longer the single most prosperous country in the world.
Predicting what cleavages and partnerships will develop among the great powers in the future is difficult because it is hard to foresee what will become the next major axis of conflict.
Concomitantly, its relations with the United States have oscillated from warm to cool.
Collaboration has been evident in the global war on terror, further reductions in nuclear weapons, and Russia entry into the World Trade Organization.
However, tensions also erupted over the Arab Spring, the overthrow of Libya’s dictator Muammar al-Qaddafl, what the United States saw as the nondemocratic election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency, and Russia’s actions in Georgia and Ukraine.
Nonetheless, the United States and Russia continue to engage in dialogue about key global issues.
For instance, despite the discord caused by Russia’s role in Ukraine, Russia’s foreign Top 10 countries • 1.
Despite the worst financial crisis in modern times and citizen uprisings in protest of autocratic regimes around the world, global prosperity has increased across all regions of the world over the last five years.
Yet there is debate as to the extent of Russia's power in the modern period and whether it is once again a geopolitical foe bent on undermining the foundations of United States leadership and the existing world order.
Some see Russia as “pushing back against the political settlement of the Cold War” (Mead, 2014, 4) and seeking to upset the United States as the global hegemon by chipping away at the relationships and norms that undergird the status quo.
Russia is strongly asserting itself across Eurasia, as seen in fhe invasion of Ukraine, challenges to United States goals in Syria, and regarding Iran's nuclear program, and these efforts are seen an attempt to dominate the region and threaten the reigning world order.
Its confrontational actions in Crimea, Armenia, and Georgia have been driven to a great extent by geopolitical vulnerability as the West has moved into its backyard.
United States power far surpasses fhat of Russia, and the liberal international framework that was shaped following World War II continues to underlie the global economy and mechanisms for addressing global problems.
In 2014, China overtook the United States to become the leading economy in terms of gross domestic product when measured in terms of purchasing power parity , which removes differences in countries’ price levels.
By some estimates, the Chinese economy will reach $61 trillion by 2050, which will far exceed the United States and India , respectively, as the next two largest economies.
The projections show that the rank order of the largest economies by 2050 will be substantially different from today.
China’s share of global GDP in PPP will increase from 16. percent in 2014 to 20 percent in 2030 and level off to around 19. percent in 2050, and it will remain the world’s largest economy throughout.
India is also likely to experience significant economic growth over this period, with its share of world GDP in PPP rising from just below 7 percent in 2014 to about 13. percent in 2050.
At the same time, the share of global GDP in PPP for the United States and the EU is expected to decline from a combined 33 percent in 2014 to 25 percent in 2050.
The speed of the transition in global economic power may vary, but the general direction of the trend is clear.
Many countries in the Global South, particularly in Asia, are rising in prominence in the global economy.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ purchasing power parity An index that calculates the true rate of exchange among currencies when parity—when what can be purchased is the same—is achieved; the index determines what can be bought with a unit of each currency. and/or eChapter.
By 2050, the top five ranked countries may inciude the United States pius the emerging market economies of China, india, indonesia, and Brazii.
Eurozone growth is projected to remain weak, and the rankings of those advanced markets are expected to deciine over the coming decades. www.thecsspoint.com [ www.cssbooks.net 1.
For example, competition could escalate between the globe’s two major contenders for supremacy, the United States and China, if the United States practices containment to try to prevent China’s rise or China threatens United States security interests.
Quite different political types of great power relations could emerge in the economic and military spheres.
The Chinese military’s outreach for international approaches to ^ ^ managing shared security cooperation is not intended to impair the international system, but to become a problems through player and builder of the system, providing additional public goods to the international collective and community so that the benefit of security can be truly shared by all. coordinated action.
The opportunities and challenges we face in the world today call for a multilateral approach, with all of the great powers working cooperatively to achieve global solutions.
The effort to build a great power coalition to wage a war against global terrorism following 9/11 is a more recent example of multilateralism to construct a concert through collective action.
According to Chris Patten, a former British governor of Hong Kong, China was the world’s leading economic power for eighteen of the past twenty centuries.
To the West, the notion of a world in which the center of global economic gravity lies in Asia may seem unimaginable.
Shown here, United States Secretary of State John Kerry meets with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
Challenge and opportunity always eome together—under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other. —Hu Jintao, former Chinese president Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds.
How the great powers react to the eventual emergence of a new global system where power and responsibility are more widely distributed is crucial.
In Chapter 5, we turn your attention from the rich, powerful, and commercially active great powers at the center of the world system to the poorer, weaker, and economically dependent states in the Global South and the emerging powers in the Global East.
The Enduring Power of the Liberal Order,” Foreign Affairs (May/ June): 2.
A blog discussing current power relations between the United States and China.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Hegemon • Structuralism • Nationalism • Multipolarity • Bipolarity • Cold War * Truman Doctrine * Containment • Soft Power • Multilateralism Additional Videos • Gelb, Leslie.
After more than a half-century of hostile relations, the softening of United States policy toward Cuba is seen by both supporters and opponents as a ""game-changer"" for relations between the two countries.
Pictured here on January 16, 2015, in Havana Cuba, a Cuban wears a shirt with a United States flag design.
This divide also represents a popular way of describing the inequalities that separate rich and poor states.
The division in power and wealth characterizing the Global North and Global South pose both moral and security problems.
Although poverty and inequality have existed throughout recorded history, today the levels have reached extremes.
What are the causes and consequences of the Global North ^ term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries iocated primarily in the Northern Hemisphere.
THE GLOBAL NORTH AND GLOBAL SOUTH Global North countries are wealthy and democratic.
Yet there is considerable variation within the Global South, with some countries enjoying higher levels of prosperity and global influence than others.
Third Worid A Cold War term to desoribe the less developed countries of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America.
First Worid The relatively wealthy industrialized countries that share a commitment to varying forms of democratic political institutions and developed market economies, including the United States, Japan, the European Union, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.
Second World During the Cold War, the group of countries, including the Soviet Union, its Eastern European allies, and China, that embraced communism and central planning to propel economic growth. small powers Countries with limited political, military, or economic capabilities and influence.
TTI COLONIAL ORIGINS AND CONSEQUENCES Many analysts trace the roots of today’s inequalities among states at the global level of analysis because they believe the global system has properties built into it that account for most poor countries’ inability to close the gap with the wealthy countries.
Taking the hypothesis that prevailing worldwide conditions are part of a much longer historical pattern, they note that the rules governing international politics today were constructed in the 1648 Peace of Westphalia following Europe’s Thirty Years’ War.
As suggested by constructivism, the origins and persistence of the inequalities of states stem in part from the fact that today’s modern global system was initially, and remains, a socially constructed reality by, of, and for the most powerful states.
So, a good starting place is to begin your inquiry by taking into consideration the legacy of this system today.
They note that almost all of the independent sovereign states in the Global South were at one time colonies and argue that today’s inequalities are a product of that past colonization.
During the Cold War, the term Third World was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but economically less developed states on either side of the Cold War divide that, for the most part, shared a colonial past.
However, the “Third World” was soon used to refer to those countries that had failed to grow economically in a way that was comparable to countries of the First World, the industrialized great powers such as Europe, North America, and Japan.
The so-called Second World, consisting of the Soviet Union and its allies, was distinguished by a communist ideological commitment to planned economic policies rather than reliance on free-market forces.
More common today are the terms Global North, which refers to what was previously known as the First World, and Global South, which refers to the less developed countries that are mostly located in the Southern Hemisphere.
For example, it includes low-income countries such as Ghana and Haiti, where a majority of the population tries to survive through subsistence agriculture; middle-income countries such as Brazil and Malaysia, which produce manufactured goods; and some countries such as Kuwait and Qatar, whose petroleum exports have generated incomes rivaling those of Global North.
Their ranks include both Indonesia—an archipelago nation of more than 17,500 islands scattered across an oceanic expanse larger than the United States—and Timor-Leste, an island state roughly the same size as Gonnecticut.
Global South countries also vary politically and culturally, ranging from democratic Gosta Rica to autocratic Myanmar.
Although most Latin American countries were independent before World War II, not until afterward did other countries of the Global South gain that status.
Since then, a diverse array of new sovereign states has joined the global community, nearly all carved from the British, Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, and French empires built under colonialism four hundred years ago.
Today, few colonies exist and the decolonization process is almost complete.
Four centuries of the slave trade by the Portuguese claimed more than 13 million lives.
Although independence was achieved in I960, peace and prosperity did not follow.
Rising to power in 1965, Mobutu Sese Seko established an authoritarian state and controlled the people through fear and repression until his overthrow in 1997.
Over the course of his reign, Mobutu perpetuated the colonial legacy of exploitation.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf emerging powers (middle powers) Countries with rising poiitical and economic capabilities and influence that seek a more assertive rote in international affairs. decolonization The process by which sovereign independence was achieved by countries that were once colonies of the great powers. and/or eChapter.
A LEGACY OF MISTRUST Spurred by the questfor labor in the New World (Africans proved much more resistant than the indigenous peoples to the diseases brought by Europeans), the expanding colonial powers eagerly participated in transatlantic slave trade from the mid-1500s through the late 1700s.
The First Wave of European Imperialism The first wave of European empire building began in the late fifteenth century, as the Dutch, English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish used their naval power to conquer territories for commercial gain.
Scientific innovations made the European explorers’ adventures possible, and merchants followed in their wake, “quickly seizing upon opportunities to increase their business and profits.
The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of “classical imperialism” is known as mercantilism —an mercantilism ^ government trade strategy for accumulating state wealth and power by encouraging exports and discouraging imports. economic philosophy advocating government regulation of economic life to increase state power.
European rulers believed that power flowed from the possession of national wealth measured in gold and silver, and that cultivating mining and industry to attain a favorable balance of trade (exporting more than they imported) was the best way to become rich.
As liberal political economist Adam Smith argued , national wealth grew not through the accumulation of precious metals but rather from the capital and goods they could buy.
We are determined, that our nation, and the world as a whole, shall not be the play thing of one small corner of the world. —Sukarno, former president of Indonesia The Second Wave of European Imperialism A second wave of imperialism washed over the world, as Europe—^joined later by the United States and Japan—aggressively colonized new territories from the 1870s until the outbreak of World War 1.
As illustrated in Map 5.3, in the last twenty years of the nineteenth century, Africa fell under the control of seven European powers (Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Spain), and in all of the Far East and the Pacific, only China, Japan, and Siam were not completely conquered.
Elsewhere, the United States expanded across its continent, acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines in the 1898 Spanish-American War, extended its colonial reach west to Hawaii, leased the Panama Canal Zone “in perpetuity” from the new state of Panama (an American creation), and exercised considerable control over several Caribbean islands, notably Cuba.
GLOBAL IMPERIALISM 1914 The ten major imperial powers competed for colonies throughout the globe in the present-day Global South, and on the eve of World War I, their combined territories covered most of the world. communism The Marxist ideology maintaining that if society is organized so that every person produces according to his or her ability and consumes according to his or her needs, a community without class distinctions will emerge, sovereign states will no longer be needed, and imperial wars of colonial conquest will vanish from history. production, and the accumulation of wealth.
Radical theorists following Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin, who called themselves adherents of communism, saw imperialism’s aggressive competition as caused by a capitalist need for profitable overseas outlets for surplus production.
Sharing a critical perspective of the capitalist world economy, world-system theory saw a world division of labor where the “core” areas exploit the (nonindustrial) “periphery,” and colonization provided a means for imperial control over foreign lands.
Liberal economists, by contrast, regarded the new imperialism not as a product of capitalism but, rather, as a response to certain maladjustments that could be corrected.
A Hobson argued, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system.
Its efforts to maintain the status quo help to explain the second wave of imperial expansion, especially in Africa, where partition served the imperial powers’ purposes to the detriment of the local populations.
Self-determination advocated giving indigenous nationalities the moral right to decide which authority would rule them.
Wilson and other liberal theorists reasoned that freedom would lead to the creation of states and governments that were content with their territorial boundaries and, therefore, less inclined to make war.
Other territorial adjustments were also made in Europe, but the proposition that self-determination should be extended to Europe’s overseas empires did not receive serious support.
Instead, the territories controlled by Germany and the Ottoman Empire were transferred, under League of Nations auspices, to countries that would govern them as “mandates” until their eventual selfrule.
Many of these territorial decisions gave rise to subsequent conflicts across the globe.
This set an important precedent so that after World War II the defeated powers’ territories placed under the United Nations trusteeship system were not absorbed by others but were promised eventual self-rule.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ realpolitik The theoretical outlook prescribing that countries should increase their power and wealth in order to compete with and dominate other countries. selfdetermination The liberal doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them. and/or eChapter.
Similarly, bloodshed followed closely on the heels of independence in the Congo when the Belgians granted their African colony independence in I960, and it dogged the unsuccessful efforts of Portugal to battle the winds of decolonization that swept over Africa as the 1960s wore on.
Despite these political convulsions, decolonization was for the most part not only extraordinarily rapid but also remarkably peaceful.
In a world increasingly dominated by rivalry between East and West, Cold War competition for political allies gave both superpower rivals incentive to lobby for the liberation of overseas empires.
WORLDS APART FREEDOM AND SELF-DETERMINATION When World War I broke out, only 62 independent countries existed.
With secession from Sudan in July 2011, the emergence of South Sudan as the world’s newest nation brought the count to 195, according to the United States Department of State.
Pictured here, Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir and South Sudan's President Salva Kiir listen to South Sudan's national anthem during a visit by al-Bashir to Juba, South Sudan.
The Global South is sometimes described today as a “zone of turmoil” or an “axis of upheaval,” in large measure because, in contrast with the peaceful and democratic Global North, most of the people in the Global South face chronic poverty amidst war, tyranny, and anarchy.
Because the Global North’s history suggests that “economic and technological development bring a coherent set of social, cultural, and political changes . . . and they also bring growing mass demands for democratic institutions and for more responsive behavior on the part of elites” , the continuing expansion of Global South market economies under capitalism appears likely to hasten democratization.
Even so, the continued spread of the liberal democratic community is not guaranteed, with some seeing democracy as failing even while elections become more commonplace.
In the average election held among the bottom billion poorest of the world’s population, despite the fact that voters usually have many grounds for complaint, the incumbent “wins” a healthy 74 percent of the vote.
When we compare the differences on some key indicators differentiating lowand middle-income countries from high-income countries, we discover huge gaps.
The situation is much more favorable—and the quality of life is relatively advantageous—in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Flemisphere, where nearly all the Global South countries are located.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ developing countries /\ category used by the World Bank to identify lowincome Global South countries with an annual GNI per capita at or below $1,045 and middle-income countries with an annual GNI per capita of more than $1,045 but less than $$12,746 . gross national income A measure of the production of goods and services within a given time period, which is used to delimit the geographic scope of production.
GNI measures production by a state’s citizens or companies, regardless of where the production occurs. developed countries A category used by the World Bank to identify Global North countries with an annual GNI per capita of $12,746 or more . and/or eChapter. ts restrictions require it.
Average annual population growth rate, 2010-2020 13% 0.7% Population density 74 25 Women in parliaments 21% 26% Land area 80,385.
Gross national income per capita $8,444 $40,788 Average annual % growth of GDP, 2010-2011 5.0% 1.4% Net foreign direct investment inflows 3.0% 2.0% Exports—Goods and Services $6,997 $16,486 Imports—Goods and Services $6,980 $15,781 Workers’ remittances received $324,529 $135,695 Refugees by country of origin 11,303.
Sometimes described as the “Third World’s Third World,” these countries are the very poorest, with little economic growth and rapid population growth that is increasingly straining their overburdened society and environment.
The daunting scale of misery and marginalization is thus evident across the Global South, from which only a fraction of its countries have begun to escape.
Other theorists focus on international causes such as the position of developing countries within the global political economy.
Walt W Rostow , an economic historian and United States policy maker, envisioned countries moving through stages of economic growth.
He predicted that traditional societies beginning the path to development would inevitably pass through various stages by means of the free market and would eventually “take off” and eventually become similar to the mass-consumption societies of the capitalist Global North.
The countries of the Global South rejected that prognosis and the premises on which it was based.
Leaders there did not accept the classical liberal argument that the countries of the Global North became prosperous because they concentrated on hard work, innovative inventions of new products, and investments in schooling.
Furthermore, by the mid-1970s, it was apparent that assistance from the rich countries of the Global North had not brought about the expected prosperity or democracy in the Global South.
International Sources of Underdevelopment Whereas classical theory attributes the causes of most developing countries’ underdevelopment to internal conditions within states, dependency theory emphasizes international factors, specifically the Global South’s dependence on the dominant great powers.
As noted in Chapter 2, dependency theory builds on Vladimir Lenin’s Marxist critique of imperialism, but it goes beyond it to account for changes that have occurred in recent decades.
Whereas classical liberal theorists submit that specialization in production according to comparative advantage will increase income in an unfettered market and thereby help close the gap between the world’s haves and have-nots, dependency theorists maintain that global inequalities cannot be reduced so long as developing countries continue to specialize in producing primary products for which there are often numerous competing suppliers and limited demand.
Governments (often dictatorships) became heavily involved in managing their economies, and in some cases became the owners and operators of industry.
Multinational corporations contribute to dualism by favoring a minority of well-compensated employees over the rest, which increases gaps in pay, and widens differences between rural and urban economic opportunities.
Twenty years ago North America, Europe and Japan produced almost all of the world’s science.
They were the aristocrats of technical knowledge, presiding over a centuries-old regime.
Typically, Global South countries have been unable to develop indigenous technology appropriate to their own resources and have been dependent on powerful Global North multinational corporations to transfer technical know-how.
This means that research and development expenditures are devoted to solving the Global North’s problems, with technological advances seldom meeting the needs of the Global South.
However, although the Global North remains committed to global research and development, regional shifts are occurring.
The United States share of global research and development declined from 34 percent in 2009 to 31 percent in 2014.
Similarly, Europe experienced a decline from 26 percent to 22 percent between 2009 and 2014.
Over time, the perceived effectiveness and credibility of development theories have waxed and waned depending, at least in part, on their ability to explain and predict current world events.
During its heyday in the 1960s, classical theory prescribed that countries should emulate the path of industrial democracies in order to develop.
For example, many countries in Latin America suffered from authoritarian rule and abject poverty.
Yet the relevance of this theoretical explanation came to be questioned as well, particularly in light of the success of countries that experienced meaningful growth by participating in the global market and pursuing export-oriented strategies.
A society's beliefs, values, and traditions shape its larger worldview and its engagement with the forces of modernization.
The success of industrialization in the Global East challenges earlier ethnocentric assumptions.
There are multiple inflection points, as individual phases of modernization tend to be associated with particular changes in society.
With the expanding importance of the Internet to global commerce and communication, critics fear that the digital divide in access to communications technology is not closing fast enough and that small entrepreneurs in the Global South will be put at a disadvantage.
At present, the Global North remains predominant and the primary beneficiary of the information technology revolution.
However, most of the growth in the media and telecommunications industries is expected to occur in the Global South.
Insecurity and Weapons of War Global South countries must face the fateful question of whether they dare to call for help from the great powers and dominating international organizations when violence, terrorism, and anarchy prevail.
The cry for assistance poses risks, because where there is outside involvement, there tends to be outside influence, some of which may be unwelcome.
Faced with seemingly endless conflict at home or abroad, and a desire to address military insecurity on their own terms, it is not surprising that the Global South countries have joined the rest of the world’s quest to acquire modern weapons of war—including nuclear weapons, as in the cases of Ghina, India, North Korea, and Pakistan.
In the Global South, military spending typically exceeds expenditures on health and education; impoverished states facing ethnic, religious, or tribal strife at home are quite prepared to sacrifice economic development to acquire weapons.
O North America O South America O Europe O Middle East & Africa O Asia-Pacific -O Russia CIS © Singapore Denmark Norway O R&D as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product Long-Term Outlook for R&D Expenditures FIGURE 5.
GLOBAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The amount of money a country spends on scientific research and development is one indicator of its global scientific standing.
Comparing the gross domestic expenditure on research and development as a percentage of a country's total GDP , this figure indicates that Israel spent the largest portion—4. percent of its GDP—on scientific discovery in 2014, with Finland claiming the greatest number of scientists and engineers as a proportion of its total population.
THE DIGITAL DIVIDE IN INFDRMATIDN AND COMMUNICATIDN TECHNOLDGIES Information and communication technology has spread rapidly in recent years.
However, the level of penetration varies both among and within countries; a digital divide has emerged in which some countries have high levels of access and others have limited access.
Based on the Digital Inclusion Risk Index, which takes into account access to personal computers, Internet and broadband, and mobile telephones and fixed-line telephones, this map depicts relative levels of access to ICT across the globe.
Countries are grouped into four categories that range from high to low ICT access.
As shown, the United States enjoys high access, whereas countries on Africa's west coast have limited access. vulnerable to recessions in the global economy.
How to cope with dominance and dependence thus remains a key concern in the Global South.
To gain control over their economic futures, they began coordinating their efforts within the United Nations, where their growing numbers and voting power gave them greater influence than they could otherwise command.
UNGTAD later became a permanent UN organization through which the Global South would express its interests concerning development issues.
Motivated by the oil-exporting countries’ rising bargaining power, the Global South sought to compel the Global North to abandon practices perceived as perpetuating the Global South’s dependence.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights Group of 77 The coalition of Third Worid countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Deveioping Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade.
New International Economic Order The 1974 UN policy resolution that called for a NorthSouth dialogue to open the way for the less developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy. id/or eChapter. restrictions require it.
Dubai and Kuwait are prime examples, as rising oil prices have created a boom that is transforming both of these Arab kingdoms into zones of prosperity.
In Dubai, the construction of one of the world's largest shopping malls, with the world's largest aquarium and a fivestory underwater hotel, demonstrate its wealth.
In 2009, seven Latin American countries agreed to establish the “Banco del Sur” in part to compete directly with the World Bank and circumvent Global North interference by funding big infrastructure projects within the region.
The BRIGS countries also agreed to establish a New Development Bank, which is expected to be operational by 2016.
The “rising economic strength of the BRIGS countries has outpaced increases in their voice at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund ” at the same time that economic cooperation within the Global South has greatly expanded.
Dissatisfaction with these Bretton-Woods institutions has led the BRIGS countries to develop an alternative to global development finance.
Foreign Aid and Remittances One approach for closing the gap between the Global South and the Global North is the distribution of foreign assistance.
Security objectives have also figured prominently in motives of both economic and military assistance.
The general global trend in the overall amount of foreign aid allocations since 1970 has been toward gradual increases.
Critics particularly resent what they perceive to be an entrenched state of mind in many Global South cultures that stands in the way of development, which—while bemoaning poverty—condemns the profit motive, competition, and consumerism that lie at the heart of capitalism.
In response to this viewpoint, donors have grown increasingly insistent on “conditionality,” or demands that aid recipients must meet to receive continued assistance.
Donors also persist in “tying” development assistance to the donors for their benefit, such as requiring purchases from the donors, even though the World Bank estimates this practice reduces the value of aid by 15 to 30 percent, decreases its efficiency, and violates the same free-market principles that the Global North claims to promote.
BROKEN PROMISES With UN Resolution 2626, the wealthy countries of the Global North agreed in 1970 to allocate 0. percent of their GNP as aid forthe long-term development of the poorer countries of the Global South.
Much more money—more than double the global total in foreign aid—is primarily funneled into Global South economies through the remittances that migrant laborers working in the Global North faithfully send home to their families.
Not as sensitive to economic downturns as private-capital flows, global remittances have risen steadily each year since the 1970s.
They have quadrupled over the past fourteen years, from $132 billion in 2000 to $583 billion in 2014, with an anticipated rise to $636 billion by 2017.
The money received is an important source of family income in many developing economies, representing in some cases a very relevant percentage of the GDP of the receiving countries.
In Lebanon and Tajikistan, for example, remittances in some years MAP 5.
SENDING MDNEY BACK HDME The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year are vital to developing countries.
Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Developing countries have long pleaded for “trade, not aid” to improve their global position, turning to the NIG’s and the Global East experience to support the view that access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth.
Indeed, many countries of the Global South have benefited from a “virtuous cycle” (Blanton and Blanton, 2008), wherein increased trade leads to improved domestic conditions that in turn facilitate trade.
The General America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAFTA and create a free-trade zone that includes the United States, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Gosta Rica.
Mercosur, commonly referred to as the “Gommon Market of the South,” is the largest trading bloc in South America and aims for full economic integration of the region.
Full members include Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela, with Bolivia, Golombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Ghile holding associate membership status.
The association of Asia-Pacific Economic Gooperation , an informal forum created in 1989, is committed to free trade and regional economic integration.
Additionally, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , first established in 1967 by Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, and now including Vietnam, Gambodia, Laos, and Myanmar, agreed to set up a free-trade area.
The U.S.-Middle East Free Trade Area includes agreements between the United States and Bahrain, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, and Oman.
The Gulf Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf was established in 1981 as a regional common market that also included a defense council.
It includes countries with similar political systems rooted in Islamic beliefs, and the founding members included Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.
With a membership of fifteen southern African states, its objective is to facilitate socioeconomic cooperation.
In the western region of Africa, the Economic Community of West African States was established in 1975 as a regional economic and trade union.
With low-cost production models based on inexpensive local labor and growing domestic markets, companies in the Global South are competing with the rich-country multinationals in the Global North.
In an effort to shore up the global economy, global leaders pledged to finance trade, resist protectionist measures, and assist the Global South.
Such policies entail considerable risks and trade-offs, and they can create conflict between those with competing values and goals.
The primary danger lies in the potential for foreign investments to lead to foreign control and the erosion of the sovereign governments’ capacities to regulate the economy within their borders.
An additional danger is that the multinational foreign investors might not invest their profits locally but channel them abroad for new investments or disburse them as dividends for their wealthy Global North shareholders.
However, despite the risks, many developing countries have relaxed restrictions in order to attract foreign investors, with less emphasis placed on liberalizing investment restrictions and encouraging open domestic economic competition than on offering Official Development Assistance tax and cash enticements and opportunities for joint ventures.
The impact of this new infusion of foreign investments in developing countries has been substantial given the Global South’s relatively small economies.
It has paved the way for emerging markets to expand their rates of economic development—despite the resistance of local industries that are threatened by the new competition and the critics who complain about the increasing income inequalities that the investments are causing.
Such fears and consequences notwithstanding, developing countries are intensifying their competition for foreign investment capital to liberate themselves from dependence and destitution.
MAKING NEW FRIENDS The fortunes of small powers are increasingly integrated with those of major powers.
Shown here, patients leave a Chinese-operated hospital in Dar es Salaam in Tanzania.
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY Over the past decade, foreign capital has been a primary source for growth in the Global South.
Private eguity, portfolio investment, and FDI experienced great volatility between 2007 and 2009, although remittances and ODA were more stable.
Debt Management and Governmental Corruption The prospects for foreign aid, trade, or foreign direct investments to contribute to the future development of, and relief of poverty in, the Global South will depend on a number of other factors.
One is the extent to which the level of debt facing many Global South countries can be managed.
But national debt is not the only drain on a country’s economic and political resources; corruption also undermines essential institutional structures and foments a culture of fear and distrust.
Often, public resources are funneled away from the development of infrastructure in areas such as education and health care.
Widespread corruption also compromises market structures and discourages investment.
The violation of public trust that results from widespread corruption weakens civil society.
Pervasive apathy and disengagement of ordinary citizens enhances the opportunity for public officials to use their position and national assets for personal gain.
Environmental regulations are often ignored, and environmental projects are often easy to exploit for private gain.
As a result, corruption frequently leads to pronounced environmental degradation within a country.
In the aftermath of the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia in 2011, the breadth and scope of the corrupt practices by the ruling MAP 5.
For a country with a GNP that only reaches $80 billion in a single year, this amount was staggering and had enormous implications for the welfare of its citizens.
Most were colonized by people of another race, experience varying degrees of poverty and hunger, and feel powerless in a world system dominated by the affluent countries that once controlled them and perhaps still do.
Gonsiderable change occurred among the newly emergent states as postWorld War II decolonization took place, but much also remained the same.
The relationships between the world’s great, middle, and small powers will no doubt continue to change—exactly how remains uncertain.
Gonversely, a new era of North-South-East cooperation could begin, dedicated to finding solutions to common problems ranging from commercial to environmental and security concerns.
As South Korea’s Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Kim Sung-han noted, “Although great powers are useful in mobilizing cooperation, their efforts are insufficient to coordinate all involved actors.
Although elements of both approaches are evident, relations between the Global South and the Global North remain dominated by the great powers.
That domination is funneled in part through powerful international organizations, such as the United Nations and the World Bank, which the great powers have created.
At the same time, intergovernmental organizations provide an opportunity for the small and middle powers of the Global South to exert influence on world politics.
To understand world politics and the roots of changes in international affairs, it is important to understand the impact of these influential IGOs as actors in the global arena.
DIPLOMACY AND DEVELOPMENT IN CUBA In 1959, Fidel Castro led a revolution that resulted in the overthrow of the authoritarian dictator Fulgencio Batista and the establishment of communist government in Cuba.
The United States responded to Castro’s nationalization of private property by imposing trade restrictions on all goods except medical supplies and food, and in 1962 President John Kennedy made these economic sanctions permanent.
In 1982, the United States placed Cuba on its list of state sponsors of terrorism because of Cuba’s support for armed revolution and leftist guerrilla groups in countries such as Angola, Ethiopia, Colombia, and Spain.
Cuba’s relations with the superpower remained strained for over fifty years, with Cubans attributing their poor economic situation and constrained diplomatic standing in the international community in large part to United States policy and actions.
In 2015, however, the two countries moved toward normalization of relations—a transition that has momentous implications for Cuba and could usher in a future of increased wealth and welfare for its people.
In addition to restoring diplomatic relations, the United States eased restrictions on remittances, travel, and banking relations and allowed United States travelers to import small amounts of cigars and alcohol.
Cuba was removed from the United States terrorism list, which not only had been viewed by the Cubans as unjust but had undermined its ability to participate in the global economy.
It is now better able to do business with foreign banks, including United States banks as well as the World Bank and other global financial bodies.
The two countries have also planned to work together on transnational issues such as human trafficking, counter-narcotics, and environmental protection.
These historic steps signal a new future, with an opportunity to chart a different course for the special relationship of these two respective members of the Global South and Global North.
The United States has had long-standing diplomatic and economic ties with China, Russia, and Vietnam.
The prospects of countries in the Global South, such as Cuba, are shaped by both internal and international factors.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos Information Technology Foreign Aid Remittances Foreign Direct Investment • Second World • Decolonization • Mercantilism • Classic Liberal Economy Theory Self-Determination Development Modernization Communications Technology Additional Videos • Collier, Paul.
Y ou are a member of the human race, and your future will be determined to a large degree by the capacity of humanity to work together to manage the many common problems confronting the entire world.
The answer for centuries has primarily relied on sovereign territorial states.
States’ foreign policy decisions and interactions, more than any other factor, give rise to trends and transformations in world politics.
Today, however, as liberal theory posits, the extraordinary power of states over global destiny is eroding as our world becomes increasingly complex and interdependent, and as nonstate actors continue to multiply and seek greater influence in the global community.
A critical question to consider, then, is whether or not the predicted decline of states’ sovereign authority will ultimately prove to be a cure for global problems.
This chapter provides information and insight to help you evaluate this question.
Impressive numbers of nonstate actors on the world stage are increasingly flexing their political muscle in an effort to engineer global changes.
This chapter explores two broad types of nonstate actors—international organizations that carry out independent foreign policies as transnational actors and NGOs made up of individual people who band together in coalitions of private citizens to exercise international influence.
To introduce this discussion, we begin with a look at the general characteristics of both types of nonstate actors.
What distinguishes the two is that intergovernmental organizations are international organizations whose members are states, whereas nongovernmental organizations are associations composed of private individuals.
Intergovernmental Organizations IGOs are purposely created by states to solve problems.
IGOs are generally regarded as more important than NGOs, in part because IGO members are powerful state governments and tend to be more permanent.
IGOs meet at regular intervals, and they have established rules for making decisions and a permanent secretariat or headquarters staff FIGURE 6.
NGOS, AND STATES SINCE 1900 Since 1900, the number of independent states has increased dramatically, with growth accelerating after World War II when the decolonization movement began.
Only thirty-four IGOs qualify as “intercontinental organizations,” and only thirty-six are, like the United Nations , “universal membership” IGOs.
The expansion of IGOs has created a complex network of overlapping international organizations that cooperate with one another to deal with a wide range of global issues.
They support one another on issues as varied as trade, defense, disarmament, economic development, agriculture, health, culture, human rights, the arts, illegal drugs, tourism, labor, gender inequality, education, debt, the environment, crime, humanitarian aid, civilian crisis relief, telecommunications, science, globalization, immigration, and refugees.
Nongovernmental Organizations The term NGO can be applied to all nonstate and nonprofit organizations that operate as intermediaries to build transnational bridges between those with resources and a targeted group.
According to a constructivist perspective, they are inspired to action by their interests and values.
People speak of NGOs, INGOs , BINGOs , RINGOs (Religious International NGOs), ENGOs , QUANGOs (Quasi-NonGovernmental Organizations—i.e., those that are at least partially created or supported by states), and many others.
In general, the socially constructed image of NGOs widely accepted throughout the world is very positive—most pursue objectives that are held by large segments of society and, therefore, do not provoke much opposition.
For example, NGOs such as Amnesty International, the International Ghamber of Gommerce, the International Red Gross, Save the Ghildren, and the World Wildlife Federation enjoy widespread popular support.
Others, however, are more controversial because they unite people for collective action in ways that can harm others, as in the case of terrorist groups, international drug rings, or transnational pirates.
For instance, more than 3000 NGOs actively consult with various agencies of the extensive UN system, maintain offices in hundreds of cities, and hold parallel conferences with IGO meetings to which states send representatives.
As IGOs and NGOs rise in numbers and influence, a key question to contemplate is whether a “global society” will materialize to override the traditional state-centric global system and, if so, whether this structural transformation will democratize or disrupt global governance.
The UN’s nearly fourfold growth from the 51 states that joined it at the UN’s birth in 1945 has been spectacular, but the admission process has from the start been governed by political conflicts.
These conflicts show the extent to which the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and govern it through veto authority in the Security Gouncil.
This was especially true during the Cold War, when both the United States and the Soviet Union prevented countries aligned with their adversaries from joining.
These institutional forms were inspired by the liberal conviction that both war and the management of other global problems are best controlled by managing global anarchy —the absence of supranational authority to regulate relations between states—on the international scene.
During World War II, the U.S., British, and Russian allies began planning for a new international organization, the United Nations, to preserve the postwar peace because it was believed that peace could not be maintained unilaterally by any one great power acting alone.
Although faith in the UN’s ability eroded when it became paralyzed by the unforeseen Gold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, in the post-Gold War era it was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission.
THE UN'S HEADQUARTERS AND GLOBAL NETWORK To reduce the gap between aspiration and accomplishment, the UN has spread its administrative arm to every corner of the globe to fulfill its primary purpose of spearheading international cooperation.
Responsible for coordinating the UN’s social and economic programs, functional commissions, and specialized agencies, its fifty-four members are elected by the General Assembly for staggered three-year terms.
Despite the intentions of the founders of the UN, the General Assembly has assumed wider responsibilities as countries in the Global South—seizing advantage of their growing numbers under the one-state/one-vote rules of the General Assembly—have guided UN involvement in directions of particular concern to them.
This coalition pushes the UN to address economic and social needs and protests when it fails to respect the Global South’s special interests.
The growth of the General Assembly’s power may not be sufficient to ensure the Global South’s control of the agenda, however, as the original five great powers in the Security Council continue to run the show—with the United States hegemon in a preeminent position.
In a similar move to maintain power within the UN, China surprised many with its refusal to support an Indian bid for a permanent seat in 2008.
Budget Controversy Differences between the Global North and the Global South over perceived priorities are most clearly exhibited in the heated debate over the UN’s budget.
U THANT, 1961-1971 The placid Thant had a low profile but got flak for pulling UN peacekeepers from Sinai.
Thus the United States, which has the greatest resources, is assessed 22 percent of the UN’s regular budget, for a net contribution in 2015 of over $654 million.
Yet the poorest 18 percent of the UN’s members, or a total of thirty-five member states, pay the minimum , each contributing only $27,136 annually and altogether less than 1 percent of the UN’s 2015 budget.
In comparison, the richest 20 percent of states were assessed to pay almost 94 percent of the UN’s 2015 budget.
Although the regular portion of the budget reflects an overall budget decline and continues to reflect the fiscal constraint embraced the prior year, the amount allocated to special political missions has grown to almost 25 percent of the budget from just 6. percent a decade earlier.
Among the various budget categories , political affairs is the largest with an allocation of 24. percent of the program budget.
A difference in opinion about what is important and which states should have political influence are the real issues.
Poor states argue that need should determine expenditure levels rather than rich countries’ interests, and major contributors do not want to pay for programs they oppose.
Future Challenges The UN’s future remains uncertain, and its persistent financial troubles leave it without the resources to combat global problems and carry out the responsibilities assigned to it.
Despite some resistance by members of the Global South, who feared that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon might bend to big-donor pressure and compromise the interests of small powers, the UN has undertaken a series of reforms since 2006 to change its management procedures and bring its recruitment, contracting, and training responsibilities into line with its vast new responsibilities.
The UN is frequently blamed for failures when the real failure belongs to its members, particularly those of the Global North.
Moreover, the UN is often faced with very difficult tasks that individual states have been unable to solve.
As former Secretary-General U Thant observed, “Great problems usually come to the United Nations because governments have been unable to think of anything else to do about them.
In the final analysis, the UN can be no more than the mandates and power that the member states give to it.
After troops fired on the rioting crowds, however, the protests turned into armed conflict over the legitimacy of al-Assad’s rule.
Fighting continued between the Syrian army and various opposition forces, and as of March 2015, the UN estimated that at least 220,000 have perished since the start of the hostilities.
Despite considerable international concern over the conflict in Syria, there has been division within the United Nations, particularly among the Security Council members, over the extent to which it should intervene.
The United States and many other Western governments have condemned the Syrian government’s brutal response to the protests and called for al-Assad to step down from power.
They have supporfed a sfronger role for the UN in addressing the violent conflict.
Many supporters see UN intervention as supported by the UN Charter, which envisions the protection of human righfs as the responsibility of global society.
Unanimously adopted by UN members in 2005, the Responsibility to Protect doctrine also calls for intervention by the international community if a state fails fo protecf its citizens from war crimes, ethnic cleansing, genocide, and crimes against humanity.
However, critics of intervention argue that action motivated by nonhumanitarian reasons is in contradiction to the UN Charter, which rests on the principle of sovereignty and prohibits forceful intervention that violates the political independence and territorial integrity of any sfate.
China and Russia have opposed UN actions that they see as constituting intervention into the internal concerns of a sovereign state, although they joined the United States and others in calling for a peace process that would bring an end to the civil war.
This gridlock, and the United Nation’s inability to stop the violence in Syria, raises questions about the efficacy of the organization.
It also highlights the tension between a state’s sovereign authority over its territory, its responsibility to protect and provide for the compelling needs of ifs own people, and the grounds for intervention by the international community.
Note that each of these IGOs was created by the great powers in response to the great powers’ need for a stable international economic order even though it required the voluntary sacrifice of sovereignty.
The creation of international regimes, as well as authoritative IGO institutions for global governance, can pay dividends.
The World Trade Organization Remembering the hardships caused by the Great Depression of 1929, after World War II the United States sought to create international economic institutions that would prevent another depression by promoting world trade.
These calls led to a meeting in 1947 in Geneva where twenty-three states agreed to a number of bilateral tariff concessions between two states.
These treaties were written into a final act called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , which was originally thought of as a temporary arrangement until the ITO came into operation.
Although it was not exactly what the ITO envisaged immediately following World War II, it nevertheless represents the most ambitious tariff-reduction institution yet.
Unlike GATT, the WTO is a full-fledged IGO with formal decision-making procedures.
Mandated to manage disputes arising from its trading partners, the WTO has been given authority to enforce trading rules and to adjudicate trade disputes.
At the heart of their complaint is that the WTO undermines the traditional rule of law that prohibits interfering in sovereign states’ domestic affairs, including management of economic practices within the states’ territorial jurisdiction.
However, it should be kept in mind that the WTO developed as a result of voluntary agreements states reached to surrender some of their sovereign decision-making freedom, under the conviction that this pooling of sovereignty would produce more gains than losses.
Nonetheless, the WTO is criticized because it is widely perceived that “the WTO and democracy are incompatible.
Just as with the United Nations, many of its policies are orchestrated by its most powerful members, often during informal meetings that do not include the full WTO membership.
Most recently, the World Bank has set a goal to end extreme poverty throughout the world by 2030.
Thus far, this ambitious goal has met with praise from the donor countries.
The five countries with the largest number of shares in the World Bank’s capital stock (the United States, Germany, Japan, France, and the United Kingdom) appoint their own executive directors, and the remaining executive directors are either appointed , elected by their states , or elected by groups of countries.
This weighted voting system recognizes the differences among members’ holdings systems and protects the interests of the great powers that make more substantial contributions to the World Bank’s resources.
Now, with a poverty reduction target date of 2030, the World Bank is aggressively pursuing innovative ways to address such a pressing issue.
Seen here is one such outburst on May 21, 2015, in response to a visit to the Philippines by WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo.
Protesters criticize the impact of economic globalization and the Philippines’ membership to the WTO, which was seen by many as leading to an enormous influx of imported food and agricultural products.
At the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference, the United States was a prime mover in creating the International Monetary Fund , a truly global IGO designed to maintain currency exchange stability by promoting international monetary cooperation and orderly exchange arrangements.
Further, the IMF sometimes functions as a lender of last resort for countries experiencing financial crises.
Dayto-day business is conducted by a twenty-four-member executive board chaired by a managing director, who is also the administrative head of a staff of approximately 2000 employees.
Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate in economics and former chief economist of the World Bank, complains that the policies produce disappointing results because they are anchored in a freemarket dogma that ignores the unique sociocultural contexts of the countries in which they are applied.
Given the diversity of the Global South, development strategies for the future should avoid grandiose claims of universality and one-size-fits-all policies.
T3 regional intergovernmental ORGANIZATIONS The tug of war between individual states and groups of states within the UN, the WTO, the World Bank, and the IMF are reminders of an underlying principle that IGOs are run by the states that join them.
This severely inhibits the ability of IGOs to rise above interstate competition and independently pursue their organizational purposes.
For this reason, universal IGOs are often viewed from a realist perspective as instruments of their members’ foreign policies and arenas for debate rather than as independent nonstate actors.
This limits a given IGO’s ability to foster multilateral decision making to engineer global change.
A rival hypothesis—that cooperation among powerful states is possible and international organizations help produce it—emerges from liberal theory.
The EU serves as a model for other regional IGOs to emulate as the globe’s most successful example of peaceful cross-border cooperation that has produced an integrated security community with a single economy.
Of these, the Organization for Security and Gooperation in Europe and the Gouncil of Europe stand as regional institutions of equal European partners, free of dividing lines, designed to manage regional security and promote the human rights of minorities through democratization.
Even within this overlapping network of European IGOs, the EU stands out as the example of how a powerful organization has transformed itself from a singleto a multiple-purpose nonstate actor.
That is what happened after World War II—European leaders conceived of a bold plan to eradicate the curse of war by removing the incentives for war.
Their reform program sought xht political integration of Europe via a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states—to bring about nothing less than the transformation of international relations.
European integration began with the European Goal and Steel Gommunity in 1951, the European Atomic Energy Gommunity in 1957, and the European Economic Gommunity in 1957.
Further expansion is also conceivable because the admission procedures for possible new membership are currently under way for eight additional countries.
Turkey began accession talks in 2005 and could be admitted between 2015 and 2020.
Other countries in the western Balkans—^Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina—are also lobbying for future membership.
In 2009, Iceland, a state that would give increased access to the resource-rich Artie, applied for membership with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the block.
However, accession talks stalled due to dispute over mackerel fishing and the sensitive issue of financial reform.
EU expansion is not simply a procedure for enlarging membership; it has become a foreign policy in that the process seeks to transform external applicants into member states.
Having such a transformative effect, it is hardly surprising that even EU expansion does not escape controversy.
Nationalism has crept into the process in recent years, with legal and political hurdles that call into question the sincerity and credibility of EU commitments to states that aspire to membership.
For one, the prospect of a populous Muslim Turkey joining the EU raises fundamental questions about Europe’s identity.
The possible entry of Turkey and, perhaps, more remote and culturally different countries would have major implications for the way many people, especially within the six Western founders of the EU, conceive of Europe.
These nationalistic inclinations were further reflected in calls for revision of the Schengen rules as thousands of North Africans sought refuge during the protests and violence of the Arab Spring in 2011—as well as Syrian refugees seeking safety in Europe since then.
Italy, France, and Belgium have called for the rules to be “revised so that national governments can more easily reimpose border controls” under exceptional circumstances {The Economist, 2011a, 57), as each sought to control the flow of North African illegal migrants between their countries.
EU enlargement through eastward expansion is further challenged by the fact that the twelve newest members, whose combined economies are less than 10 percent of that of the entire EU, have poorer economies and smaller populations than the previous fifteen EU members.
As a result, these new members have different needs and interests that can make reaching agreements on policy decisions increasingly difficult.
It has grown in eight expansions from six members in 1951 to 28 in 2013, as shown here, and eight other countries, such as Albania and Turkey, as waiting in the wings.
This deal sparked the first deadly violent protests in Greece in twenty years.
If Germany, France, and other northern European countries join together to oppose the smaller, less developed new members, a “club within a club” could split the EU into two opposed coalitions.
Nevertheless, the idea of a single, integrated Europe is compelling for those who are haunted by the specter of European nationalities and states that have been fighting each other ever since the Pax Romana collapsed 1800 years ago.
EU Organization and Management As the EU has grown and expanded its authority, its principal institutions for governance have changed.
The EU’s central administrative unit, the Gouncil of Ministers, represents the governments of the EU’s member states and retains final authority over policy-making decisions.
Gommissioners are nominated by EU member governments, in consultation with the president of the European Gommission, and must be approved by the European Parliament.
It has existed since the beginning of Europe’s journey toward political unification, although it was initially appointed rather than elected and had little power.
The citizens of the EU’s member states now choose the European Parliament in a direct election.
The European Parliament shares authority with the Gouncil of Ministers, but the Parliament’s influence has increased over time.
The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Gommission, whose decisions the Parliament can overturn.
The European Gourt of Justice in Euxembourg has also grown to prominence and power as European integration has developed.
The court was founded to adjudicate claims and conflicts among EU governments as well as between those governments and the new institutions the EU created.
THE EVOLUTIONARY DEVELOPMENT OF THE EUROPEAN UNION'S GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE The EU is a complex organization, with different responsibilities performed by various units.
The figure illustrates the principal institutions and the relationships among them that collectively lead to EU decisions and policies. arise within the EU’s institutions, and decides cases concerning individual citizens.
Debate continues also over how far and how fast such a process tawSird pooled sovereignty should proceed, and several efforts to further integrate the countries of Europe have met with resistance—the Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001, and the French and Dutch rejected the EU Constitution in 2005.
The leaders of the member states agreed to a final draft of the most recent initiative, the Lisbon Treaty, in October 2007.
It was presented as an institutional treaty that would streamline the decision-making process for the EU by creating a full-time president and a single foreign policy chief to represent the EU governments as a whole.
These detractors remained reluctant to pursue deeper political integration and further constrain the pursuit of individual national self-interest, and concerned about the extent to which EU decision making is democratic.
Ratification was required by all member states for the treaty to go into force and was initially anticipated before the end of 2008.
However, the Irish initially rejected the treaty in a national referendum, leading to speculation that there was not sufficient popular support for a federal Europe.
This decision was reversed during a subsequent referendum in October 2009, and with the final ratification by the Czech Republic, the Lisbon Treaty became law on December 1, 2009.
Belgian Herman Van Rompuy became the EU’s first full-time president and assumed office on January 4, 2010.
Other Regional IGOs Since Europe’s initial steps toward integration in the 1950s, more than a dozen regional IGOs have been created in other parts of the world, notably among states in the Global South.
In May 2015 in Boracay, Philippines, APEG held its meeting of trade ministers and economic leaders to further discuss how to promote regional economic integration, achieve shared development and common prosperity, secure inclusive sustainable growth, and cultivate the enormous potential that Asia-Pacific partnerships hold for companies and workers in the region.
This organization was established in 1967 by five founding members to promote regional economic, social, and cultural cooperation.
In 1999, it created a free-trade zone among its ten Southeast Asian members as a counterweight outside the orbit of Japan, Ghina, the United States, and other great powers so that ASEAN could compete as a bloc in international trade.
At the ASEAN summit in 2015 in Malaysia, the group focused on deepening economic integration, addressing not only the reduction of tariffs but also other barriers such as infrastructure, communications technology, and the skill levels of workers.
This organization was established in 1964 from a 1957 accord to promote trade and economic integration among its eighteen North African and Middle Eastern members.
This organization was established in 1973 as a common market to promote economic development and integration among its fifteen country and territory members.
Emphasizing the region’s susceptibility to external shocks as evidenced by the impact of the global financial crisis, it created a five-year strategic plan outlining specific initiatives to be accomplished between 2015 and 2019 to further the goals of Caribbean unity, resilience, and prosperity.
Established in 1975 to promote regional economic cooperation among its fifteen members, it has a much larger agenda today.
As part of its vision for accomplishments by 2020, it also emphasizes regional peace, good governance, greater human security and development, and environmental preservation.
This is a military alliance created in 1949 primarily to deter the Soviet Union’s activities in Western Europe.
The security ICO has expanded its membership to twenty-eight countries and broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe.
This organization was established in 1992 to promote regional economic development and integration and to alleviate poverty among its fifteen members.
Its strategic goals for 2020 include not only greater trade and economic liberalization but also sustainable food security, greater human development, gender equality, and combating health pandemics.
As these examples illustrate, most IGOs are organized on a regional rather than a global basis.
The governments that create them usually concentrate on one or two major goals (such as liberalizing trade or promoting peace within the region) instead of attempting to address the complete range of issues that they face in common all at once.
The substantial difficulty most regions have experienced in pursuing the EU’s level of institutional integration suggests the enormity of the obstacles to creating new political communities out of previously divided ones.
IGOs’ expanding webs of interdependence are infringing on the power of states and changing the ways in which they network on the global stage.
IGOs are not, however, the only nonstate actors leading the potential transformation of world politics.
They include transnational humanitarian organizations, multinational corporations, transnational religions and ethnic groups, and global terrorist and criminal networks.
Such NGOs are growing in number and roaring with voices too loud to ignore, making them increasingly influential in world politics.
The near monopoly of power once enjoyed by sovereign entities is being eroded. —Richard N Haass, Foreign Relations Council president T-a prominent types of NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS nonstate nations National or ethnic groups struggling to obtain power and/or statehood.
Increasing numbers of people have found that through joining nongovernmental organizations they can influence international decision making.
They have chosen to become international decision makers themselves by electing to join one or more NGOs.
These tens of thousands of “transitional activists” are influencing the policies of state governments and intergovernmental organizations through a variety of strategies.
Individuals who think nationalistically are very likely to pledge their primary allegiance not to the state and the government that rules them but to a politically active ethnic group whose members identify with one another because they perceive themselves as bound together by kinship, language, and a common culture.
Ethnicity is socially constructed in that members of an ethnic or racial group learn to see themselves as members of that group and thereby perceive their identity as determined by their inherited membership at birth.
These identities, even in the plural, are usually very easily negotiated by their owners and are context-specific.
China came under intense international criticism for its crackdown on ethnic Tibetan groups following rioting in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital.
The Chinese, however, see him as a “splittist,” after the spiritual leader fled Tibet in 1959 following a failed armed uprising against Chinese PROTECTING INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Indigenous groups have frequently seen their rights and welfare fall victim to a larger national interest in progress and development as determined by the state government.
Pictured here, representatives of local indigenous communities demonstrate in Sao Paulo, Brazil, against the construction of the Belo Monte dam at the Xingu River in the Brazilian Amazon.
In most cases, indigenous people were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient but are now controlled by a state government.
As Edward Sapir and Benjamin Eee Whorf hypothesized in the 1930s, different languages reflect different views of the world that predispose their speakers toward different ways of thought.
Although indigenous peoples are located within many of the globe’s pluralistic states, they also have a transnational dimension because they are geographically spread across existing state boundaries.
For that reason, we now turn from ethnic group NGOs to an examination of the ways religious movements may operate as NGOs as well.
Transnational Religious Movements Ideally, religion would seem a natural worldwide force for global unity and harmony.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights clash of civilizations Political scientist Samuel Huntington’s controversial thesis that in the twenty-first century the globe’s major civilizations will conflict with one another, leading to anarchy and warfare similar to that resutting from conflicts between states over the past 500years. id/or eChapter. restrictions require it.
Similarly, the religious conflicts during the Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants killed nearly one-fourth of all Europeans.
Most of the world’s more than 7 billion people are affiliated at some level with transnational religious movements.
At the most abstract level, a religion is a system of thought shared by a group that provides its members with an object of devotion and a code of behavior by which they can ethically judge their actions.
This definition points to commonalities across the great diversity of organized religions in the world, but the world’s principal religions also vary greatly in the theological doctrines and beliefs they embrace.
They also differ widely in the geographical locations where they are most prevalent (see Map 6.5), the extent to which they engage in political efforts to direct international affairs, and the number of adherents.
Between 2010 and 2050, the percentage of the world population that is Buddhist is expected to decline from 7. percent to 5. percent.
The percentage that is Hindu holds steady , as do Jewish and Christian groups.
MAJOR RELIGIONS I I Eastern Orthodox I I Protestant I I Roman Catholic I I Other Christian I j Jewish I I Shia Muslim I I Sunni Muslim I I Hindu I I Lamaistic Buddhist I I Theravada Buddhist I I Buddhist and Shintoist □ Mahayana Buddhist, onfucianist, Taoist I I Sikh I I Indigenous i I I 1 i MAP 6.
Those who study religious movements comparatively note that a system of belief provides religious followers with their main source of identity, and that this identification with and devotion to their religion springs from the natural human need to find a set of values with which to determine the meaning of life and the consequences of choices.
This human need sometimes leads believers to perceive the values of their own religion as superior to those of others, which, sadly, often results in intolerance.
The proponents of most organized religious movements believe their religion should be universal—that is, accepted by everyone throughout the world.
To confirm their faith in their religious movement’s natural superiority, many organized religions actively proselytize to convert nonbelievers to their faith, engaging in evangelical campaigns to win over nonbelievers and followers of other religions.
In evaluating the impact of religious movements on international affairs, it is important to carefully distinguish between the high ideals of doctrines from the activities of the people who head these religious bodies.
In some countries, the two realms are politically separate, with legal protection for freedom of religion and little or no state support for a particular established religion.
In many other countries, however, religion and state are tightly linked and almost indistinguishable.
After 9/11, the debate about the impact of religion on international conflict intensified because of the role the Islamic Al Qaeda global terrorist network played in organizing the attack.
As a result, the religious roots of terrorism and opposition to democracy in the Global South {Shah, 2004) have received much attention, as have religious bodies acting as NGO global actors.
It is difficult to understand the religious origins of violence because most people equate religion with peace, compassion, and forgiveness, not hatred or intolerance.
Calling on religious leaders to condemn extremists who use religion to justify violence, in 2014 Pope Francis said “To Kill in the name of God is a grave sacrilege.
The world’s major religious movements voice respect and reverence for the sanctity of life and accept people as equal creations of a deity, regardless of race or color.
However, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, the role of religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial.
Some hold the view that religious hostility results from the fact that universalistic religions are managed by organizations that often adopt a particularistic and dogmatic outlook.
The virtues that religions uphold can ironically become weapons against those who do not hold such views.
In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, believers reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from whaf they or other religions think to be true.
In part, they tend to see outsiders as threatening rivals whose loyalty and allegiance to other deities represents a challenge to their own religion’s universal claims.
In a word, religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and disregard for fhe right of people to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs.
Yet it is dangerous to accept stereotypes of religious groups as responsible for relenfless barrages of terrorism.
Paganistic and atheistic societies recognizing no higher deity have equally long histories of waging violenf wars against external enemies and their own people.
Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peacemaking (Gaetan, 2013), and in fact most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for cenfurles.
Thus it is important for you to objectively weigh the evidence about the impact of religious NGOs on world affairs.
In many cases, the religious movement substitutes itself for the government at the local level, involving itself in education, health, and other social welfare programs.
This generally means that the government and all of its domestic and foreign activities must be in the hands of believers or subject to their close oversight.
In some cases, this means that international boundaries are not recognized as barriers to the propagation of the faith, even if this means they must resort to violence.
The first is irredentism —the attempt by a dominant religion to reclaim previously possessed territory in an adjacent region from a foreign state that now controls it, often through the use of force.
The second is secession, or separatist revolts — the attempt by a religious minority to revolt and break away from an internationally recognized state.
Third, militant religions tend to cause migration, the departure of religious minorities from their countries of origin to escape persecution.
This consequence notwithstanding, transnational religions compete with one another, which tends to divide humanity and breed separatist efforts that can tear countries apart.
Pictured here, Pope Francis meets with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at the Vatican.
Noting the common concerns discussed during his audience with the pope, Ki-moon remarked that the pope ""speaks loudly of his commitment to the poor, he has a deep sense of humility, his passion and compassion to improve the human condition."" outsourcing The transfer of jobs by a corporation usually headquartered in a Global North country to a Global South country able to supply trained workers at lower wages.
As advocates of liberal free trade and active contributors to the globalization of world politics, MNCs receive both credit for the positive aspects of free trade and globalization and blame for their costs.
This has made them highly controversial nonstate actors, especially in the Global South, where people frequently see MNCs as the cause of exploitation and poverty.
At the start of the twenty-first century, about 80 percent of all MNCs’ employees worked in developing countries, where wages were lower, which helped to bolster corporate profits at the parent headquarters in the Global North—but no longer.
Outsourcing and corporate restructuring are heralded as critical to facilitating business without borders, enhancing corporate growth and profitability, and better using skilled staff in both the Global North and the Global South.
Companies have used the downturn to aggressively trim payrolls, making cuts they’ve been reluctant to make before.
Companies have discovered that new software and computer technologies have made many workers in Asia and Latin America almost as productive as Americans and that the Internet allows far more work to be efficiently moved to another country without loss of control.
This outsourcing is now eagerly welcomed by the Global South’s developing countries as a means to economic growth, where once MNG domination was resisted.
MNGs are increasingly influential NGOs because the world’s giant producing, trading, and servicing corporations have become the primary agents of the globalization of production.
The profile shows that of the world’s top thirty-five economic entities, multinationals account for only four.
Altogether, MNGs comprise almost 23 percent of the top seventy economic entities.
In part due to their global reach and economic power, MNGs’ involvement in the domestic political affairs of local or host countries is controversial.
In some instances this concern has extended to MNGs’ involvement in the domestic politics of their home countries, where they actively lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their businesses.
Perhaps the most notorious instance of an MNG’s intervention in the politics of a host state occurred in Ghile in the early 1970s when International Telephone and Telegraph tried to protect its interests in the profitable Ghiltelco telephone company by seeking to prevent the election of Marxist-oriented Salvador Allende as president and, once Allende was elected, pressured the United States government to disrupt the Ghilean economy.
A Ranking by Size of Economy and Revenues _ Rank Country/Corporation GNI/Revenues 1 United States 16,992.
A Ranking by Size of Economy and Revenues _ Rank Country/Corporation GNI/Revenues 39 Denmark 347.
Gross National Income , World Bank, 2015 World Development Indicators; MNC revenues, Forbes.
For example, MNCs have recently taken steps toward engineering a “social responsibility revolution” by “making products and delivering services that generate profits and also help the world address challenges such as climate change, energy security, healthcare, and poverty.
The blurring of the boundaries between internal and external affairs adds potency to the political role that MNCs unavoidably play as nonstate actors at the intersection of foreign and domestic policy.
MNCs’ awesome financial resources are much greater than the official statistics suggest, and this is why many states fear that MNCs, which insist on freedom to compete internationally, are stripping away their sovereignty.
In fact, in some respects states are losing control of their national economies as MNCs merge with one another and, in the process, cease to remain tied to any one parent state or region.
Many MNCs are now globally integrated enterprises that produce the same goods in different countries so that their horizontal organization no longer ties them to any single country.
A growing trend is for celebrities who want to effect change to establish issue-advocacy organizations that promote their issue of interest.
Sean Penn founded J/P Haitian Relief Organization to provide temporary housing and medical care; Alicia Keys cofounded Keep a Ghild Alive to provide medical support for AIDS orphans in Africa; and Don Gheadle, along with George Glooney, Matt Damon, Brad Pitt, David Pressman, and Jerry Weintraub, created the antigenocide advocacy group Not on Our Watch.
George Glooney played a role in focusing attention on the political violence and independence efforts civil society ^ community that embraces shared norms and ethical standards to coiiectively manage problems without coercion and through peaceful and democratic procedures for decision making aimed at improving human welfare. in South Sudan, and he has continued to raise awareness about genocide and torture rapes in Sudan.
As a special envoy of the United Nations, Angelina Jolie focuses on humanitarian and refugee issues, and in 2015 she delivered an impassioned plea to the UN Security Gouncil to intervene in the Syrian civil war and help the millions of Syrian refugees.
That said, studies of the impact of NGO pressure on THE POWER OF FAME George Clooney has been involved in Sudan for over eight years in efforts to combat genocide and torture, and worked to help the people of South Sudan achieve independence.
Says Clooney, ""Celebrity can help focus news media where they have abdicated their responsibility.
For this reason, NGOs are often generally seen as agents of policy continuities rather than policy transformation.
These characteristics of NGO efforts to redirect global policy suggest that the mere presence of such groups, and the mere fact they are organized to persuade, does not guarantee their penetration of the global policy-making process.
On the whole, NGOs have participation without real power and involvement without real influence, given that the ability of any one to exert influence is offset by the tendency for other, countervailing powers to oppose that influence.
That is, when any coalition of interest groups seeks vigorously to push policy in one direction, other nonstate actors—aroused that their established interests are being disturbed— tend to push policy in the opposite direction.
The result is often that the quest for consensus proves elusive, the capacity of a network to push history forward rapidly in a particular direction is constrained, and the international community’s posture toward many global problems fails to move in any single direction.
However, others argue that these organizations do not meet expectations for NGOs given their illegal activities and use of violence.
No matter how we categorize these groups, they are clearly nonstate actors whose behaviors transcend national boundaries and pose a threat to global well-being. terrorism Transnational Terrorist Groups Terrorism has plagued world politics for centuries and, according to historian Max Boot , such irregular warfare is far older than conventional warfare.
Some place the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BGE with the Sicarii Zealots, who violently targeted Jewish high priests whom they saw as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law.
Premeditated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational, transnational groups, or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience.
Terrorists have shifted their tactics from theatrical violent acts to gain media attention to purposeful destruction of a target’s property and civilian noncombatants—to destroy and kill for the purpose of instilling fear in as many people as possible.
Today many terrorist organizations plan their acts through unprecedented levels of communication and coordination across vast networks of terrorist cells.
The events of September 11, 2001, challenged the conventional view of terrorism as a rare and relatively remote threat.
Not only did groups like A1 Qaeda have global reach, but stealth, ingenuity, and meticulous planning could compensate for their A TERRORIST MASTERMIND Osama Bin Laden, the head of Al Qaeda who was behind the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, was killed by United States forces on May 1, 2011.
What arguably made 9/11 a symbolic watershed was that it epitomized a deadly new strain of terrorism.
Primary Location and Goals Name Primary Location Goal Al Qaeda A global network with cells in a number of countries and tied to Sunni extremist networks; heavy concentration in Afghanistan, the border region in Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen.
To establish pan-lslamic rule throughout the world by working with allied Islamic extremist groups to overthrow regimes it deems ""non-lslamic” and expel Westerners and non-Muslims from Muslim countries.
Boko Haram Primarily Nigeria, but also active in Chad, Cameroon, and Niger.
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria / Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant Primarily in Iraq and Syria.
To expand its influence beyond Iraq and Syria and establish an Islamic state across Middle Eastern and African countries.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Colombia, with some activities in Venezuela, Panama, and Ecuador.
Flezbollah In the Bekaa Valley, the southern suburbs of Beirut, and southern Lebanon; established cells in Europe, Africa, South America, North America, and Asia.
To establish an Islamic Palestinian state in place of Israel and gain international acceptance of its rule in Gaza.
Basque Fatherland and Liberty Primarily in the Basque autonomous regions of northern Spain and southwestern France.
Real Irish Republican Army Northern Ireland, Ireland, and the United Kingdom.
To create a united Irish state that includes Northern Ireland and Ireland.
On May 19, 2009, the Sri Lankan government declared an end to the twenty-five-year civil war and a defeat of what had been characterized as the fiercest terrorist force in the world.
Others, most notably AI Qaeda, Boko Haram, and ISIS/ISIL, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals.
There is also variation in the manner in which their organizations are structured, with some having a hierarchical structure and newer groups tending to favor networked insulated cells dispersed across the globe.
Instead of having a hierarchical command structure, for example, Al Qaeda possesses a decentralized horizontal structure.
Although the leadership offers ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world, leaders do not directly plan and execute most of the attacks undertaken in Al Qaeda’s name.
What makes the newer breed of terrorists who belong to organizations such as Al Qaeda and ISIS/ISIL more lethal than previous terrorists is their religious fanaticism, which allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels.
At one level, terrorism is a means to change the political status quo by punishing those culpable for perceived wrongs.
At another level, terrorism is an end in itself, a sacrament performed for its own sake in an eschatological confrontation between good and evil.
Functioning only on the first level, most secular terrorist groups employ suicide missions less frequently.
Though terrorists are popularly portrayed as “madmen” bent on death and destruction, terrorist expert Robert Pape has noted that even “suicide terrorism follows a strategic logic.
Take care to consider how your value judgments can affect your interpretation of the identity and purpose of any group you may believe belongs in this menacing category of nonstate actors.
Transnational Crime Organizations Like terrorists, transnational crime groups pose a serious challenge to global security in the twenty-first century and are expected to continue to proliferate because, as Director of the Terrorism, Transnational Crime and Corruption Center Louise Shelly explains, “these crime groups are major beneficiaries of globalization.
Because terrorists require significant resources to function, there is frequently an overlap between terrorist organizations and transnational crime organizations, as terrorists are often involved in an array of domestic and transnational crime.
MAJOR GLOBAL CRIME FLOWS The specific markets of transnational crime organizations are in constant fluctuation.
Drug epidemics rise and fall; trafficking in humans and firearms expands rapidly in areas of conflict and subsides in times of peace.
It is therefore critical that the international community better understand the way that transnational crime relates to broader social changes. t I I 1 I g I I I I © i mafia.
Between 1920 and 1990 this organization was the most prominent international organized crime group in the world.
Targeted law enforcement in the United States greatly reduced the organization’s activities in that country, although it remains active in Italy and elsewhere.
Japan’s Yakuza is yet another organized crime group that is heavily involved in global human trafficking.
International criminal activity poses a threat to economic growth in legitimate business activities, particularly in emerging states that are vulnerable to internationally organized crime.
Transnational crime ring activities weaken economies and financial systems and undermine democracy.
These networks often prey on governments that are not powerful enough to oppose them, prospering on illegal activities, such as drug trafficking, that bring them immense profits.
Traditionally states have taken a realist approach to sovereignty, and carefully guarded their own territory.
To combat this, states must engage in law-enforcement collaboration and transborder intelligence sharing.
Displacing international criminal groups is not sufficient, as new groups will simply fill the void.
Criminal groups flourish in areas where there is rampant corruption, instability, and a lack of development.
Strengthening laws not only provides a more solid foundation from which to combat crime organizations, but also makes an area less conducive to transnational crime activity in the first place.
To disrupt cash flows, it is important for governments and financial institutions to work together to regulate and stop informal money transfers, recycling through real estate, offshore banking, and banking privacy practices that protect criminal profits.
As the world grows more interdependent and transactions across state borders increase through the movement of people, information, and traded products, it is likely that world politics will be increasingly affected by the activities of both IGO and NGO nonstate actors.
Many work to improve the human condition, but nonstate actors such as terrorists and transnational crime organizations prey on the vulnerabilities and misfortunes of others.
Global cooperation is necessary if we are to successfully counter this “dark side” of globalization.
Otherwise, the efforts by states and other organizations to fight terrorism and international crime will result in merely displacing the problem from one country to another.
It is misleading to think that politics is only about territorial states in interaction with each other, exercising supreme authority within their own borders.
The outlines of a future type of dual global system may be coming into view, driven simultaneously by the continuing importance of relations between states and by the growing impact of multiple cross-border transactions and channels of communication among nonstate actors.
This change would lead to a hybrid, or two-tiered, world in which the clout and authority of the governments that rule countries decline while the relative power of nonstate actors rise.
These speculations by no means resolve the question of whether the era of state dominance is coming to an end as nonstate actors increase their clout.
In Ghapter 7, you have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security.
In Ghapters 8 and 9, we weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace.
A blog on NGOs and various aspects of their performance in global issues.
The Epic Rivalry between Big Business and Government—and the Reckoning that Lies Ahead.
Eor many people, world politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise of military force over rivals and other actors on the global stage.
An attack by an enemy is the most dangerous direct threat to survival, and preventing such death and destruction is a precondition for attaining all other important values.
Yet changes are required in the practices of state and nonstate actors if we are to control armed conflict and reduce its frequency and destructiveness.
In Chapter 8, the pursuit of national interest defined in terms of military power is examined through the lens of realist approaches to national and international security.
In Chapter 9, you will consider liberal ideas for managing international disputes that provide alternatives to fighting on the battlefield.
WAR AND ITS ALTERNATIVES Placing high importance on power, realists emphasize the need to prepare for war and recommend that it be placed at the very top of a state's concerns.
Liberals, and many constructivists, stress a path to peace that embodies progressive Ideas and cooperative behavior.
They have mobilized to exert pressure to contain arms races, warfare, and world poverty, among other causes.
Shown here, demonstrators gather In Seoul, South Korea, to call for the nations of the world to seek nonviolent solutions to conflict.
Shown here, protestors express their grief and outrage over a terrorist attack on the office of the satirical publication Charlie Hebdo in January 2015 in the deadliest terrorist incident in Paris in more than fifty years.
In the wake of the incident, ""Je Suis Charlie"" became a rallying call of ordinary people around the world for the preservation of civil sociefy in the face of terrorist threats.
To destroy can be the thoughtless act of a single day ."" —Sir Winston Churchill, British prime minister I n the calm summer of 2001, complacency had taken hold in the generally peaceful Global North, where many thoughtful observers, noting the disappearance of interstate war among the economic giants, began to ask if war had become obsolete.
The 9/11 attack and the United States war in Afghanistan; terrorist attacks elsewhere around the world, such as in Madrid in 2004, London in 2005, Moscow in 2011, and Paris 2015; the U.S.-led military struggle in Iraq; the 2006 Israeli-HezboIIah War in Lebanon; and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for sustained peace.
Although the 2011 popular protests and demonstrations across much of the Arab world raised hopes that democratization might take place, the violent clashes with state authorities and counterdemonstrators put such reforms in jeopardy and raise concerns about the ubiquity of violence.
Based on even these few events, it becomes understandable why so many people think that armed conflict is the essence of world politics.
This insight underscores the realist belief that war is a policy instrument that transnational actors use to resolve their conflicts.
In and of itself, conflict is not necessarily threatening because war and conflict are different.
Some conflict results whenever people interact and may be generated by religious, ideological, ethnic, economic, political, or territorial issues; therefore, it should not be regarded as abnormal.
Conflict can promote social solidarity, creative thinking, learning, and communication—all factors critical to the resolution of disputes and the durability of cooperation.
However, the costs of conflict do become threatening when the parties take up arms to settle perceived irreconcilable differences or to settle old scores.
When that happens, violence occurs, and we enter the sphere of warfare.
This chapter presents information and ideas so you can explore the nature of armed conflict in your world—its causes, changing characteristics, and frequency.
You will be forced to confront the ethical dilemmas that these military threats create—about when it is moral or immoral to take up arms.
You will have the opportunity to review the leading theories that seek to explain the causes of these three types of armed conflict in world politics.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ war A condition arising within states (civil war) or between states (interstate war) when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission. conflict Discord often arising in international relations over perceived incompatibilities of interest armed conflict Combat between the military forces of two or more states or groups. and/or eChapter.
Throughout history, efforts have been made to explain why people engage in organized violence.
Some causes directly influence the odds of war; others are remote and indirect, creating the context in which any one of a number of more proximate factors may trigger violence.
In a sense, all wars originate from the decisions of the leaders of states or transnational nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations.
So a good starting point for explaining why warfare occurs is to consider the relationship of armed conflict to the choices of individual leaders.
The repeated outbreak of war has led some, such as psychiatrist Sigmund Freud, to conclude that aggression is an instinctive part of human nature that stems from humanity’s genetic psychological programming.
Realist theorists likewise believe that all humans are born with an innate drive for power that they cannot avoid and that this instinct leads to competition and war.
To pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, which they see as aggressive, greedy, and power-seeking.
Most people, at least outwardly, reject killing as evil based on certain ethical principles.
Liberal theory and behavioral social science research suggest that genetics fails to explain why individuals may be belligerent only at certain times.
Although the nature versus nurture debate regarding the biological bases of aggression has not been resolved , most social scientists now strongly disagree with the realist premise that because humans are essentially selfish, they are also aggressive—which then leads them to murder and kill.
It appears as though this self-sacrifice stems from learned beliefs that some convictions are worth dying for, such as loyalty to one’s own country.
This suggests that factors other than national character (the inborn collective traits of particular peoples) may be better suited to explain why certain countries tend to engage in organized violence.
Rather, armed conflict occurs most often as a result of the choices leaders make, and not because of the popular preferences of their entire societies.
Because, unless all members of the group are exactly alike, the characteristics of the collectivity (the entire state or culture, for example) cannot reliably predict the beliefs and behaviors of the individuals in that group.
However, the opposite, what logicians call the individualistic fallacy, is also a mental error.
Britain, or Vladimir Putin of Russia) and ascribe them to the prevailing preferences of the collective cultures and states that each of them heads.
What should be obvious is that leaders do make some immoral foreign policy decisions.
Moreover, many of those decisions by countries’ leaders are the outcome of flawed decisionmaking processes; they fail to conform to the rational choice model of foreign policy decision making, which assumes that decision makers make choices through cool-headed cost-benefit calculations in order to select the option with the best chance of accomplishing preferred goals.
In addition, even intelligent and moral leaders are sometimes prone to make unnecessarily high-risk decisions to wage war because they are pressured through groupthink by influential advisers rather than acting on what they personally believe to be the most rational choice.
This observation about the determinants of leaders’ choices about war and peace directs attention to the domestic factors that encourage some states to engage in foreign aggression.
These internal factors create the context that constrains or enables the policy decisions leaders can make.
States' Internal Characteristics We next examine some theories about the internal characteristics of states that influence leaders’ choices regarding the use of force.
Implicit in this approach to explaining armed conflict at the state level of analysis is the assumption that differences in the types or categories of states determine whether they will engage in war.
Arguing that the prospects for war are influenced most heavily by national attributes challenges the structural realism premise that war is inevitable and that global circumstances, not internal factors, are the most important determinants of warfare.
Duration of independence also influences the likelihood of armed conflict and disputes over territory.
Newly independent countries usually go through a period of political unrest following their acquisition of independence as sovereign members in the international community of states.
They then are likely to seek to resolve long-standing internal grievances and www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
The high levels of civil wars and wars between neighboring states throughout the Global South may be explained by the fact that nearly all of these less developed countries have recently gained independence, many through violent revolutions.
Nationalism and Cultural Traditions A country’s behavior is strongly influenced by the cultural and ethical traditions of its peoples.
Instead, most governments encourage their populations to glorify the state and accept whatever decisions their leaders proclaim as necessary for national security, including warfare against adversaries.
Advocates of the cultural origins of war argue that most people in most societies are disengaged, or “numb,” to what is going on around them and this prevents them from opposing their leaders’ decisions to wage war.
As a natural extension of unerring loyalty to a nation, nationalism is widely believed to be the cauldron from which wars often spring.
English essayist Aldous Huxley saw nationalism as “the religion of the twentieth century”— when history’s most destructive interstate wars were fought.
This leads many to critique nationalism, although many defend it as a virtue that creates unity and solidarity within a country.
Whatever its consequences, nationalism is seen as a powerful political force in today’s world, an idea and ideology that animates the constructed images of many around the world.
Feminist theory contends that gender roles, supported by realist values, contribute to the prevalence of militarism and warfare.
What followed from this extreme form of nationalism was a ruthless German world war and campaign of genocide that exterminated 6 million Jews and other ethnic minorities.
Many governments, through the educational programs they fund in schools and other institutions, indoctrinate militaristic values in their political culture that, taken to the extreme, condone war.
States often disseminate the belief that their right to make war should not be questioned and that the ethical principles of religious and secular philosophies prohibiting violence should be disregarded.
Consequently, critics highlight the existence of powerful institutions that prepare individuals to subconsciously accept warfare as necessary and legitimate.
Poverty, Relative Deprivation, and Demographic Stress A country’s level of economic development affects the probability of its involvement in war and armed revolution.
Violence erupts so frequently because hundreds of millions of people face discrimination or are disadvantaged in comparison to others in their country, with a form of cultural exclusion existing between groups.
This is partially why the probability of armed conflict is the highest in the Global South, where people’s expectations of what they deserve are rising more rapidly than their material rewards, and the existing gap in the distribution of wealth and opportunities is widening.
Popular support is critical to the success of armed rebellions, and poverty is a great motivator for allegiance to armed groups that promise security and an improved standard of living.
This relationship between poverty and armed conflict is all the more pronounced in countries where there is 2 , youth bulge, where a large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security.
This is pointed to as one, among many, of the factors that will continue to contribute to unrest in the Middle East as the youth unemployment rate continues to hover around 25 percent.
Yet government policy and changing demographic trends have the potential to alter the outlook in the longer term.
The risk of political violence can be reduced to some extent by providing education and concomitant employment opportunities.
Before concluding that poverty always breeds armed conflict, note that the most impoverished countries have been the least prone to start wars.
It is questionable whether the acquisition of military power leads to peace or to war, but most Global South countries agree with the realists’ thesis that weapons contribute to their security.
As Global South countries continue to equip their militaries, many worry that war will become more frequent.
In other words, militarization has not led to peace in the Global South.
One clue comes from an examination of the relationship between changes in military capabilities and war that occurred over centuries in Europe.
During the period leading to the peak of the region’s development, the world’s most frequent and deadly wars occurred in Europe.
Not coincidentally, this happened when the developing states of Europe were most energetically building their militaries in competition with one another.
Since 1945, however, with the exception of war among the now-independent states of the former Yugoslavia and between Russia and Georgia, interstate war has not occurred in Europe.
As the European countries moved up the ladder of economic and political development, they moved away from war with one another.
If, in the immediate future, the Global South follows the model of Europe before 1945, we are likely to see an ocean of Global South violence surrounding a European island of peace and prosperity.
According to the communist theory of imperialism, capitalism is mired in excess production.
The need to export this excess provokes wars to capture and protect foreign markets. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
Rebels comprised largely of the Iran-allied Houthi movement forced the Western-backed Hadi government to flee the country.
The neighboring Saudi government formed a coalition of Arab nations to halt the uprising.
Pictured here is a Saudi-led airstrike on Yemen's capital, Sanaa, on Monday, May 11, 2015.
Citing the demonstrable frequency with which wealthy capitalist societies militarily intervened on foreign soil for capital gain, Marxists believed, and generally still believe, that the best way to end international war was to end capitalism.
Conclusions depend in part on perceptions regarding economic influences on international behavior because alternative perspectives focus on different dimensions of the linkage.
Regime Type Realist theories discount the importance of government type as an influence on war and peace.
As noted in Chapter 2, liberal theory assigns great weight to the kinds of political institutions that states create to make policy decisions, and it predicts that the spread of “free” democratically ruled governments will promote peaceful interstate relations.
As Immanuel Kant argued, when citizens are given basic human rights such as choosing their leaders through ballots as well as civil liberties such as free speech and a free press, these democracies would be far less likely to initiate wars than would countries ruled by dictators and kings.
This is because a government accountable to the people would be constrained from waging war by public opinion.
Other liberal reformers have since agreed with Kant, such as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Woodrow Wilson.
The impact of government type on propensity for armed conflict has taken on great significance following the rapid conversion of many dictatorships to democratic rule.
In a remarkable global transformation from past world history, the once radical idea that democracy is the ideal form of decision making has prevailed.
As this figure shows, that has changed with the growth of ""electoral democracy"" worldwide, with competitive and regular multiparty elections conducted openly without massive voting fraud.
Democracies are unlikely to engage in any kind of militarized disputes with each other or to let any such disputes escalate into war.
Yet there is no certainty that liberal democracy will become universal or that the continued democratic reforms will automatically produce a peaceful world order.
Yet, however important domestic influences might be as a source of war, many believe that the nature of the global system is even more critical.
In the next section, we discuss the global context within which actors decide whether or not to wage armed conflict.
Although different realist theories often generate conflicting predictions, they share a core of common assumptions: The key actors in world politics are sovereign states that act rationally to advance their security, power, and wealth in a conflictual international system that lacks a legitimate governmental authority to regulate conflicts or enforce agreements.
This is the security dilemma —the possibility that a state’s actions to provide for its security may result in a decrease in the security of all states, including itself . bargaining modei of war ^n interpretation of war's onset as a choice by the initiator to bargain through aggression with an enemy in order to win on an issue or to obtain things of value, such as territory or oil.
International anarchy, or the absence of institutions for global governance, may promote an outbreak of war.
To capture the many global determinants of armed conflict, also consider how and why global systems change.
World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, the United States attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War, and the successive waves of violent protest and brutal state retaliation in the Middle East that began in 2011 were seen by many as a domino effect, with each armed conflict stimulated by its predecessor.
Because the frequency of past wars is correlated with the incidence of wars in later periods, war appears to be contagious and its future outbreaks inevitable.
Instead, they embrace the bargaining model of war, which sees war as a product of a rational choice that weighs anticipated costs against benefits.
This indicates that armed conflict is not necessarily inevitable and that historical forces do not control people’s freedom of choice or experiences.
This theoretical explanation of armed conflict is a central tenant of structural realism, which emphasizes that power distribution is a key determinant of the behavior of states.
During the transition from developing to developed status, emergent challengers can use force to achieve the recognition that their newly formed military muscles allow them.
For example, the rapid changes in the power and status that produced the division of Europe among seven great powers nearly equal in military strength are often interpreted as the tinderbox from which World War I ignited.
The power transition theory provides leverage for ""anticipating when and where great power and regional wars most likely will occur.
With a warning well ahead of time comes the opportunity to construct current policies that can manage the events that lead to future disputes"" (Kugler, Tammen, and Efird, 2004, 165). power transition theory The theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival's capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power.
Moreover, transitions in states’ relative capabilities can potentially lead the weaker party to start a war either to overtake its rival or to protect itself from domination.
Along with this, there is concern that there may also be a transition in the ideas and principles that underlie the existing global order—with commitment to democracy, free markets, and the acceptability of United States military power replaced by alternative illiberal constructions that present an authoritarian capitalist alternative.
The struggle over international order today is not about fundamental principles.
China and other emerging great powers do not want to contest the basic rules and principles of the liberal international order; they wish to gain more authority and leadership within it.
While a global diffusion of wealth and power is occurring, emerging powers are benefiting from the rules and institutions that have been largely shaped by the United States.
And, to date, no viable alternatives have emerged to challenge the current construction of the existing international order.
The absence of a clear trend in war’s frequency since the late fifteenth century, and its periodic outbreak after intermittent stretches of peace, suggests that world history seesaws between long cycles of war and peace.
Hegemonic stability theory expects that a stable world order requires sustained global leadership by a single great power.
By exercising its preponderance of power, the hegemon establishes the conditions necessary for order in the international system, and discourages aggressors who would challenge the global status quo.
In each cycle, overcommitments, the costs of empire, and ultimately the appearance of rivals have led to the delegitimation of the hegemon’s authority and to the deconcentration of power globally.
The theory of power cycles contends that the growth and decline of national power holds the key to understanding the occurrence of extensive wars.
Yet attempts to influence the outcomes of such conflicts are often more subtle, such as providing weapons, signaling intent to do so, or generating international support for a given side.
Pictured here, the Syrian government drops a bomb near Damascus as the Syrian conflict continues.
It seems plausible, for instance, that just as long-term downswings and recoveries in business cycles profoundly affect subsequent behaviors and conditions, wars produce after-effects that may last for generations.
In the relative short term , the pattern has shifted to fewer, but more deadly, armed conflicts.
These inventories reflect in different ways what the mass media tell us—that violence and global insecurity are inherent in world politics.
Armed conflict in 2015 in Syria, Sudan, South Sudan, Yemen, and elsewhere—as well as the tension surrounding the South Ghina Sea dispute—cast a dark shadow.
In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they Measuring the frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the figure depicts a gradual increase in the frequency of conflicts until the peak in 1992, after which a decline transpired that lasted roughly a decade before, in 2003, the number of conflicts again began to rise.
Both types of wars were frequently under way at similar rates each year between 1816 and World War 11.
However, since then, internal wars have increasingly defined the global landscape.
This new pattern of civil wars and armed conflicts that do not involve government forces on at least one side has become especially prevalent since 1990.
The conflicts between Eritrea-Ethiopia and India-Pakistan concerned territory, whereas the war between Iraq and the United States and its allies was fought over governmental power.
Nine of the major intrastate armed conflicts were internationalized, where troops from states that were not primary parties to the conflict aided the side of the government.
These included the conflict between the United States and A1 Qaeda, as well as those involving Afghanistan, Mali, Nigeria, Uganda, Sudan, Yemen, Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This suggests an increased risk of further armed aggression, fought by irregular militia and private or semiprivate forces against the armies of states, or by “shadow warriors” commissioned by states as “outsourced” mercenaries or paid militia.
Although in the long term, armed conflict between states may disappear, the frequency of armed conflict inside established states is growing.
On December 28, 2014, the United States formally marked the end to its combat role in Afghanistan, in what is the longest United States war to date.
However, 9800 United States troops are expected to remain through 2016, and continue to train Afghan forces and pursue a counterterrorism mission that involves airstrikes and ground patrol.
Explained top United States commander in Afghanistan General John F Campbell, ""Combat and war and transition, as you know, it's a very complex thing.
Pictured here United States soldiers conduct a patrol in Chorah, Afghanistan.
This incompetence has led to an epidemic oi fragile states throughout the globe.
Sometimes the armed conflict is confined to local regions that seek secession and independence, and other times fragile states are victims of widespread but episodic fighting by insurgents and warlords.
The citizens of fragile states pay the heaviest price for the internal conflict, political violence, and humanitarian catastrophe that commonly befall states that cannot discharge basic functions.
THE THREAT OF FRAGILE STATES Based upon twelve social, economic, and political indicators, this map assesses countries based on their levels of stability.
In 2015, Finland had the strongest score and is identified as the only country falling within the ""Very Sustainable"" category.
State fragility and civil war are particularly evident in the high-risk, weak, and impoverished states in Africa.
The most vulnerable countries whose governments are most critically in danger of failing and most likely to collapse in civil war and anarchy are Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, and the Central African Republic.
Also identified are an additional thirty-four countries that are either on ""High Alert"" or ""Alert,"" where some significant elements of their societies and institutions are vulnerable to failure.
These potential ""fragile states"" threaten the progress and stability of surrounding countries.
There are many causes of state failure and civil disintegration, but fragile states share some key characteristics that make them vulnerable to disintegration, civil war, and terrorism.
Inasmuch as most of the sovereign states in the world have one or more of these attributes, it is likely that the prevalence of fragile states is a growing problem in the globalized twenty-first century.
Between 1989 and 2014, internal armed conflict over government or territory has by far been the most common.
Consider examples of long-lasting and resumed civil wars in Afghanistan, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Liberia, Myanmar, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Turkey, and Uganda.
Civil wars also have a propensity to diffuse beyond the original state’s borders and increase the likelihood of violent internal conflict within its neighbors.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf enduring internal rivalry Protracted violent conflicts between governments and insurgent groups within a state. and/or eChapter.
Data for 1816-1945 courtesy of the Correlates of War project under the direction of J David Singer and Melvin Small; data from 1946 to 2011 for intrastate armed conflicts with 1,000 or more battle-related deaths drawn from the Uppsala Conflict Data Program Dyadic Dataset 1-2014 . as evident in the wars of decolonization in Africa in the mid-1900s and the civil wars in the Caucasus more recently.
The “infection” of other states is most likely when the civil war is a separatist conflict as opposed to one being fought over government power, the states are ethnically polarized, and countries are in near proximity to the one fighting a civil war.
Although consolidated democracy is likely to reduce the likelihood of civil war, such is not the case for transitioning democracies or authoritarian governments that hold elections.
In fact, these countries are often vulnerable to the escalation of internal conflict and more receptive to diffusion across borders.
In a competitive political environment , ethnicity and group identity tend to be more salient when there are actors that seek to ensure that the government serves the interest of select groups.
Moreover, elites may try to mobilize supporters to win elections by emphasizing group differences, inciting hostility, and engaging in discrimination and intimidation.
Another noteworthy characteristic of intrastate armed conflicts is their severity.
There are spillover externalities generated by severe civil conflict that spread beyond the original state borders and affect a region broadly, particularly those countries in near proximity.
Yet perhaps the most devastating indicator of the severity of civil war is the number of lives lost.
Death from civil violence has always been very high, and casualties from civil wars since World War 11 have increased at alarming rates, especially among children who have been both innocent victims and major participants.
The year 1991 marked a peak in fatalities, with almost 80,000 battle-related deaths, due in large part to the intense war waged in Ethiopia over control of the government.
A second peak occurred in 1999, when once again over 80,000 people lost their lives to hostilities in the Horn of Africa as Eritrea and Ethiopia clashed over border disputes.
With the turn of the century, deadly conflicts have been more common in Asia and the Middle East.
In particular, increased fatalities have been seen in Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Yemen, and Iraq.
Since the outbreak of civil war in 1955, Sudan has been in an almost continuous state of violent internal conflict.
The first phase of civil war erupted when the Arab-led Khartoum government broke its promises to southerners to create a federal system to ensure their representation and regional autonomy in the newly independent state.
Compounded by deep cultural and religious differences, violent aggression raged, eventually claiming the lives of more than a half million people—of which only 20 percent were armed combatants—and displacing hundreds of thousands more.
With mediation from religious NGOs, in 1972 the Addis Ababa Agreement was reached, which established a single southern administrative region and brought an end to armed hostilities. state-sponsored terrorism However, the cease-fire proved to be only a fleeting peace.
In 1983, civil war broke out again, fueled by racial and religious tensions, competition over oil resources, and struggles for political power.
The Arab-controlled Sudanese government and government-backed Janjaweed militia suspended democracy in 1989 and undertook a divide-and-destroy campaign of state-sponsored terrorism against those living in the south.
Yet attacks on non-Arab civilians in the extremely marginalized district of Darfur escalated.
By February 2010, when the Sudanese government signed a cease-fire agreement with the JEM, the largest rebel group in Darfur, UN estimates put the death toll at roughly 300,000 people, with another 2. million having fled their homes.
Though a mostly peaceful process for secession of South Sudan took place In 2011, another fault line erupted in 2012 when vicious armed conflict sprang up along the border between the two countries over control of the oil-rich regions that lie largely in South Sudan.
Additionally, fierce fighting continued in the Nuba Mountains of central Sudan, with the northern Sudanese Army waging an aggressive campaign to crush rebel fighters.
The bloodbath throughout Sudan and South Sudan has made this tragic place of death the worst since World War II, and raises questions about the prospects for lasting peace.
Another salient characteristic of internal armed conflicts is the resistance to negotiated settlement.
Making peace between rival factions that are struggling for power, driven by hatred, and poisoned by the inertia of prolonged killing is difficult.
Few domestic enemies fighting in a civil war have succeeded in ending the combat through negotiated compromise.
The reoccurrence of civil war is often due to commitment problems and uncertainties about the military capabilities of the opponent.
Typically, a civil war settlement requires insurgents to lay down their arms.
This shifts the balance of power in favor of the government, which may be tempted to press its advantage and exploit the cease-fire.
Further evidence shows that the concerns of insurgents can be addressed through third-party guarantees, the adoption of institutional safeguards that promote the sharing of power between domestic groups, and transparent information-sharing regarding military capabilities and resolve.
This can be seen in the international negotiations—and the opposing perspectives of the United States and Russia—regarding the Syrian civil war.
The rise of fragile states and their frequent fall into intrastate conflict may make it tempting to think of armed conflict within states as stemming exclusively from conditions within those countries.
Take, for example, the consequences of violent government takeover through a coup d'etat.
Although coups continue to occur—an attempted coup in May 2015 to overthrow the president of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, was foiled and, just a year prior in May 2014, a successful coup took place in Thailand whereby the military established a ruling junta—since the end of the Cold War, the frequency of coups has declined by almost half and the resulting governments have generally permitted competitive elections within five years.
Because the great powers have global interests, they have played roles “behind the scenes,” not only in the occurrence of coup d’etats, but also militarily in intrastate conflict to support MAP 7.
Coups are most common in the Global South, with Africa and Latin America experiencing the greatest number.
At times, external actors have sent armed forces into failed states to contain and control the civil conflict causing violence and attempt to reestablish governing authority.
Many analysts believe that domestic insurrections become internationalized when leaders faced with internal opposition intentionally provoke an international crisis, hoping their citizens will become less rebellious if their attention is diverted to the threat of foreign aggression.
It is logical for leaders to assume that national unity will rise when a foreign rivalry exists.
This creates strong temptations for them to seek to manage domestic unrest by initiating foreign adventures and demonstrating their competence.
This strategy was suspected in Ugandan President Idi Amin’s invasion of Tanzania in 1978 as an effort, in part, to counter growing domestic dissent and cover up an army mutiny in the southwestern region of his own country.
Pictured here are residents of the Pakistani district of Dir fleeing the fighting between Taliban militants and government. manipulative by addressing domestic problems rather than engaging in reckless wars overseas— especially unpopular wars that trigger protest demonstrations and reduce leaders’ public opinion approval ratings.
Another potential explanation involves a leader’s “conceptual complexity,” or the degree to which leaders display awareness of nuanced international relations concepts.
This is particularly true if the leader is inclined to view the use of force as a legitimate and effective foreign policy tool.
In sum, intrastate conflicts can become internationalized through both the tendency for them to invite external intervention as well as the propensity for leaders of failing governments to wage wars abroad as a means of preventing rebellion at home.
Although leaders today still ready their countries for such clashes, they are increasingly faced with the prospect of asymmetric warfare —armed conflict between terrorist networks and conventional military forces.
Pundits and the press too often treat terrorism and guerrilla tactics as something new, a departure from old-fashioned ways of war.
A mixture of drama and dread, terrorism is not senseless violence; it is a premeditated political strategy that threatens people with a coming danger that seems ubiquitous, unavoidable, and unpredictable.
After the United States broadened its definitional criteria to include the deaths of civilian victims in Iraq, the estimates of the number of global terrorist acts rose dramatically.
And even after the killing of A1 Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden by United States Special Forces in May 2011, the threat of terrorist attacks remains.
Warns terrorism expert Richard Bloom, “the security threat remains consistent.
Terrorism can be used to support or to change the political status quo.
Repressive terror, which is wielded to sustain an existing political order, has been used by governments as well as by vigilantes.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ asymmetric warfare Armed conflict between belligerents of vastiy unequai military strength, in which the weaker side is often a nonstate actor that relies on unconventional tactics. and/or eChapter.
THE PERSISTENT THREAT OF GLOBAL TERRORISM Shown here are the locations of terrorist attacks that occurred from 2000 until the start of 2014.
About 5 percent of the 107,000 fatalities from terrorism since 2000 have occurred in the Global North.
Reflecting upon initiatives to combat terrorism, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted that the ""complexity and interdependence of these issues mean that no single country or organization can provide solutions alone.
Indeed, it is their ability to plan, execute, and learn from these operations that make todays terrorists so dangerous.
This dissident terror may be grounded in anticolonialism, separatism, religion, or secular ideology.
Almost two-thirds of recorded terrorist incidents involve the use of explosives.
Flijacking and hostage-taking generally involve more complex operations than planting a bomb in a crowded department store or gunning down travelers in a train station.
However, such activities do occur and can be seen in the careful planning required by the September 1970 coordinated hijacking of five airliners by Palestinians, which eventually led to one airliner being blown up in Cairo and three others in Jordan.
TOOLS OF TERRORIST WARFARE The figure indicates the major methods used by terrorists worldwide from 2000 through 2013.
The pattern of weapons used in terrorist attacks across the globe is relatively constant, with 60 percent of incidents involving explosives, 30 percent firearms, and 10 percent involving other methods.
Since 2000, 5 percent of all terrorist incidents have involved suicide attacks.
Beyond the conventional tactics of bombings, assaults, hijacking, and hostage taking, two other threats—^what former United States Navy Secretary Richard Danzig called “nonexplosive warfare”—could become part of the terrorist repertoire.
First, dissidents may acquire weapons of mass destruction to deliver a moral blow against their enemies.
Nuclear armaments may be the ultimate terror weapons, but radiological, chemical, and biological weapons also pose extraordinary dangers.
In 2015, Australian intelligence reports indicated that ISIS/ISIL had “seized enough radioactive material from government facilities to suggest it has the capacity to build a large and devastating ‘dirty’ bomb” that combines conventional explosives with radioactive material.
Biological weapons based on viral agents are typically more difficult to produce, although the dispersal of anthrax spores through the mail during the fall of 2001 and the inadvertent distribution of live anthrax samples in the summer of 2015 from a United States military base in Utah to laboratories in nineteen United States states, Washington D.C., Australia, Canada, Britain, and South Korea illustrated that low-technology attacks with bacterial agents in powder form are a frightening possibility.
Not only can the extremists use the Internet as a recruiting tool and a means of coordinating their activities with likeminded groups, they can also hack into a foe’s computer system to case potential targets.
Viruses and other weapons of information warfare could also cause havoc if they disable financial institutions.
Cyberattacks have risen as a heated issue between the United States and China, with the United States charging China with responsibility for high-tech spying in 2013 that compromised more than two dozen major United States weapons systems.
Both bioweapons and cyberattacks challenge our thinking about the future of terrorism and war as they pose a strategic quandary; because they are extraordinarily difficult to trace back to the perpetrator, they defy deterrence and elude defenses.
Renowned historian and terrorism expert Walter Laqueur sees a future of postmodern terrorism that poses a great threat to technologically advanced societies, where terrorists tend to be less ideological, more likely to hold ethnic grievances, and increasingly difficult to distinguish from other criminals.
The information age facilitates transnational networking among terrorists and has made available a variety of new methods of warfare.
Moreover, this new global environment encourages the rapid spread of new weapons and technology across borders, which provides unprecedented opportunities for terrorists to commit atrocities and to change their tactics in response to successful counterterror operations.
The growing difficulty of detecting and deterring the attacks of disciplined globalized terrorist networks is further exacerbated by their ties to international organized crime syndicates and internationally linked networks of thousands of gangs, which facilitate their profit in the narcotics trade and provide resources to support terrorist activities.
Compounding these challenges is the fact that states have often financed, trained, equipped, and provided sanctuary for terrorists whose activities serve their foreign policy goals.
In the throes of the terrorist attack on the United States on September II, 2001, United States President George W Bush described the threat as a network of terrorist groups as well as the rogue states that harbored them.
However, disagreement about the character and causes of global terrorism remain pronounced, and without agreement on these basic characteristics, a consensus on the best response is unlikely.
Much like a disease that cannot be treated until it is accurately diagnosed, the plague of new global terrorism cannot be eradicated until its sources are understood.
Those advocating repression see terrorism springing from the cold calculations of extremists who should be neutralized by preemptive surgical strikes.
War between states is disappearing, and this inspires optimists who hope that it will vanish from human interaction altogether.
As some security studies experts predict, “Unlike breathing, eating or sex, war is not something that is somehow required by the human condition or by the forces of history.
Efforts to defeat terrorism must include developing governments that can meet the needs of the people and jobs that provide an alternative to fighting.
Assessing the prospects of winning the war on terror in Afghanistan, Lieutenant Colonel Brett Jenkinson, commander of the United States battalion in the Korengal Valley, explains that “What we need is a better recruiting pitch for disaffected youth.
Moreover, strategists often fail to distinguish different types of terrorist movements and their diverse origins.
Your search for solutions will necessarily spring from assumptions you make about terrorism’s nature and sources, and these assumptions will strongly affect your conclusions about the wisdom or futility of contemplated remedies.
Keep in mind that what may appear to be a policy around which an effective counterterrorist program might be constructed could potentially make the problem worse.
Scores dipped most sharply for Libya, Ukraine, Djibouti, and Niger; and Syria and Iraq replaced Afghanistan as the least peaceful countries.
Europe remains the most peaceful region, with fifteen of the top twenty most peaceful countries in the world.
However, that threat remains, and because armed conflict between and within states threatens everyone in the borderless globalized world, all of humanity is at risk.
Between 2008 and 2015, the level of peace in the world declined by 12 percent , deteriorating in eighty-six countries around the world and improving in only seventy-six.
But the sad news is that your life and livelihood are certain to be threatened by the continuing onset of armed conflict.
That threat imperils the future and affects all other aspects of world politics—which is why much of world history is written about the causes and consequences of armed conflict from the vantage point of all peoples’ and professions’ perspectives.
Yet in order for us to reduce and possibly eliminate the plague of armed conflict in the world, it is necessary for us to first understand what drives violent conflict.
Thus, in this chapter you also have been given the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed conflict that theorists have constructed to explain why political violence in its various forms erupts. ft is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that we next consider.
In Chapter 8, we examine the vision realism advances about dealing with the threat of war, specifically as it deals with arms, military strategy, alliances, and the balance of power.
Throughout history, countries have used weapons to back their enemies into surrender.
Realists regard the prudent use of armed force as a powerful instrument for maintaining security and stability in world politics.
Learning Objectives 8-1 Discuss the implications of realist theory for the examination of armed conflict.
They are armed because they are in conflict and have not yet learned peaceful ways to resolve their conflicting interests ."" —Richard M Nixon, United States president I magine yourself someday becoming the next secretary-general of the United Nations.
But looking at the globe, you would likely see that many countries are engaged in armed conflict and that those wars are destroying life and property.
Moreover, you would undoubtedly also be distressed by the countries and possibly some transnational terrorist groups with the new capacity to annihilate their enemies with weapons of mass destruction.
As a result of the escalating destructive power of modern weapons, you cannot help but notice that the UN members most feverishly working to increase their capacity to resist threats to their physical survival are the same countries whose national security, or psychological freedom from fear of foreign aggression, seems to be declining the most rapidly.
As you watch the jockeying for power and position among the UN members, you also notice that countries tend to forge partnerships, based on converging and clashing interests and values.
Because when the topic of war and peace is debated, and in periods when international tensions are high, policy makers turn to realist theory for guidance.
Our interests are eternal and perpetual and those interests it is our duty to follow. —Lord Palmerston, British prime minister Tfl REALIST APPROACHES TO WAR AND PEACE Nearly all states continue to believe that the anarchical global system requires them to rely on self-help and depend only on themselves for security.
They have been schooled in the lessons constructed from realism —the school of thought that teaches that the drive for power and the domination of others for self-advantage is a universal and permanent motive throughout world www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
In this chapter, you will explore states’ efforts to follow the realist recipes for reducing threats to their national security by creating a favorable balance of power.
In the spirit of seventeenthcentury English philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who viewed the natural human condition as one of “war of all against all” and advised that successful states are those that hold the “posture of Gladiators; having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another,” this chapter introduces the acquisition and use of arms, major trends in weaponry, and the role of alliances in ensuring that national security and national interests are served and a balance of power persists among rivals that prevents any one transnational actor from using force against the others.
This discussion begins by underscoring the high importance that realists place on power, which they believe has, throughout history, been key in driving world politics.
Because the threat of armed conflict persists, realism recommends that war be placed at the very top of a state’s concerns and that, to contain dangers, the pursuit of power must be the top priority.
Standards of right and wrong apply to individuals but not to states; in world affairs amoral actions are sometimes necessary for security.
Strive to increase military capabilities and fight rather than submit to subordination.
Even texts such as the Bible reflect this assumption, as it observes and warns that people seem born to sin, and the drive for power to dominate others is one of their inalterable compulsions.
That said, the abstraction called power, which realists assume to be humanity’s primary objective, defies precise definition.
Constructivists recognize that in the broadest sense power is usually interpreted as the political capacity of one actor to exercise influence over another actor to the first’s benefit.
However, beyond the semantic definition of power as politics —the exercise of influence to control others—power is an ambiguous concept, and difficult to measure.
The Elements of State Power Of all the components of state power, realists see military capability as by far the most important.
Realist theory maintains that the ability to coerce militarily is more important than rewarding favors or buying concessions.
Following tradition, one way to estimate the power potential of states is to compare their military expenditures.
On this dimension, the United States is the undisputed military powerhouse of the world, with defense spending that leaves all other countries far behind.
Since the peak of United States military spending in 2010, the United States has decreased its expenditures in real terms by 19. percent.
Among the so-called elements of power, analysts also consider such capabilities as the relative size of a state’s economy, its population and territorial size, geographic position, raw materials, technological capacity, political culture and values, efficiency of governmental decision making, volume of www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ngage Learning.
Due in part to its extensive military capabilities, the United States continues to be regarded as a true hegemonic superpower, without rival.
In 2016, United States military spending is expected to include $534. billion in base budget, which excludes nuclear expenditures, plus $50. billion to support the drawdown in Afghanistan, counterinsurgency in Iraq and Syria, and its European allies as they counter Russian assertiveness.
This brings the United States defense budget to $ 585. billion in 2016 . trade, educational level, national morale, and internal solidarity.
For example, if power potential were measured by territorial size, Russia, which is twice as large as its closest rivals (Canada, China, the United States, Brazil, and Australia, in that order), would be the globe’s most powerful country.
Likewise, if power were measured by the UN’s projections for countries’ populations by the year 2025, China, India, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Brazil, in that order, would be the most powerful.
Another measure of power projection is the number of uniform personnel in states' armies, navies, and airforces.
In the more recent past, Vietnam succeeded against a vastly stronger France and, later, the United States.
Similarly, the United States’ superior military power did not prevent Iran from taking American diplomats as hostages or the A1 Qaeda terrorist network’s 9/11 attack.
Intangible factors, such as the will of the target population to resist a more powerful army and their willingness to die for their cause, were key elements in the capacity of each of these weaker actors to combat a much stronger military force.
Most security analysts believe that this is because military capability is a prerequisite for the successful exercise of coercive diplomacy through the threat of limited force.
The ""Cost"" of Military Spending Military power is central in leaders’ concepts of national security, and even though the end of the Gold War reduced tensions worldwide and therefore the need for military preparations, world military spending rose to $1.78 trillion in 2014, which represents slightly more than a 2 percent increase since 2011, and a 56 percent increase since 2000.
The world is spending $3,378,995 each minute ior military preparations.
As 2015 began, the Global North was spending $1,277 billion for defense, in contrast with the developing Global South’s $467 billion.
However, when measured against other factors, the differences become clearer.
Military expenditures incur opportunity costs — when what is gained for one purpose is lost for other purposes—so that any particular choice means the cost of some lost opportunity must be paid.
The substantial costs of defense can erode national welfare—the very thing that policy makers hope to defend with military might.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ opportunity costs The sacrifices that resuit when the decision to seiect one option means that the opportunity to realize gains from another options is lost and/or eChapter.
Many countries have gained a relative competitive edge by investing in research on the development of goods to export abroad, while conserving resources by relying on allies and global institutions to provide defense against potential threats.
In addition to its high military spending, the United States has also been the dominant investor in research and development funding.
I Some believe that this miliI tary-industrial complex exercises s enormous influence over the United States defense budget and arms sales agreements.
One symptom of this influence is the ability of defense contractors to charge the Pentagon inflated prices for their products.
Shares of Global Military Expenditiires, 2014 UAE 1-3% Australia FIGURE 8.
RISING GLOBAL MILITARY EXPENDITURES Global military budgets have fluctuated since 1960, with total expenditures worldwide peaking in 1987, after which they fell about a third until the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
As shown on top, the military budget of the Global South's developing countries, particularly in Asia and Oceania, has grown to command a significant portion of world military expenditures, amounting to almost 25 percent of the world total at the start of 2015.
However, as shown on bottom, United States military expenditures continue to far exceed those of any other country and are almost three times more than the expenditures of the next closest country—China.
In 2012, global military expenditures began to reflect this economic reality with the first decrease in world military spending since 1998, due to a large extent to the United States’ reduced spending as it continued to disengage from its wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and address its federal budget deficit.
In 2013 and 2014, overall military spending continued to decline in North America, much of Europe, and Latin America.
Politics requires making hard choices about priorities and about how public funds should be spent.
The former category looks to arms to combat threats and preserve national security, and the latter stresses human security, which places an emphasis on protecting the well-being of individuals.
Neither goal can be pursued without making some sacrifice for the other, and different countries deal with this dilemma in different ways.
The global trend shows that the share of resources used for military purposes has increased steadily since 2000, and the military burden now corresponds to 2. percent of world GDP . militaryindustrial complex A combination of defense establishments, contractors who suppiy arms for them, and government agencies that benefit from high military spending, which acts as a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate targe expenditures for military preparedness.
MILITARY EXPENDITURES AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP As the map shows, wide variations exist in the percentage of a country's gross domestic product that is allocated toward military spending.
Many countries allocate a high proportion of their total GDP to defense, and others spend their wealth to enhance human security.
Indeed, some comparatively wealthy states bear a heavy burden, whereas other states that provide a high average income for their citizens (Japan, Austria, and Luxembourg) have a low defense burden.
These skeptics of high military spending believe the high costs can easily reduce the human security found within a particular country.
Furthermore, a growing trend since the beginning of the Iraq War has been the increased use oi private military services, which enhances a state’s military capabilities by allowing the government to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed.
Trends in the Weapons Trade During the Cold War, many states sought to increase their security by purchasing arms produced by suppliers eagerly seeking allies as well as profits from exports.
There have been troubling trends in the global arms trade in recent years.
Overall, the major recipients of global arms shipments remain heavily concentrated in a subset of Global South arms purchasers.
The top five arms recipients, which accounted for 33 percent of arms imports, included India, China, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and the United Arab Emirates.
The stream of weapons to these insecure and eager buyers with money to spend is not likely to end soon, and the shortand long-term consequences of arms transfers to countries experiencing internal conflict is a concern.
Nigeria and Cameroon purchased helicopters from Russia and China and armored vehicles from South Africa, China, Czech Republic and Ukraine to aid in the fight against Boko Haram.
Along with the changing demands of arms importers, changes in the activities of arms suppliers are also important.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ private military services Outsourcing activities of a miiitary-specific nature to private companies, such as armed security, equipment maintenance, if services, logistics, and intelligence services. and/or eChapter. ts restrictions require it.
Interestingly, it is still the United States and Russia that dominate the arms export market, supplying 31 and 27 percent of all conventional weapons exports, respectively, between 2010 and 2014.
The 2013 arms sales of Lockheed Martin, an Americanbased company, were greater than the GDPs of ninety-four countries.
The sales of weapons by the British-based BAE Systems exceed the baseline budget of the Marine Corps in 2013 by roughly $3 billion.
Another development in the post-Gold War era, which has been likened to modern-day mercenaries, is the growth in companies that provide private military services for hire on the global market.
The outsourcing of military-like activities enables governments to maintain their force structure for a lower cost than otherwise would be possible.
Top Twenty Arms-Producing Companies Rank Arms Sales 2013 2012 Company 2013 2012 1 1 Lockheed Martin 35.
An angry Iraqi government blamed them for the shooting deaths of seventeen civilians and the injuries of twenty others—some of whom were women and children.
Although Blackwater said the guards were responding to an ambush by insurgents and were innocent of any crime, others said the shooting was unprovoked and the Blackwater guards fired indiscriminately.
The incident inflamed anti-American sentiment in the country (Blackwater renamed itself Xe Services in an effort to distance its brand from the incident) and raised questions about the role and accountability of private military companies in war zones.
Iraq is not the only place where private solders have been prevalent; in 2011 Muammar al-Qaddafi’s government recruited mercenaries from Guinea and Nigeria, offering up to $2,000, to quash the ongoing protests in Libya against his regime.
Supporters of private military services point out that private contractors like Blackwater, Triple Canopy, and DynCorp are not of fhe same ilk as al-Qaddafl’s mercenary forces fhat come from Informal networks of former civil war combatants.
Military contractors from repufable companies tend to be professional, efficient, and effective.
Critics, however, point out that private military companies operate in a legal gray area and that they do not receive adequate monitoring and evaluation.
In the Blackwater case, it was unclear whether the employees were subject to Iraqi, U.S., civilian, or military law.
And even If employees are found culpable, it is difficult to establish corporate liability unless it can be proven that the company itself intended to break the law.
For example, during the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union thought they could maintain peace by spreading arms to strategically important countries.
Yet many of these recipients went to war with their neighbors or experienced internal rebellion.
As the arms exporters “peddle death to the poor,” they seldom acknowledge how this scouting for customers contradicts other proclaimed foreign policy goals.
Between 2010 and 2014, the United States was responsible for 31 percent of all global arms exports, with major weapons delivered to ninety-four countries, including many with human rights problems such as the UAE, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia.
The inability of arms suppliers to control the uses of their military hardware is troubling.
This also happened when the Stinger missiles the United States supplied to Taliban forces resisting the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion in Afghanistan fell into the hands of terrorists who later used them against the United States.
Likewise, in 1982 Great Britain found itself shipping military equipment to Argentina just eight days before Argentina’s attack on the British-controlled Falkland Islands; and in 1998 United States military technology sold to Ghina was exported to Pakistan, making its nuclear weapons test possible.
According to Graham Allison, a leading nuclear expert, “he nuclear security of the arsenal is now a lot better than it was.
The use of nuclear weapons could not only destroy entire cities and countries but also, conceivably, the world’s entire population.
Nth country problem The expansion of additional new nuclear weapon states. horizontal nuclear proliferation An increase in the number of states that possess nuclear weapons. vertical nuclear proliferation The expansion of the capabilities of existing nuclear powers to Inflict increasing destruction with their nuclear weapons.
Most have been dismantled since the 1986 peak, but as many as 4300 remained deployed at the start of 2015.
The United States possessed 2080 deployed warheads; Russia, 1780; France, 290; and Britain, 150.
Tht proliferation of arms is a serious global concern, because the so-called Nth country problem (the addition of new nuclear states) is expected to become increasingly probable.
Both horizontal nuclear proliferation and vertical nuclear proliferation are likely.
Consider India and Pakistan’s successful nuclear programs and North Korea’s nuclear tests, as well as Iran’s and Syria’s self-proclaimed aims to acquire nuclear weapons.
Nuclear proliferation is likely to continue as states face strong incentives to join the nuclear club and acquire missiles and bombers for their delivery.
As long as they do, the threat remains that Argentina, Brazil, Libya, and Taiwan, which once had active nuclear programs, could revive these capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons.
Likewise, there is widespread international concern regarding the expansion of existing nuclear programs.
Further propelling the arms race, in April 2013, China and Pakistan reached a formal agreement whereby China will help Pakistan build a third nuclear reactor in Chashma.
Ending a twelve-year nuclear stand-off, in 2015 negotiations between Iran and the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and China resulted in an agreement that limited Iran’s capacity to build a nuclear bomb and imposed inspections of Iranian facilities in exchange for lifting international sanctions that have greatly hindered Iran’s economy.
The complaint of former French President Charles de Gaulle, who argued that without an independent nuclear capability France could not “command its own destiny,” reflects the strong incentive of nonnuclear states to develop weapons similar to those of the existing nuclear club.
In 2013, North Korea conducted further nuclear tests, with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un’s defiant rhetoric adding to global tensions as he challenged other countries, including the United States, with the threat of nuclear annihilation.
Because of the widespread conviction, rooted in realism, that military power confers political stature, many countries, such as Iran and North Korea, regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as hypocritical because it provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others.
Although the underlying demand for nuclear weapons is rather straightforward, the supply of nuclear weapons does not appear to make as much sense.
Aside from economic motivations, it is less clear why nuclear-capable states themselves have contributed to the global spread of nuclear weapons by providing sensitive nuclear know-how to non-nuclear states.
Consider, for example, that Israel built its first nuclear weapon just two years after receiving nuclear assistance from France in the early 1960s.
A ROGUE NUCLEAR POWER Shown here, in April 2012, North Korea launched a ballistic missile in defiance of UN Security Council resolutions and an agreement with the United States.
Third, states that are less vulnerable to superpower pressure are more likely to provide sensitive nuclear assistance.
The number of new operational nuclear reactors is certain to increase because about 66 new nuclear reactors are now planned or under construction.
As Matthew Bunn, editor oiArms Control Today, explains, “There’s not a snowball’s chance in hell we’ll eliminate all nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
The Revolution in Military Technology Another trend that is increasing the lethality of the weapons of war is the rapidity of technological refinements that increase the capacity of states to send their weapons great distances with ever-greater accuracy.
Missiles can now send weapons from as far away as 11,000 miles to within one hundred feet of their targets in less than thirty minutes.
This allows these countries to launch many warheads on a single missile toward different targets simultaneously and accurately.
Laser weapons, nuclear-armed tactical air-to-surface missiles , stealth air-launched cruise missiles , and antisatellite weapons that can project force and wage war from outer space have become a part of the military landscape.
The new generation includes sounds, shocks, and smells to disperse or incapacitate crowds.
A CHAIN REACTION OF PROLIFERATION Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the secrets for making nuclear weapons have spread, eitherthrough intentional transfer, leak, or espionage.
Halting nuclear proliferation continues to be seen as one of the most urgent challenges facing the world. by giving them an instant and intense headache.
Another example is the United States Air Force’s “active denial technology” that uses electromagnetic radiation to penetrate clothing and cause water molecules to vibrate and burn skin tissue.
More seriously, NLWs are already deployed in information-warfare squadrons to protect military computer networks from electronic sneak attacks.
Examples include such futuristic weapons as the electromagnetic pulse bomb, which can be hand-delivered in a suitcase and can immobilize an entire city’s computer and communications systems; computer viruses of electronicseating microbytes that can eliminate a country’s telephone system; and logic bombs that can confuse and redirect traffic on the target country’s air and rail systems.
Robotic Weaponry A revolution in robotic military technology is also already under way, with new unmanned systems such as the forty-two-pound PackBot used in Iraq and Afghanistan to detect improvised explosive devices.
Altogether, at least twenty-two different robot systems are now in use on the ground, with prototypes for a variety of others, from automated machine guns to robotic stretcher bearers to lethal robots the size of insects.
Though only the United States, United Kingdom, and Israel have used armed drones, many other countries are developing and enlarging their drone capabilities.
India has indicated that it is equipping its existing drones with precision-guided munitions “to conduct cross-border attacks on suspected terrorists.
Of growing concern is that countries might use drones in ways that they would not use manned aircraft, and that this might lead to an escalation of disputes.
China flies drones over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, eight uninhabited islands in a strategically important location that lie at the heart of a continuing territorial row with Japan and have contributed to tensions between the two countries.
This revolution in military technology is reshaping the conduct of war, in part because weapons that are symbols of military might like stealth bombers and nuclear submarines are of little use in today’s asymmetric warfare, in which individual soldiers equipped with the latest technologies are needed for search-and-destroy missions against guerrilla militias.
A major development in the conduct of \A/arfare has been the widespread use of unmanned aerial vehicles , commonly referred fo as drones.
While the bulk of drones deployed around the world function as tools for unarmed surveillance, the United States has provoked controversy over its growing use of drones as lethal robots of war both on and off the battlefield.
Such capabilities raise important questions about the limitations that should, or should not, be placed on the use of drones.
Addressing the privacy concerns of ordinary civilians, proponents of drones point out that they are operated by trained personnel as part of a security strategy; they are not controlled by voyeuristic amateurs.
Moreover, there is growing concern about the extent to which drones are used to observe domestic noncombatants for nonmilitary security purposes.
Technological advances thus may make obsolete current ways of classifying weapons systems and measuring power ratios.
Even though these new weapons have been heralded as a way to accomplish the mission without exposing soldiers to the risks of combat, there are concerns about long-term implications.
The war in Afghanistan is the first time that robots have been used by the United States military for combat purposes.
Chemical weapons are toxic chemicals contained in a delivery mechanism such as a shell or bomb that have immediate consequence at the point of skin contact or inhalation.
They kill or injure through toxic effects on the lungs, skin, blood, nerves, eyes, or other organs and are typically categorized as choking, blister, blood, or nerve agents; examples of each, respectively, include chlorine, mustard gas, hydrogen cyanide, and sarin.
Biological weapons are infectious agents that cause disease or death, the release and effects of which may not be apparent until days after the weapon has been dispersed.
These weapons are categorized as bacterial, viral, or toxic agents and include anthrax, smallpox, yellow fever, pneumonic plague, and botulism.
In addition to the American hegemon, which led the way in building these weapons, twelve other states have declared past production of chemical weapons, still others are suspected of secret production, and many terrorists claim they intend to acquire and use them.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States, for example, there were fears that the spread of anthrax through the United States mail system was the first step in an endless series of future biological warfare attacks by terrorist networks.
Advances in biotechnology have made it easier and cheaper to develop dangerous bacteria, viruses, and toxins, and this has increased the likelihood that such weapons will proliferate not only to an increasing number of countries but that nonstate actors also will develop or acquire these weapons of mass destruction and use them to attack civilian populations.
International law prohibits the use of chemical and biological weapons.
The 1925 Geneva Protocol banned the use of chemical and biological weapons in warfare, though some signatories indicated that they would not abide by the prohibitions if their enemies used such weapons.
Israel signed the treaty in 1993, but as of June 19, 2015, had yet to ratify it.
Only North Korea, Angola, Egypt, and South Sudan have declined to sign or accede to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention extends the 1925 Geneva Protocol’s restriction on the use of biological weapons to also prohibit the acquisition, development, production, and stockpiling of biological weapons.
Although there is concerted global attention to the threats of chemical and biological weapons, the ability to verify and thwart their development and use is limited.
Iran’s and Iraq’s use of gas in their eight-year 1980s war against each other, Iraq’s 1989 use of chemical weapons against its own Kurdish population, and Syria’s use of sarin and chloride against unarmed civilians demonstrate the weaknesses of this, and similar, legal barriers.
In addition, many radical extremists, often beyond the control of weak state governments, see chemical and biological weapons as a cheap and efficient terrorist method.
Military Strategies The most important event distinguishing prefrom post-World War II politics occurred on August 6, 1945 , when the United State dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan.
The search for answers is critical because both the immediate and delayed effects of weapons of mass destruction are terrifying to contemplate.
Consider that even a short war using a tiny fraction of any great power’s nuclear arsenal would destroy all life as we know it.
A nuclear winter would result, with devastating consequences that could make the planet uninhabitable.
Even a more limited nuclear conflict would greatly affect the atmosphere, with the INSIDIOUS WEAPONS OF WAR Pervasive insecurity haunts much of the world because real supranational controls over the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons do not exist.
Shown here are unexploded artillery shells from World War I that are believed to contain chemical warfare agents and are still being cleared from the border area between France and Germany.
Since World War II, not only have nuclear arsenals and the number of states that possess nuclear capabilities grown, but many have also come to think of biological, chemical, and radiological weapons as weapons of mass destruction because of their capacity for large-scale devastation and casualties.
Rogue states and nonstate actors, such as terrorist organizations, also pose a threat to global security with their potential use of WMDs.
Military strategies that respond to changes in technologies, defense needs, capabilities, and global actors and conditions are critical.
Military capabilities do not have to be used for them to be instrumental; a country can exercise influence over enemies simply by demonstrating the power of its weapons and signaling its willingness to use them.
Through a show of force, or a convincing threat of force, countries can use compellence as a strategy to convince others to do what they might not otherwise do.
The United States, the world’s first and for many years unchallenged nuclear power, adopted the strategy of compellence when it enjoyed a clear-cut nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union.
The United States sought to gain bargaining leverage by giving the impression that it would actually use its nuclear weapons.
This posture was especially evident during the Eisenhower administration, when Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced brinkmanship, deliberately threatening United States adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, on the brink of war, they would concede to United States demands.
To contain communism and Soviet expansionism, this doctrine called for aiming United States nuclear weapons at what the Soviets valued most—their population and industrial centers.
Massive retaliation heightened fears in the Kremlin that a nuclear exchange would destroy the Soviet Union but permit the survival of the United States.
Thus, the superpowers’ strategic competition took a new turn as the United States for the first time faced a nuclear threat to its homeland.
Deterrence Whereas a strategy of compellence relies on an offensive threat aimed at persuading an adversary to relinquish something without resistance, deterrence seeks to dissuade an adversary from undertaking some future action.
The chief assumption of deterrence theory is that the defender has the ability to punish an adversary with unacceptably high costs if it launches an attack.
The ability to send a potential aggressor the clear message that the threat will be carried out.
A deterrence strategy depends on obtaining the unquestionable ability to inflict intolerable damage on an opponent.
This means that a state seeking to deter an enemy must build its weapons to acquire a second-strike capability, which necessitates having sufficient destructive weapons to ensure that the country can withstand an adversary’s first strike and still retaliate with a devastating counterattack.
To guarantee that an adversary is aware that a second-strike capability exists, deterrence rationalizes an unrestrained search for sophisticated retaliatory capabilities.
Regardless of who struck first, the other side could destroy the attacker.
Using an integrated system of ground, sea, and space-based radars and weapons, this defense technology detects, intercepts, and destroys weapons launched in fear, anger, or by accident.
The goal of ballistic missile defense , in United States President Reagan’s words, is to make nuclear weapons “impotent and obsolete” and to shift nuclear strategy away from mutual assured destruction.
The United States’ pursuit of antiballistic missile defense currently includes twenty-nine Aegis BMD ships WEAPONS FOR WAR AND PEACE Shown here is a United States test of a nuclear bomb in 1954, when only the United States and the Soviet Union had nuclear capabilities.
What to do with such weapons for war and for peace is the central concern of realist theorizing, which looks on the acquisition of military power and its consequences as the most important dimension of world politics. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net /ed.
GLOBAL BALLISTIC MISSILE CAPABILITIES The map above shows countries with ballistic missiles.
Although the direct threat is limited, such military capacity is widely feared.
Others worry that BMD undermines the deterrence strategy, rather than complements it, and may lead to more nuclear missiles worldwide instead of fewer.
Preventive warfare Strictly outlawed by international law, a war undertaken by choice against an enemy to prevent it from suspected intentions to attack sometime in the distant future—if and when the enemy might acquire the necessary military capabilities.
Preemption Strategic planning continues to find new ways of dealing with the constant danger of emergent military threats.
The United States has led the way in forging new strategies to deal with global terrorism and belligerent enemies in the post-9/11 world.
From that threat has emerged tht preemptive warfare strategy, which calls for striking a potential enemy before it undertakes armed aggression.
A preemptive strategy calls for attacking a potential enemy before it engages in armed aggression, either with or without the support of allies and international institutions.
Preventive warfare entails the use of force to eliminate any possible future strike, even if there is no reason to believe that the capacity to launch an attack currently exists.
According to critics, the preventive use of military force sets a dangerous precedent.
Predicting an adversary’s future behavior is difficult because its leadership’s intentions are hard to discern, information about long-term goals may be shrouded in secrecy, and signals of its policy direction may be missed in an oversupply of unimportant intelligence information.
In 2009, President Barack Obama signaled a shift from the preemptive and unilateral policies of the prior administration.
In its place, he called for an approach that maintained America’s military strength but also sought to broaden engagement with the global community.
The ever-present threat of armed aggression raises timeless questions about the conditions under which, and the purposes for which, using military force is justified.
Drawing on aspects of a strategy of compellence, threats to use arms are made to force an adversary to reach a compromise or, even better, to reverse its policies.
The goal is to alter the target state’s costs and benefits calculation, so that the enemy is convinced that acceding to demands will be better than defying them.
Intervention can be practiced in various ways—physically through direct entry of military forces into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through covert operations.
Global actors also can take a unilateral or multilateral approach to intervention.
States send their troops into the sovereign territory of other states in order to influence the target, even though military intervention is under most circumstances prohibited by international law.
The frequency of this forceful coercive diplomacy fluctuates from year to year, and suggests that military interventions rise and fall in response to both changing global circumstances and shifting perceptions about the advantages and disadvantages of intervention as an effective method of coercive diplomacy.
These questions are hotly debated now because of the prevalence of fragile states.
The great powers have not reached a consensus about whether to intervene in sovereign states when tyrants victimize innocent civilians.
Primarily because these interventions undermine state sovereignty and the deeply entrenched nonintervention norm.
Research on coercive diplomacy suggests that its success depends upon each specific context.
The following conditions are thought to favor the effective use of coercive diplomacy (Art, 2005; George, 1992); ■ Clarity of user objectives.
The coercing power must convince the adversary mind that compliance with its demand is an urgent matter.
The coercing power must be able to articulate the specific conditions for ending the crisis, as well as assure that it will not formulate new demands for greater concessions once the target capitulates.
History shows that leaders who rely on military intervention for coercive diplomacy often start a process that they later find they cannot control, and many states that have ventured down this path have come to regret it.
In the aftermath of failed interventions, confidence in this military method of coercive diplomacy frequently vanishes, and the search for other means to exercise power in world politics has intensified.
At issue is whether the traditional realist emphasis on arms and military strategies that require either the threat or actual use of weapons for coercive diplomacy is the best and safest route to national and international security.
However, other realists recommend an alternative path—one that sees national interests served most, not by the acquisition and use of arms but by the acquisition of allies in order to maintain a balance of power among rivals that will prevent any transnational actor from using force against the others.
Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends. —Count Diego Sarmiento Gondomar, Spanish ambassador to London in 1618 8 5 REALIST INTERPRETATIONS OF ALLIANCES IN WORLD POLITICS Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate.
According to liberal theory, states may form an alliance even if their immediate interest is not realized in order to maximize their long-term collective interest.
Realism, however, provides the dominant lens through which the dynamics of alliance formation and decay, and the impact of these dynamics on global security, are most often interpreted.
Realism provides the most compelling explanation of the coldly calculating motives underlying decisions about alliances, which realists see first and foremost as a method for states to protect themselves from threats posed by predatory common enemies and as a mechanism by which a “balance of power” can be maintained.
Realism posits that military alliances are forged when the parties perceive that the advantages of an alliance outweigh the disadvantages.
PARTNERSHIPS FOR SECURITY The map above shows a number of allinces that were created, in part, to integrate joint regional military or economic security interests and promote cooperation.
Highlighting the importance of alliances in United States national security strategy.
Under anarchy a state must rely on self-help for its own security, and cannot really count on allies to come to its defense if attacked.
Moreover, alliances bind a state to a commitment that may later become disadvantageous.
When considering whether joining a new alliance is a rational choice in which the benefits outweigh the costs, heads of state usually recognize that allies can easily do more harm than good.
Despite their uncertain usefulness, many states throughout history have chosen to ally because, the risks notwithstanding, the perceived benefits to security in a time of threat justified the decision.
To best picture how alliances affect global security, it is instructive to move from the state level of analysis, which views alliance decisions from the perspective of an individual state’s security, to the global level of analysis by looking at the impact of alliances on the frequency of interstate war.
Supporters envision it as an equilibrating process that maintains peace by counterbalancing any state that seeks military superiority, distributing global power evenly through alignments or shifts by nonaligned states to one or the other opposed coalitions.
At the core of “balance of power” is the idea that national security is enhanced when military capabilities are distributed so that no single state is strong enough to dominate all others.
If one state gains inordinate power, balance-of-power theory predicts that it will take advantage of its strength and attack weaker neighbors, thereby giving compelling incentive for those threatened to unite in a defensive coalition.
According to the theory, the threatened states’ combined military strength would then deter the state seeking to expand.
Thus, for realists, laissez-faire competition among states striving to maximize their national power yields an international equilibrium, ensuring the survival of all by checking the hegemonic ambitions of any.
Realists assume that www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net alignments The acceptance by a neutral state threatened by foreign enemies of a special relationship short of formal alliance with a stronger power able to protect it from attack.
It follows that all countries are potential adversaries and that each must strengthen its military capability to protect itself Invariably, this reasoning rationalizes the quest for military superiority, because others pursue it as well.
This rationale springs from the realist belief that a system revolving around suspicion, competition, and anarchy will breed caution; uncertainty creates restraints on the propensity for war.
The use of alliances to balance power is intrinsically tied to shifts in the global structure of the international system.
Historically, these have ranged from unipolarity, where there is a high concentration of power in the hands of a single hegemon, to multipolarity, where the power distribution is highly dispersed among multiple actors.
Examples of unipolarity include regional empires such as the Roman Empire, as well as the United States in the years immediately following World War II when it was without rival and no state could counterbalance it.
An example of the latter is the approximate equality of power held by the European powers at the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
In between these two ends of the continuum is bipolarity —the division of the balance of power into two coalitions headed by rival military powers, each seeking to contain the other’s expansion.
In 1949, when the Soviets broke the United States monopoly on atomic weapons, a redistribution of power began to emerge.
Military capabilities became concentrated in the hands of two competitive “superpowers” whose capacities to destroy anyone else made comparisons with the other great powers meaningless.
Both superpowers attached great importance to balancing power by recruiting new allies.
The formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , linking the United States to the defense of Western Europe, and the Warsaw Pact, linking the former Soviet Union in a formal alliance with its Eastern European client states, occurred due to this polarization.
To balance power, realists recognize that national actors need to see the value of rapidly shifting alliances.
Although balancing is occasionally described as an automatic, self-adjusting process, most realists see it as the result of deliberate choices undertaken by national leaders to maintain equilibrium among contending states.
Such choices must be made by rational, self-interested actors who recognize the costs and benefits of various strategic options.
Many theorists have attempted to specify a set of rules that leaders must heed in order to effectively balance other states.
CHANGING EUROPEAN ALLIANCES When relationships and conditions change, new alliances form and established alliances dissolve as transnational actors—all obsessed with the power of their rivals—realign.
States sitting on the sidelines, riders, cannot as rational actors risk nonalignment.
Formed and dissolved according to the strategic needs of the moment, alliances must be made without regard to similarities of culture or ideological beliefs , and past experiences should not predispose states to accept or reject any potential partner.
Nowhere is this philosophy better seen than in the role Great Britain once played as a balancer in European diplomacy.
Under www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net free riders Those who obtain benefits at others expense without the usual costs and effort. nonalignment A foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with an alliance bloc for fear it will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war. balancer Under a baianceof-power system, an influential global or regional great power that throws its support in decisive fashion to a defensive coalition.
Over the last few years, China and Russia have sought to put their Cold War rivalries behind them, strengthen bilateral ties, and rise as a counterbalance to United States global dominance.
Victors that couple firmness regarding their own interests with fairness toward the interests of others encourage defeated powers to work within the postwar balance of power.
Human beings and states, they argue, are selfish by nature, but balancing rival interests stabilizes their interactions.
The resistance of Germany, France, and many other countries to the 2003 United States decision to launch a preemptive war to prevent Iraq from acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction—especially as evidence of Iraq’s possession of such weapons, ties to the 9/11 terrorist attacks, or intention to wage war were highly questionable—illustrates the balancing process.
The alarm of countries in the Baltic, such as Estonia, Eatvia, and Eithuania, to France’s decision to sell Mistral-class assault ships to Russia that would enter service in 2015 provides another example.
Yet sometimes bandwagoning with www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ngage Learning.
Intangible factors, such as leadership skills, troop morale, or public support for adventuresome or aggressive foreign policies, are even more difficult to gauge.
The uncertainty of power balances due to difficulties in determining the strength of adversaries and the trustworthiness of allies frequently causes military planners to engage in worst-case analysis, which can spark an arms race.
Indeed, the historical record has led some theorists to construct the hegemonic stability theory as an alternative to the balance-of-power theory.
The potential for great power harmony to be replaced by great power rivalry is what alarms many realist observers.
On July 9 and 10, 2015, the BRIGS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) held their seventh annual summit in Ufa, Russia.
Seen as a balancing maneuver, this cooperative venture is a product of the growing desire to have greater influence in shaping the global economy and the political order, and it took a major step forward with establishment of the BRIGS New Development Bank.
Although the group has economic heft, its political clout is uncertain.
Says former Indian ambassador to the United States Lalit Mansingh, ""They don't see eye to eye on many international issues.
These difficulties associated with balancing power lead most realists to conclude that international conflict and competition is a permanent feature of world politics.
Sooner or later, America’s predominance will inevitably fade, and some new distribution of power will develop.
Others see a more complex multipolar pattern of balance-of-power competition, in which the United States, China, Japan, Russia, India, and the European Union would constitute six centers of global power.
An enlarged global chessboard of multiple geostrategic relationships will develop and lead to uncertainty about others’ allegiances.
But behind the diplomatic smiles and handshakes, one-time friends and allies begin to grow apart, formally “specialized” relations begin to dissolve, and former enemies forge friendly ties and begin making a common cause against other common threats.
Much counterbalancing and shifting in flexible and fluid alliances is occurring.
For example, friction grew between the United States and its closest allies over how to pursue the war on terrorism, particularly with regard to the war in Iraq.
It is difficult to confidently predict what the twenty-first century will look like and whether it will be chaotic or stable.
Their expectations have been strengthened by China’s rapid rise toward becoming the globe’s biggest economy and the growing fears that this coming financial clout will translate into Chinese hard power and a military threat.
Likewise, realists think that great power competition will continue because the American military giant is unlikely to quietly accept a diminished stature.
In the next chapter of World Politics, turn your attention away from the balance-of-power politics of realism to examine what liberal theorists say about institutional reforms that they contend lead to a more orderly world.
Pictured here are leaders from around the world at a meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations in Kruen, Germany on June 7, 2015.
Leaders gathered to discuss an array of global issues, including ways to foil the threat of terrorism, strengthen the global economy, and address climate change.
How 21st Century Technology Is Changing the Way We Fight and Think About War.
Progressive ideas and global cooperation create the possibility of a world without violence.
Shown here is the sculpture by Swedish artist Carl Fredrik Reutersward, known as ""The Knotted Gun"" or ""Non-Violence,"" which was given to the United Nations in 1988 by the government of Luxembourg and symbolizes hope for peace.
Ob 9-1 Link liberal and constructivist ideas to the development of peaceful norms, laws, and institutions.
You are joining Andrew Carnegie, Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, and other exceptionally wealthy philanthropists who generously chose to give large portions of their fortunes to causes that attempt to change the world for the better.
You could seek, for example, to provide humanitarian relief for refugees, fight worldwide poverty and disease, join others in seeking to stem the threat of global warming, or subsidize a global campaign to educate all youth throughout the world.
Sorting through your moral values, however, you conclude that the greatest threat to the world is the awesome danger of armed conflict.
Acting on this conviction, you make it your mission to help others find better ways than violence to settle conflict.
So now you have found your cause—finding peaceful methods for settling potentially violent disputes.
In the quest to better understand nonviolent approaches to world security, you draw insights from policy makers and philosophers who have spent their lifetimes probing the same question you are now asking yourself—how to do good in a wicked world.
This chapter presents some of the major ways in which liberal international thought directly challenges the assumptions underlying realist thinking about world politics.
Also, from constructivist and identity perspectives, it looks at the importance of progressive ideas and norms in shaping international behavior and collective conceptions of world politics.
The various paths to peace that liberal thinkers depict differ greatly in their approach to world order, but they all share a fear of states’ historic propensity to wage war.
Resting on the liberal premises that principled moral behavior ultimately reaps higher rewards for all because fair treatment promotes peace and cooperation, liberalism leads us to emphasize the role of collaboration and rulemaking in shaping behavior in world politics.
To understand how international norms and rules are created, constructivism informs us that popular ideas have meaningful consequences, and that when a favorable climate crystallizes around the preferred conduct for interstate relations, those constructed images influence perceptions about the rules by which world politics should be governed.
Whereas realists, and even liberals, emphasize the material underpinnings of war and peace, constructivists take into account both the material and communicative sources.
As ideas “do not float freely are embedded in an elaborate set of rules, norms, regimes and institutions” (Kolodziej, 2005, 297), the constructivist perspective often compliments the liberal emphasis on institutional and normative paths to peace, and the idea that constraints on the development and spread of weapons of war are critical to global security.
For this reason, and consistent with constructivist theory, many experts see international law and collective security regimes mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history Keep these perspectives in mind as you contemplate the benefits and liabilities of alternative roads to peace.
Here, rivet your focus on the hope that reduction in armaments will lead to less armed conflict and a safer and more secure world.
A FERVENT CALL FOR PEACE Liberal and constructivist views on war and peace are influenced by the importance of shared ethics and morality around the globe.
Shown here, mourners gather to remember the eleven victims of a bomb blast at a cafe in Pune, India.
If a country is militarily stronger than its rivals, it is not very likely to be attacked.
It is possible that a country would become less secure, not more, as it builds its military might.
In this construction, the security dilemma figures prominently—^when a country builds armaments, alarmed neighbors mistrust its claims that the weapons are only for defensive purposes and out of fear begin to vigorously arm themselves.
All of the arming parties are now more vulnerable—wanting peace, war preparations increase the likelihood of war.
Although there is no single constructivist position on armaments or armed conflict, there is a widespread interest in moving beyond a limited traditional conception of security to one that takes into account the consequence of progressive ideas and human creativity.
Many feminist scholars are critical of the role of weapons of mass destruction in ensuring global security.
There is optimism that by reducing the supply of arms, armed conflict will be less likely and will result in a more secure world.
But in thinking about the control of the spread of weapons around the world, keep in mind that it is not strictly a tenet of liberal or constructivist theory.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf arms race The buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other, with the competition driven by the conviction that gaining a lead is necessary for security. and/or eChapter.
Disarmament Versus Arms Control as Routes to Peace Several distinctions must be made in this approach to international security.
It aims to reduce or eliminate armaments or classes of armaments completely, usually by negotiated reciprocal agreements between two or more rivals, in an effort to prevent their use in warfare.
Where they part ways is in their respective postures toward the advantages of disarmament versus arms control.
Liberals are more willing to take a leap of faith and consider disarmament as a workable possibility for peace.
Most disarmaments have been involuntary, the product of reductions imposed by the victors in the immediate aftermath of a war, as when the Allied powers attempted to disarm a defeated Germany after World War I In addition to differentiating between arms control and disarmament, you should also distinguish between bilateral agreements and multilateral agreements.
Because the former involves only two countries, such agreements are often easier to negotiate and to enforce than are the latter, which are agreements between three or more countries.
By far the most revealing examples are the superpower agreements to control nuclear weapons.
This chapter looks briefly at the record of Soviet-American negotiations before examining the checkered history of multilateral arms control and disarmament.
Bilateral Arms Control and Disarmament The Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States never degenerated into a direct trial of military strength.
One of the reasons was the series of more than twenty-five arms control agreements that Moscow and Washington negotiated in the wake of the Cuban Missile www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
The most important agreements between the superpowers were the Strate^c Arms Limitation Talks of 1972 and 1979; the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987; the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty of 1991, 1993, 1997, and 2010; and the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty of 2002.
The first two agreements stabilized the nuclear arms race, and the remaining agreements reduced each side’s stockpile of nuclear weapons.
Even with these initial steps, at the end of the Cold War in 1991, the United States still had more than 9500 nuclear warheads and Russia had about 8000.
Since their 1986 peak, the sizes of the two superpowers’ nuclear arsenals have declined by over 90 percent, and they will decline much further if the terms of the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, which entered into force on February 5, 2011, are implemented.
According to this agreement, both sides will reduce strategic warheads to 1550 in seven years—which is a 74 percent reduction from the limit established by the 1991 START treaty and a 30 percent reduction from the maximum 2200 allowed under the previous SORT accord.
This achievement has inspired other nuclear powers to discontinue building and expanding their nuclear arsenals.
Most nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear Nuclear-warhead Stockpile, in thousands RUSSIA'S FIRST CUBAN MISSILE FALL OF NEW ATOMIC TEST CRISIS SALT* I SALT* II BERLIN WALL STARTt I SORT* STARU •Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty tstrategic Arms Reduction Treaty ♦Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty §lncludes 5,500 retired warheads awaiting dismantling ""Excludes retired warheads FIGURE 9.
SHRINKING THE STOCKPILE The overall record of successful bilateral arms control and even disarmament between the United States and Russia attests to the possibilities for rival military powers to contain by agreement a dangerous arms race.
As shown here, the nuclear warhead stockpiles of both countries have been reduced significantly in the post-Cold War period.
However, the fragility of these agreements underscores the difficulties associated with maintaining and implementing such commitments, and both countries have slowed their disarmament in the midst of their confrontation over the conflict in Ukraine.
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty The U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and, with the 1997 START-Ill by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of both sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks to lower the risk of nuclear war.
In fact, the progress achieved by both Russia and the United States in limiting their nuclear arsenals is threatened by their political dispute over the United States’ missile defense system in Europe.
In 2015, disarmament efforts also slowed due largely to tensions between the two countries over the conflict in Ukraine, with the Russians indicating that they would not be attending the Nuclear Security Summit hosted in the United States in 2016.
Nonetheless, the progress made by the United States and Russia in reducing their nuclear weapons stockpiles illustrates the possibility for rival military powers to take steps to de-escalate a risky arms race.
Of these, the 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty , which prohibited the transfer of nuclear weapons and production technologies to nonnuclear weapons states, stands out as particularly important.
This 2400-word contract that some say saved the world is historically the most symbolic multilateral arms control agreement.
Two years later, at the second Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul, South Korea, progress seemed to be slowing.
North Korea violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons.
Fears of nuclear proliferation were further inflamed by Iran’s pursuit of nuclear capabilities.
In September 2009, Iran test-fired missiles capable of striking Israel, Europe, and American bases in the Persian Gulf The United Nations subsequently adopted new sanctions against Iran, including a prohibition on Iranian investment in uranium mining and activity involving ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
Further speculation about Iranian military capabilities was raised by Iran’s announced testflring of a land-to-sea ballistic missile in April 2013.
Many countries in the Middle East have a vested interest in preventing Iran from becoming a nuclear power, but perhaps none are more vocal than Israel.
Recall that in an anarchic international system, each country must ensure its own survival—and this demands that countries strive to become more powerful fhan their potential opponents.
Yet, as described by the imagery of the spiral model, this enhancement of milifary capabilities for defensive purposes tends to result in escalating arms races that diminish the security of all.
The increase in armaments, that is intended in each nation to produce consciousness of strength and a sense of security, does not produce these efforts.
With efforts by Pakistan under way to double its nuclear weapons arsenal by 2021, relations between Pakistan and India remain tense.
Liberal theory posits that security may depend as much on the control of force as its pursuit.
Expanding confidencebuilding measures that reduce fear and suspicion—including increased transparency and a global culture of disclosure—is critical to countering the uncertainties of the security dilemma and establishing a foundation of trust for future disarmament.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rig spiral model A metaphor used to describe the tendency of efforts to enhance defense to result in escalating arms races. and/or eChapter.
Although the nuclear accord would not permanently eliminate Iran’s capacity to produce nuclear weapons, it signaled an interest and willingness of Iran to collaborate and pursue a path to peace with members of the global community.
Furthermore, some states that signed the original agreement wonder whether the deal they were handed by the “nuclear club” in 1968 was fair.
The ability and will to stem further nuclear proliferation remains in doubt, and in recognition of these serious trends.
President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting nuclear proliferation.
Gritics complain that these agreements frequently regulate only obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive to continue developing in the first place.
Like a balloon that is squeezed at one end but simply expands at the other, constraints on certain parts of a country’s arsenal can lead to enhancements elsewhere.
An example can be seen in the 1972 SALT I agreement, which limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles possessed by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Although the number of missiles was restricted, no limits were placed on the number of nuclear warheads that could be placed on each missile.
In short, the quantitative freeze on launchers led to qualitative improvements in their warhead delivery systems.
Furthermore, the slow and ineffective ability of the global community to ban some of the most dangerous and counterproductive weapons reduces optimism in the future of meaningful arms control.
Gonsider the case of antipersonnel landmines that cannot discriminate www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
It is estimated that about one mine exists for every fifty people in the world and that each year they kill or maim more than 26,000 people—almost all of them civilians.
It took peace activist Jody Williams to organize the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, which led to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines, which opened for signature in December 1997.
But the United States, Russia, and other great powers stubbornly resisted the APL convention until a coalition of NGO peace groups mounted sufficient pressure for them to produce this important treaty.
A final problem facing those advocating arms control and disarmament is continuous innovation in the defense industry.
Significant controls would save money, reduce tension, decrease environmental hazards, and diminish the potential destructiveness of war.
Realists and liberal theorists both agree that the world could be a better place if countries would see their self-interests served by international cooperation.
A LEGACY OF WAR Antipersonnel mines are triggered by the contact or presence of a person.
Realism insists that national security is best protected by developing military capabilities and not by reducing armaments or military spending as advocated by liberalism.
Realists regard treaties as dangerous in an anarchical world in which the promises of self-interested rivals cannot be trusted.
To illustrate, imagine that two suspects following an armed robbery are taken into police custody and placed in separate cells by the district attorney, who is certain that they are guilty but only has sufficient evidence to convict them on an illegal weapons charge.
If one prisoner confesses and the other doesn’t, he will be given immunity from prosecution for providing evidence, whereas his accomplice will get a sentence of ten years in prison.
If neither confesses, they each will be convicted on the weapons charge but serve only six months in prison.
They both want as little time behind bars as possible, and they are being interrogated separately so they cannot communicate.
This situation, which can be roughly applied to interactions between transnational actors, has some interesting consequences.
Prisoner A cooperate defect cooperate Prisoner B defect 2,2 win-win 4, 1 lose more-win more 1,4 win more-lose more 3,3 lose-lose FIGURE 9.
THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA The matrix depicts the results that will occur depending on whether each prisoner chooses to cooperate with his accomplice by remaining silent or defect by confessing to the district attorney.
The first number shown in each cell is Actor A's outcome; the second number is B's outcome.
Consequently, they both receive a less optimal result (the lose-lose outcome 3, 3 in the matrix—five years in prison) than if they had tacitly cooperated and remained silent.
The dilemma is that seemingly rational calculations by each individual actor can yield collectively worse results for both than had they chosen other strategies.
As a result of their joint defection , they end up worse off by locking themselves into an expensive arms race that may destabilize the prevailing balance of power.
This mind-set was very evident in United States decisions at the turn of the century to reject an array of international treaties designed to control the threat of nuclear weapons.
During 2001 alone, the United States decided to abrogate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, withdraw from a UN conference to impose limits on illegal small arms trafficking, and reject proposed enforcement measures for the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention.
Especially troubling was the United States repudiation of the 1972 ABM treaty, which was regarded by many as the cornerstone of nuclear arms control, as that announcement was the first time in modern history that the United States had renounced a major international accord.
Flowever, while acknowledging a continued commitment to defensive military preparation, United States President Barack Obama indicated a renewed interest in controlling the spread of deadly weapons, stating, “We are spending billions of dollars on missile defense.
As indicated in the timeline, nuclear testing has declined dramatically since the 19B0s.
This commitment to arms control is reflected in support for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
However, 13 states still have not signed, including Pakistan, India, and North Korea.
Nineteen of the countries that have signed have yet to ratify the treaty, including the United States, China, Iran, and Israel.
Both China and the United States regularly conduct zero-yield nuclear experiments and are suspected of conducting explosive tests so small that they cannot be detected.
Over three-fourths of all nuclear tests took place after the ban went into effect.
North Korea conducted an underground nuclear test on February 12, 2013.
The past record of arms control and disarmament has dispirited liberal and constructivist reformers who hope that negotiated compromises will curtail the global arms race.
It appears that realism, and its abiding emphasis on peace through military preparations, is trumping liberalism’s premise that weapons acquisitions are not a safe road toward world order.
Someday, however, Woodrow Wilson’s cause of world disarmament may yet triumph.
As long as the threat of armed conflict haunts the world, leaders are unlikely to think it prudent to disarm.
Ts MAINTAINING COLLECTIVE SECURITY THROUGH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS One of the prime rationales for the formation of international organizations is the preservation of peace.
An institutional pathway to international peace is sculpted in liberal and constructivist thinking, with liberals focusing on interdependence and cooperation and constructivists emphasizing the centrality of ideas and norms.
These approaches are voiced as alternatives to the balancing of power advocated by realist thinkers.
Note that classical realism vigorously opposes relying on international organizations.
Realism, it should be recalled, prizes the sovereign independence of states as a core value and berates any international organization as a barrier to states’ foreign policy autonomy, freedom, and flexibility of unilateral action.
Indeed, realism rejects prescriptions for the global community to “get organized” by creating institutions above states as a route to global stability.
By definition, collective security requires collective decisions for collective goals, such as containing armed conflict, which is guided by the principle that an act of aggression by any state will be met with a unified response from the rest.
In addition to providing a mechanism for the mediation of disagreements, the collective security organization would also contain a judicial organ authorized to issue binding verdicts on contentious disputes.
A final assumption underpinning this theory holds that members of the collective security organization would be willing and able to give mutual assistance to any state suffering an attack.
Sanctions could range from public condemnation to economic boycott to military retaliation.
Putting the pieces of these premises together, this approach to international peace through collective security organizations aims to control anarchical self-help warfare by guaranteeing every state’s defenses through collective regulation.
Perhaps ironically, therefore, liberal reformers accept the use of military might—not to expand state power, but rather to deter potential aggressors by confronting them with armed force organized by the united opposition of the entire global community.
Citing arms races, secret treaties, and competing alliances as sources of divisive tension, many liberals viewed power balancing as a cause of war instead of as an instrument for its prevention.
This plea led to the formation of the League of Nations, a precursor to the United Nations, to replace the balance of power with a global governance system for world order in which aggression by any state would be met by a united response.
The belief that an organized “community” of power would be more effective in preserving peace than shifting alliances aimed at balancing power served as a foundation for these proposals.
To the disappointment of its advocates, the League of Nations never became an effective collective security system.
It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War 1.
Moreover, its members disagreed over how to define “aggression,” as well as how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response to potential aggressors.
Although the league failed to realize its lofty goal, the principles of collective security embedded in the League of Nations guided the subsequent formation of the United Nations.
Like the league, the United Nations was established to promote international peace and security after a gruesome world war.
Although the UN’s founders voiced support for collective security, they were heavily influenced by the idea of a concert of great powers that together would manage global issues.
Because the UN’s structure limited its ability to function as a true collective security organization, during the Cold War the United Nations fell short of many of its ambitious ideals.
Nevertheless, like any adaptive institution, the United Nations found other ways to overcome its compromising legal restrictions and lack of great power cooperation that inhibited its capacity to preserve world order.
Furthermore, in I960 Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed preventive diplomacy by attempting to resolve conflicts before they became a crisis, in contrast to ending wars once they erupted.
Frustrated with the superpowers’ prevention of the United Nations from playing “as effective and decisive a role as the charter certainly envisaged for it,” in 1989 Secretary-General Javier Perez de Guellar pursued peacemaking initiatives.
These programs were designed to end fighting so that the UN Security Gouncil could then establish operations to keep the peace.
Later, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating conditions that would make renewed war unlikely, while at the same time working on peacemaking (ending fighting already under way) and managing the UUW peace operations to police those conflicts in which the threat of renewed fighting between enemies is high.
These endeavors have emphasvLed peace enforcement opemriotts, relying on UN forces that are trained and equipped to use military force if necessary without the prior consent of the disputants.
For over four decades, the United Nations was a victim of superpower rivalry.
However, the end of the Gold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to act to preserve peace.
For example, in 1999, the Security Gouncil swung into action to authorize military coercion to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, which it had invaded.
This successful collective security initiative jump-started optimism for the usefulness of the UN’s peacekeeping leadership.
After 1990, the United Nations launched over three times as many peacekeeping missions as it had in the previous forty years of its existence.
Although liberals have great hope for the United Nations as a means of promoting human rights and a global rule of law , the constraints that it faces as an organization may be due in part to its continued emphasis on sovereignty and dependence on power politics.
UN PEACE MISSIONS, 1948-2015 In its first forty years, the United Nations undertook a mere eighteen peacekeeping operations.
But since 1990, the United Nations has been much more active, sending peacekeepers to fifty flash points.
As the map shows, most of the seventy-one missions between 1948 and 2015 lasted at least a decade.
UN analyst Brian Urquhart embraces this view, which he sees as critical to the continued relevance of the United Nations in the age of globalization; If governments really considered the effectiveness of the United Nations an urgent priority, this would be the first problem they would have to tackle.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights r @ peace enforcement The application of military force to warring parties, or the threat of its use, normally pursuant to international authorization, to compel compliance with resolutions orwith sanctions designed to maintain or restore peace and order. l/or eChapter. estrictions require it.
The Quest for Peace Through International Law and Collective Security The CSS Point can only wonder which of the great global problems will provide the cosmic disaster that will prove beyond doubt, and probably too late, that our present situation demands a postWestphalian international order.
In 1945 , there were few global problems that a single state could not successfully address alone.
Today, the world faces intimidating challenges such as nuclear proliferation, international terrorism, global pandemics, environmental deterioration, and resource scarcities— global problems that require cooperative solutions.
It is not only the interests of the Security Council’s permanent members that constrain the United Nations, but also its limited infrastructure and financial resources.
For the United Nations to succeed, the world community must match the means given to it with the demands made on it.
In support of the UN’s seventy-one peacekeeping operations since 1948, expenditures have totaled almost $84.33 billion.
For the period from July 2014 through June 2015, the budget support to more than 125,000 UN peacekeeping personnel was $8.47 billion.
To put this in perspective, compare this to United States military spending during the same period, which was $615. billion.
THE INCREASING DEMAND FOR ""PEACE"" The chart shows a clear trend in the demand for peacekeepers over time, as the total number of personnel involved in peacekeeping missions—often referred to as ""Blue Helmets"" because of tbeir blue helmets or berets—has increased sevenfold since 1999.
However, the use of regional security organizations is rising as regional IGOs are stepping into the breach in those situations where UN Blue Helmets have not been given the necessary support to do the job.
Regional Security Organizations and Collective Defense If the United Nations reflects the lack of shared values and common purpose characteristic of a divided global community, perhaps regional organizations, whose members already share some interests and cultural traditions, offer better prospects.
The kinds of wars raging today do not lend themselves to being controlled by a worldwide body because these conflicts are now almost entirely civil wars.
The United Nations was designed to manage international wars between states; it was not organized or legally authorized to intervene in internal battles within sovereign borders.
Regional IGOs see their security interests vitally affected by armed conflicts within countries in their area, and historically they have shown the determination and discipline to police these bitter intrastate conflicts.
Regional organizations with somewhat broader political mandates beyond defense include the Organization of American States , the League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity , the Nordic Gouncil, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , and the Gulf Gooperation Gouncil.
Many of todays regional security organizations face the challenge of preserving consensus and solidarity without a clear sense of its mission.
In the years since the end of the Gold War, the ambiguous European security setting has been marked by ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle.
Its original charter envisioned only one purpose—mutual self-protection from the Soviet Union.
Gonsequently, until 1995, when NATO took charge of all military operations in BosniaHerzegovina from the United Nations, it was uncertain whether the alliance could adapt to the new security environment.
For the first time invoking its Article 5, which requires collective defense of a member under attack, NATO joined the war in Afghanistan in 2001 in a strong show of support for the United States following the terrorist attacks on 9/11.
In March 2011, NATO took over responsibility for military operations in Libya that were initially conducted by the United States, France, and Britain.
In 2014, NATO condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the destabilization of eastern Ukraine by Russia and Russian-backed separatists as a violation of international law.
The alliance declared its support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, and agreed to help Ukraine provide for its security.
A number of countries in Eastern Europe are candidates for future membership, and many feel that it is in NATO’s and Europe’s interest to integrate Russia into the membership as well.
THE ENLARGED NATO IN THE NEW GEOSTRATEGIC BALANCE OF POWER The twenty-firstcentury geostrategic landscape has been transformed by NATO's expansion to twenty-eight full members, with Albania and Croatia formally joining as the newest members on April 1,2009.
As shown in this map, NATO now casts its security umbrella across and beyond Europe in its endeavor to create a collective security regime, including states that were once its enemies.
Although NATO is widely seen as a proxy for the Global North, collective security operations under its authority convey a legitimacy that unilateral interventions tend to lack.
Nonetheless, as is the case with the United Nations and other regional organizations, NATO faces barriers to its success as a collective security organization.
NATO is most capable of conducting successful peacekeeping operations only when it’s most powerful members reach agreement about any proposed operation.
In the case of Libya, the mandate as approved by the UN Security Council resolution was narrowly focused on civilian protection in order to secure tacit approval through abstentions, and avoid direct opposition, from Russia and China.
Second, the scope of NATO’s mission is constrained as it is unlikely to target any country that is a great power or has a military alliance with one.
Its traditional foe, Russia, agrees that in the twenty-first century, NATO and Russia should work together to confront terrorism, nuclear proliferation, piracy, and the illegal drug trade.
However, “Russia is still far from reconciled to NATO’s presence in countries that it regards as being within its ‘sphere of privileged interests’” {The Economist, 2010a, 67), as evidenced by the tension between Russia and NATO over the military escalation in Crimea and Russia’s military action against Ukraine.
Instead, they remain dependent upon the United States to take the lead in military operations and provide most of the weapons.
The United States accounts for almost three-fourths of all military spending by NATO countries.
Further, the limited investment by other NATO members is frequently matched by limited political will.
Collective security organizations represent a major liberal path to international peace.
Liberals have also long advocated that international law be strengthened in order to more capably provide for world order.
Actually, no, or at least the idea that it should has only gained ground in recent history.
Core Principles of International Law International law has been conceived and written mostly by realists, who have placed the privileges of the powerful as their primary concern and have historically advocated that the use of force should be an acceptable practice to protect a dominant state’s position in the global hierarchy.
No principle of international law is more important than state sovereignty.
Recall that sovereignty means that no authority is legally above the state, except that which the state voluntarily confers.
Ever since the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia, states have tried to preserve the right to perform within their territories in any way the government chooses.
That norm is the basis for all other legal rules; the key concepts in international law all speak to the rules by which sovereign states say they wish to abide.
In fact, as conceived by theoreticians schooled in the realist tradition since the seventeenth century, the rules of international law express codes of conduct designed to protect a state’s freedom to preserve its sovereign independence and act in terms of their perceived national interests.
Although the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights addressed concerns about the state’s treatment of individual people, states remain supreme.
Accordingly, most rules address the rights and duties of states, not people.
The right of independence also guarantees states’ autonomy in their domestic affairs and external relations, under the logic that the independence of each presumes the independence of all.
Furthermore, the noninterference principle forms the basis for the nonintervention norm, which requires states to refrain from uninvited activities within another country’s territory.
Although international law has deficiencies, this does not mean that it is irrelevant or useless.
States themselves find international law useful and expend a lot of effort to shape its evolution.
This behavior demonstrates that countries interpret international law as real law and obey it most of the time . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net igage Learning.
These rules might designate that the tree is out of bounds, the swing set is a safe base, once touched a player is “frozen” and cannot move, and so forth.
There is no enforcement mechanism or real punishment for violating the rules, but the rules help organize the game, create certain expectations, and make it a pleasurable interaction.
These communication functions serve every member of the global system by allowing for states to trust one another.
Even the most powerful states usually abide by international laws because they recognize that adherence pays benefits that often outweigh the costs of expedient rule violation.
Those international actors that obey the rules receive rewards, whereas those that ignore international law or opportunistically break customary norms engender penalties for doing as they please.
International reputations are important, and contribute to a state’s soft power.
States that routinely violate international legal rules are likely to find that other countries will be reluctant to cooperate with them.
Violators also must fear the retaliation of those they victimize, as well as the loss of prestige.
For this reason, only the most ambitious or reckless state is apt to flagrantly disregard accepted standards of conduct.
Nonetheless, to liberal theoreticians, putting the state ahead of the global community was a serious flaw that undermined international law’s potential effectiveness.
Many theorists consider the international legal system institutionally defective due to its dependence on state participation.
Because formal legal institutions are weak at the global level, critics point to several major limitations.
First, in world politics, no legislative body is capable of making truly binding laws.
Rules apply only when states willingly observe or embrace them in the treaties to which they voluntarily subscribe.
Generally accepted as the authoritative FOLLOWING THE RULES OF THE GAME In world politics, as in ordinary life, there are norms and expectations of state and nonstate behavior.
As liberalism and constructivism contend, such principles help to create order and predictability which contribute to global peace.
Second, in world politics, no judicial body exists to authoritatively identify and record the rules accepted by states, interpret when and how the rules apply, and then identify violations.
Enforcement usually occurs through the unilateral self-help actions of the victims of a transgression or with the assistance of their allies or other interested parties.
The whole system rests, therefore, on states’ willingness to abide by the rules to which they consent and on the ability of each to use retaliatory measures to punish violations of the norms and behaviors they value.
According to the precept of Roman law, ubi societas, ibijus , shared community values are a minimal precondition for forming a legal system.
Yet the contemporary international order is incredibly diverse culturally and ideologically and, as a consequence, lacks consensus on common values.
The simultaneous functioning of often-incompatible legal traditions throughout the world undermines the creation of a universal, cosmopolitan culture and legal system.
As in any legal system, in world politics what is legal is not necessarily legitimate.
Although legality is important in determining an action’s legitimacy, other values play a role—such as popular normative acceptance of international law as having authority.
Moreover, the legality of an action does not always imply wisdom or usefulness.
Eminent legal scholar Hans Kelsens contention that “states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved” K^itcts positivist legal theory that when a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal.
In fact, positive legal theory stresses that law is socially constructed.
States’ customary practices are the most important source from which laws derive in the absence of formal machinery for creating international rules.
This ambivalence makes it possible for states to exploit international law to get what they can and to justify what they have obtained. positivist legal theory ^ theory that stresses states’ customs and habitual mys of behaving as the most important source of law.
The Judicial Framework of International Law To be sure, liberal and constructivist reformers have a long way to go in order to fulfill their dream of seeing international law strengthen so that it can more effectively police international conflict.
However, reformers take heart from recent trends that have enabled international law to increase its capacity to manage the threat of war within states, between states, and through global terrorism—and they question those cynics who still contend that international law is and should remain irrelevant to states’ use of armed force.
It is a mistake, therefore, to claim that international law is broken whenever war breaks out—though whether a war is seen as defensive or aggressive is often a matter of which side the participant is on in the conflict.
Thus, war is a method of last resort to punish aggressors and thereby maintain the global system’s legal framework.
For the rule of law to gain strength in world politics, it is also necessary to strengthen the international adjudicative machinery to enhance its effectiveness and legitimacy.
The International Court of Justice , known as the World Court, was created in 1945 as the highest judicial body on Earth—the only international court with universal scope and general jurisdiction.
In accordance with international law, it settles legal disputes submitted by states.
It offers advisory opinions on legal questions that are submitted by the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
A weakness in the World Court is that it can make rulings only on disputes freely submitted by the states themselves; the court cannot rule on cases that states do not bring forward.
State sovereignty is protected, and many states have traditionally been hesitant to use the court because ICJ decisions are considered final—there is no opportunity to appeal.
Whereas the number of sovereign states since 1950 has tripled, the court’s caseload has not seen a similar increase.
Moreover, once the court has ruled on cases, the disputants have complied with ICJ judgments only a little more than half of the time.
This record suggests that although approval for using the court of law to resolve international conflicts is increasingly voiced, most states remain reluctant to voluntarily use judicial procedures to settle their most important international disputes.
However, it bodes well that the global community has radically revised international law to prevent the horror of civilian casualties and WAR CRIMES AND THE LOSS OF GLOBAL LEGITIMACY In 2004, scandal erupted when more than 1000 graphic photos taken at the Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad were televised worldwide, ostensibly showing United States personnel torturing Iraqi prisoners.
Similar methods—including electric shocks, prolonged exposure to frigid temperatures, and simulated drowning—were purportedly used to interrogate terror suspects detained at the United States Guantanamo Naval Base.
Both became a negative symbol of United States power in the Muslim world, and cast doubt upon the United State's commitment to moral and ethical principles. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net /ed.
This was true even when their commands ignored the laws of the appropriate conduct of war.
Attempts to bring armed conflict under more potent legal controls are now spread across the jurisdiction of several international judicial bodies.
The international criminal tribunals formed in 1993 signaled to would-be perpetrators that the global community would not tolerate these atrocities.
Milosevic was the former Yugoslav president who perpetrated four wars in the 1990s that killed more than 250,000 and tore the Balkans apart—he died of a heart attack in March 2006 in his Hague prison cell while facing trial.
In 2002, the Rome Statute launched the International Criminal Court as an independent court of last resort that investigates and prosecutes terrible mass crimes such as genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes that have been committed since the court’s inception.
The ICC only pursues a case when a state’s courts are unwilling or unable to do so, and brings charges only against individuals as opposed to states.
Though the United States has long been a leader in developing standards for international law and supports the prosecution of atrocities—and directly endorsed the ICC’s investigation of such crimes in Sudan—in 2002 it suspended its signature of the Rome Statute and declared that it did not intend to become a member of the ICC due to concerns over the court’s statute, accountability, and jurisdiction.
The United States’ opposition to the ICC is also due to the conviction that its citizens would be treated unfairly by the court and would war crimes Acts performed during war that the international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of war, civilians, or the state’s own minority population. international criminal tribunals Special tribunals established by the United Nations to prosecute those responsible for wartime atrocities and genocide, bring justice to victims, and deter such crimes in the future.
The International Court of Justice , which is known as the World Court, was established by the UN Charter in 1945.
It is the primary judicial body of the United Nations, with global jurisdiction to settle legal disputes between states and provide advisory opinions to international agencies and the UN General Assembly.
Shown is the Peace Palace, which houses the ICJ in The Hague, Netherlands.
Also commonly referred to as a ""world court,"" the International Criminal Court is an independent court of last resort that tries those accused of committing the most horrendous of mass crimes.
Though criticized as violating the Nuremburg principle of individual accountability, the United States sought to guarantee that Americans would be immune to the court’s jurisdiction and pressed other states for bilateral immunity agreements that take into account its concerns.
More recently, however, the United States has become less hostile to the ICC and has agreed to cooperate with the court on a case-by-case basis.
Despite resistance from some members of the African Union, the ICC ruled in February 2010 that Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir could be charged with genocide for his part in the five-year campaign of violence in Sudan’s Darfur region that, according to UN estimates, cost 300,000 people their lives and forced another 2. million from their homes.
In a case that stood as a milestone in international justice and a deterrent of war crimes, the Congolese militia leader was found guilty of conscripting and using child soldiers.
The ICC is gaining legitimacy as the appropriate court of last resort for cases involving crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes, but it is often criticized for the length of time it takes for cases to be brought to trial, and it lacks the independent ability to enforce its decisions or physically detain the accused.
William Fulbright, former United States senator 9-5 LEGAL AND DIPLOMATIC RESPONSES TO ARMED CONFLICT Many people are confused by international law because it both prohibits and justifies the use of force.
Therefore, it is important to understand the origins of just war theory and the way it is evolving today, and to also consider how the rules of law shape military interventions and negotiated solutions to international disputes. morals Principles clarifying the difference between good and evil and the situations in which they are opposed.
Augustine, the City of Man was inherently sinful, in contrast to the perfect City of God.
Though there are references to just war principles in classical Greek political thought, as reflected in Aristotle’s reference to “war that is by nature just” and Ciceros’ writings on helium justum , the moAem just war doctrine was heavily influenced by early Christian doctrine and further developed by such humanist reformers as Hugo Grotius.
The former sets the legal criteria by which a leader may initiate a war.
Thomas More contended that the assassination of an evil leader responsible for starting a war was justified if it would prevent the loss of innocent lives.
War can be just only if employed to defend a stable political order or a morally preferable cause against a real threat or to restore justice after a real injury has been sustained.
A just war must have a reasonable chance of succeeding in these limited goals.
Advanced technological innovations have blurred many of the lines between acceptable and unacceptable conduct in war.
For example, insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on improvised explosive devices planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers in addition to lEDs left in the open in order to kill with minimal risk to the attacker.
Today’s lEDs, first invented by the United States and now available on the global black market, are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs.
Just war theory reflects the continuing quest to place legal constraints on the use of armed force in order to create a moral consensus about the conditions under which ends justify means, even though vehement disagreements continue today about what criteria should be accepted.
These differences became especially evident in the heated debate after the United States preemptive invasion of Iraq in 2003.
Others disagreed , however, with some suggesting that United States intent in waging war was justifiable as Saddam Hussein intentionally let the United States believe Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.
The United States invasion of Iraq made the legality of the use of force a hot topic, and concerns emerged regarding the preemptive and preventive use of force.
THE LEGAL PROHIBITION AGAINST INITIATING WARS, 1815-2015 Legal restraints on the historic right of states to start a war have fluctuated over time, but have increased steadily since World War I when that carnage prompted the global community to make wars of conquest illegal.
Thus, liberals advocate institutional methods that pool sovereignty to collectively manage global problems.
Here, consider the ways in which changing conceptions of sovereignty and global responsibility are shaping state responses to military intervention and the diplomatic resolution of crises.
New Rules for Military Intervention International law has recently begun to revise its traditional prohibition against military intervention in the wake of the recent wave of terrorism by states against their own people.
The belief that governments have a right, even an obligation, to intervene in the affairs of other states under certain conditions for humanitarian purposes has won advocates.
International law has relaxed its restrictive definition that delimits when the global community can legally use military intervention to intervene in other states.
The world has made a choice on genocide and has declared organized savagery illegal.
Over the last fifty years, near-universal support for humanitarian intervention has emerged as a legal right to protect human rights —political rights and civil liberties are now recognized by the global community as inalienable and universally applicable.
Although many states and IGOs have been reluctant to intervene militarily in internal conflicts outside their spheres of influence, NATO's intervention in Libya in 2011 proved an exception.
The UN Security Council argued that Muammar al-Qaddafi’s response to the popular uprising—replete with his promise to ""cleanse Libya house by house"" of the rebel ""cockroaches”—posed an imminent threat of mass atrocities.
This sea change suggests that international law develops and changes most rapidly when global problems arise that require collective solutions and legal remedies.
The spread of genocide and atrocities in failed states and countries ruled by tyrants has spawned new sets of legal rules that attempt to arrest these dangers and to permit interventions within these countries.
Likewise, the rising frequency of global crises has pushed efforts to rewrite international law so as to facilitate diplomatic negotiations that bring about a nonviolent settlement of disputes.
International Crises and the Negotiated Settlement of Disputes Crises have been very frequent in modern history.
The threat of force causes stress and reduces the amount of time available to reach decisions that might successfully end the crisis peacefully.
And, often, such crises resulting from coercive diplomacy have escalated to the use of force when bargaining failed and the adversaries took up arms.
The problem that liberal reformers identify is that these crises and armed conflicts could potentially have been settled by diplomatic negotiations had that avenue for dispute settlement been tried.
To liberals, it is always better to talk about divisive issues at a negotiating table than to let anger and anxieties sizzle and tempt the disputants to take up arms.
Only through discussion and bargaining can positions be clarified and, possibly, concessions and compromises be reached that terminate the threat of warfare.
Embedded in international law, negotiation is a process of bargaining between two or more actors in an effort to deal with an issue or situation and reach an agreement.
As an approach to conflict management, the goal is to facilitate communication between the parties regarding their intentions and goals, and to produce options that address the interests of those involved.
In the give-and-take required to negotiate a solution, there is a strong tendency for some level of reciprocity to emerge from the action-and-reaction sequence of communications—to return in kind or degree the kind of friendly or hostile communication received from the other party.
That is why negotiation is not a sure-fire way to resolve global conflicts and crises.
Still, negotiations make the settlement of disputes possible by providing reciprocated concessions between disputants.
Reciprocated gestures of goodwill and empathy for the opponent’s situation pave the way for a compromise.
Diplomacy aims to revolve international disputes peacefully, which is why liberals favor it.
Conversely, realists, for whom the state’s primary interest is the pursuit of power, believe that threats of war preserve peace better than diplomatic efforts.
Chinese former foreign minister Zhou Enlai spoke to this view when he echoed Clausewitz, saying “all diplomacy is the continuation of war by other means.” tit-for-lat strategy A bargaining approach that consistently reciprocates in kind the offers or threats made by the other party in a negotiation, with equivalent rewards returned and equivalent punishing communications returned in retaliation.
Boris Yeltsin and Bill Clinton, 1994 Vladimir Putin and George W Bush, 2002 Dmitri Medvedev and Barack Obama, 2009 DIPLOMACY DIALOGUES To liberal reformers, direct negotiations between adversaries are a crucial step on the path to make peace a possibility.
Talks allow both sides to put their interests on the bargaining table and discuss issues openly—far better than resolving them on the battlefield.
These methods include diplomatic negotiations, international courts, collective security, and other methods of conflict resolution that are advocated by policy makers whose image of world politics is informed by liberal and constructivist theories.
Diplomacy requires great intelligence, information, imagination, flexibility, ingenuity, and honesty to successfully maintain peaceful negotiations.
Compounding the challenge is the common liability that while diplomats are sent to negotiate for their countries, no matter what their skill or sincerity, they cannot succeed unless they have the full backing of their government’s authority.
As former UN Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold similarly cautioned, “The best results of negotiation cannot be achieved in international life any more than in our private world in the full glare of publicity with current debate of all moves, unavoidable misunderstandings, inescapable freezing of positions due to considerations of prestige and the temptation to utilize public opinion as an element integrated into the negotiation itself” These problems, potholes, and pitfalls notwithstanding, liberals prefer negotiation when trying to facilitate international peace.
Fortunately, those playing the game of international politics have been inventive in creating supplementary methods that enable negotiations to reduce the threat of war.
When two conflicting parties have a history of relatively peaceful negotiations, often a “good office” will be provided by a third party as neutral ground for negotiation.
In these circumstances, the good office provider does not participate in the actual negotiations.
When two or more conflicting parties wish to negotiate a dispute resolution but wish to maintain control over the final compromise, often a third party will assist both sides during the negotiations and attempt to offer unbiased opinions and suggestions to help achieve a solution while remaining neutral and refraining from proposing a solution.
When disputing parties are willing to allow a third party to make a binding decision to resolve their dispute, a temporary ruling board considers both sides’ arguments and reaches a decision.
Perhaps the most formal of the dispute resolution options, this approach is roughly the equivalent of arguing a case in court and accepting a binding decision or ruling by a judge.
The quest for international security involves the unconditional surrender by every nation, in a certain measure, of its liberty of action, its sovereignty that is to say, and it is clear beyond all doubt that no other road can lead to such security. —Albert Einstein, Nobel Prize-winning physicist 9 6 | INSTITUTIONS, NORMS, AND WORLD ORDER Liberal and constructivist perspectives on war and peace, armed conflict, and international security are fundamentally shaped by the importance attached to shared ethics and morality in world politics.
Liberalism places the power of principle over the principle of power because it is based on the idea that peace depends on actions driven by moral convictions.
Feminist theory stresses the importance of gender in studying world politics, and explores the extent to which a “masculine"" conceptualization of key ideas—such as power, interest, and security—shapes the way transnational actors conduct foreign affairs.
With its emphasis on the role of power in an amoral pursuit of narrow self-interest by rational actors, realism portrays a competitive world in which a masculine approach to decision making reigns.
Power is typically viewed as the ability to influence another to do what you want them to do, and in this context the accumulation of power is achieved through greater strength and authority, and at the expense of others.
Some argue that, due to their traditional social roles, women have interdependent self-schemas and a nurturing orientation that gives them valuable perspectives that are an asset to conflict negotiation and mediation.
Moreover, women understand events in a context that accounts for relationships as well as evolving situations.
Eschewing the realist perspective of power achieved through competition, women tend to be more inclined to a liberal view of mutual empowerment achieved through cooperative interactions that construct connections and understandings.
The liberal road to peace begins with a dedication to doing what is right and not doing what is wrong, and constructivism, although itself conventionally thought of as ethically neutral, serves as a means for explaining systems of ethical beliefs.
Future generations will likely judge whether disarmament agreements, multilateral international organizations, and international law can lead to a collective response to the multitude of global needs.
This survey can aid in understanding the world as it presently exists and allow you to contemplate, as caring and responsible global citizens, the prospects for transformations that could create a better world.
Each chapter explores some facet of the challenges to prosperity and human security that we face in our globalized world, and the extent to which we have the ability, and responsibility, to respond and seek solutions to them.
Chapter 12 then examines the demographic dimensions of globalization as well as how increased access to information is shaping culture and perceptions of identity.
Einally, Chapter 14 considers threats to the global environment that pose a serious challenge to the planet and humanity’s continued survival.
MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD The growing web of globalization enhances the prospect and need for mutual toleration and cooperation.
World leaders focused on measures to spur balanced and sustainable economic growth through effective regulation, jobs creation and investment, and bolstering trust and transparency.
Even though such aphorisms and cliches are somewhat contradictory, they all contain elements of truth.
Your challenge is to separate fact from fiction by determining the place of money in your life and in the world around you.
However, the quality of your conclusions will depend on your analytic skills in evaluating how money affects the many dimensions of world politics—and your own personal financial fate.
Today, more than ever, money truly is moving around the world, and with increasing speed.
What is more, when you buy a sandwich, a sweater, a car, or the gasoline to make it run, the cost is very likely to be affected by the rate at which your own country’s currency is valued and exchanged for the currency of the producer abroad.
Should you have the opportunity to travel abroad, you will instantly discover how the global exchange of national currencies will determine whether you can afford to attend a rock concert or buy that extra bottle of wine.
It looks at the processes governing currency exchanges, particularly on how the transfer of money across borders affects levels of national prosperity and human security.
Note that this topic is part of the larger one of international economics in general, and it serves as an introduction to international trade, which is discussed in Chapter 11.
Neither dimension of international economics—money or trade—can be considered without the other.
They are inextricably linked, and only by looking at both together can you understand how money and markets drive the rise and fall of individual and national wealth.
You will be looking at a phenomenon as old as recorded history and inspecting how it influences life in the twenty-first century.
Financial markets are like the mirror of mankind, revealing every hour of each working day the way we value ourselves and the resourees of the world around us. —Niall Ferguson, British historian ^1| INTERPRETING CONTEMPORARY ECONOMIC CHANGE When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf geo-economics The relationship between geography and the economic conditions and behavior of states that define their levels of production, trade, and consumption of goods and services. and/or eChapter.
Bond purchases by Chinese investors, or even statements about future purchases, influence the relative value of currencies worldwide.
Financial crises in the United States can likewise create turbulence in markets around the world.
Revolutionary activity in the Middle East causes rapid increases in world oil prices.
These are only a few of the consequences of globalization, and the undercurrents of the global economy have assumed increasing importance as they are inextricably linked to world politics.
Although some regard globalization as little more than a euphemism for capitalism (Petras and Veltmeyer, 2004), it is a multifaceted phenomenon that encompasses the development of interconnected material relations, the increasing rapidity with which they take place, and the shift in public perception of these changes.
GLOBALIZATION AROUND THE WORLD This map depicts the extent of globalization across the globe and is rendered from the 2015 Index of Globalization released by the KOF Swiss Economic Institute.
The United States ranked thirty-fourth, with a globalization index score of 74.81 out of 100.
Moreover, most analysts would probably agree that globalization is a permanent trend leading to the probable transformation of world politics—the end of one historic pattern and the beginning of a new one.
This new era of globalization will prove to be such a difference of degree that it will be seen, in time, as a difference in kind ... it will be remembered as one of those fundamental changes—like the rise of the nation-state or the Industrial Revolution—each of which, in its day, produced changes in the role of individuals, the role and form of governments, the way we innovated the way we conducted business.
Given the broad and multifaceted scope of globalization, this chapter, as well as the remaining chapters in World Politics, deals with different dimensions of globalization and their implications.
We next focus our attention on the dynamics of the international monetary system through which currencies and credits are calculated as capital moves freely across national boundaries by way of investments, trade, foreign aid, and loans.
THE TRANSNATIONAL EXCHANGE OF MONEY international monetary system The financial procedures used to calculate the value of currencies and credits when capital is transferred across borders through trade, Investment, foreign aid, and loans.
For its part, the state seeks to provide some operational rules for the system as well as measures to mitigate the more disruptive effects of the marketplace upon its citizenry.
In the area of currency exchanges, a number of governments have taken some tentative steps in creating rules for adjusting their currencies with one another and stabilizing wide fluctuations in their exchange rates.
Ffowever, the process through which money is exchanged between countries does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions.
Moreover, states often have very limited ability to control either those transactions or the relative value of their currencies on the world market.
At the same time, these transactions, as noted above, are escalating at a furious rate.
This globalization of finance refers to the increasing transnationalization and centralization of these markets through integrating worldwide capital flows.
The most fundamental characteristic of this emerging system of financial arrangements is that it is not centered on any single state.
Whereas telecommunications specialists talk about the “death of distance,” financial specialists talk about the “end of geography” because geographic location is no longer a barrier to finance.
Moreover, growth in the arbitrage market, in which currencies are bought and sold for profit based off differences and fluctuations in their relative values, has been truly staggering.
By way of comparison, the total value of all goods and services produced in the United States during 2014—its gross domestic product —^was $17. trillion.
Viewed another way, the amount of currency that circulates in four days is greater than the total yearly production of the United States economy.
Today, even more speculative financial instruments have exponentially increased the size and scope of these capital flows.
For example, by 2014 the total value of all the stock markets in the world was $69. trillion, which was somewhat less than actual global GDP of $77 trillion.
Yet the value of the derivatives market— newer financial instruments that are essentially “side bets” placed on the prospective future value of assets such as stocks and bonds—was much greater.
In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North seas, and city-states such as Liibeck, Flamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading.
Moreover, international financial crises are nothing new; economist Charles Kindleberger notes that the “manics, panics, and crashes” of global finance began in the early seventeenth century, with twenty-seven major financial crises occurring before the beginning of the twentieth century.
The difference is the speed and breadth of finance capital flows throughout the entire globe.
The combination of rapid, computer-driven trading and the sheer volume of shares processed can produce rapid swings in global stock markets for very idiosyncratic reasons.
For example, a momentary crash occurred around 1:08m. on April 23, 2013, when someone hacked the Associated Press Twitter account and reported that two explosions had just occurred at the United States White House and that President Obama had been hurt.
Over the course of two minutes the United States stock market plummeted $200 billion.
Although this is only part of global finance, it does provide some indication of the centers of global finance.
A clear pattern is continued United States dominance, as its two largest exchanges, the NYSE and NASDAQ, are larger in size than the next eight exchanges combined.
At the same time, Chinese exchanges are growing, and the Shanghai Security Exchange overtook the Japan Exchange group in early 2015.
There is also some indication of emerging economic powers, including India, South Korea, and Brazil.
Broader patterns in stock exchanges beyond the twenty reveal almost universal participation in this aspect of global finance, as only nine countries in the world have no stock exchanges.
Thus, although power centers remain, an increasing number of countries are participating in the stock exchange system.
Though the structure of financial markets is somewhat indicative of a state’s economic power, other aspects of the global capital market reveal limitations in the power of the state.
For example, the volume of currencies traded far exceeds the actual amount of reserve currencies held by governments, which limits the ability of governments to influence exchange rates.
Indeed, the value of a country’s currency can fluctuate wildly no matter the wishes of a particular country.
For example, the value of the Russian ruble decreased 85 percent during 2014 , which greatly increased the economic cost associated with its assertiveness in the Ukraine.
Taiwan 0.919 BM&FBOVESPA Brazil 0.740 Singapore Exchange Singapore 0.774 •As of May 31,2015.
The globalization of finance also has implications for international trade because the currency exchange rate directly affects the price of goods traded internationally.
The international monetary system is the most critical factor facilitating international trade, as such transactions could not exist without a stable and predictable method for calculating the value of sales and investments.
Most notably, currency values are at the heart of a key issue of contention between the United States and China, with United States officials contending that China undervalues its currency.
China’s relatively low exchange rate reduces the relative cost of Chinese goods shipped abroad and thus gives them a competitive advantage over goods produced in other countries.
Thus contention persists, as the United States still maintains that the renminbi is undervalued, and that China has not yet fully liberalized its currency—that is, they do not allow it to trade freely on the global market.
It is important to note that such “conflicts” are still within the context of mutually beneficial economic relations.
Yet the globalization of finance does not affect all countries equally.
Though a majority of global capital goes to the Global North, all countries are mutually vulnerable to rapid transfers of capital in this globalized system.
Yet historically the Global South has been the most dependent and vulnerable to shifts in the financial marketplace.
In accordance with neoliberal institutionalist approaches, this multitude of crises suggests why bankers and economists have called for more reliable multilateral mechanisms for policy coordination to better manage the massive movement of cross-border capital.
This was the raison d’etre for the G-20, a grouping of the twenty largest economies that was formed in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis.
In assessing the implications of capital mobility for the global system, as well as the global economy as a whole, it is necessary to understand the international monetary system and the processes through which the relative value of each state’s currencies are set.
With that in mind, we next examine the core concepts of the global monetary system, some of the key issues and dilemmas surrounding monetary policy, and its recent historical context.
To begin to put together how these factors are related, and the importance of a state’s monetary policy in determining its well-being, we consider why a country’s exchange rate fluctuates frequently and the challenges states face in dealing with these fluctuations.
As you will see, states face a variety of trade-offs in navigating monetary policies and must seek a difficult balance between competing values, goals, and priorities.
Second, money must store value, so that people will be willing to keep some of their wealth in the form of that particular currency.
Movements in a state’s exchange rate occur, in part, when changes develop in the people’s assessment of a national currency’s underlying economic strength or the ability of its government to maintain the value of its money.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf monetary policy The decisions made by states' central banks to change the country’s money supply In an effort to manage the national economy and control Inflation, such as changing the amount of money in circulation and raising or lowering interest rates. exchange rate The rate at which one state’s currency is exchanged for another state’s currency in the global marketplace. and/or eChapter.
Budget Deficit Yearly amount of debt necessary to fund a balance-of-payments deficit.
Money is most commonly raised by selling bonds to foreign and domestic investors.
National Debt Cumulative amount of debt that a country owes its various bondholders, both foreign and domestic.
An expansionary fiscal policy would consist of lowering taxes and/or increasing spending, whereas a “tight” or contractionary policy would involve raising taxes and/or decreasing spending.
Flowever, it can also reduce the spending power of citizens within that country.
Daily changes are generally quite small, although they can vary greatly over the long run.
Fixed Exchange Rate A system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country’s currency or another measure of value (such as a group of different currencies or a precious metal such as gold) so that the exchange value is not free to fluctuate in the global money market.
Fixed-but-Adjustable Exchange Rate System A system in which a government fixes its currency in relation to that of another country’s currency but may still change the fixed price to reflect changes in the underlying strengths and weaknesses of its economy.
Inflation A decrease in the value of money, which increases the prices paid for goods and services.
For example, in 2010 the inflation rate for Zimbabwe was over 12,000 percent.
The following year, Zimbabwe abandoned its currency and adopted the dollar.
Conversely, if they believe that the yen will be worth less in three months, they can sell yen today for a certain number of dollars and then buy back the same yen in three months for less money.
As is the case with global capital flows, the globalization of finance allows investors to rapidly move funds from one currency to another in order to realize gains from differences in states’ interest rates and the declining value of other currencies.
Their willingness to do so is important to importers and exporters, whose success may depend on predictability in the value of the currencies in which they deal to carry out transnational exchanges.
Governments intervene when their central banks buy or sell currencies to change the relative value of their own.
Unlike speculators, however, governments should not try to manipulate exchange rates so as to gain unfair advantages because that could tarnish their reputations as custodians of monetary stability.
Within this system, governments are faced with the difficult task of balancing the demands of the global currency market with the need to manage their economies.
Inflation occurs when the government creates too much money in relation to the goods and services produced in its economy.
However, the creation of money—whether through increasing the money supply or lowering interest rates—does serve to stimulate the economy.
Alternatively, restrictive monetary policy is very useful in curbing inflation or helping the government reduce debt.
Yet such actions slow an economy down, which can result in increased unemployment and even recessions.
As mentioned, states are generally expected to refrain from manipulating the value of their currencies, or the currencies of other countries, in order to maintain predictability and stability.
CALCULATING THE CHANGING COSTS OF GOODS IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY People from the United States who travel abroad must use currency exchange rates to convert the price of their purchases abroad to the value of United States dollars, and sometimes they are alarmed at the higher price.
Economists usually calculate currency exchange rates in terms of purchasing power parity because that index of the value of exchange rates measures the cost of identical goods or services in any two countries.
On January 22,2015, the least expensive burger could be purchased in the Ukraine for $1.20 versus an average price of $4.79 in the United States.
Inflation also affects the cost of goods and services, as a general increase in the level of prices means that each unit of currency purchases less.
As shown by the figure on the left, although inflation is higher in the Global South than the Global North, overall inflation levels have declined since the 2008 global financial crisis.
Although a weaker currency has a negative effect on the spending power of domestic consumers, it makes exporting industries more competitive because their goods become relatively less expensive in the global marketplace as compared to those countries with a stronger currency.
Conflicting Goals in Financial Policy Policy Tools Dilemma Inflation vs. unemployment Monetary policy (interest rates and money supply) Stimulative policies may create inflation.
Strong vs. weak currency Capital controls Choice of exchange rate regime Currency devaluation Monetary policy Any choice hurts some segments within the country, such as exporting industries or consumers.
Currency stability vs. policy autonomy Choice of exchange rate regime Cannot have both stability and autonomy in an open economy. unfair competition in the global marketplace.
This speaks to the trade-off that is at the core of global monetary policy, namely, the choice between currency stability and policy autonomy.
The basic problem is that in a system in which capital flows freely , it is impossible to have both stability and autonomy.
In this case, autonomy is gained, although there is no guarantee of stability, as the currency is subject to the vicissitudes of the global currency markets.
A fixed exchange rate regime provides currency stability, yet it gives states practically no freedom to conduct monetary policy.
For example, if a country with a fixed exchange rate were to lower interest rates, the exchange rate could not move to take the decreased demand for the currency into account.
To fill this deficit, the country would need to intervene in the foreign exchange market to reduce the oversupply of currency—a “tight’ monetary policy that would essentially undo the initial policy—or get rid of the fixed exchange rate altogether.
The United States near the end of the Bretton Woods era and Argentina in the late 1990s faced such dilemmas, and Greece has been confronting them since 2010.
States thus have to balance competing interests when creating monetary policy—the desire to help their economy grow with the necessity to maintain their currencies, the relative utility of strong versus weak currency valuation, and the incompatibility of stability and policy autonomy.
It is helpful to keep these trade-offs and limitations on state power in mind as you consider the monetary policies of the Bretton Woods era, as well as some of the current issues in international finance.
Liberal International Economic Order The set of regimes created after World Ward, designed to promote monetary stability and reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and capital.
The perceived causes of the economic catastrophes of the previous decade, as well as the states’ beliefs about the need for active United States leadership, shaped the proposals.
Led by John Maynard Keynes— whose theories about the state’s role in managing inflation, unemployment, and growth still influence economic thinking around the world—the British delegation won support for the principle of strong government action when states face economic problems.
First, power was concentrated in the rich Western European and North American countries, which reduced the number of states needed to reach decisions.
The onset of the Cold War helped cement Western unity along these lines.
Third, Bretton Woods worked because the United States assumed the burdens of hegemonic leadership, which others willingly accepted.
Thus, it is still useful to characterize the contemporary international economic system as a Liberal International Economic Order —one based on such free-market principles as openness and free trade.
Former World Trade Organization Director-General Pascal Lamy remarked that ""the wealth of the great Merchant Cities extends far beyond money.
Financial and Monetary Aspects of the Bretton Woods System The global economic collapse of the 1930s provided important lessons for monetary relations.
In particular, as the major economies contracted in the late 1920s, they found themselves unable to maintain their fixed exchange rate regimes.
The resulting flexible currency regime was highly unstable, replete with speculative attacks on currencies and currency devaluations.
To avoid repeating history, the leaders sought to construct a common set of practices regarding monetary and currency policy to help simplify international trade and finance.
The negotiating parties agreed that the postwar monetary regime should be based on fixed exchange rates, and governments were tasked with maintaining this new currency regime.
The IMF was to function somewhat like a global credit union—countries contributed to the fund and were able to draw capital from it to help them maintain a balance-of-payments equilibrium, and hence exchange rate stability.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigi speculative attacks Massive sales of a country's currency, caused by the anticipation of a future decline in its value. fixed exchange rates A system in which a government sets the value of its currency in relation to another country’s currency at a fixed rate of exchange and does not allow it to fluctuate in the global money market and/or eChapter.
Today the IMF and World Bank continue to be important, if controversial, players in the global monetary and financial systems.
It was used in exchange markets as the reserve used by monetary authorities in most countries and by private banks, corporations, and individuals for international trade and capital transactions.
Thus, the Bretton Woods monetary regime was based on fixedbut-adjustable exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar and gold, which ultimately required government intervention to maintain.
To get United States dollars into the hands of those who needed them most, the Marshall Plan provided Western European states billions of dollars in aid to buy the United States goods necessary to rebuild their war-torn economies.
MONEY MATTERS Currency now moves effortlessly across borders, and the globalization of international finance is wreaking havoc on the efforts of state governments to control rapid fluctuations in economic conditions.
As part of the Occupy Wall Street movement, May Day protestors expressed popular outrage and frustration over the corrupt and fraudulent practices of financial institutions, as well as the failure of governments to hold them accountable.
Pictured left, around 32,000 people took to the streets in Tokyo on May 1, 2013, to protest economic conditions for the common man.
THE IMF, WORLD BANK, AND STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT POLICIES The protests in Greece, which have taken place since 2010, are perhaps the most visible example of contentious action against the IMF and World Bank.
In the case of Indonesia in 1998, such profesfs and riots can sometimes even contribute to overturning a government.
The greatest sources of tension are structural adjustment policies —the strings attached to IMF and World Bank financial assistance.
Although this “playbook” is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, the political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of crificism.
Interest rate increases make it more expensive for citizens to acquire loans, and currency devaluation lowers individual spending power.
In many instances, reducing state subsidies may result in drastic increases in the prices that citizens pay for basic services, such as electricity and water, or goods that were formerly subsidized, including fuel and food.
These difficulties can be further exacerbated by trade liberalization, as inefficient domestic industries are likely unable to compete with their foreign competitors.
THE IMF, WORLD BANK, AND STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT POLICIES Politically, participation in SAPs is also problematic.
Countries in the Global South may view these institutions as another manifestation of “neocolonialism,” which serves more to meet the interests of global investors and corporations rather than the needs of the citizens in the Global South.
Indeed, in many instances privatization of industries results in many large state-run companies being sold to multinational corporations from the Global North.
Flowever, studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs on their recipient states.
Although acknowledging, and currently reforming, their imperfect record, the World Bank and the IMF defend their role in the international financial system.
Pointing to successes, such as in Poland, officials note that the IMF has played a key role in helping countries recover.
Finally, political leaders may find it expedient to “scapegoat” the IMF and the World Bank, which can provide them with “cover” for enacting necessary, though unpopular, economic policies.
In addition to providing liquidity, the United States assumed a disproportionate share of the burden in rejuvenating Western Europe and Japan.
The End of Bretton Woods Although this system worked well initially, it grew overly burdensome.
By the 1960s, it had become apparent that the system would ultimately be unsustainable.
As use of the dollar—as well as the amount of dollars in circulation—continued to expand, the resulting United States balanceof-payments deficit became increasingly problematic.
Unlike other countries, the United States was not able to adjust the value of its currency because it was pegged to gold.
Simply put, although the dollar was officially “as good as gold,” the monetary reality was far different.
This left the Bretton Woods system in a tenuous position, and the United States with few options.
Such policies would have international ramifications as well because reducing the supply of dollars would damage countries that relied on the dollar for liquidity purposes.
Although some of the other major economies were willing to intervene to support the dollar, there were limits to what these countries would do, and it was widely known that the status quo was not sustainable.
The ultimate key is not economics or finance, but politics—the art of developing supportfor strong policy. —Robert Rubin, former United States secretary of the treasury Floating Exchange Rates and Financial Crises In 1971, United States President Richard Nixon cut this Gordian knot by abruptly announcing—without consulting allies—that the United States would no longer exchange dollars for gold.
With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton Woods system gave way to a system based on floating exchange rates.
Market forces, rather than government intervention, now determined currency values.
As a result, states should be forced to closely monitor their fiscal and monetary policies to avoid balance-of-payments deficits and inflation.
In the Global South, the situation was particularly grim during the 1980s and 1990s.
A massive debt crisis in Latin America, as well as unsustainable debt levels throughout the developing and transitioning economies, raised alarms throughout the global financial system.
Yet the debt picture within the developing world has improved markedly during the twentyfirst century.
Increased export performance, as well as higher prices for many of the commodities sold by these countries, similarly enhanced economic conditions.
FINANCIAL CRISES SINCE BRETTON WOODS This map shows the global distribution and frequency of systemic banking crises, a type of financial crisis, marked by significant financial distress in the banking system such as bank runs and liquidations.
Greece, for example, has perennially dealt with debt issues, and controversy still surrounds the tight fiscal policies that the country is forced to enact to reduce its debt.
These cuts have translated into massive layoffs of government employees, decreased spending on social services—including a 40 percent reduction in public health expenditures —increased taxes, and higher ages for retirement.
In addition to generating controversy, such measures have shrunk the Greek economy and increased unemployment, which stood around 26 percent.
Given the large volumes of debt, as well as the rapidity with which currencies flow across borders, conditions have been ripe for financial crises, whether due to poor government practices or the massive “boom and bust” patterns of global investment and currency markets.
To put such loss in perspective, in the absence of a financial crisis, these countries would have produced almost a quarter more goods and services.
To better understand the dynamics and far-reaching effects of financial crises, the next section focuses on the causes and effects of one of the largest financial collapses in history—the 2008 global financial crisis.
As the global economy is to a large extent still recovering from the crisis, the remainder of the chapter assesses the aftermath of the crisis and the future challenges facing the global financial system.
Demonstrators have thrown furniture, rocks, and even yogurt at police, who have responded with the widespread use of tear gas and clubs to disperse the crowds.
The Greek economy Is In a tailspin; the official unemployment rate is 27 percent overall and almost 62. percent for workers under age 25.
Indeed, frustration with such cuts was the key factor that led to the January 2015 election of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, whose Syriza party campaigned heavily against austerity.
The crisis was initially set off In December 2009 when President Papandreou “revised” his estimate of the Greek budget deficit from 6. percent of GDP to 12. percent, which severely undercut confidence in his government.
Yet many argue that the country is “too big to fail"" and that debt default will hurt markets throughout the EU as well as the rest of the world.
The role of private investment banks, such as Goldman Sachs, in this crisis has generated controversy.
Recent reports indicate that over the past decade they have helped Greece hide portions of its debt from public view through a complex array of derivatives and side deals, such as paying Greece to trade away future rights to long-term government revenues such as airport fees and lottery proceeds.
Yet such measures are legal, as there are no regulations that govern how a country handles its sovereign debt.
There were several developments that brought increased attention to the mortgage and securities markets during the beginning of the century, including massive cash holdings by states such as China and the OPEC members, the real estate boom in the United States, extremely low interest rates in the United States, and new investment instruments that banks and investment firms had created for themselves.
At the same time, the low interest rates also meant that mortgages were less expensive for United States homeowners and that businesses had access to very inexpensive loans that could be leveraged for investment purchases.
As housing prices were increasing, buying new or larger homes was a good investment.
Sensing opportunity, banks created instruments to link the “pool” of money to the housing market, by selling securities based off of the value of these mortgages to large investors.
As a result, the investors made a higher rate of return from the mortgages, homeowners reaped the benefits of lower interest rates, and everyone in this chain of economic interactions—from mortgage brokers to investment banks—made billions of dollars as intermediaries.
Moreover, as the investments were backed by houses—whose values had been steadily increasing—many of these securities were highly rated by the credit agencies.
Thus the perception was that these investments were almost as safe as a money market account.
To further service the “pool,” banks began to invent more investment instruments (essentially different ways to bundle these mortgages and securities together), and huge derivative markets based on the performance of these instruments began to emerge.
At some point in this process, the market for traditional mortgages became saturated; basically everyone who was willing and able to purchase and/or refinance a home had already done so.
Yet the “pool” continued to grow, and demand for these securities continued to increase.
Financial crises are “periods of dramatic change"" during which much of the economic and political status quo—including the competency of the state—may be called into question.
Post-crises policies may exacerbate this situation, as they commonly entail debt reduction measures, such as lower government spending and higher taxes.
The trade-off entailed with these measures is that they are recessionary and can produce a politically difficult combination of increased unemployment, higher taxes, and fewer government services.
Shown above are protestors outside Parliament in Athens, Greece, who are acting in response to the so-called austerity policies enacted in the wake of their financial crisis. pay off their mortgages.
Even if the loans defaulted, the banks would get the real estate, which was considered at the time to be an ever-appreciating asset.
For their part, investment banks continued to use a mind-boggling array of speculative instruments based off the mortgage securities, including derivatives linked to the performance of mortgage-backed securities, as well as so-called synthetic securities, which were essentially repackaged derivatives based off the derivatives based on the securities themselves.
The market for collateralized debt obligations , which functioned as de facto insurance for the mortgage-backed securities and the various derivatives, boomed.
Given the panoply of instruments and their cross purposes, for many investment banks it was a “no lose” situation—they made fees for processing all of these investment flows, and even if the securities crashed, they could still recoup their losses via the CDOs.
Thus their “bets” were effectively covered, and they stood to make a profit regardless of the actual outcome of the investment.
Investment banks further maximized their profits, as well as their exposure, through excessive use of leveraging to obtain additional investments.
As homeowners failed to repay the mortgages, banks quickly found themselves without a stream of income from mortgage holders and holding properties of declining value that they were unable to sell.
For their part, the highly-leveraged investment banks found themselves facing debt loads more than thirty times greater than their own net worth.
CHALLENGES FACING GLOBAL FINANCE Though financial crises are not new to the global financial system, the 2008 crisis had a particularly profound and broad-based impact.
The crisis drove global FDI and trade to unprecedented declines in 2009—FDI outflows fell approximately 42 percent, and world trade slipped over 12 percent.
Moreover, global markets are still recovering from the crisis, and the recovery has been fairly weak and uneven.
Yet the crisis and its aftermath also raise broader concerns that call into question some of the fundamentals of the global financial system, including the leadership of the United States and the dominance of the dollar, the relevance of commercial liberal perspectives and policies, and the governance of the global financial system.
We now turn to these issues, which figure prominently in assessing the future of global finance.
Although Germany and Ganada remained strong, the United States entered a multiyear recession.
At the same time, the Global South was much less affected by the immediate crisis and experienced rapid economic growth in the wake of the crisis.
These effects have implications for the structure of the global financial system, particularly the continued leadership of the United States.
Moreover, the United States was unable to assert leadership in the immediate wake of the 2008 crisis.
As such leadership is a facet of hegemony, the crisis also had geopolitical implications.
Most significantly, it weakened the economic power of the United States while improving the relative global position of Ghina.
The post-crisis recession in the United States also increased Ghina’s prominence as the largest holder of United States debt securities, as its share of the total United States debt increased almost 50 percent from 2008.
Doubts about United States leadership also raised questions about the continued role of the dollar as the world’s leading currency.
The dollar is still the dominant currency in the global financial system.
According to the IMF, at the end of 2013, 62 percent of all foreign exchange reserves were in dollars.
This implies that countries place a great deal of trust in the dollar, in that they use it as a store of value.
Although the value of the dollar on the world market has been stable, some of the leading economies in the world, most notably Ghina, have suggested that the dollar ultimately be replaced—or at least supplanted—as the major currency of the global marketplace.
While the euro, or even the SDR used by the IMF, have been suggested as possibilities , neither is presently a practical alternative.
Eventually, China’s rise to economic power may translate into the increasing influence of their currency.
In terms of economic fundamentals—market size and growth, trade volumes, and its status as a leading creditor state—China is poised to dominate the global economy.
Along these lines, they could potentially emerge as a hegemon, and the renminbi could become the most common reserve currency.
Despite these potential changes in the economic balance of power, the dominance of the dollar is unlikely to wane anytime soon.
Paradoxically, to a large extent the financial crisis served to increase support for the dollar.
Emerging economies, including Brazil, Taiwan, India, and particularly China, saw their foreign exchange reserves depleted as a result of the crisis.
At the same time, a key lesson of the collapse was that investments formerly thought of as “safe” were anything but—recall that many mortgage-backed securities were given the highest credit ratings.
Thus, the dollar was seen as a way to replenish reserves while avoiding risk.
Investors are also unhappy with the extremely low interest earned on United States bonds.
Yet there are two main reasons the dollar will likely continue to be the leading reserve currency.
First, given the sheer size of United States debt held by these countries, they have a vested interest in making sure that their investment remains safe.
Although the low interest rate and worries about the United States economy are concerns, the dollar is ultimately more desirable than the euro and more accessible than the renminbi.
Although the open exchanges of currencies and free movement of capital are viewed as foundational to liberal economics, the financial crisis has undercut basic beliefs regarding the efficacy of the marketplace.
Though globalization is generally related to positive outcomes such as economic growth and development , in this instance the countries that fared better were the ones that were less integrated into the financial system.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigl reserve currency Currency held in large amounts by governments for the purpose of setting international debts and supporting the value of their national currency. and/or eChapter. its restrictions require it.
Interestingly, Moldova, a very small country with a rather primitive “cash-only system” of finance—banks and credit cards are largely nonexistent and savings are generally stored under mattresses or in drawers—was ranked by a leading financial journal as the fifth most stable economy in the world the year after the crisis.
In the wake of the crisis, Roger Altman, a former United States Treasury Department official, remarked, “the long movement towards market liberalization has stopped,” and “globalization itself is reversing.
Foundational to this perspective is the efficacy of free markets, with minimal intervention—either regulatory or economic—from the state.
Regarding neoliberal policies, the crisis served to undermine both the inherent trust in the market as well as the purported benefits of minimal state intervention.
One of the factors that led to the crisis was a lack of adequate regulatory structures over the financial institutions, as well as their neglect of the new investment instruments that had emerged.
State responses to the crisis, specifically the prevalence of austerity measures, also called into question the utility of a minimal state, in this case a state that is less willing to use its fiscal and monetary tools to directly invest in the global economy.
The general idea is that reducing state spending will allow for increased private investment for two reasons—businesses will be heartened by the smaller budget deficits that accompany reductions in government spending, and the smaller amount of state spending will no longer “crowd out” private investment.
The end product is an improved business environment as well as balanced budgets.
In the wake of the crisis, several European countries, including Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, Spain, and to a lesser extent the United Kingdom, implemented these policies, instituting massive budget cuts in hopes of reducing their budget deficits and thus spurring economic growth.
However, most analysts argue that these policies were counterproductive.
Not only were the sometimes draconian cuts politically unpopular—Greek Finance Minister Giannis Varoufakis referred to it as “fiscal waterboarding”—but they failed to reduce budget deficits.
Indeed, as economist Martin Wolf bluntly concluded “Austerity has failed.
Problems with austerity demonstrate the dangers of applying a common policy solution to financial situations that may be different as well as the dilemmas inherent in balancing fiscal and monetary policy tools.
More broadly, they also demonstrate the difficult nature of determining how active a state should be in its economy.
States thus find themselves in a double bind as they balance the somewhat contradictory needs to “unleash creative capitalism and ... intervene directly to make certain markets work optimally” to attain broader societal goals.
Overall, the widespread support of neoliberal policies has certainly become more qualified, and many are arguing that we are currently witnessing the emergence of a “new heterogeneity” as policy makers look to multiple ways to manage their economies.
Though precise definitions of this consensus vary (Ferchen, 2013), it is generally portrayed as a more developmental and pragmatic approach in which the state plays a much heavier role in the marketplace and is particularly mindful of the distributional effects of its policies.
Regarding alternate theories of world politics, the crisis and its aftermath revealed strengths in perspectives critical of commercial liberalism.
Marxists have long noted the inherent instability of capitalism, its susceptibility to speculative panics, and the need for strong state intervention in the financial system.
For their part, feminist scholars note the gendered nature of the crisis, specifically that males are primarily responsible for the crisis, and that the predominantly male culture in finance is an impediment to meaningful reform.
The banking sector of the economy remains driven by males , and traditionally “male” traits—risk taking, aggression, and hypercompetitiveness—were driving factors behind the speculative surges that helped to create the financial crisis.
Indeed, some argue that an artifact of this culture has been the “capture” of regulators by the banks that they are supposed to regulate.
Pictured right is Christine Lagarde, a former French minister of finance, who is the first woman to serve as managing director of the IMF. the regulators are bullied and intimidated by the banks to the extent that they fail to hold them accountable.
Along these lines, the post-crisis behavior of the banks shows that— despite the widespread impacts of their failures—little has changed.
There were decidedly gendered elements in the responses of the bank leaders—who were exclusively male— to female investigators.
For her part, Warren noted that it “was not an accident” that none of the major banks were led by women.
Regarding her expertise in the area, she noted that “The finance guys argue that if you’re never in the club, you can’t understand it, but 1 think they have it backward.
In the next section, we assess how states and the extant financial institutions handled the crisis, and consider some of the major suggestions made for reforming the global financial architecture.
Yet, ultimately, the major economies were, at the least, able to avoid another Great Depression.
Drezner argues that the system worked, as global trade did not implode and capital markets were able to provide liquidity to counteract the immediate effects of the crisis.
At the same time, the reaction to the crisis was somewhat ad hoc, and to a large extent represented a series of individual state responses rather than a coordinated effort at recovery.
The increased prominence of the G-20—a much more inclusive group of states than the G-7—was noteworthy for its incorporation of the emerging economies, but the most important function of the group was as a common forum for discussion.
Thus, despite the revolutionary nature of the crisis itself, the reaction was quite conventional.
Viewed in light of the response, the “crisis was a strangely conservative event” that threatened, though ultimately did not change, the status quo.
Indeed, the systemic factors that allowed the crisis to occur are still in existence.
Given these potential problems, various suggestions have been made for reforming the international financial architecture.
Some argue that the banking system itself—specifically their use of leveraging—is fundamentally flawed, and that much higher global standards for capital should be required.
As for the financial institutions, there has been no shortage of criticisms of the IMF, including its policies as well as the internal practices of the institution, such as its underrepresentation of emerging economies.
For its part, the IMF is aware of the widespread criticism of its policies and practices, and it has made substantial efforts at reform in the aftermath of the crisis.
The IMF also increased emerging country representation on its board, and moved that all board members should be elected.
Although most analysts view these changes with optimism , there is still much to do.
Flowever, as is often the case with international law, the IMF and the other financial institutions are ultimately constrained by the willingness of their members to act.
That is, the more expansive powers that many economists—and the IMF leadership—recommend, such as regulation of banks and investment instruments, can only happen if the member states exert the political will necessary to resolve these issues in a collaborative fashion.
The politics surrounding the IMF reforms demonstrate the problems with such willingness.
Though the IMF board of directors approved the reforms in 2010, the United States Congress has still not approved the funding levels for the new IMF quota.
Given the frustrations with the existing international institutions, as well as the changing balance of economic power, regional development banks have started to emerge as alternatives.
In 2014 the BRIGS countries launched the New Development Bank , pledging $50 billion in startup capital to be devoted to “sustainable development” projects in BRIGS countries.
Thus far the United States has tried to dissuade other major countries from joining, arguing that the AIIB may undercut environmental standards and will compete against the IMF and World Bank.
The founding of the NDB and AIIB was driven in no small part by frustration with the existing system, particularly at the perceived underrepresentation of the emerging economies.
Chinese leadership in both these ventures is also significant, as it evidences its increased power and assertiveness in the global financial order.
Political motivations aside, there are potential advantages to regional banks.
First, they could function as a “lender of last resort” that could be “better placed to coordinate economic actions” given their proximity to the country in need of relief Ideally, they could work alongside the IMF or the World Bank to resolve problems.
Along those lines, it may be the case that a regional body could be better suited to help troubled countries maintain their credit ratings, as they are better situated to use informal pressure, rather than strict conditionality measures, to encourage countries to service their debts.
In this picture, taken January 15,1998, Indonesian President Suharto signs an agreement for a $43 billion assistance and reform package, while IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus looks on.
It was also an economic and public relations disaster for the IMF, helping to solidify negative opinions of the IMF within the developing world . to foster a regional identity—unlike the IMF and World Bank, they would not be perceived as being driven by a few developed countries.
Efforts also have been made to develop regional funds in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East.
Although regional banks represent a “challenge to the existing global economic order” , they could potentially supplement the efforts of the IMF and the World Bank in seeking financial stability and economic growth.
Though such organizations may prove useful in helping countries to respond to financial difficulties, many of the factors underlying the instability of the global financial system persist.
Though the system passed the “stress test” of the 2008 crisis, it was hardly a bloodless victory, and many countries are still struggling with its aftermath.
The debate over currency and monetary policies will remain as intense as ever, while global finance becomes increasingly complex and interconnected.
Further adding to this turbulence is the related, and contentious, arena of international trade.
A blog by the Council on Foreign Relations featuring graphs regarding geo-economic issues.
How Web Resources Globalization Creates Systemic Risks, and What to Do About It.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos * Globalization * International Monetary System Additional Videos • Cassidy, John.
Coca-Cola—one of the most recognizable brands in the world—illustrates this, with over 1. billion servings consumed daily.
Shown here are some of its products in China, which is one of its most important growth markets.
The downside of globalized international trade has been brought home, and the quality of your life is declining.
You learn that scholars also hold competing views about the consequences of the globalization of international trade.
To construct an objective evaluation of these rival interpretations, consider leading ideas about various trade policies rooted in past thinking.
However, the best place to start is by identifying emerging trends in the globalization of international trade.
Evidence of global trade is as close to you as the clothes you wear and the coffee you drink.
Fortunately, a relatively straightforward index provides insights into the degree of trade integration in the world economy.
Although the general trend is toward greater integration, countries differ in the degree to which their economies participate in global commerce.
Global trade integration has become most rapid as a result of the increasing participation of the Global South in world trade, which, in turn, fuels economic growth in the Global North.
The Global South’s share of global exports grew from 10 percent in 1980 to 44 percent in 2013 , fueled predominantly by Asia’s growth in the share of new export products.
THE GROWTH OF GLOBAL TRADE INTEGRATION 2007-2016 When the annual percentage change in the volume of world trade grows faster than the annual growth rate of the combined world economy, ""trade integration"" increases.
However, in 2009 world trade declined dramatically, by 12. percent, a casualty of the 2008 global financial crisis.
The 2010 rebound was just as dramatic, with a 13. percent surge in export volume.
However, the spread of information technology, the ease with which new business software can be used, and the comparatively lower wage costs in developing economies are among the many reasons the World Bank predicts that developing countries will capture an increasing share of world trade in services.
Countries with significant numbers of educated, English-speaking citizens, such as India, are already operating call centers and consumer assistance hotlines for Global North companies.
However, globalization is a multifaceted phenomenon, encompassing a variety of often interrelated actions.
There is a close relationship between trade and the global financial markets, as exchange rates set the values for traded goods, and capital flows are often necessary to finance these commercial activities.
Understanding these components of globalization, as well as their relationship with trade, is important to understanding the complex world economy.
Global interdependence today means that economic disasters in developing countries could create a backlash on developed countries. —Atal Bihari Vajpayee, former prime minister of India Trade, Multinational Corporations, and the Globalization of Production Selling products to consumers in another country often requires companies to establish a presence abroad, where they can produce goods and offer services.
Traditionally, the overseas operations of multinational corporations were “appendages” of a centralized hub.
Made feasible by the revolution in communication and transportation, production facilities are located around the world.
Every Dell computer that is sold is, in effect, generating trade between nine different countries.
Trade is no longer viewed as a bilateral interaction but as part of a broader, multicountry chain of production and commerce.
It once made sense to count trade in terms of flows between countries, and that practice continues because national account statistics are still gathered using states as the unit of analysis.
Altogether MNCs are now responsible for about one-fourth of the world’s production and two-thirds of global exports.
Thomas Friedman even goes so far as to offer a ""Dell Theory"" of conflict prevention, which posits that states that are part of common major supply chains are less likely to go to war. affiliates.
As they facilitate large commercial flows across national borders, these global conglomerates are also integrating national economies into the worldwide market.
In short, foreign direct investment affects global identities as well as global trade.
Although the ultimate effects of FDI are controversial , many agree that the globalization of production will only increase.
FDI flows—the amount of new investment entering a country in a given year—increased one-hundred-fold from 1970 to 2000, and peaked at over $1. trillion in 2007.
Developing countries are increasingly the recipients of investments from abroad.
Between 1995 and 2014, net inflows of FDI to developing countries increased almost sevenfold, from $98 billion to over $681 billion.
The Global South countries are also investing outside of their own borders.
Between 1995 and 2007, global foreign direct investment increased roughly sixfold, from about $350 billion to a record $1.98 trillion.
This was followed by a sharp decline in global FDI in 2008 and 2009, due to the worldwide financial crisis.
Shown on the right are the most popular FDI destinations in 2013 and 2014, based on the volume of FDI inflows.
A particularly controversial strategy is corporate inversion, a form of restructuring in which a multinational corporation purchases a smaller corporation and then declares the smaller one to be their “parent” company, thus moving its headquarters to the other country.
As financial journalist Allan Sloan noted, firms “take advantage of the great things that make America America,” including its infrastructure, rule of law, and consumer market, while avoiding paying the taxes that help to fund the system.
The globalization of production is thus inextricably linked to the globalization of labor.
The globalization of labor has emerged as a result of related changes in the world economy and global demographics.
As evident from the growing volume of global FDI, an increasing amount of productive capital is mobile and can readily change locations according to the firm’s desires as well as the perceived advantages of prospective host countries.
Businesses are increasingly able to use labor from multiple countries and to switch locations when conditions change.
By 2011, the total global labor force was 3.31 billion people, having increased more than fourfold since 1980.
Gomparing these two figures reveals that the mobility of labor, although substantial, is far less than the mobility of capital, as only a small portion of the overall labor pool actually relocates to another country.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ corporate Inversion The relocation of corporate headquarters to another country, usually for the purpose of reduoing tax payments. globalization of labor Integration of labor markets, predicated by the global nature of production as well as the increased size and mobility of the global labor force. and/or eChapter.
Yet outsourcing in higher-skill industry areas—from information technology to legal research—is also prominent.
In Gurgaon, India, for example, lawyer Ritu Solanki earns $50 an hour working for a legal-outsourcing company to draft contracts and legal memos.
By comparison, a London law firm would likely charge up to $400 an hour for the same type of work.
Because of this, law firms and corporate legal departments are beginning to look to outsourcing as a way to cut costs.
Though the simple logic of supply and demand—that increased labor supply serves to lower the “price” of labor—bodes poorly for wage levels, it oversimplifies the situation by treating labor as a relatively homogeneous and interchangeable good.
Such a view ignores a key factor in business decisions—labor productivity.
For example, it would not make sense for a corporation to move to a place where labor is 50 percent less expensive if the productivity of that labor is 75 percent less than the current labor force, as such a move would result in a net increase in operating expenses.
Bringing this to bear on outsourcing—which involves corporate use of gaps in wages across countries to maximize profitability—there is evidence that the practice is becoming less effective.
In addition to differences in productivity across countries, some firms are beginning to rediscover the advantages of producing goods close to where they are ultimately sold, as higher labor costs may be offset by other factors such as lower inventory requirements, quicker customer service, lower transport costs, and lower risk of supply chain interruptions.
Similar trends are apparent in service industries, particularly the high-tech sector.
Technology firms such as IBM and HP led the outsourcing charge during the 1980s and 1990s, moving such services as data management, call centers, and software assistance abroad.
Yet in addition to some of the issues faced in manufacturing, service industries have “become keener to the social and political ramifications of outsourcing” , particularly consumer backlash from the practice.
As a result, outsourcing is on the decline across many industrial sectors, and the practice of near-sourcing is on the rise.
Further supporting these trends, there is evidence that the gap between labor costs across countries may be lessening.
As skill and education levels, and thus productivity, have increased in the Global South, countries that have traditionally been abundant sources of cheap labor have seen sharp increases in labor costs over the past few years.
To the extent that rising wages connote the expansion of a middle class in the Global South, such trends offer support for the liberal economic perspective that global commerce—despite its disruptive effects in the short term—may lead to development and economic prosperity in the long run.
That said, empirical studies of this issue indicate that globalization is problematic for lowskilled labor, which is more readily interchangeable across countries.
Yet even though some workers may face lower wages, globalization acts to increase the purchasing power of these workers.
In concordance with liberal economic theory, global commerce enables consumers to purchase a greater selection of goods at lower prices than would be the case without globalization.
Indeed, an IMF study found that though globalization had lowered the wage levels in some states, the losses were offset by increases in their purchasing power.
A similar dynamic occurs between the globalization of labor and labor rights.
In this case the concern is that competition for capital and the increased supply of labor could have an adverse effect on labor rights, including the right to form unions and to legal protections from morally questionable labor practices such as the use of child labor and slave labor.
Anecdotal evidence about “sweatshops” and the repression of union rights in the name of profit abound; companies as varied as Unocal, Walt Disney, Nike, and Apple have suffered embarrassment and financial costs for their associations with poor labor practices.
STRUGGLES WITH GLOBALIZATION After decades of communist rule, Vietnam has opened up to the global economy, enjoying rapid growth since 1990.
This is particularly the case among the female labor force, which provides a majority of the labor in light-manufacturing industries.
Though most studies have found globalization of production and the globalization of labor to be—on balance— positive developments for societies, the gains have not been spread equally across or within societies.
Yet whatever the overall relationship between globalization and social well-being, fears about globalization persist.
Though it creates winners and losers, the negative consequences of globalization—companies outsourcing their work or using child labor—are quite visible and strike people profoundly.
Alternatively, the gains from globalization, such as less expensive products and the gradual diffusion of technologies, are often unnoticed as their benefits are widely dispersed and shared by all.
Thus, though globalization may be good for societies as a whole, the losers of globalization attract much more attention than the winners.
As we will see, similar dynamics are apparent in many of the controversies surrounding trade policy.
Here, a child labors under hazardous conditions and at extremely low wages in Bangladesh, producing goods that cost less than those made where labor unions protect workers.
Although some neoliberal reforms, such as those associated with IMF and World Bank programs, are damaging to labor rights (Blanton, Blanton, and Peksen, 2015), other aspects of globalization may be more amenable to labor.
Moreover, increased foreign investment has been found to be related to decreased 11 2 CONTENDING TRADE STRATEGIES International trade is a far-reaching and hotly debated dimension of globalization, and the differing sides of the trade debates each offer their own set of policy prescriptions.
Over the course of the next three years, the leaders founded the liberal economic order based around convertible currencies and free trade.
The basic mission of the GATT was to encourage free trade among countries by reducing trade barriers and serving as a common forum for resolving trade disputes.
Reciprocity calls for the mutual lowering of trade barriers, so countries that lowered their tariffs could expect their trading partners to do the same.
According to the nondiscrimination principle, all members have the same level of access to the markets of other member states.
In practice, nondiscrimination had two specific forms, the most-favored nation principle and national treatment.
National treatment means that foreign goods are treated the same as domestic goods, and that countries are not able to enact policies, such as taxes or other regulations, to give their domestic products any advantage over foreign products.
Finally, the GATT called for transparency in trade policy, meaning that trade regulations and barriers need to be clearly articulated.
In a series of successive meetings, or “rounds,” held from 1947 to 1994, the average tariff levels were lowered from 40 percent to just below 5 percent.
COMMUNIST CHINA CHOOSES TO CONVERT TO CAPITALISM AND CONSUMERISM Shown here is one example of China's growing consumerism: a view of the huge South China Mall in Dongguan, the world’s biggest shopping center.
China has now long embraced America's ""shop-'til-you-drop"" ethos and is overtaking the United States in many areas of consumer spending . www.cssbooks.net /ed.
This dispute settlement mechanism gave the WTO the ability to enforce its rules, and the WTO has settled hundreds of disputes among its members since 1994.
Although liberalization has spread as a policy principle around the world (Simmons, Dobbin, and Garrett, 2006), not all states consistently support the liberal tenet that governments should not actively manage trade flows.
Indeed, commercial liberalism is under attack in many states, including some of liberalism’s supposed proponents, which are under domestic pressure to protect industries and employment at home.
The choices force governments to reconcile the overriding need for state cooperation in liberalizing trade if they are to maximize their wealth with each state’s natural competitive desire to put its own welfare first.
Many controversies in the international political economy are ultimately reducible to differences between liberalism and mercantilism.
Commercial Liberalism Commercial liberalism proceeds from the idea that humans are naturally inclined to cooperate.
Thus, progress through mutually beneficial exchanges is possible, both to increase prosperity and to enlarge individual liberty under the law.
In commercial liberalism, economic activity can contribute to global welfare, and the major problems of capitalism (boomand-bust cycles, trade wars, poverty, and income inequalities) can be managed.
One of the globe’s “great causes” is to promote free international trade to lift the poor from poverty and to expand political liberties.
Adam Smith laid the foundations for commercial liberalism in 1776 when he wrote the nowclassic The Wealth of Nations.
In it, he argued how the “invisible hand” of an unregulated market, guided by humanity’s natural tendency to “truck, barter, and exchange” in pursuit of private interest, could serve the globe’s collective, or public, interest by creating efficiency and gains.
Key Differences between Liberalism and Mercantilism Liberalism Mercantilism | Economic Relations | Harmonious Conflictual | Major Actors | Households, firms States 1 Goal of Economic Activity | Maximize global welfare Serve the national interest Priority of Economics vs.
Regarding trade between states, the key concept Smith fostered was the idea of absolute advantage, the belief that countries should produce goods in which their cost of production is lowest in comparison with other countries.
David Ricardo, an eighteenth-century political economist, addressed this issue with his concept of comparative advantage.
In other words, a country should focus on the production of goods that it produces comparatively cheaply, rather than other goods that it could conceivably produce but only at a relatively higher cost.
This was a profound concept with important implications for liberal theory as well as the discipline of economics.
For our purposes, comparative advantage shows that trade benefits all parties that partake in it.
This principle is the basis for commercial liberalism’s claim that free trade will enable all countries to achieve economic progress together.
Clearly, China has an absolute advantage in both products, as its workers are more productive at producing both textiles and automobiles than American workers.
Viewing the first column in terms of opportunity cost, the “cost” of China producing each additional automobile is three units of textiles.
Alternatively, by producing one less automobile, China can produce three more units of textiles.
However, it only “costs” the United States two units of textiles for each additional automobile, and the United States only gains two units of textiles by producing one less automobile.
Put another way, though the United States is at a disadvantage in the production of both goods, its disadvantage is comparatively less in automobiles.
The remaining scenarios show specifically how trade can benefit each country by enabling it to further specialize in producing the good in which it has a comparative advantage.
The fourth column shows how both countries can then benefit from trade.
If we permit trade between the two countries, then eighty units of textiles are sold or exported to the United States, and thirty United States automobiles are exported to China.
By shifting Chinese resources into textiles, United States resources into automobiles, and allowing trade, the same total allocations will cause both textile and automobile output to increase by ten units each.
Resources are now being used more efficiently and both countries benefit—China ends up with more textiles than before specialization and trade, and with the same number of automobiles.
The United States finds itself with more automobiles and the same number of textiles.
Achieving greater output with the same number of workers means that both countries enjoy higher living standards.
The assumption implicit in liberalism is that markets succeed according to their own logic.
For liberals, minimal state regulation of the national economy will maximize growth and prosperity.
The best government is one that stays out of business, and politics should be separate from the economic market.
Although liberal theory promises that the “invisible hand” will maximize efficiency so that everyone will gain, it does not promise that everyone will gain equally.
The gains from international trade are distributed quite unequally, even if the states are acting in accordance with comparative advantage.
Mercantilism Mercantilism is essentially an economic extension of realist thinking.
Classic mercantilists viewed gold and silver accumulation as the route to state power and wealth, and advocated imperialism as a means to that end.
In the early nineteenth century, what we now call mercantilism emerged largely as a response to the rise of liberalism.
Indeed, one of the leading mercantilist works, Friedrich List’s National System of Political Economy, can be seen as a direct critique of Smith’s The Wealth of Nations.
Although economic nationalists draw from some of the core ideas of liberalism, such as the importance of productivity, the benefits of specialization, and the efficiency of the marketplace, they draw a different set of political conclusions.
Such industrialization would thus increase the “diversity of talents” in the country and, as a result, industrial capabilities would more readily convert to military might.
Since some specializations are superior to others, states can encourage the development of certain industries by subsidizing them and “protecting” them from foreign competition.
Whereas commercial liberals emphasize the mutual benefits of cooperative economic agreements, mercantilists focus on zero-sum competition and are therefore more concerned that the gains realized by one party in a trade exchange will come at the expense of the other trade partner.
They view free trade as an acceptable practice for a powerful country, in that it often serves to solidify that country’s power.
In many instances, practicing liberal trade can undermine national security and long-term economic development.
Indeed, as mercantilists point out, powerful countries who profess liberal ideals, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom, were quite protectionist when their industries were developing.
United States President Abraham Lincoln was an ardent protectionist who doubted the benefits of international trade and viewed tariffs as a way to protect the United States industrial base.
He succinctly noted that his “politics are short and sweet, like the old woman’s dance.
I am in favor of a national bank... and a high protective tariff” In short, “hile American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire.
After it had grown strong, the United States began preaching laissez-faire to the rest of the world” . m3 TRADE AND GLOBAL POLITICS public good Collective goods, such as clean air or sunlight, whose use is nonexclusive and nonrival in nature; thus, if anyone can use the good, it is available to all. collective action dilemma Paradox regarding the provision of collective goods in which, if there is no accountability for paying the costs of maintaining or providing the good, it may cease to exist Trade plays a central role in the global system.
At the systemic level, one of the most influential theories of global trade is hegemonic stability theory.
Hegemonic stability theory, which is also used in theories of global conflict (see Chapter 7), is based on the proposition that free trade and international peace depend upon a single predominant great power, or hegemon, that is willing and able to use its economic and military might to enforce rules for international interaction.
A hegemon is much more than a powerful state; rather, it refers to an instance in which a single state has a preponderance of economic and military power, a dominant ideology shared by the world, and the willingness to exert its power and influence.
The underlying assumption of hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a collective or public good in that it provides shared benefits from which no one can be excluded.
This is due to the problematic nature of providing public goods, or the collective action dilemma.
First, although a public good generates benefits, there are certain costs associated with providing or maintaining it.
If the benefit has a large group of potential recipients, it is not possible to hold any single party accountable for paying its portion of the cost to provide this good.
If we assume that the actors are rational, then they would seek to enjoy the good as free riders that reap the benefits without paying any of the cost.
Some, however, may try to come and enjoy the benefits of the park without pitching in.
If enough people realize that they can get away with this—that they can enjoy a beautiful park without helping to maintain it—it will not be long before the once beautiful park looks shabby.
If even this basic form of cooperation is hard to sustain, imagine the difficulties in perpetuating cooperation in the international system.
The same logic applies to the collective good of the liberal international economy.
Because many states enjoy the collective good of an orderly, open, free-market economy, there are often free riders.
A hegemon, however, may tolerate free riders, partly because the benefits that the hegemon provides, such as a stable global currency, encourage other states to accept the hegemons dictates.
Moreover, the hegemon may view maintaining the system as worthwhile, even if it bears a disproportionate share of the cost.
If the costs of leadership begin to multiply, however, a hegemon tends to become less tolerant of free riders.
In such a situation, cooperation is increasingly seen as one-sided, or zerosum, because most of the benefits come at the expense of the hegemon.
The open global economy could then crumble amid a competitive race for individual gain at others’ expense.
The theory is thus quite parsimonious in that it explains very broad political and economic trends on the basis of one condition—hegemonic leadership.
Although theorists may disagree about how many instances of hegemony have existed throughout history, there is widespread agreement about the most recent case—the United States during the post-World War II period.
In 1949 Chiang Kai-shek and his party, the Kuomintang , lost the Chinese Civil War and retreated from Mainland China to Taiwan with one to two million followers and troops.
Since then, Taiwan has exercised de facto, if not de jure, sovereignty in international affairs.
Ever since it lost its status as a recognized member of the United Nations in 1971, Taiwan has long sought broad international recognition as a sovereign state.
For its part, China views Taiwan as a “breakaway province” that is rightfully a part of China.
The Chinese emphatically adhere to the “One China"" principle—that there is only one Chinese nation, of which Taiwan is a part.
As such, any formal declaration of Taiwanese independence is viewed as an act of war.
In 2005 China passed an Anti-Secession Law, which formalized this long-standing commitment to use “nonpeaceful means” if Taiwan declares formal independence.
Given these fundamental political differences, relations between China and Taiwan, or “Cross-Strait” relations, have been tarnished with suspicion and hostility.
In 1958, China bombarded several offshore islands that are part of Taiwan, which nearly brought the United States, a close military ally of Taiwan, into war with China.
Before Taiwan’s first democratic elections in 1996, China test-fired missiles near two major Taiwanese ports, again risking military hostilities with both Taiwan and the United States.
President Clinton responded by deploying aircraft carrier battle groups in the area.
Yet at the same time, the economies of China and Taiwan have become ever-more closely integrated.
China is currently Taiwan's largest trading partner, responsible for 21. percent of Taiwan's total trade volume, and Taiwan ranks as China’s fifth largest trading partner.
China and Taiwan signed an agreement liberalizing the services trade in 2013, which is still waiting ratification by the Taiwanese parliament.
From the theoretical viewpoint of liberalism, we would expect that economic interdependence may be reducing the probability of military conflict between the two countries.
Given the close integration between both sides, any military conflict would be very costly to both countries, as it would damage large portions ot both economies.
Moreover, economic ties serve to empower business interests that have a vested concern in maintaining peaceful relations between the two countries.
Finaily, economic interdependence provides each country with a means to engage in “costly signaling,’’ that is, a way to have conflicts through economic rather than poiitical means.
There is some evidence that relations have improved between the two countries.
Thus, key political issues remain unresolved, even in the face of economic integration.
Furthermore, rising tensions about territorial claims in the South China Sea may embroil Taiwan and China in conflict.
These payoffs notwithstanding, states still have many reasons to try to increase their own domestic standard of living through trade protectionism.
Some states feel as though free trade is neither free nor fair because it does not benefit everyone equally.
Although the overall trend is toward increased liberalization, many states remain unwilling to open their domestic markets to foreign competition because they are also unwilling to reform their home markets.
Although governments may face political pressure to close off their economies, such policies frequently have negative consequences.
Economically closed countries tend to be the poorest and the most corrupt.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM IN THE WORLD Economic liberals and mercantilists portray two different visions of international economics, one in which the market has virtually free reign and the other in which the state actively intervenes to regulate and manipulate market forces.
This map depicts economic freedom as measured by the 2015 Index of Economic Freedom.
By using measures across ten economic areas, including government policies on trade, labor, investment, and property rights, the Economic Freedom Index assesses the extent to which countries promote competition, individual empowerment, and nondiscrimination.
These patterns underscore the influence of a state’s internal conditions on its international economic policies, and suggest that the future preservation of a global free-trade regime may be compromised in the absence of increasing numbers of free governments and free economies.
Trade can also function as a foreign policy tool for states, and it is readily used as both a “carrot” and a “stick” in interstate relations.
Trade ties, and granting of preferential access to markets, are commonly established with developing countries as a way to help them compete in the global market and thereby achieve economic growth.
Leading examples include the WTO’s Generalized System of Preferences, which exempts developing countries from some of the nondiscrimination and reciprocity principles of the organization; the Lome Convention, which gives seventy-one developing countries preferential access to the EU markets; and the African Growth and Opportunities Act, which gives sub-Saharan African countries duty-free access to the United States market.
Economic sanctions — deliberate actions against a target country to deprive it of the benefits of economic relations—are the most common way that trade can be used as a “stick” for coercive diplomacy.
Sanctions are used frequently and have proliferated rapidly since the end of the Cold War.
Politically, sanctions are an expedient tool because they are relatively easy to enact and are viewed as largely “cost free” by the sender country.
A considerable amount of research has been devoted to sanctions, and most scholars are skeptical of their utility as a strategic tool.
First, sanctions “are seldom effective in impairing the military potential” of their targets and are rarely successful as a substitute for warfare.
Although they have little effect on the regimes of targeted countries, sanctions can impose significant costs on their citizens.
To minimize such humanitarian concerns, policy makers have started to use more narrowly targeted sanctions, known as “smart sanctions,” which they try to focus more closely on specific elements of the target country, such as freezing assets or only stopping strategically significant commerce like arms shipments, rather than all economic relations.
Although the overall verdict on sanctions is quite negative, research does point out some complexities on the potential use of sanctions as a policy tool.
By focusing only on strategically motivated sanctions that are enacted, the number of cases examined is limited, which could lead to results that understate the actual effectiveness of sanctions.
Policy makers have a variety of tools at their disposal, all of which have costs and benefits.
Stated policy goals, particularly strategic goals such as territorial concessions or regime change, may be too costly to carry out.
In such cases, sanctions may be used as a symbol that a given country is “doing something,” even if it is not likely to achieve its goal.
Shown here, leaders of the G-7 states discuss sanctions imposed against Russia for its 2014 intervention in Ukraine.
Though the sanctions have damaged the Russian economy , their impact on Russian policy is hard to ascertain.
Yet arguments for protectionism still resonate, feeding in part off societal feelings of insecurity about the global economy.
Such arguments are particularly tempting in times of economic downturn, as foreign trade makes a ready target for blame.
Even in many economically open countries, there is skepticism regarding trade liberalization efforts.
Thus, before assessing current issues facing the world trading order, it is helpful to develop an understanding of the “trade tricks” countries can use to influence trade flows.
However, free trade is politically less attractive than mercantilism because of the nature of the costs and benefits that accompany free trade.
Yet these benefits, particularly the consumer gains from imports, are spread throughout an entire society and are often not noticed.
For example, although foreign trade may enable you to save $10 on a sweatshirt, you are probably unaware that imports are the reason behind your savings.
There is thus little incentive to politically organize in the interests of imports—if you discovered that the price of sweatshirts had risen by $10, you probably would not take the time to organize “pro-import” protest marches.
It is quite common, for example, to hear about plants closing and people losing jobs due to competition with cheaper imports.
This section explains some of these policy tools, all of which fall under the broad rubric oi protectionism —policies designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition.
Although average tariff levels have greatly decreased due to WTO agreements and intervention, they are still occasionally employed.
For example, in 2002 President George W Bush imposed tariffs ranging from 8 percent to 30 percent on steel imports.
Hence the government, rather than the marketplace, determined the amount and source of imports.
Exporting countries are willing to accept such restrictions in exchange for concessions from the would-be importing countries.
It originated in the early 1960s, when the United States formalized voluntary export restrictions with Japan and Hong Kong to protect domestic producers from cheap cotton imports.
These cover a wide range of creative government regulations designed to shelter particular domestic industries from foreign competition, including health and safety regulations, government purchasing procedures, and subsidies.
Antidumping duties counter competitors’ sale of products below their cost of production.
For example, in March 2015, Indonesia filed a suit with the WTO over countervailing duties on paper products imposed by the United States, which the United States argued were in response to Indonesian dumping of these products.
A notable example of this strategy is Airbus, a European company that builds wide-bodied airplanes.
The company was founded in large part by France, Germany, and the United Kingdom, and has been heavily subsidized during much of its existence.
Although economic liberalism is based on free trade, realist theory helps to account for the state’s impulse to pursue mercantilist policies.
The Uneasy Coexistence of Liberalism and Mercantilism Given the political advantages of mercantilism, states often have a hard time resisting the calls of domestic industries and interest groups for protection.
They do so even if, according to liberalism, their relations with their trade partners will deteriorate and all will suffer in the long run, as trade partners retaliate with the many clever and innovative counter-protectionist strategic trade policy Government support for particular domestic industries to help them gain competitive advantages over foreign producers. actions.
Such a paradoxical approach to trade policy reflects the state’s determination to reap the benefits of interdependence while minimizing costs.
The absence of a world government encourages each state to be more concerned with how it fares as compared to other states—its relative gains—than collectively with its absolute gains.
America’s trade competitors have long noted that the United States, the principal advocate of free trade in the post-World War II era, has often failed to live up to its own rhetoric.
There are various ways in which the United States uses its foreign economic tools to intervene in global trade markets and subsidize its own economy.
The specific ways in which aid may be tied are complex and may vary with the type of aid, and the political power of the industry that dispenses the aid.
According to United States law, 75 percent of United States food aid has to be shipped on United States vessels, of which 75 percent of the crew are United States citizens.
Also a sizeable portion of food aid is simply “monetized”; that is, the government buys the food directly from farmers, sells it to other countries, and then donates the proceeds to international charities.
Such processes reveal a mercantilist nature, as they turn foreign aid into a de facto subsidy for domestic corporations.
Security goals also figure into United States trade liberalization efforts.
The African Growth and Opportunities Act has been particularly contentious in this regard.
A key assumption of liberalism is that the state should step aside and let the ""invisible hand” of the marketplace operate as freely as possible.
Yet the economic reality is much more ""hands on"" because states take an active role in supporting many industries.
Shown here are several Boeing officials as well as two United States senators in a ""ground-breaking"" ceremony at a new Boeing factory in Everett, Washington.
The state of Washington gave Boeing $8. billion in tax breaks to encourage the company to locate there.
Additionally, although overall tariff levels in the United States are lower than those in the developing world, the United States, like the rest of the developed countries, still protects several key sectors, most notably agriculture.
Such mercantilist tactics are damaging to the liberal trade regime, given United States liberal rhetoric and its stature as the globe’s leading economic superpower.
This is particularly troubling for developing countries, as they often have very powerful agricultural sectors as well.
The gap between the ideals and the actions of the Global North also brings back vestiges of colonialism and past hypocrisy on the part of the rich countries.
To free-trade liberals, as well as Marxists, the trade game is rigged by the routine and lucrative corruption known as “rent-seeking,” in which governments impose handicaps on competitors.
To better assess this key issue, we next examine the progression of the liberal trade order, as well as the current issues it faces.
The Development of the WTO Although it is difficult to maintain a liberal trade regime, and there are problems with the global trading system, it has a better developed architecture than the global financial system.
It does not set broad-based, enforceable rules and practices for global financial flows.
The GATT/WTO has had a rather tumultuous and uneven history and has been criticized for its lack of progress throughout its existence.
Yet to paraphrase Mark Twain, rumors of the institution’s death have been “greatly exaggerated,” and the WTO soldiers on.
During the Bretton Woods era, successive meetings of the GATT were very successful in cutting tariffs.
The initial Geneva Round of negotiations in 1947 reduced tariffs by 35 percent, and successive rounds of negotiations in the 1950s, 1960s , 1970s , and the 1980s and 1990s virtually eliminated tariffs on manufactured goods.
The Doha Round, which officially began in 2002, has a very ambitious agenda for trade liberalization that addresses many of the remaining nontariff barriers as well as other trade-related items on the global agenda, including intellectual property rights, environmental issues, trade in services, and trade-related investment measures.
THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION GOES GLOBAL When the GAH began in 1949, it had 23 members.
As of July 2015,161 countries were members of the World Trade Organization.
For example, the WTO played a pivotal role in forcing the United States to rescind its 2002 steel tariffs.
When the GATT was formed, it contained twenty-three members and was charged with one central goal—reducing tariffs.
As tariffs have declined as a policy tool across most industrial sectors, the WTO has turned its attention to industries that previous rounds had left largely untouched and has begun to address a broad variety of nontariff barriers that impede foreign trade.
Expansion into each of these areas has proven politically difficult, albeit for somewhat different reasons.
Despite the economic advantages of liberal trade, it is often politically advantageous to protect industries through mercantilist policies.
Such is the case with agriculture, which has long been “the most distorted sector of the world economy” , as many states subsidize their agricultural producers and enact various measures to protect them from foreign competition.
Although worldwide liberalization of agriculture could double agricultural exports from both the Global North and Global South , states are unwilling to pay the political costs of removing subsidies and other barriers to agricultural trade.
The so-called “cotton wars” between the United States and Brazil illustrate the competing pressures highlighted by liberalism and mercantilism.
The United States has long subsidized cotton production, and Brazil, seeking access to the United States market, has filed—and won—many disputes with the WTO . tfowever, the United States continually appealed these rulings and refused to remove the subsidies.
Faced with two politically difficult options, removing cotton subsidies or starting a “trade war” with Brazil, the United States found a rather innovative solution.
In exchange for Brazil dropping its trade dispute, it agreed to make payments to both the United States and Brazilian cotton farmers.
As the WTO has begun to focus on nontariff barriers to trade, it has found itself addressing issues that go beyond the traditional dichotomy of free trade versus protectionism.
Destler posits (Destler, 2005, 253), a “new politics” of international trade has emerged.
Traditionally GATT/WTO negotiations followed a “club model” in which a small group of trade officials—typically the United States, European Union, and Japan—ironed out policy, with other countries largely following their lead.
Rounds were largely private affairs, with the public paying little or no attention to them.
For example, the conclusion of the Tokyo Round in 1979, which was widely heralded by experts as a sweeping victory for trade liberalization, was reported on page 18 of the Business Section of the Washington Post —hardly prime placement for news items.
As evidenced by the massive protests that have become ubiquitous at every meeting, WTO rounds now attract a great deal of public attention.
At the same time, the power structure in the organization has become much more multipolar.
The liberalization of agriculture has been one of the most intractable items on the WTO agenda and often triggers visceral responses to any potential ""threat"" to the status quo.
This photo, taken at the 2003 WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun, Mexico, shows South Korean rice farmer Lee Kyung Hae (at left, with sign) protesting rice liberalization.
Shortly after this picture was taken, Lee, a longtime advocate for rice farmers, publicly stabbed himself in the heart as a dramatic display of his opposition to trade liberalization; he died shortly thereafter.
Critics charge that globalization, of which free frade is a parf, leads to a “race to the bottom” in environmental standards because countries are encouraged to enhance their competitiveness by lessening environmental regulations.
At the root of fhe trade-environment controversy is a substantial gap in global governance.
Beyond this vague mandate, the WTO has no explicit set of environmental rules to guide its decisions.
Rather, the principle of nafional treatmenf implies that goods are to be treated equally for frade purposes, no matter how they were made.
Thus, to discriminate against a country's product because of the way it is manufactured constitutes protectionism.
For example, the WTO ruled that United States labeling of “dolphin safe” tuna unfairly discriminated against Mexican tuna, which did not use dolphin-safe nets.
The WTO also ruled against other United States environmental laws, such as provisions for “furtle-safe” shrimp harvesting methods and gasoline standards—although supporting the laws themselves, the panel nonetheless ruled that they were being enforced in a manner that unfairly targeted certain countries.
States obviously have a right to maintain environmental standards and practices, yet there is wide variance in how states choose to do this.
The WTO thus faces an interesting dilemma—having largely succeeded in its goal of lowering tariffs, and having attracted almost every state into the organization, it is now tasked with getting an increasing number of states to agree on a large number of very difficult and contentious issues.
The most recent round of WTO negotiations, the Doha Round, was begun only after seven years of pre-negotiations and has been ongoing since 2002.
Thus far the only accord reached—the Bali Agreement concluded in December 2013—is very narrow in scope, covering trade facilitation measures, such as streamlining customs requirements.
These institutional struggles have taken place in a particularly challenging economic environment.
We next turn to how the WTO, and the world trading system as a whole, dealt with these challenges.
World Trade and the Global Financial Crisis In assessing global trade, it is important to keep the global context in mind, as recent issues and struggles have occurred in the aftermath of the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression.
World trade fell 9 percent in 2008—the first time annual world trade had decreased since 1982—and declined an additional 12. percent in 2009.
Examining the effects of the 2008 global financial crisis on world trade can provide an understanding of how facets of economic globalization, particularly trade and finance, interact.
It also demonstrates the resilience of liberal trade norms even in times of economic crisis, and provides the context to assess future prospects for the global trading order.
The 2008 global financial crisis caused a historic drop in world trade levels due to three primary factors.
There was less of a market for foreign goods, as well as products in general.
For example, for each unit decrease in the sales of Dell computers in the United States, trade between nine countries is reduced.
Global supply chains mean that trade reduction has a “multiplier effect,” and that the pain of trade contractions is shared among a large group of companies and states.
Additionally, with the collapse in credit markets, trade finance dried up; international trade often requires shortto medium-term credit that was no longer readily available.
The Great Depression pushed the United States to enact the Smoot-HawIeyAct of 1932, which increased United States tariffs by 50 percent and contributed to a collapse in world trade.
This refers to more subtle NTBs that may not be direct violations of WTO laws but are, rather, “abuses of legitimate discretion” on behalf of policy makers that serve to reduce trade.
As implied by the name, such “murky” measures are often hard to detect because they may be very narrow in purpose, and states are not required to report these measures to the WTO as they may not formally be “trade” measures.
For example, calls placed from a government official to a company to “encourage” them to use more domestic products, or new port laws that slow down the importing process while paperwork is processed, can easily fall beneath the radar.
Moreover, their particular impact on trade may not be as immediately apparent as is the case with broadly sweeping acts such as tariffs and quotas.
One of the more notable examples was the United States “bailout” of its domestic automobile industries with $30 billion in subsidies.
Many foreign governments, whose economies were also suffering and whose industries were also requesting assistance, quickly pounced on the bailouts as a violation of free-trade principles.
Yet despite these difficulties, a rush toward broader protectionism never occurred, and world trade rebounded rapidly in 2010.
There were several reasons global trade did not fall prey to protectionism and collapse.
Although some protectionist policies were enacted, they were narrowly focused measures; at the peak of the crisis, the various protectionist measures only affected 2 percent of world imports.
Although trade wars were averted in the aftermath of the crisis, there are nonetheless mixed prospects for the future of the global trade order.
Though the number of protectionist measures has decreased since the 2008 crisis , trade-restrictive measures are still more common that trade-promotion policies.
Many restrictive policies fall into the broad category of murky protectionism; since the 2008 crisis more than 2000 such initiatives have been implemented.
As a recent WTO study concluded, “the overall response to the 2008 crisis has been more muted than expected when compared with previous crises.
Moreover, an increasing portion of world trade, particularly in emerging economies such as BRIGS countries, is within supply chains.
Since the production processes are increasingly split across different countries, participation in global trade becomes less a matter of shipping finished products and more one of participating in global supply chain networks.
Within this context, liberalization—through regional or even unilateral measures—is now the key to joining these chains as they develop.
Multinational corporations control many of these chains, hence FDI as well as its relation to global trade becomes increasingly important to potential host countries.
For the WTO, this underscores the need to change its emphasis from “20th century trade issues” (Baldwin, 2013, 25) such as tariffs and agriculture to areas more directly related to the formation of supply chains, including FDI policies as well as trade facilitation—the administrative “nuts and bolts of international trade” , including customs and shipping regulations.
Indeed, the only real progress that the WTO has made, the 2013 Bali Agreement, was in this area.
MERCANTILISM VERSUS LIBERALISM State policies reflect a mixture of mercantilism and liberalism, as they enact a variety of measures to either encourage or impede trade.
The graph shows the relative prominence of each type of policy since the 2008 global financial crisis.
More precisely, it shows the ratio of traderestrictive to trade-liberalizing measures that were implemented since the beginning of 2009.
The very high initial levels indicate the widespread interventions to assist failing industries in the wake of the crisis.
The prevalence of trade-restrictive measures decreased in the wake of the crisis, as states terminated earlier restrictions, or passed additional measures to encourage or facilitate trade.
Yet many question whether the completion of another comprehensive round is even viable.
Given the size of the organization and growing power of many of its members, overly broad and ambitious rounds may no longer be possible.
Yet despite the myriad difficulties the global economy has faced, trade is nonetheless expanding, and liberalization efforts continue.
In assessing the WTO, it can be argued that its “success does not only depend on how well it promotes trade talks but also on how well it prevents trade wars.
Returning to the bicycle metaphor, it could be argued that even though the “pedals” of negotiation may have stopped, the WTO is the “kickstand” that keeps the bicycle of global trade from falling.
At the same time, the key role of the WTO connotes that international governance of global trade is necessary.
Given the size of the WTO, it may be the case that alternate governance structures—regional, plurilateral, or bilateral— may be more viable vehicles for advancing trade liberalization.
We next consider these alternative governance structures, paying particular attention to regional trade agreements as the most prevalent trade institutions. regional trade agreements Treaties that integrate the economies of members through the reduction of trade barriers.
The EU was the earliest and most successful example of regional integration, and similar, albeit less successful, initiatives occurred in the Global South during the 1960s and 1970s.
However, the rapid proliferation of regional trade agreements and bilateral trade agreements did not begin in earnest until the early 1990s.
According to the WTO, the number of trade agreements in force increased more than tenfold since 1990.
MEMBERSHIP IN REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS RTAs have proliferated since the 1990s, and they have emerged worldwide as a means of expanding trade ties between groups of states.
As shown here, many states, particularly in the Global South, join multiple RTAs.
In the Global North, many of the ED countries belong to more than thirty RTAs.
Membership often falls along geographic lines; for example, most of the RTAs to which the United States belongs are within the Western Hemisphere.
They may also codify groups of countries that have traditionally had trade relations, as evidenced by the Lome Convention, which joins EU members and the wide variety of states that were formerly colonial holdings.
Many RTAs are consistent with WTO principles and are viewed as catalysts to trade because they encourage trade liberalization, albeit among smaller groups of states.
Indeed, political leaders commonly assume that there is no natural conflict between bilateralism, regionalism, and multilateralism.
For example, Robert Zoellick, a former president of the World Bank, argued that through a process of “competitive liberalization,” the formation of bilateral and regional trade deals could pressure countries into strengthening multilateral institutions.
Countries may see RTAs as a means to assert economic power within their geographic area, as evidenced by the Eurasian Union, which joined Russia with four of its former Soviet-era republics.
The significance of this RTA, which went into effect in January 2015, is not so much its economic size as its geopolitical implications.
Other potential RTAs, the so-called mega-regionals , are important due to their sheer economic size, as they involve major economic powers and can encompass large swaths of the global economy.
The TPP, which will include twelve countries that border the Pacific Ocean, including the United States, Japan, Chile, Australia, and Singapore, is current progressing toward fruition.
Economically, this grouping would be more than twice the size of the TPP, but it is much further from completion.
Some who support a multilateral trading order are less sanguine about these agreements.
Finally, although the WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, they violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MEN, as they give some WTO members advantages over others.
I discovered that the European Union, which started the pandemic ... applied its MEN tariff to only six countries—^Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States—with all other nations enjoying more favorable tariffs.
Plurilateral negotiations are open to all WTO members, though participation is voluntary and only those who specifically sign onto the agreement are subject to enforcement.
It thus brings together countries that share at least some agreement over a given issue.
Moreover, unlike PTAs, plurilateral agreements are negotiated within the context of the WTO, thus reducing the chance of potential contradictions between these agreements and broader WTO statutes.
Overall, although the liberal commercial order has proven robust, the WTO encounters continued difficulties in expanding its power and legitimacy within a more multipolar system, and alternate structures of governing world trade are proliferating.
Such problems provide some corroboration to the realist viewpoint that there are definite limits to the strength of international organizations, as countries will focus on their domestic interests when threats arise, be they economic or political.
At the same time, a liberal case can be made—for the WTO to maintain legitimacy during such tumultuous times does attest to its underlying strength and utility within the global economy.
Whatever the current balance between the two, the perennial battle between mercantilism and liberalism will continue, and countries and organizations will continue to grapple with how to balance trade interests with noneconomic concerns such as human rights and the environment.
This chapter, as well as the previous one, has shown that globalization is a “double-edged sword”—the same processes and ties that help our economies grow also ensure that crises have a diffuse effect.
A blog by the Global Policy Forum with links for different aspects of the global economy.
A blog hosted by the International Trade Administration regarding the effects of trade agreements.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Globalization of Labor * Economic Sanctions • Protectionism Additional Videos • Steward, Devin T, and Ian Bremmer.
Pictured here, children dance in one of the squatter communities that surround Caracas, a city of more than 3. million people in Venezuela.
The provision of better housing, social services, and education is a major challenge to improving human security and realizing benefits from urbanization.
As you probably have at one time or another imagined, beneath the skin every human being is essentially similar.
And we all tend to respond to the same experiences that almost everyone feels at one time or another— love, fear, alienation, or a sense of a common community and destiny.
One explanation is that growing numbers of people throughout the world are pursuing these human goals because globalization is bringing all humanity together as never before in bonds of interdependence.
You will be asked to consider whether global trends might transform the world, and the world politics that condition this.
Once you have glimpsed the world as it might be, as it ought to be, as it’s going to be , it is impossible to live compliant and complacent anymore in the world as it is. —Victoria Safford, Unitarian minister lTi| POPULATION CHANGE AS A GLOBAL CHALLENGE To formulate your interpretation of this human dimension of globalization and world politics, it is instructive to first look at how changes in world population are a part of the globalization of world politics.
Others claim that controls on family size are necessary because an unregulated population will “parent” a crowded and unlivable future world without the resources necessary to sustain life for all people.
To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace the global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic.
The Grand Vizier, the principal adviser to the King, had invented a new game.
It has since dropped to about 1. percent and is expected to drop slightly more to 1 percent between now and 2020, when 81 million new people (nearly equivalent to the population of Egypt or Germany) will be added each year.
Plainly, the planet is certain to have many people by the mid-twenty-first century, well beyond the roughly 7. billion in 2015.
The size of the global population is shaped by worldwide fertility rates and cannot stabilize until it falls below replacement-level fertility.
That will happen after the total fertility rate, the worldwide average number of children born to a woman, falls to 2.1.
Nonetheless, world population is projected to continue to surge because of “population momentum” resulting from a large number of women now entering their childbearing years.
Like the inertia of a descending airliner when it first touches down on the runway, population growth simply cannot be halted even with an immediate, full application of the brakes.
WORLD POPULATION GROWTH PROJECTIONS TO THE YEAR 2100 It took until the early 1800s for world population to reach 1 billion people, and today another billion people are added every twelve to fourteen years.
World population is expected to reach 9. billion in 2050 and continue to rise to 10. billion by 2100.
The distribution of world population is also anticipated to change significantly.
As the figure shows, Africa is expected to experience rapid population growth and account for over a third of global population by 2100; Europe is expected to continue to decline from almost 22 percent in 1950 to less than 7 percent in 2100.
Improvements in general health conditions have led to declines in mortality, and the global population has grown as people have lived longer lives.
World population will reach 8. billion by 2030 and 9. billion by 2050, at which point it is expected to stabilize.
Population is expected to decline in Europe by almost 1 percent by 2030.
Youth Bulges and Aging Populations Consider the demographic divide between the Global South and Global North as a whole.
Fertility rates in the Global South are, on average, almost a full 1 percent higher than the Global North.
Continued population growth in the Global South also reflects the progress that has been made to combat infectious and childhood disease in developing countries around the world.
In the Global North, population is stabilizing or declining, despite increasingly longer life spans.
Sub-Saharan Africa and Western Europe illustrate the force of two different pictures of population momentum.
Africa’s demographic profde is one of rapid population growth, as each new age group contains more people than the one before it.
A GEOGRAPHIC POPULATION OlVIDE Although world population growth Is anticipated to decelerate in the latter half of the twenty-first century, it is expected to reach 10. billion by 2100.
UN prediction of growth rates are based on expectations of replacement-level fertility and declining mortality across most regions of the globe.
Depicting trends overtime, the graph shows that total fertility remains highest in Africa throughout most of this century.
Should fertility remain at 2010 rates across the entire globe, the world would instead see a global population of almost 27 billion by 2100.
Furthermore, the highest national fertility rates are concentrated in Africa, where fifteen of the countries with fertility rates of five or more children per woman are located.
In contrast, Europe’s population is growing slowly because recent generations have been smaller than preceding ones.
A product of an extended period of low birthrates, low death rates, and increased longevity, Europe is best described as an aging society, where the low birthrates and aging populations have caused alarm that the number of European newborns will not be sufficient to renew populations or bear the financial burden of supporting an aged society.
In addition to population size and rate of growth, a demographic divide is also reflected in age distribution with some countries experiencing a youth bulge and others an aging population.
BABY BOOM OR BUST As global population grows, so too does the number of youth.
In 2015 there were 1. billion young people aged fifteen to twenty-four years; by 2030, the number is expected to increase by 7 percent to reach almost 1. billion.
Yet the rate of growth varies across regions, as shown in the graph above.
Youth populations are expected to stabilize in Europe, North America, Latin America, and Oceania over the coming decades.
In Europe and North America, the proportion of people sixty years of age or older is advancing the fastest due to changes in fertility and mortality rates.
For countries that struggle to educate and employ their young people, a burgeoning youth population poses challenges for economic growth and political stability.
Furthermore, as an enlarged youth population in the Global South faces poor economic conditions and a lack of resources to provide for a family, many are turning to religious fundamentalism to counter their frustration and despair and are propelling an Islamic revival.
This is creating an increasingly aged world population, and changing the contours of the global community.
Global aging is occurring at rates never before seen, in part because of improvements in medicine and health care, with some physicians now distinguishing between chronological and biological aging.
There are concerns that, due to its rapidly aging populations, the Global North will be especially burdened by rising old-age dependency and face an array of economic, budgetary, and social challenges.
Although the effects are expected to vary among developed countries, these could include a decreasing labor supply; a decline in economic growth and per capita income; increased demand for public expenditures on health care, long-term care, and pensions; and an increased need to invest in the human capital of future generations in order to boost overall productivity.
AGING AND GRAYING AROUND THE WORLD As falling fertility is met with rising life expectancy, the world moves toward a major demographic transformation—global aging—wherein elderly people constitute an increasing percentage of a state's population.
As the map shows, this transformation is already well underway in the Global North.
French families with at least three children benefit from tax breaks and discounts such as reduced train fares.
Russia, where the population declined for two decades, has begun a sustained effort to encourage marriage and childbearing by offering financial incentives to women who have multiple children.
To boost the country’s fertility rate, the government has created a number of policies, including the promotion of speed-dating events.
It will also hinge on reforming age-related public expenditures in the Global North, in particular health care, long-term care, and government-supported retirement pensions.
An aging population raises challenges for our societies and economies, culturally, organizationally and from an economic point of view.
Policy makers worry about how living standards will be affected as each worker has to provide for the consumption needs of a growing number of elderly dependents.
Markets worry about fiscal sustainability and the ability of policy makers to address timely and sufficiently these challenges in several Member States.
The seriousness of the challenge depends on how our economies and societies respond and adapt to these changing demographic conditions.
Looking ahead, policy makers need to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability in the face of large but predictable challenges, as well as significant uncertainty.
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE In response to Russia’s demographic crisis, policy makers are offering married couples incentives to procreate.
With September 12 declared Family Contact Day throughout Russia in an effort to encourage marital intimacy, the governor of the Ulyanovsk region coined it the ""Day of Conception"" and offered prizes to couples that give birth nine months later on June 12, Russia's independence Day.
Shown here is a couple on the Bench of Reconciliation in a Moscow park, which is curved to promote physical contact and help couples to work out their differences.
It is easy to see how this facet of globalization is not making people in the world more alike.
Variation in the geographical distribution of population is increasing the differences in the quality of life experienced around the planet, and this demographic diversity is the result of different changes in the key determinants of population growth and structure—fertility, mortality, and migration.
Let us now consider how the movement of people, both across and within countries, shapes global population structures.
The United States, Saudi Arabia, Germany, the Russian Federation, and the United Arab Emirates are the top five migrant destinations.
The MexicoUnited States corridor is the most frequent migrant path, accounting for 13 million migrants in 2013.
The second largest migration corridor is Russia-Ukraine, followed by Bangladesh-India.
The migration of people between countries has raised a host of moral issues, such as the ethnic balance inside host countries, the meaning of citizenship and sovereignty, the distribution of income, labor supply, xenophobia, the impact of multiculturalism, and protection of basic human rights and prevention of exploitation.
The governments of sovereign states have difficulty regulating the movement of foreigners inside their borders, and no multilateral IGOs for meaningful global governance exist to deal with the consequences of the escalating migration of people around the globe.
Porous borders create ambiguous ethics about mass migration movements, but one consequence is clear; there are both winners and losers through the globalization of migration.
A Quest for Sustenance and Freedom People most commonly migrate in search of better jobs.
Remittances sent home by migrants from the Global South are projected to be at least $479 billion in 2017, with global remittances for both developing and developed countries reaching $636 billion . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ngage Learning.
Construction continues in the United States to extend the line of barrier fences along the border with Mexico.
In 2009, the European Parliament implemented controversial immigration rules that allow illegal immigrants to be detained up to eighteen months and then expelled.
Italy and France called for changes to tighten Europe’s Schengen open-border treaty in 2011 in response to the more than 25,000 migrants who entered Italy from North Africa, many of whom also crossed into other European countries.
Another trend in our “age of migration” is the flight of people not in search of economic opportunity but out of fear of persecution.
Additionally, though not considered displaced per se, there are about 3. million stateless people worldwide refugees People who flee for safety to another country because of a well-founded fear of political persecution, environmental degradation, or famine.
Shown left, these Somali women and their children are among more than 1.11 million refugees that sought safety and shelter from the ongoing violence in their country.
Pictured right is actress Angelina Jolie meeting with women in refugee camps in the Democratic Republic of Congo in March 2013.
As a Special Envoy for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , Jolie attracts global attention to the fight against rape as a tool of warfare.
For the first time, Turkey became tbe largest refugee-hosting country, followed by Pakistan and Lebanon.
A large proportion of the world’s refugees and displaced people flee their own homelands when ethnic and religious conflicts erupt in fragile states where governments fail to preserve law and order.
With a weakening global economy, people are ever-more resistant to foreigners competing for domestic jobs and resources.
Moreover, as security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide, the linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls. atrocities Bmt^\ and savage acts against targeted citizen groups or prisoners of war, defined as iliegai under internationai law.
At the start of 2015, there were 59. million forcibly displaced people worldwide, with the vast majority fleeing dangerous conditions in Africa and the Middle East.
Although it is commonly assumed that states in the Global North admit tbe most refugees from conflict, evidence indicates instead that tbe majority flee to neighboring countries in the Global South.
To Italy's frustration, the other members of the EU were unwilling to share the illegal immigration burden.
Italy’s request that the EU apply an emergency rule that would relocate the refugees across the various EU member states was blocked.
In an effort to address its immigration crisis, Italy repatriated some of the migrants to their home country.
This not only allowed the North Africans to remain in Italy, but it also enabled them to travel within Europe's border-free Schengen area to other countries.
This latter action angered France, as thousands of migrants traveled from Italy in the hopes of joining relatives in France.
As tension between Italy and France accelerated, the leaders of the two countries at the time—French President Nicolas Sarkozy and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi—collectively called for reform of the open-border Schengen treaty that allowed legal residents of most EU countries to travel across borders with only minimal border checks.
Although both wished to see the treaty persist, they argued that it was necessary to allow temporary controls to be enacted when exceptional circumstances arise.
They further sought commitment to a “principle of solidarity” among the EU member states, with assurances that other EU countries would assist the southern states along the Mediterranean in dealing with problems posed by mass immigration.
The challenges posed by migration to the EU have only increased as record numbers of people continue to seek refuge from conflict, persecution, and poverty in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia.
In 2014, more than 140,000 refugees landed in Italy; many were victims of human trafficking, and others died at sea from the horrible conditions.
In the face of the desperate need for compassion and care, Lampedusa’s deputy mayor, Damiano Sferlazzo, stated in frustration, “We have an economic union in Europe, not a political one.
The highest level ever recorded, this represented a 54 percent increase from the previous year in the number of people seeking sanctuary, after a 16 percent increase the prior year.
With more than 274,700 asylum applications, the Russian Federation was the world’s largest recipient of individual applications in 2014, with 99 percent of the applicants fleeing conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Flow will human security be reconciled with national security^ The welfare and survival of everyday people are endangered, and the need for their protection is increasing.
Urbanization When considering migration patterns and interpreting demographic projections, it is also important to examine the geographic concentration of people within countries.
Known zs population density, this measures how close together people are living.
Today, more than half the world lives in cities, and the urbanization of the world is accelerating and spreading.
Already 80 percent of the populations in the Global North live in big cities that are getting bigger , but cities are growing fastest in the developing Global South countries.
This is particularly evident in Asia and the Pacific, where three of the world’s ten most global cities are located.
The Demographic and Cultural Dimensions of Globalization The CSS Point FIGURE 12.
Within the top twenty-five in 2015, eight are in the Asia Pacific region, seven are in Europe, and nine are in the Americas.
I I 1 I I < i I As the percentage of world population residing in dense urban agglomerations increases worldwide, the “dualism” between city dwellers and those living in the rural and poor periphery will make the urbanized core cities more similar to each other in outlooks, values, and lifestyles.
People in megacities are already communicating and computing with one another more frequently than they do with people living in the countryside within their own states.
The world is witnessing a surge in urbanization, where capital flows, supply chains, and telecommunications link global cities and denationalize international relations.
The power and influence of cities, however, are not unique to the contemporary period.
Sociologist Saskia Sassen points out that, in ages past, nations and empires did not restrain cities but instead served as filters for their global ambitions.
However, urbanization and the growth of megacities can pose challenges for national governance.
Taken together, the advent of global hubs and megacities forces us to rethink whether state sovereignty or economic might is the new prerequisite for participating in global diplomacy.
Though cities can serve as engines for growth and development, they can also pose risks to human security.
Millions of urban squatters pour into megacities each year, and economic inequality and urban blight is rampant in major metropolitan areas.
Migrants live in slums in destitution and squalor next to stunning high rises and private gated communities in cities such as Sao Paulo, Shanghai, and Istanbul.
In fragile cities, the social contract between municipal governments and their people has deteriorated, and urban violence is rampant.
A key factor connected to insecurity and violence in cities appears to be turbo-urbanization, characterized by extremely rapid urbanization and unregulated growth.
Another factor is the presence of a youth bulge that leaves large numbers of young people, particularly males, undereducated and unemployed.
The Pakistani city of Karachi stands out as a fragile city, having expanded from a half million people in 1947 to 21 million today.
The impact of global urbanization is also likely to aggravate health and environmental problems, straining supplies of clean water, shelter, and sanitation.
If urbanization throughout the global community continues at its current pace, which is almost certain, this trend will lead to still another kind of transformation in the world.
Threats, such as the outbreak of a widespread and deadly disease, could produce population implosion.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ fragile cities Cities in a state of violent crisis, with the municipal government incapable or unwilling to govern and provide public services. population implosion A rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward progressively larger populations; a severe reduction in the world’s population. and/or eChapter.
Pictured here, vendors, pedestrians, and vehicles vie for space on the streets of Kokata, India, a city of 16 million people.
THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF DISEASE Although infant and child mortality rates remain discouragingly high in many developing countries, at least they are decreasing.
However, this rising longevity could reverse if globally transmittable diseases cut into the life spans made possible by improvements in health care, nutrition, water quality, and public sanitation.
THE BURDEN OF DISEASE Globally, almost 25 percent of deaths are due to communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutrition conditions collectively.
Yet a death divide is apparent between the Global North and the Global South.
Shown on the right, low income countries are most affected by risks associated with poverty such as undernutrition, poor sanitation, and unsafe water and are highly vulnerable to communicable disease.
In the Global North, people face health risks due to physical inactivity, diet-related factors, and tobacco-related factors and die from noncommunicable conditions such as cardiovascular disease and cancer. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net pyright 2017 Cengage Learning.
Due to electronic rights, some third party content ma ay be suppresse Adapted from the World Health Organization.
Today, nearly 10 percent of people worldwide between the ages of fifteen and forty-nine have HIV , although some regions of the world suffer more from the disease than others.
Sadly, many diseases pose significant threats to human well-being and remind us of the permeability of our national borders.
As the second leading cause of death from a single infectious agent , the World Health Organization declared tuberculosis a major health emergency, and since 1993 has led efforts to improve TB care and control.
Tuberculosis is an airborne infectious disease that, though preventable and curable, claims the lives of millions of people.
An estimated 9 million new cases of TB, with 1. million deaths, were reported in 2013.
The disease is most prevalent in Asia and Africa, with almost 40 percent of the cases worldwide occurring in India and China.
However, considerable progress has been made toward halting and reversing the global tuberculosis epidemic.
This is tragic because the disease, which is transmitted by mosquitoes to human beings, is largely preventable and treatable.
Efforts to combat the spread of the disease include distributing millions of insecticide-treated bed nets.
In May 2015, the World Health Assembly adopted a new global strategy for malaria that emphasizes universal access to malaria prevention, treatment, and diagnosis.
The member states set an ambitious target of reducing global malaria incidence and mortality rates by 90 percent by 2030.
Over the past decade, deadly outbreaks of influenza have also generated global concern.
Another recent deadly strain, known as HlNl, or swine flu, crossed the species barrier between pigs and people.
A number of countries, particularly China and Russia, took vigorous quarantine measures against people who had traveled to countries suffering from high numbers of infected people.
In 2014, the World Health Organization declared the Ebola outbreak in West Africa to pose a global public health emergency.
A viral disease with a high fatality rate, it is transmitted from wild animals to people and spreads through human-to-human transmission.
Discovered in 1976, the latest outbreak of the disease began in Guinea and also claimed lives in the Democratic Republic of Congo , Gabon, South Sudan, Cote d’Ivoire, Uganda, Republic of the Congo , Guinea, and Liberia.
The toll of the disease was initially projected to be far worse, and governments around the world engaged in a committed effort to contain the outbreak.
Yet despite the positive steps made to control Ebola, many feel that the epidemic brought to light how woefully unprepared governments and international organizations are to combat global health crises.
Shown here, a nine-year-old girl in Liberia is ushered away by health care workers after showing signs of being infected with Ebola.
Most of the health care facilities in the region are underfunded and have limited resources.
The spread and control of infectious diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, cholera, Middle East respiratory syndrome , Ebola, lymphatic filariasis, avian flu, mad cow disease, and swine flu have established themselves on the radar screen of policy makers throughout the world.
These diseases will not vanish from sight anytime soon and are a stark reminder of the transnational threats that remain ever-present in our borderless world and necessitate global cooperation and coordination.
A relationship exists between the health of individuals within a state and that state’s national seeurity.
A population’s health is of utmost importanee to the state’s ability to survive. —Jeremy Youde, global health expert the global information age Pessimists predict that one result of globalization will be competition between states as they seek to preserve their sovereign independence, retain the allegiance of their citizens, resist the homogenizing forces now sweeping the world, and ensure their own national security.
In a contrasting, more optimistic scenario, liberal theory anticipates a globalization of cultures that transcends contemporary geopolitical boundaries and erodes the meaning of national identity and sovereignty by creating “global citizens” who assign loyalty to the common interests of all peoples.
Trends in the cultural dimension of globalization are generating changes in how people construct their identities and encourage a more cosmopolitan perspective.
No area of the world and no arena of politics, economics, society, or culture are immune from the pervasive influence of communication technology.
More than 78. percent of citizens in the Global North are Internet users, as are 29. percent of people In the Global South , and Internet usage continues to grow.
Personal computers and the “wireless world” of mobile phones have facilitated communication between people in areas as diverse as rural communities in the Global South and the technology-intensive countries in the Global North.
The result of this expanding worldwide use of the Internet is the creation of cyberspace, a global information superhighway allowing people everywhere to communicate freely as they surf the Web, exchange emails, and join social networking sites.
The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to unfdtered information for the first time.
Shelves and pill bottles connected to the Internet can alert a forgetful patient when to take a pill, a pharmacist to make a refill, and a doctor when a dose is missed.
It will make today’s methods of communicating look ancient in a few years and, in the process it will transform how people communicate as well as which countries lead and which follow.
Enthusiasts believe that the advantages of the global communications revolution are a blessing for humanity.
When people and things around the world are connected through the revolution in digital communications, the shared information propels human development and productivity.
For example, in 2011, through the use of information technology such as Twitter, Facebook, and the online video-sharing site YouTube, Egyptians were able to organize protest demonstrations, document to the world images of repression, and bring to life a digital people’s movement for freedom.
These actions ultimately toppled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak from power.
In such a world, one can conceal one’s true identity, which threatens to make the activities of international organized crime and terrorist groups easier; The world’s most repressive regimes and violent transnational groups—from al Qaeda and the Mexican drug cartels to the Mafia and the Taliban—are effectively using technology to bring on new recruits, terrify local populations, and threaten democratic institutions.
The Mexican drug cartels, in order to illustrate the consequences of opposition, spread graphic videos showing decapitations of those who cooperate with law enforcement, and al Qaeda and its affiliates have created viral videos showing the killings of foreigners held hostage in Iraq . virtuality Imagery created by computer technology of objects and phenomena that produces an imaginary picture of actual things, people, and experiences.
Similarly, online social networks, such as Facebook, which has a global membership that would place it as the world’s most populous country, encourage users to share information.
One example is the hightech surveillance program in China, known as “Golden Shield,” which can identify dissent and allow the government to address it before it turns into a mass movement.
The United States’ extensive surveillance of Internet communications, which became the focus of considerable international criticism in 2013, is another example.
The United States National Security Agency , Federal Bureau of Investigation , and Central Intelligence Agency secretly collected millions of records from United States telecommunications and technology firms.
United States Senator Mark Udall of the Senate Intelligence Committee summarized these concerns, saying “You have a law that’s been interpreted secretly by a secret court that then issues secret orders to generate a secret program.
This regime ended government and private telecommunications monopolies in many states, and the resulting cuts in phone costs were widely seen as a catalyst of the world economy’s expansion.
Advances in information technology and the expansive scope of global media have augmented this development.
Yet, contrary to conventional wisdom that the media has the ability to drive a country’s foreign policy, the type of power that media wields over international affairs is arguably limited.
Scholarship shows that the media influence what people think about mort than what they think.
Moreover, though ours is often described as the information age, a remarkably large portion of the available information is controlled by a cartel of huge multinational media corporations.
Headquartered mostly in the rich Global North, these industry leaders are merging to combine their resources and, in the process, are expanding their global reach. us fully entertained and perhaps half-informed, always growing here and shriveling there, with certain of its members bulking up, while others slowly fall apart or get digested whole.
Because globalized communications and information may be used as tools for terrorism and revolution as well as for community and peace, the creation of a world without boundaries, where everybody will know everything about anybody’s activities, will not necessarily be a better world.
People from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from the same teehnology plaform, but different eultures willflourish on it.
The next phase of globalization is going to be more gloealization—more and more loeal eontent made global. —Thomas L Friedman, international journalist 12 5 GLOBALIZATION AND THE GLOBAL FUTURE Rapid globalization, propelled in large measure by revolutions in technology, is almost certain to continue.
Expect the controversies about globalization’s alleged virtues and vices to heighten as finance, trade, population, labor, communications, and cultures continue to converge globally.
Although globalization has narrowed the distance between the world’s people, some have gained and others have lost ground.
The debate about globalization’s problematic impact is intensifying, but without resolution, as contenders are hardening their positions without listening to the counterarguments.
You have now taken into account a number of the dimensions of globalization—in international economics, demography, global communication, and the potential spread of universal values for the entire world.
Shown here is one image that fuels that point of view—an enormous inflated Santa Claus in front of a hotel in downtown Hanoi, Vietnam—a predominantly Buddhist city still subscribing to communist principles that emphasize the greed of market capitalism and the class divisions it is believed to create.
Since the 1970s, there has been an upward trend in all three dimensions of globalization, with a strong increase after the end of the Cold War.
The latest global economic and financial crisis has slowed the pace of the economic globalization process, although social and political globalization continue to rise. uniting all of humanity, these values and understandings might unify all people on Earth in a common global culture.
This could conceivably prepare the way for a global civil society, even with the eventual emergence of supranational institutions to govern all of humanity.
Yet this worldview and set of predictions strike fear into the hearts of many people who experience cognitive dissonance when they confront a frightening vision that challenges their customary way of thinking about world affairs.
These people strenuously reject the idea that the traditional system of independent sovereign states can or should be replaced by a global community with strong supranational regulatory institutions that enhance global governance.
To many students of international relations, globalization has two faces, one positive and one negative.
To those whose perceptions focus on globalization’s benefits, globalization helps to break down traditional divisions of humanity—between races, nations, and cultures—that are barriers to peace, prosperity, and justice.
The gap between people’s income in the richest and poorest countries has never been wider_More than one billion people are either unemployed, underemployed, or working poor.
An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment about the morality of globalizafion.
This is what the philosopher Peter Singer did in applying as a criterion the utilitarian principle that it is a moral duty to maximize the happiness and welfare of all human beings and even animal welfare.
Singer sees great benefit from the erosion of state sovereignty and the idea that the entire world should be the unit of ethical analysis.
As the pace of globalization has become a recognized force in world politics, it also has become a topic of heated debate.
Globalization has hit a political speed bump, provoking intense critical evaluation of globalization’s causes, characteristics, and consequences, and inspiring fresh ethical examination of the elevated interdependence of countries and human beings.
The uncertain wisdom and morality of globalization may be the most discussed issue on todays global agenda, receiving even more attention than poverty, disease, urbanization, or the preservation of identity.
In the next chapter of World Politics, we consider the circumstances of the more than 7 billion human beings striving throughout the world to sustain themselves, improve the human condition, and protect their right to life, liberty, and happiness.
How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier and Happier.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Demography • Fertility Rate • Xenophobia • Refugees Additional Videos • Grewal, David Singh.
The Worid Cup in Qatar in 2022 has come under intense controversy due to allegations of bribery and human rights abuses.
Given this profound abuse, as shown here, many oppose Qatar's hosting of the world sporting event.
From living in conditions of squalor and poverty to suffering the raping and pillaging of paramilitary forces, you would be stunned and sickened at the trials and tribulations that many less fortunate people must endure.
They experience slower rates of development and less human security than in the Global North, and the prospects of the “have-nots” are not improving.
Given the serious deprivations facing so many people, there are many reasons for concern.
The denial of the inalienable rights to which all humans are presumably entitled—the “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” of which the United States Declaration of Independence speaks—attests to the extent that fundamental human security is not being met.
Every human life is preeious... it is not just about our eriminaljustiee system, whieh we also want to be proportionate and restorative; it is about the type ofsoeiety that we want to build—a soeiety that values every person, and one that doesn’t give up on its people. —Laurence Lien, member of Parliament of Singapore 13 1 | PUTTING PEOPLE INTO THE PICTURE Until relatively recently in the theoretical study of world politics, the needs of the faceless billions of everyday people were neglected.
That past theoretical legacy pictured the mass of humanity as marginalized victims or left them invisible by painting their fates as controlled by forces over which hapless people have little influence.
When thinking about world affairs, the average person has long been relegated to a mere “subject” whom rulers were traditionally permitted to manipulate to advance their states’ interests.
That consensus notwithstanding, many observers embrace the traditional realist assumption that vast global forces render people powerless.
Realists recognize that people participate politically but claim they have no real power because an invisible set of powerful forces described before as the “system” gives most human beings only superficial involvement without granting real influence.
Denying the importance and influence of individual human agency seems increasingly strange; classic thinking about the world has long been concentrated on people and the essential characteristics of human nature.
This requires a humanistic interpretation that gives people status and value.
For the most part, classical realism focuses solely upon the state and its ruler’s sovereign freedom and, except for building its image of international reality from a pessimistic conception of human nature, it ignores the role of leaders and the nongovernmental organizations that people form.
Fiberals attach more importance to humans, following the ethical precept of German philosopher Immanuel Kant that people should be treated as ends and not means, and that human rights and human dignity should be safeguarded.
The five countries with the greatest number of executions in 2014 were China—which refused to divulge official figures, though it is known that thousands of executions took place—Iran , Saudi Arabia , Iraq , and the United States . vvww.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net Id.
Others challenge this conception and place primacy on the security of individual people, arguing that social and environmental protection must be seen as a global priority.
In considering this question, remember the traditional realist view that national security is essentially the freedom from fear of attack by another country or nonstate terrorists.
Realists maintain that armed aggression is the paramount security threat and that preparing for war to prevent war overrides all other security concerns.
Therefore, “security” is defined primarily in terms of each country’s capacity to resist armed threats.
In contrast, “human security” has risen as a concept that focuses on protecting individuals from threat.
All proponents of human security agree that the primary goal is protection of individuals.
Although there Is a lack of consensus regarding the specific threats against which individuals need to be protected, some see a synergy between the security of individuals and the security of the state.
THE HUMAN CONDITION TODAY “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains,” bemoaned political philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his famous 1762 book.
Times have since changed, but in many respects Rousseau’s characterization of the human condition remains accurate.
The inequalities and disparities evident in people’s standards of living cannot help but to evoke sympathy for the difficult conditions many people face, especially in the less developed Global South countries.
One American graduate student, when working on his PhD, confronted this reality during his field research in South America.
When I left for Colombia [South America], I fully expected Bogota to be like any large United States city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish.
It means politicians across the ideological spectrum who are so full of abstract solutions or personal greed that they forget that it is real people they are dealing with.
This is a dramatic improvement since 1990, when 43. percent of the world’s people lived on no more than $1.25 a day.
Consumption patterns show that the division between the rich and the poor is growing.
About one-fifth of the globe’s wealthiest people consume anywhere from two-thirds to nine-tenths of its resources.
The extreme suffering of people in many parts of the world, especially in the low-income countries of the Global South, manifests itself in many areas.
For example, life expectancy in the Global South averages sixty-nine years, whereas in the Global North it is seventy-nine years.
In the Global South, the average infant mortality rate—the number of infant deaths per 1000 live births—is fifty, as compared to an infant mortality rate of six in the Global North.
On average, people in developing countries are healthier, better educated, and less impoverished—and they are more likely to live in a multiparty democracy.
Since 1990 life expectancy in developing countries has increased by six years, from sixtythree to sixty-nine.
In the same period, primary school completion rates increased to 92 percent from 78 percent.
These human development gains should not be underestimated; nor should they be exaggerated.
World Bank President Jim Yong Kim acknowledged the pervasive threat of continued global poverty, noting that to meet the goal of eradicating extreme poverty by 2030 “it’s going to take more than business as usual.
Human Development Index (HDD An index that uses life expectancy, literacy, average number of years of schooling, and income to assess a country’s performance in providing for its people’s welfare and security.
Inequalityadjusted Human Development Index An index that accounts for the impact of inequality on the human development of people in a country.
This theory, popular among some leaders in the Global South, attributes persistent poverty to the exploitation caused by dependent relationships of the less developed countries with the wealthy Global North.
Advocates of the basic human needs perspective sought new ways to measure development beyond those focusing exclusively on economic indicators such as the average income for each person in each country.
The Human Development Index measures states’ comparative ability to provide for their citizens’ well-being.
The HDI, as the United Nations Development Programme most recently defines it, seeks to capture as many aspects of human development as possible in one simple composite index and to rank human development achievements.
Although no multiple-indicator index can perfectly monitor the progress of human development, the HDI comes close as an estimating procedure.
Thus, by focusing on aspects of human welfare beyond average income for each person—by treating income as a proxy for a decent standard of living—the HDI provides a more complete picture of human life than does income alone.
By this measure, the evidence provides a basic profde of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding or failing.
The HDI ranges from 0 to I The HDI value for a country shows the distance that it has already traveled toward the maximum possible value of 1 and allows for comparison with other countries.
The difference between the value achieved by a country and the maximum possible value shows how far it has to go, and the challenge for every country is to find ways to improve.
To further assess human welfare, in 2010 the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index was added to take into account the effect of inequality in the distribution of health, education, and income upon human development within a society.
In a country with perfect equality, the HDI score and the IHDI score are equivalent; in a country where there is significant inequality, the IHDI score is lower than the HDI score, which means that the haves and have-nots live in very different conditions.
In Latin America, there is up to a 36. percent regional drop in human development due to inequality in income.
Differences in life expectancy across sub-Saharan Africa are linked to a 36. percent decrease in human development for those with the lowest expected length of life.
When using the Human Development Index to measure the human welfare and development of people within various populations, notice how countries can rank somewhat differently than when using an aggregate measure such as the gross national income per capita.
The inequality-adjusted Human Development Index further takes into account the effect of variation in the human condition within a country upon human development.
Generally, countries that have lower levels of human development suffer from higher levels of multidimensional inequality.
Conversely, countries in the Global North experience the least inequality in human development.
For example, the Bahamas and New Zealand have similar levels of income per person, but life expectancy and expected years of schooling differ greatly between the two countries, resulting in New Zealand having a much higher FIDI value than the Bahamas.
Thus, despite its strengths as an indicator of human well-being around the world, there are many important aspects of human security and human rights that it does not assess.
Globalization, Democratization, and Economic Prosperity The rapid transfer of global capital and investment across borders is integrating the world’s economies and has led some to speculate that globalization will provide a cure for the chronic poverty faced by the majority of humanity.
However, critics of globalization complain that it is the culprit—that globalization actually causes relative deprivation rather than cures it.
In their constructed image of the consequences of globalization, a more global economy increases inequality in some countries, particularly in the Global South.
Although some Global South countries have made big gains in the past quarter-century (following political reforms leading to greater democracy and economic reforms leading to free markets), a gap in people's quality of life and in their levels of human development is apparent and parallels, to some degree, the gap between the Global North and the Global South. thrives, human development and human rights also tend to thrive.
But in autocratic governments not ruled by the will of the people, human development fails to occur and human rights are frequently denied.
But the exceptions demonstrate the general rule that a country’s regime type, and its protection of the civil and political liberties of its population, make a crucial difference in achieving levels of human development.
Some question the “trickle-down” hypothesis (that if the rich first get richer, eventually the benefits will trickle down to help the poor) while accepting the evidence that meeting basic human needs ultimately promotes long-term economic growth.
Others maintain that redistributive policies aimed at enhancing human welfare and growth-oriented policies focusing on “trickle-down” benefits function at cross-purposes because the latter can only be attained at the expense of the former.
Many now recommend fostering human development through a strategy that combines the efficiency of a free-enterprise capitalistic market with the compassion of governmental economic planning and regulation in an effort to cooperatively produce the greatest good for the greatest number.
The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia, which marked the end of the Thirty Years’ War, recognized limited religious rights for select Christian minorities.
International campaigns in the mid-1800s against slavery were a form of human rights advocacy and, following World War I, labor rights and minority rights were addressed by the International Labor Organization and the League of Nations.
These rights have since been codified and extended in a series of treaties, most notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.
Although the multilateral treaties enumerating these rights are legally binding on the states ratifying them, many have either not ratified them or have done so only with significant caveats.
When states specify caveats, they are expressing agreement with the broad declarations of principle contained in these treaties while indicating that they object to certain specific provisions and elect not to be bound by them.
Countries that agree with the general principle that all human beings possess certain rights that cannot be withheld may still disagree on the scope of these rights.
Stipulated in Islam's holy book, the Quran, caning is practiced in some Muslim countries.
The Precarious Life of Indigenous Peoples As you learned in the Chapter 6 introduction to nonstate actors, indigenous peoples are representative of one type of ethnic and cultural group that were once native to a geographic location.
The Turkish mass killing of Armenians, Hiker’s slaughter of Jews (and other groups), the Khmer Rouge slaughter of Cambodians, and the Hutu slaughter of the Tutsi of Rwanda all exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century.
In describing the tragedy of the Nazi holocaust, Polish jurist Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide from the Greek word genos and the Latin caedere , and called for it to be singled out as the most grievous violation of human rights, a heinous crime that the international community would be morally responsible for punishing.
Shown above are over 5000 skirts, which were hung in a football stadium in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo, in June 2015 to honor the victims of sexual violence.
The intent of this project is to increase awareness of these war crimes.
Various native peoples are now fighting back across the globe against the injustice they believe states have perpetrated against them.
The members of these nonstate nations, however, are often outnumbered and divided about their objectives.
Most indigenous movements only seek a greater voice in redirecting the policies and allocation of resources within existing states and are eliciting the support of NGOs and intergovernmental organizations to pressure states to recognize their claims and protect their rights.
Substantial numbers of indigenous movements in the last decade have successfully negotiated settlements resulting in devolution —the granting of regional political power that increases local self-governance.
Examples include the Miskitos in Nicaragua, the Gagauz in Moldova, and most regional separatists in Ethiopia as well as in India’s Assam region.
The goal expressed in the UN Charter of promoting “universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms” is very challenging for many nationally diverse countries.
The belief that one’s nationality is superior to all others undermines human rights.
Some analysts predict that conflict within and between ethnically divided states will become a major axis on which twenty-first-century world politics will revolve.
The policy proposals crafted to address these questions may involve controversial trade-offs, and point to the difficulties in appropriately responding to the global refugee crisis in particular , and human rights abuse in general.
A global consensus has emerged that the status of women needs to improve if human rights and development are to progress.
They have introduced the world to the incontrovertible evidence that women’s status in society, and especially their education, profoundly influences human development and that the treatment of women is a global rights issue that affects everyone.
Gender inequality —difference in living standards between men and women—erodes human development and human rights, and is reflected in differences found in female mortality and fertility rates, political power and educational attainment, and participation in the workforce.
Step It Up for Gender Equality A major campaign launched by the United Nations that calls upon governments to make concrete commitments to gender equality and women’s empowerment Gender inequality varies enormously around the world, and is especially prevalent in three Global South regions: South Asia, the Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa.
Women continue to be responsible for the bulk of family labor and care work and are underrepresented in positions of power in business, academia, media, and law.
Today, women continue to be vastly underrepresented in decision-making positions in government, even in democracies and developed countries.
Gender differences in parliaments around the world are highly skewed in favor of men.
In most societies, politics is seen “as a largely male sport—unarmed combat—and women are very often ignored or pushed aside in an effort to gain or consolidate power,” explained former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
Moreover, she continued, “where women are disempowered and dehumanized, you are more likely to see not just antidemocratic forces, but extremism that leads to security challenges,” both within the home country and for the world at large.
Women continue to be the primary victims of sex trafficking and sexual violence, and not until 2001 did the International Criminal Court confirm “sexual enslavement” as a war crime—a fact that feminists point out as an example of the traditional disregard for women’s human rights.
For many in liberal Western countries that focus on social, political, and economic equality of the sexes, these traditions are difficult to understand.
And 5 Countries With None Micronesia, Palau, Qatar, Vanuatu, and Yemen MAP 13.
GENDER POLITICS There are now more women in government than ever before.
The proportion of women in national parliaments grew by only 1 percent between 1975 and 1995, compared to 8 percent between 1998 and 2008.
There is only one woman for every four males in legislatures around the world, and in mid-2015 only twenty-eight heads of state were female.
According to the United Nations, ""countries with 'first past the post' electoral systems without any type of quota arrangements will not reach the 40 percent threshold of women in public office until near to the end of this century"" . shape ideas and values as well as the freedom to make choices and participate equally in social, political, and economic life.
Once the concept of empowerment gained acceptance as a lens through which to construct a view of the core issues on the global agenda, gender issues became a central concern.
Shown left is Dilma Rousseff, who was inaugurated as Brazil's first female president on January 1, 2011.
Pictured right is United States Major General Maggie Woodward, who, in 2011, became the first woman in United States history to command a military air campaign when the United States participated in attacks against Libya.
I hope I'm an inspiring figure to lots of little boys and girls"" . transformation is under way.
Greater economic empowerment for women has been achieved through progressive legislation that has prohibited discriminatory practices, guaranteed equal pay, provided for maternity and paternity leave, and put in place protection against sexual harassment in the workplace.
Governments have turned their back on the idea that violence against women is a private affair, with laws in every region now outlawing this scourge in its many manifestations.
Roughly 80,000 Africans were brought to the New World each year during the peak of the slave trade in the 1780s.
Contemporary slavery typically involves women and children being forced into servitude through violence and deprivation.
The United Nations has found that the leading form of human trafficking is sexual exploitation, which accounts for 79 percent of the trafficking of women and 53 percent of the slave trade overall.
This form of human trafficking is on the rise and accounts for 83 percent of male trafficking victims and 40 percent of the slave trade as a whole.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ gendercide Systematic killing of members of a specific gender. and/or eChapter.
GLOBAL HUMAN TRAFFICKING FLOWS Almost every country is affected by the slave trade.
The two largest forms of exploitation of trafficking victims throughout each region are sexual exploitation and forced labor/servitude.
Children and Human Rights Children are one of the most dependent and vulnerable groups in society, and their human rights are frequently violated.
They face horrific neglect and abuse, as evident in their suffering from unmitigated hunger and illness, slavery for labor or sexual exploitation, and conscription as child soldiers.
Because children are “easy targets,” they are sometimes threatened, beaten or raped in order to punish family members who are not so accessible.
Shown right, a starving farmer in Afghanistan, Akhtar Mohammed, watches his ten-year-old son, Sher, whom he traded to a wealthy farmer in exchange for a monthly supply of wheat.
Though child mortality has declined in every region of the world since I960, almost 7 million children every year still do not live to see their fifth birthday.
Progress is being made toward improving conditions for children, and the underfive mortality rate is declining faster than at any other time during the past two decades, with many regions halving the number of children that die young.
Not only are children often orphaned or separated from their families without food or care, but many are also direct participants in war.
The United Nations estimates that 300,000 boys and girls between the ages of seven and eighteen were recruited and used as child soldiers in over fifty countries in violation of international law.
The absence of clear front lines and identifiable opponents, the increasing use of terror tactics by some armed groups and certain methods used by security forces have made children more vulnerable.
Children are being used as suicide bombers and human shields, while schools continue to be attacked, affecting girls’ education in particular, and to be used for military purposes.
In addition, children are being held in security detention for alleged association with armed groups.
To confront these consequences of armed conflict, it is essential that political leaders be committed to the welfare of children.
In June 2015, the UN Security Council reaffirmed its commitment to the protection of children affected by armed conflict by adopting a resolution that denounced attacks or abuse against children.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child embraced these sentiments, which the United Nations adopted on November 20, 1989.
As the human rights NGO Amnesty International enthusiastically proclaimed, “Here for the first time was a treaty that sought to address the particular human rights of children and to set minimum standards for the protection of their rights.
It is the only international treaty to guarantee civil and political rights as well as economic, social, and cultural rights.” > ""^^tBSIoser Look INSECURITY IN CHILDHOOD In March 2015, UNICEF estimated that of those fleeing the violence in Syria, 2 million of the refugees seeking shelter in Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey were children.
In what has become a major civil war, reports of the Syrian government intentionally targeting civilians—including the death and torture of innocent children and women—have emerged and been met with international condemnation.
Syria presents a grim example of the fate of many children who suffer physical and emotional trauma from violence and displacement.
Tragically, this story is one that is repeated frequently in other countries throughout the world where children suffer from sfarvafion, lack of education, life-threatening illness, physical abuse, forced labor, and sexual slavery.
Executive Director Justin Forsyth of fhe NGO Save the Children urged “this indiscriminate killing must stop now.
Specific protecfion measures for children, provision of nutritional supplies, and support for educafion programs are needed.
Statists or legalists reject protecting human rights in other states because it represents an unwarranted intrusion into the domestic affairs of others and an infringement upon state sovereignty.
The most common manifestations of this phenomenon are the expanding laws that regulate the practices that sovereign states may use.
The human rights revolution has advanced moral progress by breaking states’ monopoly on international affairs and over citizens.
Pictured on the left is Bibi Aisha, an Afghan woman whose husband cut off her nose and ears as punishment for running away from her abusive in-laws.
Pictured on the right is actress Emma Watson, appointed by the United Nations as a Goodwill Ambassador in July 2014.
Moreover, international law has fundamentally revised the traditional realist conception of the state by redefining the relationship of states to humans.
As former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan notes, “States are now widely understood to be instruments at the service of their people, and not vice versa.
Multilateral treaties have proliferated as part of a global effort to construct a consensus on the rights of all humanity and put an end to human rights violations.
Numerous conventions have been enacted that have increasingly recognized individual rights—asserting that people must be treated as worthy of the freedom and dignity traditionally granted by international law to states and rulers.
Moreover, from the perspective of international law, a state is obligated to respect the human rights of its own citizens as well as those of another country, and the international community has the prerogative to challenge any state that does not respect these rights.
Additionally, there are hundreds of widely accepted legal instruments and political declarations across a broad array of human rights issues.
The International Labor Organization and regional organizations, such as the African Union, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and the European Court of Human Rights, also have established human rights protections.
In addition, some countries endorse human rights treaties merely as a superficial symbolic commitment and continue to repress human rights.
The principles that guide humanitarian intervention continue to be a matter of heated debate.
The issue is not whether there exists a compelling need and moral obligation to express concerns about populations at risk of slaughter, starvation, or persecution; the issue is about how to craft a just response, when any response will comprise interference in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state.
Humanitarian intervention is controversial because it pits the legal principle of territorial sovereignty against what some see as a moral responsibility to protect vulnerable populations from egregious violations of human rights.
Although the construction of global human rights norms has made great strides over the past sixty years, the enforcement of these laws has lagged.
Within the United Nations, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is responsible for implementing international human rights agreements, overseeing major human rights programs, and providing global leadership in promoting and protecting human rights.
A5Z The Promotion of Human Development and Human Rights The CSS Point making recommendations about the best course of action.
In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the dismay of human rights advocates who felt that this greatly diminished the role of the ICO and sent a negative message about the importance of human rights around the world.
In response to these limitations, NGOs have assumed an important role in promoting human rights.
Because of their reputation for accuracy, their findings are relied on by the news media, many governments, and most intergovernmental institutions.
Their efforts account, in part, for the establishment of UN tribunals that review gross human rights abuse, as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and the creation of the International Criminal Court.
Although some individuals remain skeptical of claims that we all have transcendent moral obligations to humanity as a whole, others believe that every person, by virtue of being human, has certain inherent and inalienable rights that warrant international protection.
Because concerns for human rights have gained stature under international law and are being monitored more closely than ever before by IGOs and NGOs, we can expect human rights to receive continuing attention, as long as people are caught in emergency situations such as genocide or the threat of famine.
In the next chapter of World Politics, you have an opportunity to look at another major issue that entails rights and responsibility to humanity.
Shown here are women protesting in Kabul, Afghanistan, to demand the repeal of a law authorizing a range of extreme human rights violations, including marital rape.
A blog sponsored by gendercide Human Development Index human needs human rights Web Resources Amnesty International documenting global human rights issues.
A blog by UNICEF consisting of articles regarding international human rights.
A collection of blog posts by the World Bank regarding poverty and human development.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Human Rights * Gender Inequality • Human Development Index • Humanitarian Intervention Additional Videos • Goldhagen, Daniel Jonah.
Just three weeks later, on May 12, the country suffered a second earthquake measuring 7.3.
Members of the international community including India, China, the United States, and Israel provided relief-and-rescue assistance.
Most scientists are pessimistic and are now certain that the threat of global warming is real.
They are themselves alarmed by optimists who fail to face the “clear and present danger” of environmental threats and undertake the reforms necessary to stem the tide of global change.
The ecological threats that rivet the worried scientific community have led many to advocate immediate and sweeping changes by governments, before it is too late to save the human race from doom.
In this chapter, you have the opportunity to sharpen your own thinking by weighing the available evidence about prevailing global trends that affect the environment that we all share.
So take a look at various dimensions of the planet’s ecology now in transformation and base your stand on these global issues on information that can better ground your existing opinions.
Consider also the extent to which humanity is responsible for preserving our global environment.
Earth provides enough to satisfy every man’s needs, but not every man’s greed. —Mohandas Gandhi, Indian peace activist iTi FRAMING THE ECOLOGICAL DEBATE environmental security A concept recognizing that environmental threats to global life systems are as dangerous as the threat of armed conflicts.
The environment is linked to other priorities, such as security, economic prosperity, and social well-being.
Because fears of a nuclear holocaust and other forms of violence have long haunted the world, security has been conventionally equated with national security, the struggle for state power central to realist theory and its emphasis on armed conflict.
These problems are just as much a threat to humanity as to the environment.
Because environmental degradation undercuts economic well-being and quality of life, liberalism informs current thinking about how states can cooperate with international organizations and nongovernmental organizations to preserve the global environment.
The liberal epistemic community has redefined “security” in order to move beyond realism’s conventional state-centric and militaristic portrayal of international politics.
Today, many experts urge people and governments to construct a broader definition of what really constitutes security, much like what the United States Department of Defense did in April 2007 when it warned that global warming should be regarded as a threat to American national security.
This shift is compatible with liberal theory, which emphasizes that security should be defined as the capacity to protect quality of life.
Out of conditions of global poverty and want emerge the so-called of scarcity, which anticipates that future international conflict will likely be caused by resource scarcities—restricted access to food, oil, and water, for example—rather than by overt military challenges.
Moreover, insufficient or polluted resources will depress the living conditions of all of the people on the Earth, but particularly those in the Global South, where the ability and political will to address environmental challenges are limited.
These global environmental issues engage the competing perspectives of optimistic cornucopians and pessimistic neo-Malthusians.
Gornucopians adhere to the belief that if free markets and free trade prevail, ecological imbalances that threaten humanity will eventually be corrected.
For them, prices are the key adjustment mechanism that ultimately produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
Neo-Malthusians, on the other hand, have a lot in common with economic mercantilism, which argues that free markets fail to prevent excessive resource exploitation and that, accordingly, intervention by governing institutions is necessary.
This latter perspective rejects the belief that the free market will always maximize social welfare.
The neo-Malthusian pessimists sounding the alarm about the signs of ecological deterioration, and the cornucopian optimists confidently extolling the virtues of free markets and technological innovation in saving the planet, portray very different visions of the global future.
How we frame our understanding of environmental challenges will affect our policy prescriptions.
It will also influence the extent to which the world community has the political will and capacity to cope with ecological problems and expand the possibilities for human security.
The planet’s carrying capacity —the Earth’s ability to support and sustain life—is at the center of this discussion.
Tonight there will be 219,000 people at the dinner table who were not there last night, many of them with empty plates.
Relentless population growth is putting excessive pressure on local land and water resources in many countries, making it difficult if not impossible for farmers to keep pace . tragedy of the commons k metaphor, widely used to explain the impact of human behavior on ecological systems, that explains how rational selfinterested behavior by individuals may have a destructive, undesirable collective impact.
No single cause is by itself responsible for the alarming trends in the global environment.
Rather, many causes interact with each other to produce the dangers that are damaging the world’s life systems upon which human existence depends.
First articulated in 1833 by English political economist William Foster Lloyd, the concept was later popularized and extended to contemporary global environmental problems by human ecologist Garrett Hardin, in his famous 1968 article published in the journal Science.
This approach PRESERVING A LIFE-SUSTAINING RESOURCE Many of the world's waterways face serious pollution threats—from sources such as industrial wastewater, raw sewage, garbage, and oil spills—that pose great risk to human health and environmental sustainability.
Although it stresses the importance of individual action and personal motivations, it also ascribes those motives to collectivities or groups such as corporations and entire countries.
Lloyd, and later Hardin, asked observers to consider what happened in medieval English villages, where the village green was typically considered common property on which all villagers could let their cattle graze.
Sharing the common grazing area worked well as long as individuals didn’t reduce the land’s usefulness to everyone else.
However, assuming that the villagers were driven by the profit motive and that no laws existed to restrain their greed, herders had incentive to increase their stock as much as possible.
If pushed, individual herders might concede that the collective interest of all would be served if each contained the size of his herd rather than increasing it, so that the commons could be preserved.
But self-restraint—voluntary reduction of the number of one’s own cattle to relieve the pressure on the village commons—was not popular.
This is especially true because there was no guarantee that others would do the same.
By contrast, adding more animals to the village green would produce a personal gain whose costs would have to be borne by everyone.
Therefore, in accordance with economic rational choice, the individual pursuit of wealth encouraged all to increase indiscriminately the size of their herds, and it discouraged selfsacrifice for the common welfare.
The tragedy of the commons has become a standard concept in ecological analysis because it aptly illuminates the sources of environmental degradation as well as many other global problems and predicaments.
Overuse of common property is also highlighted, as when the oceans and atmosphere are used by some as a sink for environmental pollutants whose costs are borne by all.
However, you have probably already noted that experts disagree about the moral and ethical implications of Hardin’s interpretation.
Note that the logical conclusion is that reforms are necessary if we are to save planet Earth.
The needed changes will require both self-restraint on people’s freedom of choice as well as a modicum of regulation to control the ruinous consequences of the tragedy of an unmanaged global commons.
Theorists adhering to realism and free-market mercantilism resolutely defend freedom of economic choice without regulation as the best path to realizing the greatest good for the greatest number.
Shown here is a ""dead forest"" in Madagascar, which has lost over 80 percent of its forest due mostly to slash-and-burn rice farming that also exhausts the soil and destroys the habitats of countless species. profit will benefit all in the long run, producing more income and technological innovation than would otherwise occur under supervisory regulation of corporations, entrepreneurs, and investors.
They also feel that minimal interference in the pursuit of personal gain is helpful to the preservation of the Earth’s environment.
According to their reasoning, the pursuit of private gain with little restraint is a virtue, not a vice.
Almost all religious moral traditions question this realist and mercantilist conclusion.
The predictable outcome of selfishness and blind dedication to personal financial gain over other values such as altruistic love and compassion for humankind is a path to certain ruin and sin.
These and other ethical questions bear directly on the debate about what is causing the degradation of the planetary commons and what, if anything, should be done to counter it, and at what cost.
The next step is for you to characterize and estimate the nature and magnitude of environmental threats and challenges.
The clusters illustrate some of the obstacles to the preservation of common properties and renewable resources.
The Ecopolitics of the Atmosphere The scores of government negotiators and nongovernmental representatives who converged in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 came in the wake of the hottest decade on record.
For years, scientists had warned that global warming—the gradual rise in world temperature—would cause destructive changes in world climate patterns and that rising sea levels, melting glaciers, and freak storms would provoke widespread changes in global political and economic relationships.
Since then, fears have spread with the continuing rise in planetary temperatures and extreme weather events, and attention to the pollutants blamed for global warming has also risen.
Climate Change and Global Warming Major gaps in knowledge about climate change remain, but most climate scientists are now convinced that the gradual rise in the Earth’s temperature, especially evident since the late eighteenth century when the invention of powerdriven machinery produced the Industrial Revolution, is caused by an increase in human-made gases that alter the atmosphere’s insulating effects.
The gas molecules, primarily carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons , form the equivalent of a greenhouse roof by trapping heat emitted from Earth that would otherwise escape into outer space.
The changing temperatures are expected to have a profound effect on animal and plant life across the world.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ greenhouse effect The phenomenon producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a blanket in the atmosphere, thereby increasing temperatures. and/or eChapter.
RISING AVERAGE GLOBAL TEMPERATURES The NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies monitors average global surface temperatures around the world.
Its records indicate that since 2000, as depicted in the graph above, thirteen of the fifteen warmest years since 1880 have occurred.
With greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels on the rise, scientists predict that long-term temperatures will continue to increase.
The map on the bottom projects the globe's most intense hot spots in 2090. vvww.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net Id.
The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration makes a similar forecast, anticipating that temperature may increase by 2. to 10. degrees Fahrenheit within that same time span.
Although CO^ is the principal greenhouse gas, concentrations of methane in the atmosphere are growing even more rapidly.
To the alarm of many scientists, the largest concentrations of methane are not in the atmosphere but are locked in ice, permafrost, and coastal marine sediments.
This means that as the global temperature increases, more methane will be released into the atmosphere, which would then increase global temperatures because of methane’s strong warming potential.
The effects of continued rising temperatures around the globe will be both dramatic and devastating; ■ Sea levels will rise, mostly because of melting glaciers and the expansion of water as it warms up.
This will produce massive flooding in vast areas of low-lying coastal lands, especially in Asia and the United States Atlantic coast.
As ocean temperatures continue to rise, hurricanes, which draw their energy from warm oceans, will become stronger and more frequent.
A hotter Earth will drive some plant life to higher latitudes and greater elevations.
Many see the increase in extreme weather events such as these as evidence of global climate change.
Some scientists insist the rise in global temperature is only part of a cyclical change the world has experienced for thousands of years.
The IPCC first stated in 1995 its belief that global climate trends are “unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes,” that humans are to blame for at least part of the problem, and that the consequences are likely to be very harmful and costly.
However, Asian dynamos Ghina and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil-fuel energy.
The figure on the right identifies the distribution of carbon-equivalent greenhouse gas emissions by region from 2001 and projected through the year 2025. the increase from the entire industrialized world.
Compare the existing and new industrial giants’ consumption of energy and production of greenhouse gases with those of the low-income Global South countries.
They, too, are growing rapidly , and their appetite for fossil fuel energy sources is on the rise.
Rather than comparing rich and poor countries, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences has suggested that “it is rich people, rather than rich countries, who need to change the most.
Although far too difficult to implement, the proposal highlights how the lower level of carbon emissions in the Global South masks the variation within states where the wealthy contribute at a far higher rate to environmental degradation than the poor.
The politics of global warming are dramatically illustrated by the tensions between the countries trying to carve up the Arctic in order to reap economic payoffs from exploiting the resources that lie beneath the polar ice cap.
A “frozen conflict” is being waged in the melting north for what, according to the United States Geological Survey, amounts to one-eighth of the globe’s untapped oil and perhaps as much as 25 percent of its gas reserves.
The disappearing ice also offers new sea routes, at least for part of the year, which significantly reduces the time it takes for ships to travel from Europe to Asia.
In the summer of 2014, seventy-one cargo ships travelled the north-east passage, an increase from forty-six in 2012.
As global warming melts the Arctic ice, countries are laying claims to portions of the territory.
None of this international friction would have materialized had global warming not made competition for control of this geostrategic arena possible.
Ozone Depletion and Protection The story of climate change is similar to states’ efforts to cope with the depletion of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer.
In this case, however, an international regime has emerged, progressively strengthened by mounting scientific evidence that environmental damage is directly caused by human activity.
Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth with a critical layer of protection against the sun’s harmful ultra-violet radiation. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ■ Melted Ice FEELING THE HEAT The IPCC has concluded that evidence of the Earth’s rising temperatures is ""unequivocal"" and that global warming is more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity.
Satellite maps show that on July 8, 2012 (shown left), about 40 percent of the ice sheet's surface had melted, and that by July 12 a shocking 97 percent of the ice sheet had turned to slush.
Scientists began to link halons and CFCs to ozone depletion in the early 1970s.
However, in spite of reductions in CFCs over the past twenty years, the ozone hole over Antarctica continues to expand, and depletion of the protective ozone shield is expected to continue before it begins to regenerate itself Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products began to phase them out.
Developed countries agreed to provide aid to help the developing countries adopt CFC alternatives, but they have failed to provide all of the promised resources.
The Ecopolitics of Biodiversity, Deforestation, and Water Shortages Success at containing ozone depletion has raised hopes that other environmental threats can also be given priority over vested financial interests.
Forests and water resources are critical in preserving the Earth’s biodiversity and protecting the atmosphere and land resources.
For these reasons, they have become a rising ecological issue on the global agenda.
Some rules have emerged to guide international behavior in the preservation of biodiversity, but issues concerning the preservation of forests and the supply of water resources have proven much more difficult to address.
Until recently, public attention has focused almost exclusively on preserving species diversity by protecting ecosystems, including old forests, tail-grass prairies, wetlands, coastal habitats, and coral reefs.
Scientists believe that the global habitat contains between 8 and 10 million species.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf biodiversity The variety of plant and animal species living in the Earth's diverse ecosystems. and/or eChapter.
Of the nearly 300,000 plant species surveyed by the World Conservation Union, more than 8000 are threatened with extinction, mainly as a result of clearing land for housing, roads, and industries.
Extinction risks will accelerate with a rise in future global temperatures and are expected to threaten one in six species.
Because much of the Earth’s biological heritage is concentrated in the tropics, the Global South also has a growing concern about protecting its interests in the face of efforts by MNCs to reap profits from the sale of biological products.
MNCs in the Global North are major players in the so-called enclosure movement, which is geared to privatize and commercialize the products derived from plant and animal genes that are the genetic bases for sustained life.
Concern in the Global South is centered on the idea that the genetic character of the many species of plants and animals should be considered a part of the global commons and therefore available for commercial use by all, for their medical benefit.
Biogenetic engineering threatens to escalate the erosion of global diversity.
Map 14. shows and Polynesia 3,334 I—I Tropical rain forest I—I Tropical dry forest I—I Arid ecosystem I—I Temperate forest I—I Mediterranean ecosystem I—I Grassland MAP 14.
They are located in primarily tropical wilderness territories laden with plant and animal species yet covering only 2 percent of the land.
It also shows the location of “biodiversity hot spots,” where human activity threatens to disturb and potentially destroy many species that international law defines as collective goods, a resource for all humanity from which everyone benefits.
According to the UN, about 50,000 plant and animal species become extinct each year as the global community wrestles with the ethics of biodiversity preservation and management policies.
Shrinking Forests and Dust Bowls Trends since the 1980s show considerable deforestation throughout much of the world.
This has led to deforestation and desertification, which turn an increasing portion of the Earth’s landmass into deserts that are useless for agricultural productivity or wildlife habitats.
Additionally, soil degradation has stripped billions of acres of the Earth’s surface from productive farming.
In the Global North, reforestation has begun to alleviate some of the danger.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf deforestation The process of clearing and destroying forests. desertification The creation of deserts due to soii erosion, overfarming, and deforestation, which converts cropiand to nonproductive, arid sand. and/or eChapter.
This map displays the extent to which human activity, as opposed to natural environmental factors alone, is likely to lead to further desertification or degraded dry lands in regions across the glohe.
Although biofuels such as ethanol are often touted as being eco-friendly, critics point out that ethanol destroys forests, contributes to global warming, and inflates food prices.
From the viewpoint of climate change, green plants remove CO^ from the atmosphere during photo-synthesis.
So the natural processes that remove greenhouse gases are also being destroyed when forests are cut down and, as the forests decay or are burned, the amount of CO^ released into the atmosphere further increases.
The Amazon continues to be cleared at an alarming pace amid heated national debate over whether to ease Brazil’s Forest Code, which has required 80 percent of a landholding in the Amazon to remain forest.
Supporters of the current law fear that change will lead to greater destruction of the Amazon rain forest, whereas those who seek to reduce the restrictions argue that the law presently inhibits economic development.
Most of the population growth over the next twenty-five years—an additional 1. billion people—are expected to live in water-stressed areas.
In arid and semiarid regions, major aquifers are being dangerously over pumped, and poor irrigation practices are depleting limited groundwater reservoirs.
Almost 2 billion people use water that is critically polluted with human waste.
In India, for example, the Yamuna River—one of the most polluted rivers in the world—is the primary source of water for people in the capital territory of Delhi, which has a metropolitan population of around 16. million.
At the 2015 World Economic Forum held in Davos, Switzerland, business and political leaders identified water crises as having the largest potential impact as a source of risk facing the world.
This was a dramatic change from five years prior, when water ranked low on the list of global concerns.
Yet despite the increased awareness of the interconnection between environmental stressors, conflict, inhibited economic growth, and human security, there is pessimism about the potential for water problems to be solved.
In 2014, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization warned that drought in Central America had reduced maize output by around 9 percent, resulting in 400,000 families in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras needing food assistance.
Due to long-standing policy and practice, for instance, farmers from Pakistan to Kansas pump groundwater for their crops not only without paying for it, but often without limit or even keeping track of how much they use.
It’s seen almost as an entitlement; charging farmers for water or insisting on better irrigation technology inspires outrage and resistance.
Similarly, leisurely daily showers and lush lawns explain how Americans end up using twice the amount of water per person as Europeans do.
Adopted by the United Nations in 1993, this annual observation draws global attention to the critical role of water in sustaining human life and well-being.
Moreover, nearly one out of every five people in the world lacks access to safe drinking water.
The World Health Organization estimates that millions of people die every year from diseases caused by poor water quality, inadequate sanitation, or poor hygiene.
As the world’s population has risen, the demand for water has also increased.
With the simultaneous growth in urbanization, demand has exceeded the capacity of the already insufficient water supply and sanitation infrastructure in many cities throughout the Global South.
Furthermore, as countries across the world become wealthier, their populations tend to shift from vegetarian to meaty diets, which include foods that require more water to produce.
Jean Chretien, former Canadian prime minister and co-chair of the InterAction Council, warns that the “future political impact of water scarcity may be devastating.
Throughout the twentieth century, the demand for and consumption of oil—the primary fossil fuel supplying energy—spiraled upward.
An abundant supply of cheap oil facilitated the recovery of Western Europe and Japan after World War II and encouraged consumers to use energy-intensive technologies, such as the private automobile.
The International Energy Agency predicts that, even taking into account gains in efficiency , the world will be using 50 percent more oil in 2030 than it does now.
Following the severe deflation of oil prices in the 1990s, mergers took place between many of the large oil companies in an effort to improve the scale of production.
There are now six “supermajors” in the oil industry—Chevron, ExxonMobil, BP, Royal Dutch Shell, ConocoPhillips and Total S.A.— also collectively called “Big Oil” in reference to their substantial economic power and political influence.
Other dominant players in the oil industry include large state-owned oil companies such as Pemex in Mexico, Saudi Aramco, Petroleos de Venezuela, and China National Petroleum.
State ownership of oil companies enables governments to maintain control over energy reserves and production sites, and retain the revenue generated by the production process within the national economy.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , an intergovernmental organization of twelve oil-exporting developing countries that coordinates the petroleum policies of its members, remains important as well.
Although its influence has decreased in recent years, historically OPEC has set production targets for its members in order to manage the price of oil on the global market for both economic and political purposes.
The global oil industry has been characterized by periods of boom and bust, as seen just within the past decade.
Between 2009 and 2015, proI duction in the United States almost doubled, due in large part to growth in American shale-oil firms.
At the same time, Iraqi and Canadian oil production and exports increased annually, and the Russians continued to be among the world’s leading oil suppliers.
Furthermore, in recent years the members of OPEC have had difficulty agreeing to production quotas.
Venezuela, Iran, and Algeria pressed the cartel to slow production in order to push prices up, but the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia refused to do so.
Another challenge facing the world is how to balance the demand for oil against the environmental, economic, and health risks posed by drilling.
This dilemma is starkly illustrated by the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.
The controversy over fracking is another example, with critics lamenting the environment cost associated with the large amounts of water needed for the technique, the potentially dangerous chemicals that may escape and contaminate the FIGURE 14.
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF THE PRICE FOR OIL As seen here, there are three very different projections regarding world oil prices between now and 2030.
Most analysts expect that oil demand will grow as the world economy recovers.
In response to the threat of future shortages and the risk of heavy dependence on oil, the Global North may be on the verge of a potentially historic juncture that would overturn the pivotal place of oil in the global political economy.
Future prosperity and stability means rethinking how we exploit the planet’s natural assets. —Ban Ki-moon, UN secretary-general 14 4 TOWARD SUSTAINABILITY AND HUMAN SECURITY Across the globe, people desire to live in a clean and green environment and seek to avoid ones that are polluted, unhealthy, and prone to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and typhoons.
Environmental activists argue that the Earth is at a critical point and even more attention to environmental preservation is needed.
The Quest for Sustainable Development Environmental decay seems to recognize few borders; it is a worldwide problem, for both poor and rich countries.
Recommended changes to protect and preserve planet Earth’s ecology may be expensive, but it is important to try.
The commission concluded that the world cannot sustain the growth required to meet the needs and aspirations of the world’s growing population unless it adopts radically different approaches to basic issues of economic expansion, equity, resource management, and energy efficiency, among other areas of concern.
Before the Earth Summit, the environment and economic development had been treated separately—and often regarded as being at odds with each other because economic growth frequently imperils and degrades the environment.
Other international conferences have since punctuated the strong consensus behind the proposition that all politics—even global politics—are local, as what happens any place ultimately affects conditions every place, and accordingly that the protection of Earth’s environment is a primary international security issue.
At the UN Climate Conference in Paris in December 2015, members gathered to discuss an agreement that would reduce global emissions by at least 60 percent below 2010 levels by 2050.
Says UN climate chief Christiana Figueres, “Whatever gets done over the next 10 to 15 years, whatever gets invested particularly in the energy system ... is going to determine the energy matrix that we will have for at least 50 years.
Many scholars and policy makers are convinced that threats to the preservation of the global commons likewise threaten our basic welfare and security.
Sustainable development is crucial to striking a responsible balance for preserving the global environment and providing the resources needed to sustain human life and prosperity.
Although the goal of sustainable development remains distant and frustrations about lost opportunities are mounting, governmental and nonstate actors’ acceptance of the concept continues to inspire creative, environmentally sensitive responses.
In a political world in which growing population means growing demand for energy, food, and other resources, the politics of scarcity becomes central.
Globally, increased food prices have created civil unrest and a wave of humanitarian crises in the developing world.
As fears of food scarcity spread, panic buying ensued, and governments responded by enacting export bans and emergency price controls.
Extreme weather events—such as droughts in Ghina, Russia, and Argentina and flooding in Ganada, Pakistan, and the United States—destroy agricultural crops and lead to disruptions in the market.
Growth in population, and the explosion of megacities in the Global South, have created changes in diet that occur due to increased wealth and urbanization.
A HUNGRY WORLD The rising cost of agricultural commodities has led to food price inflation in many countries throughout the world.
The graph shows that, despite a sharp drop in 2008, three food prices spikes have occurred since the turn of the century.
There is more than enough food produced per capita to feed all of the people In the world today, and seventy-two countries in the Global South met the Millennium Development Goal of reducing the proportion of hungry people by 50 percent by 2015.
Those who live in poverty have the highest levels of food insecurity, and are hit the hardest by rising food prices.
According to the United Nations, it is likely that global food prices could nearly double by 2050.
Droughts in China cut its wheat production by almost a third, and flooding in Ecuador played a key role In the recent rise of banana prices.
These bans serve to decrease the world supply of these goods, which raises prices.
Along these lines, government encouragement of biofuel production has had an impact on food prices.
Agriculture relies heavily on petroleum for many aspects of production as well as transport, and the sector has thus been hit hard by increases in energy prices.
In particular, these countries have greatly increased their consumption of meat and dairy products.
Food insecurity is garnering more attention and rising on the political agenda.
Many international organizations have begun to articulate some type of response.
Moreover, some of the suggested solutions, such as genetic engineering and transgenic crops and livestock, are quite controversial and not supported by a variety of countries and NGOs.
Reform of national practices and policies is an intrinsic aspect of efforts to prevent and respond to food insecurity and promote sustainable development.
Converting to Renewable Sources of Energy How countries meet their growing demand for energy directly influences the evolution and preservation of the global commons.
A new and less destructive source of energy could soon emerge because of the advent of revolutionary new technologies that derive energy from the sun, wind, and other abundant and renewable sources of energy such as hydrogen.
Together, widely fluctuating oil prices and public alarm about global warming are pushing the world, however haltingly, toward cleaner and cheaper energy systems.
The supply of fossil fuels will not run out anytime soon, but the externalities or consequences of environmental and health threats make burning fossil fuels excessively dangerous.
The combustion of oil and coal is traced to lung cancer and many other health hazards.
However, safety and financial costs may limit the surge toward nuclear power; these problems have led some countries to reduce their nuclear programs.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ genetic engineering Research geared to discover seeds for new types of plant and human life for sale and use as substitutes for those produced naturally. transgenic crops New crops with Improved characteristics created artificially through genetic engineering that combine genes from species that would not naturally Interbreed. acid rain Precipitation that has been made acidic through contact with sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. and/or eChapter. ; restrictions require it.
SUPPLYING THE WORLD'S 1 GROWING ENERGY NEEDS BY THE YEAR 2035 The Global North 1 consumes, on average, four and a half times more energy per > capita than the Global South.
Though the demand for energy 2 from nonrenewable resources remains high, the development of I renewable sources to meet the world's energy needs is on the rise f . no less than five major accidents between 1995 and 1999 at Japan’s fifty-two nuclear power plants —dramatized the potential dangers of nuclear power.
Then, on March 11, 2011, a 9. earthquake and tsunami devastated Japan and caused extensive damage at its nuclear power stations.
Some 70,000 people were forced to evacuate from a twelve-mile radius of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant due to leaking radioactive materials.
Since then, safety fears concerning nuclear power have spread around the world.
FROM BOMBS TO BULBS On June 26,1954, a nuclear power plant In Obninsk, Russia, became the first in the world to generate electricity for commercial use.
The United States approved its first new nuclear project since the 1980s and provided $8. billion in federal loan guarantees to construct two nuclear reactors.
There are no safe procedures for handling the 52,000 tons of toxic radioactive nuclear waste, some of which will remain dangerous for hundreds of thousands of years.
Most nuclear energy generating facilities continue to produce weapons-grade material.
Other efforts to develop potential alternate fuel sources have also begun in hopes of breaking our dependence on fossil fuels.
Thomas L Friedman echoed this sentiment, arguing that countries clinging to fossil fuels will see their security and prosperity decline as compared to those that pioneer renewable energy technologies.
Seaweed and algae fields are touted as a THE UNFORGIVING COST OF NUCLEAR POWER FAILURE Shown here is the town of Pripyat, Ukraine, which was abandoned after the Chernobyl nuclear accident.
Indonesia and the Philippines, located within the “Pacific Ring of Fire,” are looking to harness volcanic power as a source of geothermal power.
And although presently too expensive for most people, Honda Motor has begun producing the world’s first hydrogen-powered fuel-cell car.
From it, a separate treaty set forth a comprehensive agreement for preserving biodiversity throughout the world.
The Biodiversity Treaty was followed by other international efforts to deal with environmental problems through global agreements.
In anticipation of the impending 2012 deadline for negotiating a successor to the Kyoto Protocol, the Global North committed to providing the Global South a total of $100 billion by 2020 to combat problems caused by climate change.
However, the countries failed to reach a long-term binding agreement on global climate change, and as of May 2015, only 32 countries had ratified the Doha Amendment agreeing to a second commitment period.
Yet the need to address environment challenges to the planet continues to be an issue of significant global concern.
Of the UN’s thirty-one major global environmental agreements, the United States has ratified only one-third.
Multinational corporations are also key players in the ecopolitics game that has the potential to determine the Earth’s fate.
The question is especially pertinent in a rapidly globalizing world in which trade increasingly links politics, economics, ecology, societies, and cultures in webs of ever-tightening interdependencies.
Beyond the issue of the gains from and the costs of trade, environmentalists and liberal economists differ in their assessments concerning the wisdom of using trade to promote environmental standards.
Elowever, another interpretation holds that trade PLAYING IN THE ""POISON POND"" Children play in the shadow of the former Union Carbide factory in Bhopal, India, the site of one of the worst industrial accidents in history.
The ""pond"" in which they are playing was a sludge pit containing chemical by-products from the former pesticide plant.
According to some ecologists, trade magnifies the damaging ecological effects of production and consumption by expanding the market for commodities beyond state borders.
A trend is under way in the corporate global finance culture that bodes well for the potential for global corporations to recognize that their profits will improve with investment in and development of “green” products, for which there is rising consumer demand worldwide.
The possibility that the international political economy will provide economic incentives for producing products that can contribute to global environment sustainability has inspired hope that the environmental dangers may be contained.
That hope is rising because some governments, corporations, and individuals are seeking local solutions to environmental sustainability.
A huge concern is that some very powerful states, advantageously positioned in the global hierarchy, are selfishly resisting painful and costly adjustments now.
Top Ten Green Corporations in the World, 2015 2015 Rank Company Country Sector GREEN SCORE Principal Actions 1 Biogen United States Health Care 89.
One facility has a 100,000 gallon cistern to collect rainwater for irrigation; two others condensate water and reuse it in its cooling towers.
Since 2010, Shire has reduced its paper usage by 22 percent and its landfill waste by 20 percent, while increasing its wastediversion rate by 43 percent.
In 2014, Shire attained carbon neutrality at all its North American facilities.
Allergan collects and analyzes water-use data from its facilities, which resulted in a 12 percent reduction of water usage between 2000 and 2014.
Reckitt Benckiser’s environmental risk-reduction targets for 2020 include zero waste-to-landfill and cutting water use by 35 percent, waste by 10 percent, and energy by 35 percent.
Adobe has reduced its electricity usage by 50 percent, natural gas usage by 30 percent, water usage by 79 percent, and irrigation usage by 71 percent.
It has also achieved carbon neutrality at all of its North American facilities.
Swisscom, one of Switzerland’s ten largest purchasers of power, has set goals to reduce energy use and greenhouse gasses, as well as to reduce paper consumption and recycle old cell phones.
Swisscom plans to improve energy efficiency by 35 percent from 2016 to 2020.
Unilever set the goal to decrease its environmental footprint by 50 percent and also started the brightFuture program in partnership with Global Citizen and Live Earth to recruit one billion people to commit to a better environment and society.
Broadcom has committed to increasing energy efficiency and reducing natural resource usage.
One way Broadcom has shown its commitment is through annual usage of over 17 million gallons of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation.
Roche Holding reduced its energy consumption per employee by 10 percent in five years and is now striving for a 20 percent reduction by 2020.
Roche Holding runs an “ECOmpetition” for employees every year to increase awareness of how individuals can contribute to sustainability.
BT has reduced its energy use by 4. percent in the last fiscal year, and reduced the amount of waste sent to landfills by 34 percent as well as its UK water use by 12 percent.
The company is in the process of helping its customers reduce carbon emissions by three tons and has already reached half of that goal.
Based on Newsweek Green Rankings 2015 of Global Companies. of their own existing environmental protection policies.
Numerous countries have managed to balance the risk of shortterm economic loss against the expectation of long-term economic growth by investing in costly renewable energy programs that can enable them to experience economic growth.
Clearly, some countries more so than others see environmental sustainability as a priority that protects their interests.
MEASURING NATIONAL COMMITMENTS TO ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY Measures of environmental protection performance suggest some countries are doing much more than many others to protect their environments.
Pictured are the 2014 EPI ratings of selected countries that illustrate these differences.
A collection of environment-related blogs put together by the Guardian.
What makes prediction so difficult is the sheer complexity and uncertainty surrounding world politicssome trends seem to move forward in the same direction, whereas others change direction; some trends intersect, whereas others diverge over time; and some trends are catalysts of others, whereas still different global trends impede others.
This photo shows a woman wearing a facial mask in Beijing, China to protect herself from the heavy smog caused by small particulate pollution.
In response to deteriorating environmental conditions, the government Is looking at new ways to protect the environment and the health of its people.
Yet there remains a tension between environmental protection and economic development—both conditions are products of prevailing trends In world politics.
Against a landscape of trend and transformation, humanity faces many dilemmas in a globalized world.
As former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton observed, ""The challenges of change are always hard.
Therefore, if we want to be practical, we must focus our attention on the trends and ideas that are shaping the future.
What will these changes mean for you, your family, your career, your community and your investments?"" —Tim Mack, futurist M any, sometimes conflicting, global trends are unfolding.
Some point toward integration, others toward fragmentation; the world looks like it is coming together and at the same time it is coming apart.
Seismic shifts that challenge the wisdom of old beliefs and traditions are under way.
Because both turmoil and turbulence describe contemporary international affairs, they require us to ask unconventional questions about conventional ideas.
They push us to think about the political, military, economic, demographic, and environmental pressures being brought to bear on the countries of the world, the people who reside in them, and their interactions.
To do so, you must consider a number of unusual and controversial questions rising to the top of the global agenda throughout the world.
However, the rival conclusions boldly advanced by would-be prophets are not likely to be very definitive, and often diverge wildly.
PUTTING YOURSELF IN THE PICTURE Many problems and challenges are expected to confront humanity in the twenty-first century.
As recognized by former UN Secretary-General Kofl Annan , “We face a world of extraordinary challenges—and of extraordinary interconnectedness.
To construct your own images of the future of world affairs, begin by thinking about the key questions that are likely to dominate international relations in the coming decades.
Armed with an understanding of how ideas about international relations are formed and retained, rejected, or replaced, imagine yourself at the end of a semester preparing to take the final exam in your course about international relations.
Your entire grade, your instructor tells you, will be determined by only one question.
There are really no right or wrong questions about international relations.
Indeed, there is little agreement about the trends and issues that are the most important in international affairs, and no scholarly consensus exists about the questions that deserve the greatest attention today.
To stimulate your thinking, make a preliminary list, based on what you now know after reading World Politics, of what you believe will be the crucial questions about the future of the world.
It concludes now by identifying a series of questions about the future that are high on the global agenda.
As a further catalyst for framing your own thinking, look critically at these questions.
How they are answered is widely expected to give shape to world politics throughout the remainder of the twenty-first century.
KEY QUESTIONS ABOUT A TURBULENT WORLD World Politics has argued that international relations are subject to recurring patterns.
It is governed by regular propensities, and this makes it possible to uncover “laws” or generalized action-and-reaction patterns.
Under certain conditions, it can be assumed that certain types of transnational actors respond in similar ways to the same types of stimuli.
Thus, despite regularities in world politics, social scientists cannot draw on a body of uniform, deterministic laws to precisely predict the global future.
Another factor that makes it difficult to predict the future is the role of happenstance in world politics.
Gonsider, for example, the outbreak of World War I Recall from Ghapter 4 that one of the proximate causes of the war was Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914.
Earlier that day, several would-be assassins had failed to find an opportunity to kill the archduke and had apparently given up in frustration.
When Ferdinand’s motorcade made a wrong turn enroute to visit patients in a city hospital, it stopped briefly in front of a cafe where Gavrilo Princip, one of the frustrated assassins, coincidentally had gone to get something to eat.
Although we cannot predict with certainty which one will materialize, we can narrow the range of possibilities by forecasting how current trends will likely develop and what steps may be taken to channel the course of events toward a global future we prefer.
The following six questions are designed to help you think about the future of world politics.
It is today we must create the world of the future. —Eleanor Roosevelt.
One answer has to do with “globalization,” a widely accepted socially constructed word understood as a transforming force that is creating sweeping governance crises in a new age of increasing interdependent complexity.
Globalization captures the idea that everything on the planet is now more closely connected than ever before, but only within an unsteady institutional foundation that is largely unprepared for the future.
The integration of the globe in this transformed, interconnected, borderless world and common cosmopolitan culture has reduced old feelings of independence, identity, and autonomy, and driven many states to surrender some of their sovereignty in order to benefit from collaborative participation in a competitive global marketplace.
Optimists, who are aware of the common destiny of all and the declining ability of many sovereign states to cope with global problems through unilateral self-help approaches, will energize efforts to put aside interstate competition.
According to this reasoning, conflict will recede as humanity begins to better recognize that national borders and oceans provide little protection against the multitude of challenges that arise from the global revolution in travel, communications, and trade.
These shared problems can only be managed through collective, multilateral cooperation.
Gonsequently, because globalization makes cooperation crucial to the well-being of everyone, the continued tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed.
What is especially important about globalization is that when everyone depends on everyone else, all must work together.
Global interdependence makes it imperative for states to renounce aggressive competition because they increasingly have a shared interest in cooperation and fewer and fewer incentives to fight.
Moreover, despite the successes of globalization, it is often difficult to maintain the necessary political will to support global initiatives—particularly regarding economic globalization—and international organizations only imperfectly fill this gap.
Shown here in Egypt are horse-drawn carriages parked in front of a McDonald’s, reflecting a blending of cultures and economies, traditionalism and modernity.
Although globalization certainly presents many challenges, it also provides opportunities to learn, prosper, and enjoy a world of great diversity and possibility.
Another issue with globalization concerns the distribution of its benefits.
Critics of globalization posit that it favors advantaged states but constrains the prospects of weak states, producing new inequalities as the gap between the wealthy and the poor widens.
Because its benefits may not be distributed equally, globalization may generate conflict between winners and losers.
Under conditions of fierce competition, scarcity, and resurgent nationalism, the temptation to seek isolation from globalization’s assault on national autonomy by creating barriers to trade and other transactions may be irresistible.
The temptation to achieve political benefits by military force will also persist.
Thus, the tightening web of globalization has the potential to lead to either danger or to opportunity.
From their perspective, with patience, technological solutions will eventually be found that will ease the most serious problems facing the world today.
Malnutrition and disease, they note as an example, may still exist; but as a result of technological advances in agriculture and medicine, many people are alive today who might have perished otherwise.
Technology is also profoundly important for the future of energy , both to identify alternative sources and to more efficiently use existing resources.
As advanced technology becomes cheaper and more accessible, it is likely to have a broader impact.
Perhaps such developments will reduce the need for states to compete over scarce energy resources, and thus lessen a potential source of global conflict.
In contrast to those who envision technological innovation as a way to increase economic growth and alleviate social welfare problems, some remain concerned that proposed technological solutions will only serve to compound current problems.
Whereas genetically modified crops are seen by optimists as a way to reduce famine, pessimists worry about the public health consequences.
At first, larger ships and improved maritime technology resulted in increases in the amount of fish harvested from the world’s oceans.
Likewise, critics decry the manner in which technological advancements have enabled governments to engage in widespread surveillance and targeted killings from afar.
From the proliferation of drones to clandestine electronic surveillance programs, an urgent need arises for greater transparency and global discussion about what constitutes the legitimate use of such technology, and what is an unacceptable infringement upon state sovereignty, individual rights and due process.
So, when you look at new technologies (stem cells, nanotechnology, human genomes, etc.), think counterfactually and imagine how things might turn out if new technologies had not been invented or how new ones might influence life on planet Earth for better or for worse.
Trends point toward the possibility that this may also happen for interstate wars, which have almost disappeared in modern history.
This achievement is raising expectations that large-scale warfare between countries will disappear and armed conflict between countries will become obsolete.
That said, the usefulness of traditional weapons of warfare against the emergent threats that now haunt the globe is questionable.
The old forms of military power still used by states today may be becoming impotent, and no level of military might can guarantee a state’s safety.
Whereas “third-generation” military thinking has influenced most countries since World War II, the threat of being attacked today by the military forces of another country has diminished, particularly in the Global North.
Unable to defeat conventional armies on the field of battle, irregular forces using unconventional tactics focus on their adversary’s will, using patience, ingenuity, and gruesome acts of violence to compel their opponent to face the mounting costs of continuing a long, drawn-out struggle.
Both state and nonstate actors are also turning to information technology and the Internet as unconventional weapons of war.
The ability of high-tech weapons to rapidly attack and disable thousands of targets introduces the possibility of highly volatile crises.
As a precursor to what may come, in December 2014 the United States government blamed North Korea for a cyberattack on Sony Pictures Entertainment in relation to a satiric movie about a plot to assassinate the North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un.
Many civilians are subject to widespread oppression and violence by governments presumably created to preserve law and order.
Of great concern is whether the moral outrage of the global community will be sufficient to spur concerted peacekeeping and peacemaking interventions to end human rights abuses in those countries where acceptable standards of conduct in international law have been blatantly disregarded.
Atrocities in many failed states each year expel tens of millions of refugees and displaced people from their homes.
In principle, human rights law now provides unprecedented protection for people everywhere to live in freedom without fear.
The traditional legal rule of state sovereignty and its corollary, the nonintervention norm against external interference in the internal affairs of states, have been revised.
There is growing support within the international community for a global responsibility to protect those who suffer from mass abuse at the hands of their state governments.
Principle is one thing; the reality of preventing human suffering is another.
Contention over whether the international community should intervene to stop human suffering in Syria, which intensified following the alleged use of chemical weapons in 2013, shows that these questions remain unresolved.
THE TRAGEDY OF HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSE According to a United Nations report, ISIS/ISIL and associated armed groups have violated international law and committed gross human rights abuses.
Shown here, Islamic State militants appear to be carrying out an execution of Ethiopian Christians in Libya.
As former French President Francois Mitterand once urged, “together we must urgently find the solutions to the real problems at hand—especially unemployment and underdevelopment.
These rhetorical positions reflect the problems and self-interests leaders face at home and abroad.
Flumankind may consequently self-destruct, not because it lacks opportunities, but because of its collective inability to see and to seize them.
However, they provide the vocabulary of diplomacy and inform theoretical discussion of governance and statecraft.
But the century that began full of self-confidence in the ultimate triumph of Western liberal democracy at its close to be returning full circle to where it started:... to the unabashed victory of economic and political liberalism.
Free governments practicing free trade, liberalism contends, can best create a sound world order.
A less reassuring possibility is that history has not “ended” and that the battle between totalitarian and democratic governance is not truly over.
There are signals that the march of democracy’s spread is stalling, and many countries are democracies in name only as they remain ruled by one-party despots who, although elected, disregard constitutional limits on their power and deny their citizens basic political, religious, and economic freedoms.
Although many countries are starting to regain their financial footing, the consensus on the virtues of commercial liberalism has been shattered.
The free market economies most exposed to the global economy bore the brunt of the financial damage, whereas countries that were relatively less open—ranging from India and China to Moldova—were less affected by the downturn.
The paradox of contemporary world politics is that a world no longer haunted by the paralyzing fear of a looming all-out war between great powers now faces a series of challenges every bit as threatening and potentially unmanageable.
Globalization has simultaneously enlarged the responsibilities and expanded the issues to be confronted.
The changes in recent years have spawned transnational threats to world order, in addition to resurgent nationalism, ethnic conflict, fragile states, and separatist revolts.
These include contagious diseases, human and drug trafficking, climate change, gender inequality, energy and food scarcities, desertification and deforestation, youth bulges and aging populations, and financial crises and collapsing economies.
Hfc i potential impact of these additional threats is formi■ ""S dable, as emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions and terrorism in almost any place and at any time in the world.
It has identified the most important changes under way that are leading to potential transformations in world politics.
Many trends are unfolding at the same time, and their combined impact can move the world along an unexpected trajectory.
In addition, trends can reverse themselves, and each trend advances at its own rate.
Some trends move very slowly in an evolutionary process that can only result in dramatic transformations over many centuries, whereas others exhibit short bursts of rapid change, interrupted by long periods without much change.
To appreciate the diverse ways trends may combine to affect each other, it is helpful to construct your images both by using memories of the past and by being inspired by visions of the future.
In 1775, American revolutionary Patrick Henry underscored the importance of history, stating that there was “but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of experience.
All of us need both perspectives, and a keen awareness that our images of history and the future must avoid the temptation to see ourselves and our own country as we wish to see them, without taking into account how differently others might view us and our state.
India and China are joining the United States, Russia, Europe, and Japan as major players in space exploration.
Pictured here is the first female Chinese astronaut, Liu Yang, during a departure ceremony on June 16, 2012.
Her accomplishments show that they have now soared past it . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net /ed.
Yet, juxtaposed against the revolutionary is the stable— the enduring rituals, existing rules, established institutions, and entrenched customs that resist the pull of the momentous recent changes in world politics.
Advances in science and technology far outpace the ability to resolve the social and political problems they generate.
Sophistication demands that we see the world as a whole, as well as its individual parts; it does not permit picturing others according to our self-images or projecting onto others our own values.
The future of world politics also rests on the outcome of a race between states’ ability to cooperate and their historic tendency to compete and fight.
Therefore, rather than fear the future, we should welcome its opportunities as we strive to build a more peaceful and just world.
If our image of the future were different, the decisions of today would be different.
A blog by the Center for Global Politics at Freie Universitat Berlin that focuses on an array of important global issues.
The GATT, the WTO and Some Democratic Rights,” International Studies Quarterly 55 : 379^08.
How to Cute the Pentagon’s Budget While Improving Its Performance,” Foreign Affairs 90 : 139—152.
In Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A Simmons , Handbook of International Relations.
A Weakened WTO, Mega FTAs and Murky Protectionism,” Swiss Political Science Review 19 : 550—557.
Filling the Gap between 21st Century Trade and 20th Century Trade Rules.
Human Rights Shaming and Foreign Direct Investment,” International Studies Quarterly.
Analogy, Foreign Policy Decision Making, and the Rwandan Genocide,” Foreign Policy Analysis 4 Quly): 301—320.
Personal Exposure to Terrorism, Psychological Distress, and Exclusionist Political AxxmxAcsf Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 : 363—389.
A Constructivist Perspective,” International Journal of Peace Studies 10 (Spring/ Summer); 69—86.
May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in p; Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
Understanding the Gabeikovo-Nagymaros Dam Conflict,” Foreign Policy Analysis 5 : 37—56.
The Nexus of Human Rights, Democracy, and YDtvAo'pmentJ Journal of Peace Research 46 : 181—198.
Why a Procedural Account Alone is Insufficient,” European Journal of International Relations 2Q : 1124—1147.
What Population Growth—and Decline—Means for the Global Economy,” Foreign Affairs : 54—64.
The World’s Top Currency Faces Competition,” Foreign Affairs 88 : 53—68.
Drawing from Behavioral Economics,” International Studies Review 10 : 239—265.
Center for Economic Policy, vvww.globaltradealert.org/sites/ default/files/GTAl 6.pdf. www.cssbooks.net irt.
Portrait of a Research Program,” International Studies Review 4 : 49—72.
Why Being a Unipole Isn’t All It’s Cracked Up to Be,” World Politics 61: 58—85.
Assessing China’s Potential for Territorial Expansion,” International Studies Review 12 : 505—532.
Benedict’s Quest to Bring Christians Back Together,” Foreign Ajfairs ^2 : 117—128.
If You Really Want to Fight Poverty, Fuel Growth and Combat Extremism, Try Girl Power,” Time : 64.
The Four Megatrends That Will Change the World,” Foreign Affairs 89 : 31—43.
Dispositions in International Communications, Dialogue, and Persuasion,” International Studies Review 16 : 522—539.
Crisis, Masculinity, and Responsibility” Men and Masculinities 16 : 9—34.
A Realist Structural Theory of International Relations,” International Studies Review 14 : 499—521.
May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in pa Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
How a Zombie Simulation Can Contribute to Teaching International Relations,” International Studies Perspectives: 1—15.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
In Karen A Mingst and Jack L Snyder , Essential Readings in World Politics, 3rd ed., 2.
The Power of Principle in a Pluralistic World,” Ethics & International Affairs 6: 21—42.
Policy Problems and Normative Perils,” International Politics A\ : 37—49.
Why States Provide Sensitive Nuclear Assistance,” American Political Science Review 103: 113—133.
The Destabilizing Consequences of Private Military Companies,” Journal of Peace Research 42 : 605—622.
International Organizations and Foreign Aid in the Punishing of Human Rights YioXditoTsJ Journal of Peace Research 46 : 79—97.
Countering Radicalisation and Violent Extremism among Youth to Prevent Terrorism.
A Response to Joy Gordon,” Ethics & International Affairs 26 : 135—145.
A Plea and Manifesto for Pluralism,” Review of International Studies 35; 195—218.
Institutional Pathways to Changing the Gender Division of Labor,” Perspectives on Politics 12 : 81—99.
Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourse,” Feminist Review 30 : 61—88.
Using Events Data to Assess the Impact of Human Rights INGOs,” International Studies Quarterly 56 : 1—16.
Just War in Classical Greek Political Thought and Practice,” International Studies Quarterly 59 : 1—10.
The Public Effect of Economic Sanctions,” Foreign Policy Analysis, 1 : 237—251.
Toward a Constructivist Methodology,” International Studies Quarterly 51: 359—384.
The Logic of Two-Level Games,” International Organization 42 : 427—460.
Why Failing to Complete the Green Revolution Could Bring the Next Famine,” Foreign Affairs 89 : 8—14.
Connectivity and the Diffusion of Power,” Foreign Affairs (November/ December): 75—85.
The Role of Leadership in Russian Foreign Policy,” International Politics AS\ 482—497.
A Normative Account hyL^rry May,” Ethics & International Affairs 2A : 433—435.
In Robert L Rothstein , The Evolution of Theory in International Relations.
How the WTO Boosts Economies and Opens Societies,” Foreign Affairs 87 : 125—136.
From Her Base in Germany, Major General Maggie Woodward Ruled the Skies over Libya.
States, Leaders, and the Microfoundations of Behavioral International Relations.
In Richard W Mansbach and Edward Rhodes , Global Politics in a Changing World, 3.
China, Emerging Donors and the Silent Revolution in Development Assistance,” International Affairs 1205—1221.
Thinking about Greater Interdisciplinarity,” International Studies Perspectives 12 : 94—118.
International Cooperation, State Contributions, and the Role of the Global Political Economy,” International Studies Review 12 : 316—319.
See also Russia in Cold War, 98—104 in rivalry for world leadership, 86 in World War II, 93,96 space.
In essence, World Politics strives to help you become an informed global citizen and establish a foundation for life-long learning about international affairs.
Log in using your Cengage Learning single sign-on user name and password, or create a new instructor account by clicking on “New Faculty User” and following the instructions.
Instructor Companion Website for World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition—for instructors only ISBN:9781305641235 This Instructor Companion Website is an all-in-one multimedia online resource for class preparation, presentation, and testing.
IAC Cognero for World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition ISBN:9781305641266 Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero is a flexible, online system that allows you to author, edit, and manage Test Bank content from multiple Cengage Learning solutions; create multiple test versions in an instant; and deliver tests from your LMS, your classroom, or wherever you want.
Acknowledgments Many people—in fact, too many to identify and thank individually—have contributed to the development of this leading textbook in international relations, including Eugene R Wittkopf, who served as a coauthor of the first six editions.
LIBERIA^ / GHANA / PERU BRAZIL French Polynesia BOLIVIA TONGA PARAGUAY Easter Is.
Anchorage •Valdez Inuvik % Nuuk Cambridge Bay, wm 4o°w Qaqortoq Dawson Gjoa Haven Whitehorse Rankin Inlet Hudson Bay Juneau • Arviat Kuujjuaq Fort Nelson 140°W Happy ValleyGoose Bay Churchill Fort • McMurray Prince George Chisasibi Edmonton ii Sydney Charlottetown • Fredericton • Moncton * • • Halifax St.
San Jose • Fresno Las Vegas • Los Angeles • San Diego• P ' Tijuana ’Mexicali St.
Monterrey •Culiacan MEXICO San Luis Potosf Aguascalientes* *^ Qn Guadalajara.
VINCENT BARBADOS / ® Managua GRENADA Panama ,^TRINIDAD & COSTARICA “y Caracas® TOBAGO GUYANA ..rur-n.n.
Due to Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience.
A WORLD WITHOUT BORDERS Reflecting on his space shuttle experience, astronaut Sultan bin Salman Al-Saud remarked that “the first day or so we alt pointed to our countries.
A historic deal was reached between Iran and other major world powers after nearly ten years of diplomacy that commits Iran to curbing its nuclear program in return for sanctions relief.
As you ride home from the airport, you hear a radio broadcast about economic conditions around the world.
China’s economic growth is slowing, and there are concerns about the slide in total trade and the Chinese stock market.
You also hear that in light of the warming of relations between the United States and Cuba, a popular cruise company is looking at providing trips to the island nation.
The whole purpose of education is to turn mirrors into windows. —Sydney J Harris, American political journalist 11 THE CHALLENGE OF INVESTIGATING INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS To best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s more than 7 billion people, it is critical that we perceive our times accurately.
For example, in rivalries such as Christianity’s with Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages, Israel’s and Palestine’s since the birth of the sovereign state of Israel in 1948, and the United States’ with A1 Qaeda today, both sides demonize the image of their adversary while perceiving themselves as virtuous.
In July 2014 the European Court of Human Rights upheld the French law banning such clothing, providing support for the French government’s argument that such laws do not prevent the free exercise of religion in a place of worship, but that the face plays an important role in social interaction within secular society and hidden identity creates a potential security risk.
In Canada, however, a federal court took a different approach in February 2015 when it ruled in favor of a native Pakistani woman who challenged the Canadian prohibition against wearing clothing that obscures the face during citizenship ceremonies.
Touching off a firestorm of debate within that country, the finding supported her argument that wearing a full-facial veil is an expression of her Muslim faith and cultural values.
Such was evident in February 2015 when Al Khansa, an all-female policing unit of the Islamic State, poured acid on the faces of fifteen Iraqi women because they were not properly covered.
All of these groups combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate the power of each group.
For example, Amnesty International, the World Wildlife Federation, and Doctors Without Borders are all NGOs that work to bring about change in the world and influence international decision making.
MAJOR FACTORS SHAPING FOREIGN POLICY DECISIONS AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS The factors the phenomenon we are trying to explain.
In the twentieth century, World Wars I and II and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink the premises underlying their interests, purposes, and priorities.
Similarly, the perpetuation of international anarch , in the absence of institutions to govern the globe, and continuing national insecurity still encourage preparations for war and the use of force without international mandate.
From this analytic point of departure, World Politics will accordingly inspect the values, interests, and capabilities of the individual actors affected by these global trends; the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances and how these interactions shape the ultimate trajectories of global trends; and the major macro trends in world politics that set the boundaries for action.
Alternatively, a rising China may pose a new challenge that will displace 9/11 as a transformative phenomenon in world politics.
How Superpowers, Poptdations, and Globalization Will Change the Way You Live and Work.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos World Politics Enduring Rivalries Actor Nongovernmental Organizations Global System Great Powers Anarchy Additional Videos Kupchan, Charles.
Otherwise theory becomes simply “blah, blah, blah, ” and practice, pure activism. —Paulo Freire, Brazilian pedagogical theorist www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net neoconservative A political movement in the United States calling for the use of military and economic power in foreign policy to bring freedom and democracy to other countries.
Discussions of “power politics” abound in the Artbashastra, an Indian treatise on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE by Kautilya, as well as in works written by Han Fei and Shang Yang in ancient China.
In an effort to counter what they saw as a utopian, legalistic approach to foreign affairs, Reinhold Niebuhr , Hans J Morgenthau , and other realists painted a pessimistic view of human nature.
Disputes between www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net diplomacy Communication and negotiation between global actors that is not dependent upon the use of force and seeks a cooperative solution. zero-sum An exchange in a purely conflictual relationship in which what is gained by one competitor is lost by the other.
Influenced by David Hume and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Immanuel Kant , in Perpetual Peace , helped to redefine modern liberal theory by advocating global citizenship, free trade, and a federation of democracies as a means to peace.
With intellectual roots in the twentieth-century Frankfurt School of critical social theory, contemporary scholars who have influenced the theoretical development of this perspective include Alexander Wendt, Friedrich Kratochwil, and Nicholas Onuf.
Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed, and of how prevailing ideas mold our beliefs about what is unchangeable and what can be reformed, enables us to see international relations in a new and critical light.
Thus states with a history of rivalry can change the fundamental nature of their relationships if they are able to establish patterns of peaceful interactions and www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net constructivism A paradigm based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality and later respond to the meanings given to power politics; as consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve.
As a strand of liberalism, liberal institutionalism sees a zombie outbreak as a problem that transcends national borders and threatens the global community writ large.
FEMINIST AND MARXIST CRITIQUES Although realism, liberalism, and constructivism dominate thinking about international relations in today’s academic and policy communities, these schools of thought have been challenged.
Unlike some other variants of feminist theory, liberal feminism calls for greater participation of women within the existing structures and does not think that inclusion of women in positions of www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net liberal feminism A category of feminist theory that sees men and women as equal in skills and capabilities, and promotes the equal participation of women under existing political, legal, and social institutions and practices.
Socialism envisions society as optimally characterized by public ownership and control of property and resources, to the benefit of individuals living in concert with one another.
This is in contrast to capitalism, which is premised on the private ownership of the means of production and permits individual choice through a free market to determine the distribution of goods and services.
Fie, along with his coauthor Friedrich Engels , argued that socialism emerges through the clash of social classes as opposed to the establishment of harmonious communities.
This led to an outcry by Israel, lamenting that U.S.—Israeli relations had suffered, in the words of Israeli ambassador to the United States Michael Oren, a “tectonic rift” and were at their lowest point in thirty-five years.
So in our theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is permanently fixed.
If you tell people the world is complicated, you’re not doing your job as a social scientist.
Ob ves 3-1 Use a level-of-analysis approach to identify the major influences on foreign policy decision making.
To stimulate your thinking about international decision making by all types of transnational actors, World Politics provides a framework for analyzing and explaining the processes by which foreign policies are made.
Flow these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the decisions that are reached.
Moreover, these policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time because they exert “feedback” on these causal factors as the foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent decisions.
This reaction, in turn, later transformed global conditions as well as attitudes within American society, which began to galvanize revisions {t + 4) of the original policy decision.
Decision Making as Rational Choice Realism assumes that foreign policy making consists primarily of an international actor adjusting to the pressures of an anarchical global system whose essential properties do not vary.
However, like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, and reasonable, clear-thinking people can and often do disagree about the facts and wisdom of foreign policy goals.
This debate demonstrated that although rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met or what those rational choices look like in practice.
There may be many interpretations of what is right, what is possible, and what is in the national interest . bounded rationality The concept that decision maker’s capacity to choose the best option is often constrained by many human and organizational obstacles.
At the international level, national governments seek to maximize their own ability www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net game theory Mathematical model of strategic interaction where outcomes are determined not only by a single actor’s preferences but also by the choices of all actors involved. two-level games A concept referring to the growing need for national policy makers to make decisions that will meet both domestic and foreign goals.
Similar www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net prospect theory A socialpsychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty and risk that looks at the relationship between individual risk propensity and the perceived prospects for avoiding losses and realizing big gains.
Leaders as Movers of World History This history-making individuals model of policy decision making perceives world leaders as the people who create global changes.
They provide insights ^ Extraversion N • Assertiveness • Gregariousness • Excitement-Seeking • Warmth • Optimism •Energetic_ / ^Agreeableness^ •Altruism •Trust • Compliance • Modesty • Directness •Compassion ^Conscientiousness^ • Self-Discipline • Deliberation •Order • Competence • Sense of Duty Ambition_ / ^Emotional Stability N • Impulsiveness • Vulnerability • Self-Consciousness • Anxiety • Hostility ^•Depression_ / Openness ' •To Ideas •To Values •To Feelings •To Aesthetics •To Fantasy V_ J FIGURE 3.
Zeitgeist The “spirit of the times, ” or the dominant cultural norms assumed to influence the behavior of people living in particular periods.
Any given decision you make you’ll wind up with a 30 to 40 percent chance that it isn’t going to work.
The Limits of Bureaucratic Organization What emerges from our description of ureaucracy is another idealized picture of the policy-making process.
In Graham Allison’s well-known book on the missile crisis, Essence of Decision (1971; see also Allison and Zelikow, 1999), he advanced what is widely known as the bureaucratic politics model.
For example, under Presidents Nixon and Ford, Secretary of State Flenry Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld, who headed the Department of Defense, over strategy regarding the Vietnam War; Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, repeatedly engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over the Iran hostage crisis; and under Ronald Reagan, Caspar Weinberger at Defense and George Shultz at State were famous for butting heads on most policy issues.
For instance, in the 1980s, Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafi repeatedly provoked the United States through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric and by supporting various terrorist activities.
However, Qaddafi was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom he directed his anger.
Similarly, leaders today sometimes make foreign policy decisions for domestic political purposes—as, for example, when bold or aggressive acts abroad are intended to divert public attention from economic woes, www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net constitutional democracy Government processes that allow people, through their elected representatives, to exercise power and influence the state’s policies. autocratic rule A system of authoritarian or totalitarian government in which unlimited power is concentrated in a single leader.
We have a significant stake in ensuring that those who live in fear and want today can live with dignity and opportunity tomorrow."" diversionary theory of war The hypothesis that leaders sometimes initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing national cohesion at home by diverting national public attention away from controversial domestic issues and internal problems.
Along those lines, democracies may be seen as comparatively “weak” in that they rely on public support and their political power is less centralized.
Flowever, when alliances are tight military blocs, the small state members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Rational Choice • Roles • Externalities • Political Efficacy • Policy Agenda • Multiple Advocacy • Bush Doctrine Additional Videos • Dallek, Robert.
MARCHING FOR CHANGE People, like states and international organizations, are transnational actors.
Mobilized publics often use demonstrations to express their dissent and to draw global attention to their cause.
Good leadership in this century may or may not be transformational, but it will most certainly require a careful understanding of the context of change. —Joseph S Nye, international relations scholar and United States policy maker 4 i THE QUEST FOR WORLD LEADERSHIP Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics.
Long-cycle theory elaborates on this understanding of world politics and provides a framework for our analysis of evolving www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net long-cycle theory A theory that focuses on the rise and fall of the leading global power as the central political process of the modern world system.
Over the past five centuries, each global war has led to the emergence of a jegemon.
MUTAHIDM SHEW, MIGHT MAKES FRIGHT Shown here is one example of resistance to United States global preeminence: Pakistanis burn a United States flag in an anti-American rally in protest of drone attacks in Pakistan's tribal regions.
By the time the first major European war of the twentieth century had ended, nearly 10 million people had died, three empires had crumbled, new states had been born, seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun, and the world geopolitical map had been redrawn in ways that paved the way for the rise of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany.
Structuralism Framed at the global level of analysis, structuralism postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor that determines state behavior.
Germany thus supported Austria-Flungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia.
Although the logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear—a victorious war would bolster Austria-Flungary and hamper Russian influence—it turned out to be a serious miscalculation.
European military alignments had become polarized, pitting the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Flungary, and the Ottoman Empire against the Triple Entente of Britain, France, and Russia.
The rational www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net nationalism A mindset glorifying a particular state and the nationality group living in it, which sees the state’s interest as a supreme value.
In its wake, three multiethnic empires— the Austrian-Elungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed, and the independent states of Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged in their place.
Based on Strategic Atlas, Comparative Geopolitics of the World's Powers, revised edition, by Gerard Chaliand and Jean Pierre.
In his 1924 book Mein Kampf^Mj Struggle”), Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe.
The following year, the goals originally outlined in Mein Kampf climbed to the top of Hitler’s foreign policy agenda.
Hitler, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain, and leaders of France and Italy all attended.
Japan’s invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and further forays into China in 1937 were paralleled by Italy’s absorption of Abyssinia in 1935 and Albania in 1939.
Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Hitler’s supposed ally, in June 1941.
Deciding that the eviction of the United States from the Pacific was critical to its national interest, on December 7th of that same year, Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Flarbor.
During the Nuremberg Trials after World War II, when Nazi officials were prosecuted for war crimes committed during the Elolocaust, senior Nazi Hermann Goering reflected on the Nazi propaganda success.
Domestically, German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders both to regain provinces previously lost in wars to others and to absorb Germans living in Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland.
The rise of c ascism —the Nazi regimes ideology championing the flag, the fatherland, nationalism, imperialism, and anti-Semitism—animated this renewed imperialistic push and preached an extreme version of realism that stressed power politics to justify the forceful expansion of the German state and other Axis powers that were aligned with Germany.
The Soviet Union absorbed nearly 600,000 square kilometers of territory from the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and from Einland, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Romania—recovering what Russia had lost in the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk after World War I Poland, a victim of Soviet expansionism, was compensated with land taken from Germany.
V urk,y Sea Tunisia Cyprus | | USSR before the war 1 1 ri *™ ' H U.S occupation zones Soviet annexations [ ^ French occupation zones FjH Other Western states. antes Soviet influence | | Great Britan ~~| Neutral states [ Soviet Occupation Zones | 1>M British occupation zones E~T~| Iron Curtain I o Cl.
The “BigThree” leaders—Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin—met at the Yalta Conference in February 1945 to design a new world order.
As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Cold War and its lessons still cast dark shadows over today’s geostrategic landscape.
Moreover, according to the lomino theory, which suggested that communism was inherently driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was inherently expansionistic.
Elowever, Soviet planners did not believe that this historical outcome was guaranteed.
Soon thereafter, President Harry S Truman made Kennan’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy.
Because the Soviet Union remained strategically inferior to the United States, Nikita Khrushchev pursued a policy of peaceful coexistence with capitalism.
As a result, the period following Stalin’s death saw many Cold War confrontations, with Hungary, Cuba, Egypt, and Berlin serving as flash points.
Along these lines, the objective of the United States linkage strategy was to shape superpower relations and lessen incentives for war through the continuation of mutually rewarding exchanges.
He sought to settle the Soviet Union’s differences with the capitalist West in order to halt the deterioration of his country’s economic and international position.
Embracing these principles, Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to a market economy, and proclaimed his desire to end the Cold War contest.
The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support of the Castro regime in Cuba, withdrew from Afghanistan, and announced unilateral reductions in military spending.
The [communist hard-line] conservatives and reactionaries were given predominant influence.”—Georgi Arbatov, director of the USSR’s Institute for the USA and Canada Studies State Economic Mismanagement Grassroots Movements Ideas and Ideals “Soviet militarism, in harness with communism, destroyed the Soviet economy and thus hastened the self-destruction of the Soviet empire.”—Fred Charles Ikle, United States deputy secretary of defense “It was man who ended the Cold War in case you didn’t notice.
Throughout history, hegemons repeatedly have defined their security interests more broadly than other states, only to slip from the pinnacle of power by reaching beyond their grasp. unilateralism An approach to foreign policy that relies on independent, selfhelp strategies in foreign policy. selective engagement A great power grand strategy using economic and military power to influence only important particular situations, countries, or global issues by striking a balance between a highly interventionist “global policeman"" and an uninvolved isolationist.
Imperial overstretch The historic tendency for hegemons to sap their own strength through costly imperial pursuits and military spending that weaken their economies in relation to the economies of their rivals.
As Harvard law professor Noah Feldman notes, “The world’s major power and its leading challenger are economically interdependent to an unprecedented degree.
However, tensions also erupted over the Arab Spring, the overthrow of Libya’s dictator Muammar al-Qaddafi, what the United States saw as the nondemocratic election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency, and Russia’s actions in Georgia and Ukraine.
Rendered based on data from The 2014 Legatum Prosperity Index™, Legatum Institute.
Russia is strongly asserting itself across Eurasia, as seen in the invasion of Ukraine, challenges to United States goals in Syria, and regarding Iran’s nuclear program, and these efforts are seen an attempt to dominate the region and threaten the reigning world order.
United States power far surpasses that of Russia, and the liberal international framework that was shaped following World War II continues to underlie the global economy and mechanisms for addressing global problems.
In 2014, China overtook the United States to become the leading economy in terms of gross domestic product when measured in terms of mrchasing power parity (PP1 I, which removes differences in countries’ price levels.
TRANSITIONS IN WEALTH AND ECONOMIC POWER, 2014-2050 Current and projected growth indicates that there are significant shifts taking place in the global balance of geopolitical and economic power.
By 2050, the top five ranked countries may include the United States plus the emerging market economies of China, India, Indonesia, and Brazil.
The Chinese military’s outreach for international approaches to r 1 managing shared security cooperation is not intended to impair the international system, but to become a problems through player and builder of the system, providing additional public goods to the international collective and community so that the benefit of security can be truly shared by all.
Challenge and opportunity always come together—under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other. —Hu Jintao, former Chinese president Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds.
Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos • Hegemon • Bipolarity • Structuralism • Cold War • Nationalism • Truman Doctrine • Multipolarity • Containment • Soft Power • Multilateralism Additional Videos • Gelb, Leslie.
The division in power and wealth characterizing the global North and iobal South pose both moral and security problems.
What are the causes and consequences of the Global North A term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries located primarily in the Northern Hemisphere.
First World The relatively wealthy industrialized countries that share a commitment to varying forms of democratic political institutions and developed market economies, including the United States, Japan, the European Union, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.
During the Cold War, the term Third Worlc was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but economically less developed states on either side of the Cold War divide that, for the most part, shared a colonial past.
Elowever, the “Third World” was soon used to refer to those countries that had failed to grow economically in a way that was comparable to countries of the First World , the industrialized great powers such as Europe, North America, and Japan.
Their ranks include both Indonesia—an archipelago nation of more than 17,500 islands scattered across an oceanic expanse larger than the United States—and Timor-Leste, an island state roughly the same size as Connecticut.
According to Transparency International, he embezzled more than $5 billion from his country, ranking him as the most corrupt African leader over the past two decades. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net emerging powers (middle powers) Countries with rising political and economic capabilities and influence that seek a more assertive role in international affairs. decolonization The process by which sovereign independence was achieved by countries that were once colonies of the great powers.
The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of “classical imperialism” is known as mercantilism —an mercantilism A government trade strategy for accumulating state wealth and power by encouraging exports and discouraging imports. economic philosophy advocating government regulation of economic life to increase state power.
With the Industrial Revolution, capitalism grew—emphasizing the free market, private ownership of the means of www.tnecsspomt.com j www.cssbooKs.net classical liberal economic theory A body of thought based on Adam Smith’s ideas about the forces of supply and demand in the marketplace, emphasizing the social and economic benefits when individuals pursue their own self-interest. laissez-faire economics The philosophical principle of free markets and free trade to give people free choices with little government regulation.
Hobson argued, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system.
War eventually erupted between these newly independent states as www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net realpolitik The theoretical outlook prescribing that countries should increase their power and wealth in order to compete with and dominate other countries. selfdetermination The liberal doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them.
As the old order crumbled—and as the leaders in the newly emancipated territories discovered that freedom did not translate automatically into autonomy, economic independence, or domestic prosperity—the conflict between the rich Global North and the emerging states of the Global South began.
The situation is much more favorable—and the quality of life is relatively advantageous—in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Hemisphere, where nearly all the Global South countries are located.
More than 848. million people www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net developing countries A category used by the World Bank to identify lowincome Global South countries with an annual GNI per capita at or below $1,045 and middle-income countries with an annual GNI per capita of more than $1,045 but less than $$12,746 . gross national income A measure of the production of goods and services within a given time period, which is used to delimit the geographic scope of production.
Thus, in responding to a world of powers, the Global South appears to be increasing its dependence for arms purchases on the very same rich states whose military and economic domination they historically have most feared and resented. communications technology The technological means through which information and communications are transferred. digital divide The division between the Internet-technology rich Global North and the Global South in the proportion of Internet users and hosts.
Information technology The techniques for storing, retrieving, and disseminating through computerization and the Internet recorded data and research knowledge.
THE DIGITAL DIVIDE IN INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES Information and communication technology has spread rapidly in recent years.
Today, disputes about the appropriate intersection between global governance and national sovereignty persist, www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net Group of 77 The coalition of Third World countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Developing Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade.
The BRICS countries also agreed to establish a New Development Bank, which is expected to be operational by 2016.
The “rising economic strength of the BRICS countries has outpaced increases in their voice at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund ” at the same time that economic cooperation within the Global South has greatly expanded.
Dissatisfaction with these Bretton-Woods institutions has led the BRICS countries to develop an alternative to global development finance.
SENDING MONEY BACK HOME The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year are vital to developing countries.
Rendered based on data from the World Bank; estimates based on the International Monetary Fund's Balance of Payments Statistics Database.
Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Developing countries have long pleaded for “trade, not aid” to improve their global position, turning to the NIC’s and the Global East experience to support the view that access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth.
The Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAFTA and create a free-trade zone that includes the United States, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica.
The association of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation , an informal forum created in 1989, is committed to free trade and regional economic integration.
Additionally, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , first established in 1967 by Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, and now including Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, and Myanmar, agreed to set up a free-trade area.
More recently, the Trans-Pacific partnership —Brunei, Chile, Singapore, and New Zealand were original signatories in 2005 and were subsequently joined by Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, the United States, and Vietnam—deepens trade and investment for a far-flung group that has an annual GDP of almost $28 trillion and one-third of world trade . ■ i iddle East.
EMERGING MARKET GIANTS Launched in March 2009, the Tata Nano is the world's cheapest car and is the innovation of an emerging multinational in Mumbai, India.
Private equity, portfolio investment, and FDI experienced great volatility between 2007 and 2009, although remittances and ODA were more stable.
Conversely, a new era of North-South-East cooperation could begin, dedicated to finding solutions to common problems ranging from commercial to environmental and security concerns.
When Cuba aligned with the Soviet Union, the United States severed diplomatic ties and made concerted efforts to overthrow and assassinate Castro . in 1982, the United States placed Cuba on its list of state sponsors of terrorism because of Cuba’s support for armed revolution and leftist guerrilla groups in countries such as Angola, Ethiopia, Colombia, and Spain.
In 2015, however, the two countries moved toward normalization of relations—a transition that has momentous implications for Cuba and could usher in a future of increased wealth and welfare for its people, in addition to restoring diplomatic relations, the United States eased restrictions on remittances, travel, and banking relations and allowed United States travelers to import small amounts of cigars and alcohol.
Rendered based on data for states from the Correlates of War; Data on IGOs and NGOs are from the Yearbook of International Organizations , and moving averages are from prior volumes.
These conflicts show the extent to which the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and govern it through veto authority in the Security Council.
Nonstate Actors and the Quest for Global Community The CSS Point the realist belief that countries should put their own national interest above concern for the global community guide their admissions decision making.
Although faith in the UN’s ability eroded when it became paralyzed by the unforeseen Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, in the post-Cold War era it was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission.
They have supported a stronger role for the UN in addressing the violent conflict.
Many supporters see UN intervention as supported by the UN Charter, which envisions the protection of human rights as the responsibility of global society.
Unanimously adopted by UN members in 2005, the Responsibility to Protect doctrine also calls for intervention by the international community if a state fails to protect its citizens from war crimes, ethnic cleansing, genocide, and crimes against humanity.
Flowever, critics of intervention argue that action motivated by nonhumanitarian reasons is in contradiction to the UN Charter, which rests on the principle of sovereignty and prohibits forceful intervention that violates the political independence and territorial integrity of any state.
It also highlights the tension between a state’s sovereign authority over its territory, its responsibility to protect and provide for the compelling needs of its own people, and the grounds for intervention by the international community.
While negotiations for the anticipated ITO www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net regimes Norms, rules, and procedures for interaction agreed to by a set of states.
Additionally, with charges of bribery, kickbacks, and embezzlement being leveled against World Bank projects, from road building in Kenya to dam construction in Lesotho, the last three bank presidents (James Wolfensohn, Paul Wolfowitz, and Robert Zoellick) have insisted on anticorruption reforms as well.
RAGE AGAINST INSTITUTIONAL SYMBOLS OF GLOBALIZATION In the recent past, protesters targeted the high-profile meetings of two powerful IGOs—the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
Their reform program sought the political integration of Europe via a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states—to bring about nothing less than the transformation of international relations.
European integration began with the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, the European Atomic Energy Community in 1957, and the European Economic Community in 1957.
Other countries in the western Balkans—Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Bosnia and fferzegovina—are also lobbying for future membership.
In 2009, Iceland, a state that would give increased access to the resource-rich Artie, applied for membership with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the block, ffowever, accession talks stalled due to dispute over mackerel fishing and the sensitive issue of financial reform.
As Christophe ffellion , a professor of European law, notes, the expansion procedure has allowed the European Union “to exercise its normative power, and to organize the continent in its own image.” ffaving such a transformative effect, it is hardly surprising that even EU expansion does not escape controversy.
The EU’s central administrative unit, the Council of Ministers, represents the governments of the EU’s member states and retains final authority over policy-making decisions.
Commissioners are nominated by EU member governments, in consultation with the president of the European Commission, and must be approved by the European Parliament.
The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Commission, whose decisions the Parliament can overturn.
The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has also grown to prominence and power as European integration has developed.
Debate continues also over how far and how fast such a process toward pooled sovereignty should proceed, and several efforts to further integrate the countries of Europe have met with resistance—the Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001, and the French and Dutch rejected the EU Constitution in 2005.
In May 2015 in Boracay, Philippines, APEC held its meeting of trade ministers and economic leaders to further discuss how to promote regional economic integration, achieve shared development and common prosperity, secure inclusive sustainable growth, and cultivate the enormous potential that Asia-Pacific partnerships hold for companies and workers in the region.
The security IGO has expanded its membership to twenty-eight countries and broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe.
The near monopoly of power once enjoyed by sovereign entities is being eroded. —Richard N Haass, Foreign Relations Council president 6 4 PROMINENT TYPES OF NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS nonstate nations National or ethnic groups struggling to obtain power and/or statehood.
The Chinese, however, see him as a “splittist,” after the spiritual leader fled Tibet in 1959 following a failed armed uprising against Chinese PROTECTING INDIGENOUS PEOPLES Indigenous groups have frequently seen their rights and welfare fail victim to a larger national interest in progress and development as determined by the state government.
Pictured here, representatives of local indigenous communities demonstrate in Sao Paulo, Brazil, against the construction of the Beio Monte dam at the Xingu River in the Brazilian Amazon.
Transnational Religious Movements clash of civilizations Political scientist Samuel Huntington’s controversial thesis that in the twenty-first century the globe’s major civilizations will conflict with one another, leading to anarchy and warfare similar to that resulting from conflicts between states over the past 500years.
Ideally, religion would seem a natural worldwide force for global unity and harmony.
MAJOR RELIGIONS Eastern Orthodox | Protestant | Roman Catholic | Other Christian ■ Jewish | Shia Muslim | Sunni Muslim | Hindu | Lamaistic Buddhist [B| Theravada Buddhist | J Buddhist and Shintoist □ Mahayana Buddhist, Confucianist, Taoist n Sikh I Indigenous MAP 6.
As a result, the religious roots of terrorism and opposition to democracy in the Global South have received much attention, as have religious bodies acting as NGO global actors.
Flowever, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, the role of religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial.
In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, believers reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from what they or other religions think to be true.
In a word, religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and disregard for the right of people to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs.
Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peacemaking (Gaetan, 2013), and in fact most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for centuries.
Multinational Corporations Multinational corporations —business enterprises organized in one society with activities in others growing out of direct investment abroad—are a third major type of NGO. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net secession A religious or ethnic minority's efforts, often by violent means, to gain independent statehood by separating territory from an established sovereign state. diasporas The migration of religious or ethnic groups to foreign lands despite their continuation of affiliation with the land and customs of their origin.
Altogether, MNCs comprise almost 23 percent of the top seventy economic entities.
In some instances this concern has extended to MNCs’ involvement in the domestic politics of their home countries, where they actively lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their businesses.
As a special envoy of the United Nations, Angelina Jolie focuses on humanitarian and refugee issues, and in 2015 she delivered an impassioned plea to the UN Security Council to intervene in the Syrian civil war and help the millions of Syrian refugees.
Pictured here, he speaks with people in a remote village in southern Sudan. global stage has risen to unprecedented levels.
Sean Penn founded J/P Haitian Relief Organization to provide temporary housing and medical care; Alicia Keys cofounded Keep a Child Alive to provide medical support for AIDS orphans in Africa; and Don Cheadle, along with George Clooney, Matt Damon, Brad Pitt, David Pressman, and Jerry Weintraub, created the antigenocide advocacy group Not on Our Watch.
Some place the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BCE with the Sicarii Zealots, who violently targeted Jewish high priests whom they saw as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law.
Others, most notably A1 Qaeda, Boko Haram, and ISIS/ISIL, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals.
Although the leadership offers ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world, leaders do not directly plan and execute most of the attacks undertaken in A1 Qaeda’s name.
What makes the newer breed of terrorists who belong to organizations such as A1 Qaeda and ISIS/ISIL more lethal than previous terrorists is their religious fanaticism, which allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels.
It is therefore critical that the international community better understand the way that transnational crime relates to broader social changes. mafia.
In Chapter 7, you have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security.
In Chapters 8 and 9, we weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace.
For many people, world politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise of military force over rivals and other actors on the global stage.
In the wake of the incident, ""Je Suis Charlie"" became a rallying call of ordinary people around the world for the preservation of civil society in the face of terrorist threats.
The 9/11 attack and the United States war in Afghanistan; terrorist attacks elsewhere around the world, such as in Madrid in 2004, London in 2005, Moscow in 2011, and Paris 2015; the U.S.-led military struggle in Iraq; the 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War in Lebanon; and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for sustained peace.
Only the dead have seen the end of war. —George Santayana, Spanish-American philosopher www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net war A condition arising within states (civil war) or between states (interstate war) when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission. conflict Discord often arising in international relations over perceived incompatibilities of interest. armed conflict Combat between the military forces of two or more states or groups.
To realists, pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, which they see as aggressive, greedy, and power-seeking.
To feminists www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net civil wars Wars between opposing groups within the same country or by rebels against the government.
This relationship between poverty and armed conflict is all the more pronounced in countries where there is a youth bulge, where a large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security.
If the past is a guide to the future, www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net relative deprivation Inequality between the wealth and status of individuals and groups, and the outrage of those at the bottom about their perceived exploitation by those at the top. youth bulge A burgeoning youth population, thought to make countries more prone to civil conflicts.
This controversy was at the heart of the ideological debate between the East and the West during the Cold War, when www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net commercial liberalism An economic theory advocating free markets and the removal of barriers to the flow of trade and capital as a locomotive for prosperity. economic peace The premise that economic institutions associated with a contractintensive economy are the source of peace between countries.
They all believed that an “empire of liberty” (as Madison pictured a growing community of liberal democracies) would be one freed of the curse of war, and that if democratic institutions spread throughout the world, the entire past pattern of belligerent international relations would be replaced by a d new pacific pattern.
I The impact of government type on propen| sity for armed conflict has taken on great signif| icance following the rapid conversion of many | dictatorships to democratic rule.
According to Freedom House, almost two-thirds of the world’s countries are now fully or partially democratic . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net FIGURE 7.
Since the early 1990s, however, the number of electoral democracies has plateaued, and whether the long-term democratic transformation will produce peace is being tested.
For example, World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, the United States attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War, and the successive waves of violent protest and brutal state retaliation in the Middle East that began in 2011 were seen by many as a domino effect, with each armed conflict stimulated by its predecessor.
According to the power transition theory, periods in which rivals’ military capabilities are nearly balanced create “the necessary conditions for global war, while gross power transition theory The theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival’s capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power.
Armed conflict in 2015 in Syria, Sudan, South Sudan, Yemen, and elsewhere—as well as the tension surrounding the South China Sea dispute—cast a dark shadow.
In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they ec a> FIGURE 7.
CHANGING FREQUENCY AND TYPE OF ACTS OF ARMED CONFLICT Measuring the frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the figure depicts a gradual increase in the frequency of conflicts until the peak in 1992, after which a decline transpired that lasted roughly a decade before, in 2003, the number of conflicts again began to rise.
This incompetence has led to an epidemic of mgile states throughout the globe.
Often civil wars are connected, www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net enduring Internal rivalry Protracted violent conflicts between governments and insurgent groups within a state.
Death from civil violence has always been very high, and casualties from civil wars since World War II have increased at alarming rates, especially among children who have been both innocent victims and major participants.
The Threat of Armed Conflict to the World The CSS Point SUDAN AND THE HUMAN COST OF WAR The historical north-south conflict began to move toward resolution, and eventually a peace agreement was signed in 2005 that called for sharing wealth and power, and included mutual security arrangements.
From the Gestapo in Nazi Germany to the “death squads” in various countries, violence perpetrated by the establishment attempts to defend the prevailing political order by eliminating opposition leaders and by intimidating virtually everyone else. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net asymmetric warfare Armed conflict between belligerents of vastly unequal military strength, in which the weaker side is often a nonstate actor that relies on unconventional tactics.
In the throes of the terrorist attack on the United States on September 11, 2001, United States President George W Bush described the threat as a network of terrorist groups as well as the rogue states that harbored them.
Elowever, disagreement about the character and causes of global terrorism remain pronounced, and without agreement on these basic characteristics, a consensus on the best response is unlikely.
Thus, in this chapter you also have been given the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed conflict that theorists have constructed to explain why political violence in its various forms erupts.
It is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that we next consider.
An Introduction to Theories of Interthe Twenty-First Century , 7 th ed.
They are armed because they are in conflict and have not yet learned peaceful ways to resolve their conflicting interests."" —Richard M Nixon, United States president national security A country’s psychological freedom from fears that the state will be unable to resist threats to its survival and national values emanating from abroad or at home.
I magine yourself someday becoming the next secretary-general of the United Nations.
Our interests are eternal and perpetual and those interests it is our duty to follow. —Lord Palmerston, British prime minister s i REALIST APPROACHES TO WAR AND PEACE Nearly all states continue to believe that the anarchical global system requires them to rely on self-help and depend only on themselves for security.
The ""Cost” of Military Spending Military power is central in leaders’ concepts of national security, and even though the end of the Cold War reduced tensions worldwide and therefore the need for military preparations, world military spending rose to $1.78 trillion in 2014, which represents slightly more than a 2 percent increase since 2011, and a 56 percent increase since 2000.
The world is spending $3,378,995 each minute for military preparations.
The global trend shows that the share of resources used for military purposes has increased steadily since 2000, and the military burden now corresponds to 2. percent of world GDP . militaryindustrial complex A combination of defense establishments, contractors who supply arms for them, and government agencies that benefit from high military spending, which acts as a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate large expenditures for military preparedness.
Indeed, some comparadvely wealthy states bear a heavy burden, whereas other states that provide a high average income for their citizens (Japan, Austria, and Luxembourg) have a low defense burden.
Furthermore, a growing trend since the beginning of the Iraq War has been the increased use of private military services, which enhances a state’s military capabilities by allowing the government to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed.
In the post-9/11 global war on terrorism, the United States increased its worldwide supply of weapons to countries that agreed to be partners in the “coalition www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net private military services Outsourcing activities of a military-specific nature to private companies, such as armed security, equipment maintenance, IT services, logistics, and intelligence services.
Supporters of private military services point out that private contractors like Blackwater, Triple Canopy, and DynCorp are not of the same ilk as al-Qaddafi’s mercenary forces that come from informal networks of former civil war combatants.
Military contractors from reputable companies tend to be professional, efficient, and effective.
Likewise, in 1982 Great Britain found itself shipping military equipment to Argentina just eight days before Argentina’s attack on the British-controlled Falkland Islands; and in 1998 United States military technology sold to China was exported to Pakistan, making its nuclear weapons test possible.
The proliferation of arms is a serious global concern, because the so-called <lth country problem (the addition of new nuclear states) is expected to become increasingly probable.
Because of the widespread conviction, rooted in realism, that military power confers political stature, many countries, such as Iran and North Korea, regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (N1 as hypocritical because it provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others.
According to former United States Ambassador to South Korea Donald Gregg, ""This is [Kim Jong-un's] way of demonstrating to the people of North Korea he is in charge and his country is capable of high tech things.
A major development in the conduct of warfare has been the widespread use of unmanned aerial vehicles , commonly referred to as drones.
Shown here, United States soldiers with land mine detectors wait as another soldier maneuvers a robot into a cave to check for mines, traps, and other weapons that may have been hidden by Taliban or A1 Qaeda fugitives in the eastern border town of Qiqay, Afghanistan.
This posture was especially evident during the Eisenhower administration, when Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced linkmanship, deliberately threatening United States adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, on the brink of war, they would concede to United States demands.
The goal of llistic missile defense , in United States President Reagan’s words, is to make nuclear weapons “impotent and obsolete” and to shift nuclear strategy away from mutual assured destruction.
From that threat has emerged the preemptive warfare strategy, which calls for striking a potential enemy before it undertakes armed aggression.
Intervention can be practiced in various ways—physically through direct entry of military forces into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through overt operations.
Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends. —Count Diego Sarmiento Gondomar, Spanish ambassador to London in 1618 s s REALIST INTERPRETATIONS OF ALLIANCES IN WORLD POLITICS Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate.
States sitting on the sidelines, free riders, cannot as rational actors risk nonalignment.
Under www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net free riders Those who obtain benefits at others expense without the usual costs and effort. nonalignment A foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with an alliance bloc for fear it will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war. balancer Under a balanceof-power system, an influential global or regional great power that throws its support in decisive fashion to a defensive coalition.
The alarm of countries in the Baltic, such as Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, to France’s decision to sell Mistral-class assault ships to Russia that would enter service in 2015 provides another example.
On July 9 and 10, 2015, the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) held their seventh annual summit in Ufa, Russia.
Seen as a balancing maneuver, this cooperative venture is a product of the growing desire to have greater influence in shaping the global economy and the political order, and it took a major step forward with establishment of the BRICS New Development Bank.
Ob ves 9-1 Link liberal and constructivist ideas to the development of peaceful norms, laws, and institutions.
For this reason, and consistent with constructivist theory, many experts see international law and collective security regimes mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history.
For example, Sir John Frederick Maurice wrote in his memoirs, “I went into the British Army believing that if you want peace you must prepare for war.
Although realists are reluctant to view arms control as www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net arms race The buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other, with the competition driven by the conviction that gaining a lead is necessary for security.
Most nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear Nuclear-warhead Stockpile, in thousands RUSSIA'S FIRST CUBAN MISSILE FALL OF NEW ATOMIC TEST CRISIS SALT* I SALT* II BERLIN WALL STARTt I SORT* STARTt ""Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty tstrategic Arms Reduction Treaty ♦Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty §lncludes 5,500 retired warheads awaiting dismantling ""Excludes retired warheads FIGURE 9.
Likewise, despite initially signing the treaty, North Korea violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons.
In September 2009, Iran test-fired missiles capable of striking Israel, Europe, and American bases in the Persian Gulf.
The United Nations subsequently adopted new sanctions against Iran, including a prohibition on Iranian investment in uranium mining and activity involving ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
Further speculation about Iranian military capabilities was raised by Iran’s announced testfiring of a land-to-sea ballistic missile in April 2013.
Recall that in an anarchic international system, each country must ensure its own survival—and this demands that countries strive to become more powerful than their potential opponents.
Yet, as described by the imagery of the spiral model, this enhancement of military capabilities for defensive purposes tends to result in escalating arms races that diminish the security of all.
The ability and will to stem further nuclear proliferation remains in doubt, and in recognition of these serious trends, President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting nuclear proliferation.
Critics complain that these agreements frequently regulate only obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive to continue developing in the first place.
However, most countries are reluctant to limit their armaments because the self-help international system requires each state to protect itself.
Pictured here is a twelve-year-old victim, Burin, in a hospital with his mother where he is being treated for the loss of his right leg and other serious wounds that he received while picking strawberries in a field in southern Kosovo.
Although the optimal strategy for both prisoners would be to tacitly cooperate with each other and keep quiet so each receives only a six-month sentence (the win-win outcome of 2, 2 in the matrix), the suspects face incentives in this situation that incline each to turn on the other and provide incriminating evidence to the district attorney.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. grounded in the fear of being double-crossed Prisoner A cooperate defect cooperate Prisoner B defect 2,2 win-win 4,1 lose more-win more 1,4 win more-lose more 3,3 lose-lose FIGURE 9.
As indicated in the timeline, nuclear testing has declined dramatically since the 1960s.
For instance, showing no sign of abandoning its nuclear ambitions, North Korea conducted an underground nuclear test on February 12,2013.
It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War I Moreover, its members disagreed over how to define “aggression,” as well as how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response to potential aggressors.
Furthermore, in I960 Secretary-General Dag fdammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed Preventive diplomacy by attempting to resolve conflicts before they became a crisis, in contrast to ending wars once they erupted.
Frustrated with the superpowers’ prevention of the United Nations from playing “as effective and decisive a role as the charter certainly envisaged for it,” in 1989 Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar pursued peacemaking initiatives.
These programs were designed to end fighting so that the UN Security Council could then establish operations to keep the peace.
Later, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating conditions that would make renewed war unlikely, while at the same time working on peacemaking (ending fighting already under way) and managing the UN’s peace operations to police those conflicts in which the threat of renewed fighting between enemies is high.
Ffowever, the end of the Cold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to act to preserve peace.
If governments really considered the effectiveness of the United Nations an urgent priority, this would be the first problem they would have to tackle.
THE INCREASING DEMAND FOR ""PEACE"" The chart shows a clear trend in the demand for peacekeepers over time, as the total number of personnel involved in peacekeeping missions—often referred to as ""Blue Helmets"" because of their blue helmets or berets—has increased sevenfold since 1999.
Regional organizations with somewhat broader political mandates beyond defense include the Organization of American States , the League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity , the Nordic Council, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , and the Gulf Cooperation Council.
In the years since the end of the Cold War, the ambiguous European security setting has been marked by ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle.
Consequently, until 1995, when NATO took charge of all military operations in BosniaHerzegovina from the United Nations, it was uncertain whether the alliance could adapt to the new security environment.
However, “Russia is still far from reconciled to NATO’s presence in countries that it regards as being within its ‘sphere of privileged interests’” , as evidenced by the tension between Russia and NATO over the military escalation in Crimea and Russia’s military action against Ukraine.
Eminent legal scholar Hans Kelsen’s contention that “states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved” reflects positivist legal theory that when a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal.
This ambivalence makes it possible for states to exploit international law to get what they can and to justify what they have obtained.
Although law cannot prevent war, legal procedures often make recourse to violence unnecessary by resolving disputes that might otherwise escalate to war. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net positivist legal theory A theory that stresses states’ customs and habitual ways of behaving as the most important source of law.
The United States’ opposition to the ICC is also due to the conviction that its citizens would be treated unfairly by the court and would war crimes Acts performed during war that the international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of war, civilians, or the state's own minority population.
International criminal tribunals Special tribunals established by the United Nations to prosecute those responsible for wartime atrocities and genocide, bring justice to victims, and deter such crimes in the future.
Map of ICC Members, 2015 HI Current Members of ICC I | Not Members of ICC be vulnerable targets of political retribution against the United States government for its influence and intervention in other countries around the world.
Though there are references to just war principles in classical Greek political thought, as reflected in Aristotle’s reference to “war that is by nature just” and Ciceros’ writings on bellum justum , the modern just war doctrine was heavily influenced by early Christian doctrine and further developed by such humanist reformers as Hugo Grotius.
For example, insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on improvised explosive devices planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers in addition to IEDs left in the open in order to kill with minimal risk to the attacker.
Today’s IEDs, first invented by the United States and now available on the global black market, are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs.
Chinese former foreign minister Zhou Enlai spoke to this view when he echoed Clausewitz, saying “all diplomacy is the continuation of war by other means.” tit-for-tat strategy A bargaining approach that consistently reciprocates in kind the offers or threats made by the other party in a negotiation, with equivalent rewards returned and equivalent punishing communications returned in retaliation.
These problems, potholes, and pitfalls notwithstanding, liberals prefer negotiation when trying to facilitate international peace.
Finally, Chapter 14 considers threats to the global environment that pose a serious challenge to the planet and humanity’s continued survival.
Financial markets are like the mirror of mankind, revealing every hour of each working day the way we value ourselves and the resources of the world around us. —Niall Ferguson, British historian io-i INTERPRETING CONTEMPORARY ECONOMIC CHANGE When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways.
GLOBALIZATION AROUND THE WORLD This map depicts the extent of globalization across the globe and is rendered from the 2015 Index of Globalization released by the K0F Swiss Economic Institute.
However, the process through which money is exchanged between countries does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions.
In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North seas, and city-states such as Liibeck, Hamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading.
For example, a momentary crash occurred around 1:08m. on April 23, 2013, when someone hacked the Associated Press Twitter account and reported that two explosions had just occurred at the United States White fdouse and that President Obama had been hurt.
Similarly, when those engaged in international economic transactions change their expectations about a www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net monetary policy The decisions made by states’ central banks to change the country’s money supply in an effort to manage the national economy and control inflation, such as changing the amount of money in circulation and raising or lowering interest rates. exchange rate The rate at which one state's currency is exchanged for another state's currency in the global marketplace.
Flowever, the creation of money—whether through increasing the money supply or lowering interest rates—does serve to stimulate the economy.
In Switzerland, the same burger costs $7.54. inflation also affects the cost of goods and services, as a general increase in the level of prices means that each unit of currency purchases less.
Conflicting Goals in Financial Policy Trade-Off Policy Tools Dilemma Inflation vs. unemployment Monetary policy (interest rates and money supply) Stimulative policies may create inflation.
Liberal International Economic Order The set of regimes created after World War II, designed to promote monetary stability and reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and capital.
Along somewhat similar lines, they established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, later known as the World Bank, to provide capital for longer-term development and recovery projects. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net speculative attacks Massive sales of a country’s currency, caused by the anticipation of a future decline in its value. fixed exchange rates A system in which a government sets the value of its currency in relation to another country’s currency at a fixed rate of exchange and does not allow it to fluctuate in the global money market.
In the case of Indonesia in 1998, such protests and riots can sometimes even contribute to overturning a government.
Although this “playbook” is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, the political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of criticism.
However, studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs on their recipient states.
With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton Woods system gave way to a system based on looting exchange rates.
Although flexible exchange rates give governments the autonomy to conduct their own fiscal and monetary policies, these same market forces hold governments accountable for their policies and actions.
FINANCIAL CRISES SINCE BRETT0N WOODS This map shows the global distribution and frequency of systemic banking crises, a type of financial crisis, marked by significant financial distress in the banking system such as bank runs and liquidations.
As the global economy is to a large extent still recovering from the crisis, the remainder of the chapter assesses the aftermath of the crisis and the future challenges facing the global financial system. io 4 THE 2008 GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS Myriad economic and political factors caused the global financial crisis, and the particulars of the crash, especially the investment instruments themselves, are incredibly complex.
Although Germany and Canada remained strong, the United States entered a multiyear recession.
Most significantly, it weakened the economic power of the United States while improving the relative global position of China.
The post-crisis recession in the United States also increased Chinas prominence as the largest holder of United States debt securities, as its share of the total United States debt increased almost 50 percent from 2008.
Although the value of the dollar on the world market has been stable, some of the leading economies in the world, most notably China, have suggested that the dollar ultimately be replaced—or at least supplanted—as the major currency of the global marketplace.
Among the larger economies of the world, India and China, arguably the two major countries most insulated from the global financial order, fared www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net reserve currency Currency held in large amounts by governments for the purpose of setting international debts and supporting the value of their national currency.
Regarding her expertise in the area, she noted that “The finance guys argue that if you’re never in the club, you can’t understand it, but I think they have it backward.
In 2014 the BRICS countries launched the New Development Bank , pledging $50 billion in startup capital to be devoted to “sustainable development” projects in BRICS countries.
First, they could function as a “lender of last resort” that could be “better placed to coordinate economic actions” given their proximity to the country in need of relief.
Ideally, they could work alongside the IMF or the World Bank to resolve problems.
Developing and transition economies make up five of the top ten host countries for FDI and reflect a growing interest for investing in developing and transition economies.
Comparing these two figures reveals that the mobility of labor, although substantial, is far less than the mobility of capital, as only a small portion of the overall labor pool actually relocates to another country.
When the Uruguay Round was concluded in 1994, the GATT became the World Trade Organization , reciprocity Mutual or reciprocal lowering of trade barriers. nondiscrimination Principle that goods produced by all member states should receive equal treatment, as embodied in the ideas of most favored nation and national treatment.
COMMUNIST CHINA CHOOSES TO CONVERT TO CAPITALISM AND CONSUMERISM Shown here is one example of China's growing consumerism: a view of the huge South China Mail in Dongguan, the world's biggest shopping center.
Next, we review the basic philosophical beliefs that undergird trade policy and the role of trade within the global political system so that we can assess some of the specific policy tools that states use in international trade. transparency The Clash Between Liberal and Mercantilist Values With regard to free trade, the principle that barriers to trade must be visible and thus easy to target.
For example, during the early years of the United States, Treasury Secretary Alexander Flamilton recommended that the United States specialize in manufacturing instead of agriculture, as it would better serve United States national interests.
In short, “hile American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire.
The underlying assumption of hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a collective or public goot in that it provides shared benefits from which no one can be excluded.
Given the close integration between both sides, any military conflict would be very costly to both countries, as it would damage large portions of both economies.
Finally, economic interdependence provides each country with a means to engage in “costly signaling,” that is, a way to have conflicts through economic rather than political means.
As United States Secretary of State John Kerry noted, the sanctions have “obviously had a profound impact, but not sufficient that President Putin has decided that he isn't going to pursue his particular strategy"" . ii 4 THE FATE OF FREE TRADE Global trade continues to proliferate, and protectionism is at a historically low level.
This section explains some of these policy tools, all of which fall under the broad rubric of protectionism —policies designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition.
Along those lines, orderly market arrangements are formal agreements through which a country accepts limiting the export of products that might impair workers in the importing country, often under specific rules designed to monitor www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net protectionism Barriers to foreign trade, such as tariffs and quotas, that protect local industries from foreign competition. tariffs Tax assessed on goods imported into a country.
Import quotas Numerical limit on the quantity of particular products that can be imported. export quotas Barriers to free trade agreed to by two trading states to protect their domestic producers. orderly market arrangements Voluntary export restrictions through government-to-gomnment agreements to follow specific trading rules.
A team of forecasting experts predicts that by 2020 “the benefits of globalization won’t be global_Gaps will widen between those countries benefiting from globalization economically... and those underdeveloped nations or products within nations left behind the world economy is projected to be about 80 percent larger in 2020 than it was in 2000” . u-5 TRIUMPH OR TROUBLE FOR THE GLOBAL ECONOMY The pressures on free trade notwithstanding, “rapid globalization has done nothing to undermine the confidence liberals have always placed in trade.
THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION GOES GLOBAL When the GATT began in 1949, it had 23 members.
Elowever, the United States continually appealed these rulings and refused to remove the subsidies.
Critics charge that globalization, of which free trade is a part, leads to a “race to the bottom” in environmental standards because countries are encouraged to enhance their competitiveness by lessening environmental regulations.
At the root of the trade-environment controversy is a substantial gap in global governance.
Rather, the principle of national treatment implies that goods are to be treated equally for trade purposes, no matter how they were made.
The WTO also ruled against other United States environmental laws, such as provisions for “turtle-safe” shrimp harvesting methods and gasoline standards—although supporting the laws themselves, the panel nonetheless ruled that they were being enforced in a manner that unfairly targeted certain countries.
The Great Depression pushed the United States to enact the Smoot-Hawley Act of 1932, which increased United States tariffs by 50 percent and contributed to a collapse in world trade.
Moreover, an increasing portion of world trade, particularly in emerging economies such as BRICS countries, is within supply chains.
Yet the effectiveness and future prospects of the multilateral trade system do provide some cause for concern.
We next consider these alternative governance structures, paying particular attention to regional trade agreements as the most prevalent trade institutions.
In the Global North, many of the EU countries belong to more than thirty RTAs.
Finally, although the WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, they violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MFN, as they give some WTO members advantages over others.
I discovered that the European Union, which started the pandemic ... applied its MFN tariff to only six countries—Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States—with all other nations enjoying more favorable tariffs.
Once you have glimpsed the world as it might be, as it ought to be, as it’s going to be , it is impossible to live compliant and complacent anymore in the world as it is. —Victoria Safford, Unitarian minister 12-1 POPULATION CHANGE AS A GLOBAL CHALLENGE demography The study of population changes, their sources, and their impact.
To formulate your interpretation of this human dimension of globalization and world politics, it is instructive to first look at how changes in world population are a part of the globalization of world politics.
To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace the global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic. global village A popular cosmopolitan perspective describing the growth of awareness that all people share a common fate because the world is becoming an integrated and interdependent whole.
As the figure shows, Africa is expected to experience rapid population growth and account for over a third of global population by 2100; Europe is expected to continue to decline from almost 22 percent in 1950 to less than 7 percent in 2100. at birth is expected to reach 79. years.
A GEOGRAPHIC POPULATION DIVIDE Although world population growth is anticipated to decelerate in the latter half of the twenty-first century, it is expected to reach 10. billion by 2100.
For the first time, Turkey became the largest refugee-hosting country, followed by Pakistan and Lebanon.
Moreover, as security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide, the linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls. atrocities Brutal and savage acts against targeted citizen groups or prisoners of war, defined as illegal under international law.
Although it is commonly assumed that states in the Global North admit the most refugees from conflict, evidence indicates instead that the majority flee to neighboring countries in the Global South.
The welfare and survival of everyday people are endangered, and the need for their protection is increasing.
Known as copulation density, this measures how close together people are living.
Seoul Brussels Toronto Moscow Sydney Madrid Berlin Vienna Melbourne Buenos Aires Shanghai San Francisco Boston Montreal Amsterdam Business activity * Cultural experience Human capital Information exchange Political engagement ‘Percentages indicate the relative weighting Scoring breakdown Globalization values calculated on a 0-100 scale FIGURE 12.
As the percentage of world population residing in dense urban agglomerations increases worldwide, the “dualism” between city dwellers and those living in the rural and poor periphery will make the urbanized core cities more similar to each other in outlooks, values, and lifestyles.
Next we look at examples of life-threatening diseases that are sweeping a globe without borders. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net fragile cities Cities in a state of violent crisis, with the municipal government incapable or unwilling to govern and provide public services. population implosion A rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward progressively larger populations; a severe reduction in the world’s population.
Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. lealth Organization.
Another recent deadly strain, known as H1N1, or swine flu, crossed the species barrier between pigs and people.
A populations health is of utmost importance to the state’s ability to survive. —Jeremy Youde, global health expert 12 4 THE GLOBAL INFORMATION AGE cosmopolitan An outlook that values viewing the cosmos or entire world as the best polity or unit for political governance and personal identity, as opposed to other polities such as one’s local metropolis or city of residence.
Pessimists predict that one result of globalization will be competition between states as they seek to preserve their sovereign independence, retain the allegiance of their citizens, resist the homogenizing forces now sweeping the world, and ensure their own national security.
The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to unfiltered information for the first time.
The world’s most repressive regimes and violent transnational groups—from al Qaeda and the Mexican drug cartels to the Mafia and the Taliban—are effectively using technology to bring on new recruits, terrify local populations, and threaten democratic institutions.
Moreover, though ours is often described as the information age, a remarkably large portion of the available information is controlled by a carte of huge multinational media corporations.
An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment about the morality of globalization.
The World Cup in Qatar in 2022 has come under intense controversy due to allegations of bribery and human rights abuses.
Ob ves 13-1 Describe the role of individual rights in the global system.
Every human life is precious... it is not just about our criminal justice system, which we also want to be proportionate and restorative; it is about the type of society that we want to build—a society that values every person, and one that doesn’t give up on its people. —Laurence Lien, member of Parliament of Singapore i3-i PUTTING PEOPLE INTO THE PICTURE Until relatively recently in the theoretical study of world politics, the needs of the faceless billions of everyday people were neglected.
THE HUMAN CONDITION TODAY “Man is bom free, and everywhere he is in chains,” bemoaned political philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his famous 1762 book, Social Contract.
When I left for Colombia [South America], 1 fully expected Bogota to be like any large United States city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish.
By this measure, the evidence provides a basic profile of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding or failing.
For example, the Bahamas and New Zealand have similar levels of income per person, but life expectancy and expected years of schooling differ greatly between the two countries, resulting in New Zealand having a much higher HDI value than the Bahamas.
The Turkish mass killing of Armenians, Hilter’s slaughter of Jews (and other groups), the Khmer Rouge slaughter of Cambodians, and the Hutu slaughter of the Tutsi of Rwanda all exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century.
And 5 Countries With None Micronesia, Palau, Qatar, Vanuatu, and Yemen Rwanda 64% Bolivia Andorra 53% 50% Cuba 49% Kuwait 1.5% MAP 13.
Others are sold as child brides or camel jockeys.” www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net gendercide Systematic killing of members of a specific gender.
Tragically, this story is one that is repeated frequently in other countries throughout the world where children suffer from starvation, lack of education, life-threatening illness, physical abuse, forced labor, and sexual slavery.
Calling for action from the global community, Executive Director Justin Forsyth of the NGO Save the Children urged “this indiscriminate killing must stop now.
Specific protection measures for children, provision of nutritional supplies, and support for education programs are needed.
Created by the UN General Assembly on March 15, 2006, the HRC is a relatively new intergovernmental organization designed to evaluate allegations of human rights abuse and www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net humanitarian Intervention The use of peacekeeping troops by foreign states or international organizations to protect endangered people from gross violations of their human rights and from mass murder.
In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the dismay of human rights advocates who felt that this greatly diminished the role of the IGO and sent a negative message about the importance of human rights around the world.
The total cost of repairs is estimated at more than $6 billion, which is equal to about 30 percent of Nepal's annual economic output . ves 14-1 Articulate key concepts underlying global ecological controversies.
Cornucopians adhere to the belief that if free markets and free trade prevail, ecological imbalances that threaten humanity will eventually be corrected.
Relentless population growth is putting excessive pressure on local land and water resources in many countries, making it difficult if not impossible for farmers to keep pace . tragedy of the commons A metaphor, widely used to explain the impact of human behavior on ecological systems, that explains how rational selfinterested behavior by individuals may have a destructive, undesirable collective impact.
Furthermore, “there is wide consensus that the 2 degrees Fahrenheit of global warming of the last century is behind the rise in sea levels, more intense hurricanes, more heat waves, and more droughts and deluges” . www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net greenhouse effect The phenomenon producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a blanket in the atmosphere, thereby increasing temperatures.
However, Asian dynamos China and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil-fuel energy.
Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth with a critical layer of protection against the sun’s harmful ultra-violet radiation. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net FEELING THE HEAT The IPCC has concluded that evidence of the Earth's rising temperatures is ""unequivocal” and that global warming is more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity.
Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products began to phase them out.
Destruction of tropical forests, where two-thirds to three-fourths of all species are believed to live, threatens to destroy much of the world’s undiscovered biological diversity and genetic heritage. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net biodiversity The variety of plant and animal species living in the Earth’s diverse ecosystems.
South American forests, most notably the Amazon, are generally burned for industrial-scale soybean farming or cattle grazing. www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net deforestation The process of clearing and destroying forests. desertification The creation of deserts due to soil erosion, overfarming, and deforestation, which converts cropland to nonproductive, arid sand.
This map displays the extent to which human activity, as opposed to natural environmental factors alone, is likely to lead to further desertification or degraded dry lands in regions across the globe.
In 2014, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization warned that drought in Central America had reduced maize output by around 9 percent, resulting in 400,000 families in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras needing food assistance. critically polluted with human waste.
Between 2009 and 2015, pro| duction in the United States almost doubled, due in large part to growth in American shale-oil firms.
The movement began in earnest in 1972, when the UN General Assembly convened the first UN Conference of the Eluman Environment in Stockholm.
Extreme weather events—such as droughts in China, Russia, and Argentina and flooding in Canada, Pakistan, and the United States—destroy agricultural crops and lead to disruptions in the market.
Though the demand for energy e from nonrenewable resources remains high, the development of | renewable sources to meet the world's energy needs is on the rise f . no less than five major accidents between 1995 and 1999 at Japan’s fifty-two nuclear power plants —dramatized the potential dangers of nuclear power.
Based on Newsweek Green Rankings 2015 of Global Companies. of rheir own existing environmental protection policies.
Pictured are the 2014 EPI ratings of selected countries that illustrate these differences. ■ -f If necessity really is the mother of invention, there is hope.
Rather than leave you in the lurch, World Politics puts itself to the same test.
Consequently, because globalization makes cooperation crucial to the well-being of everyone, the continued tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed.
Shown here in Egypt are horse-drawn carriages parked in front of a McDonald's, reflecting a biending of cultures and economies, traditionalism and modernity.
The evolution of the Internet of Things, with trillions of devices connected to the Internet, “holds the promise for reinventing almost every industry,” contends Internet pioneer Vinton Cerf.
The potential impact of these additional threats is formidable, as emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions and terrorism in almost any place and at any time in the world.
Further Geopolitical Consequences of the Financial Crisis,” Foreign Affairs 88 : 2—16.
A Simple Guide for Bringing the Undead into Your Classroom,” International Studies Perspectives : 1—13.
Some Experimental Findings from an International Negotiation Simulation,” International Studies Quarterly 53 : 23—47.
Analogy, Foreign Policy Decision Making, and the Rwandan Genocide,” Foreign Policy Analysis A : 301—320.
Foreign Economic Liberalization and Internal War,” International Studies Quarterly 51 : 79—97.
Personal Exposure to Terrorism, Psychological Distress, and Exclusionist Political Attitudes,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 : 363—389.
Weighing the Evidence and Cautious Inference,” International Studies Quarterly 57 : 201—214.
Understanding the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Dam Conflict,” Foreign Policy Analysis 5 : 37—56.
A New Framework for the Study of Civil War,” Journal of Peace Research 45 : 55—74.
The Nexus of Human Rights, Democracy, and Development,” Journal of Peace Research 46 : 181—198.
Why a Procedural Account Alone is Insufficient,” European Journal of International Relations 20 : 1124—1147.
In Joel Krieger , The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World, 2nd ed., 3.
Benedict’s Quest to Bring Christians Back Together,” Foreign Affairs 92 : 117—128.
In Charles W Kegley Jr. , Controversies in International Relations Theory , 1.
Contribution of Working Group LI to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Policy Problems and Normative Perils,” International Politics 41 : 37—49.
In Richard A Falk, Samuel S Kim, and Saul H Mendlovitz , The United Nations and a Just World Order, 1.
International Organizations and Foreign Aid in the Punishing of Human Rights Violators,” Journal of Peace Research 46 : 79—97.
In Jacob Bercovitch and Scott Sigmund Gartner , International Conflict Mediation, 2.
In Gary L Guertner, Robert Haffa Jr. and George Quester , Conventional Forces and the Future of Deterrence.
In Charles W Kegley Jr. and Eugene Wittkopf , The Global Agenda , 6th ed., 2.
In Sarah Owen Vandersluis and Paris Yeros , Poverty in World Politics, 2.
A Normative Account by Larry May,” Ethics & International Affairs 24 : 433—435.
Richardson, ‘Frontiers,’ and Wars in the 1945—1965 Era,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 22 : 441—467.
Liberal IR Theory in the New World Order,” International Studies Perspectives 16 : 40—49.
The Effect of Interstate Relations on Civil War,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 30 : 937—961.
Its Environmental Impact,” Springer Briefs of Pioneers in Science and Practice 1: 89—113.
