America will continue to lead the effort to prevent the spread of the world’s most dangerous weapons.
The regime in North Korea must know that they will only achieve security and prosperity by meeting their international obligations.
Provocations of the sort we saw last night will only isolate them further, as we stand by our allies, strengthen our own missile defense, and lead the world in taking firm action in response to these threats.
Likewise, the leaders of Iran must recognize that now is the time for a diplomatic solution, because a coalition stands united in demanding that they meet their obligations, and we will do what is necessary to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon.
At the same time, we will engage Russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals, and continue leading the global effort to secure nuclear materials that could fall into the wrong hands – because our ability to influence others depends on our willingness to lead.
Wall Street Journal pundit Bret Stephens interviewed Viktor Esin, former head of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces.
Esin told Stephens that China, which is developing at least five new nuclear ballistic missile models, is developing one model that can launch three Multiple Independently-targetable Re-entry Vehicle warheads.
Such missiles can strike multiple targets at once, and greatly amplify the power of an attack force.
It is between a world of fewer United States nuclear weapons and more nuclear states, or the opposite.
In his idealism, the president is setting the stage for a more nuclearized world.
It is thus foolish for American analysts to focus on the ChinaUnited States balance alone.
The 1976 panel concluded that the Soviet buildup eclipsed United States intelligence estimates by a large margin.
To grasp the dangers clearly it is vital to learn the lessons not only of Cuba in 1962, but of the 1973 nuclear confrontation that took place between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Yom Kippur War.
Cuban dictator Fidel Castro wanted the Soviets to launch a nuclear first strike, to prevent America from dethroning him and liberating his island paradise from his iron grip.
Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had no nuclear plan when Egypt and Syria invaded Israel.
Challenged by the U.S., Moscow eventually retreated, but not before the two superpower navies had come close to blows in the Mediterranean.
What animated Brezhnev to play the power projection card were two factors.
Thus Moscow would be able to impose its will upon the rest of the world.
First, a perception that America is declining can tempt rival powers to behave more aggressively.
Second, changes in the nuclear balance, and the overall balance itself, matter if one or more parties to a crisis think the balance matters and acts accordingly.
At minimum, a nuclear balance shift changes the risk calculus during a crisis, as happened in 1973.
It is a practical inquiry aimed at divining intentions of real-world actors.
The United States began reducing the size of its nuclear arsenal in 1967, and placed a freeze on its qualitative modernization of its remaining arsenal in 1992.
The latest report from Pakistan has the country deploying a 60-kilometer range single-warhead nuclear ballistic missile carrying a maneuverable nuclear warhead.
This shows a very high degree of sophistication in miniaturized warhead design and single-warhead guidance technology.
Pyongyang’s third nuclear test design was apparently lighter and more compact than the earlier ones–signs of work towards building a small but powerful warhead that can be placed atop a ballistic missile.
The North is still years away from fielding an operational missile that can carry a bomb across the Pacific Ocean and hit a major urban target in the continental United States.
Aiming at closer targets reduces the payload weight penalty and increases warhead accuracy, as well as shrinking drastically the warning time for the target population to take cover.
The sad reality is that those who respond positively to constructive behavior are either those whom you have no reason to fear, or those who decide they can no longer sustain the challenge.
They view our nuclear reductions as inducements to increase theirs, figuring that their arsenal becomes more valuable as our own decreases.
The fundamental geopolitical trend of the nuclear age in the 21st century is that smaller, more dangerous powers are at the forefront of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and their associated technologies.
Superpower rivalry could arise between China and the U.S., but unstable smaller nuclear powers are a greater risk to global stability.
Proponents of nuclear zero aim to end the nuclear nightmare; instead, they may well bring it on.
John C Wohlstetter is author of Sleepwalking With the Bomb, and founder of the issues blog Letter From the Capitol.
