By James McCartney James McCartney is a former Washington correspondent for Knight Ridder Newspapers.
One of the great myths of our time, created by self-serving political partisans and nourished by an eager, lapdog media, is the one of a young Jack Kennedy courageously facing down Nikita Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis, thus saving the world from nuclear war.
Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Kennedy's hired biographer, set the pace.
Kennedy's brother, Robert, and his White House speechwriter, Theodore Sorensen, contributed similar starry-eyed judgments.
For more than 20 years their version of the Cuban missile crisis was accepted wisdom, taught in classrooms, the stuff of legend.
Historians and scholars have pieced together quite another story, far less complimentary.
Working with newly released documents and information from recent meetings between ex-Soviet and Kennedy administration officials, they have found that many aspects of the legend are simply not true.
Though there is certainly no absolute consensus, revisionists have drawn a picture of a misguided Kennedy, caught in a political trap of his own making, perpetrating an unnecessary crisis and nearly plunging the world into nuclear disaster.
The late Dean Acheson, Harry Truman's revered secretary of state, privately called Kennedy's strategy a ""reckless gamble,"" according to Kennedy biographer Richard Reeves.
In the Cuban missile crisis, as in most foreign policy crises, the American press abandoned its traditional, constitutional role as a forum for debate and became part of the propaganda machine the administration artfully created.
The record shows that something similar has happened in virtually every foreign policy crisis since.
The fact is that in such situations the press consistently has joined in supporting whatever policy, misguided though it may be, the reigning administration tried to sell – from the vast buildup in the early stages of the Vietnam War through the Persian Gulf War.
For the most part, in foreign policy crises the critical faculties of the news media shut down.
It provides a case study of how an administration can manipulate a pliant press for its own political advantage, a capsulization of how it is done, and where and how the press failed.
The story contains many lessons for the press today in preparing itself for coverage of future crises.
The presence of components of medium-range ballistic missiles on Cuba was first reported to President Kennedy by his national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, on October 16, 1962, at 8:45m.
Kennedy called an 11:45m. meeting with his high-level advisers, a secret committee of foreign policy elders that later became known as ExComm – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
The startling discovery was not disclosed to the public until a week later when Kennedy addressed the nation in a televised speech.
What is known now is that Kennedy's version of the threat in that speech was overdramatized for political effect, a point now conceded by surviving top Kennedy administration advisers, including Theodore Sorensen and McGeorge Bundy.
Kennedy also failed to disclose a secret American program, called ""Operation Mongoose,"" that he had originated to topple the Cuban government and possibly invade the island.
Kennedy also deliberately avoided mention of comparable United States missiles on the Soviet border in Turkey.
And he was dead wrong on perhaps the most crucial question of all in the crisis, the Soviet motivation for installing the missiles.
Kennedy led the public to believe that the Soviets were threatening a nuclear strike.
We know now that the Soviets had no such intention, and in fact were fearful of an American attack on Cuba – for good reason.
We know that the world came closer to nuclear war than was known at the time.
The record shows that we were probably within 48 hours of a United States attack on Cuba that would almost inevitably have led to a Soviet nuclear counterattack on the United States.
Kennedy's language in his televised speech on October 22 was uncompromising.
He went on to say that missiles with nuclear warheads would be capable of striking Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City or any other city in the southeastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area – a truly frightening picture.
He demanded that the missiles be withdrawn and announced a naval quarantine to stop further shipments.
The record shows that the press did not challenge any of those highly questionable propositions in the days that followed.
The story of the Cuban missile crisis did not really begin when the missiles were discovered on October 16.
It began during Kennedy's 1960 election campaign against Richard Nixon.
On Labor Day Kennedy found himself several points behind in the polls and began a savage attack on Nixon – from the right.
On October 6, in a speech at the Cincinnati Garden, he accused the Eisenhower administration, including Vice President Nixon, of creating ""communism's first Caribbean base"" in Cuba.
Thus it was inevitable after he took office that Republicans would pressure him to stand up to Castro – which, of course, he did in the failed effort to depose the Cuban leader with the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The notes of the first secret meeting of ExComm – now on the public record – provide an insight into the political problem Kennedy had created.
In an interview in 1987, McNamara said, ""You have to remember that, right from the beginning, it was President Kennedy who said that it was politically unacceptable for us to leave those missile sites alone.
He had campaigned so strongly for a tougher policy toward Cuba that he was caught in a political trap of his own making.
Kennedy made clear in his televised speech that he believed the motivation was self-evident.
Yet the record shows quite convincingly that Nikita Khrushchev had no such intention.
Their action was intended to strengthen the defensive stability of Cuba.
This, of course, was the official Soviet position – including Khrushchev's and Gromyko's – at the time, but it was treated with derision and skepticism by the Kennedy administration and the press.
The press generally treated the notion that the missiles might be defensive as ""a Soviet lie,"" William LeoGrande says.
But there is now a consensus among scholars that Khrushchev's primary motivation was the defense of Cuba.
A strong secondary factor, they believe, was his justified perception of Soviet nuclear inferiority.
Khrushchev knew that the United States had established overwhelming nuclear superiority by 1962 and was still building up.
He wanted to redress the perception of imbalance by establishing a more threatening military posture.
A convincing witness to Soviet motivation is Sergo Mikoyan, who was intimately involved as the crisis unfolded.
He was personal secretary to his father, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan, a close friend and confidante of Khrushchev.
The Mikoyans and Khrushchevs lived in adjacent houses in Moscow's Lenin Hills, and Anastas Mikoyan and Khrushchev often took long walks together to discuss government problems.
At a 1987 conference in Cambridge, Massachusetts, involving both former Soviet and United States officials, Sergo Mikoyan was asked why Khrushchev installed the missiles in Cuba.
A secondary factor, Sergo Mikoyan said, was Soviet strategic inferiority.
The Soviets then estimated that the Americans had 17 nuclear weapons for every one they possessed.
Former Secretary of Defense McNamara asked Mikoyan if Khrushchev ""ever thought it would be in his interest ever to launch these missiles"" – a key question in light of Kennedy's description of the threat.
At the meetings between former Soüiet and American officials, McNamara acknowledged that Khrushchev had every reason to believe that a United States invasion might be in the works, but doubted that Kennedy would have ever done it.
McNamara insisted that the United States had ""absolutely no intention of invading Cuba, and therefore the Soviet action to install missiles with that as its objective was, I think, based on a misconception – a clearly understandable one, and one that we, in part were responsible for.
It was the super-secret ""Operation Mongoose"" that lay at the root of Cuban and Soviet fears – a program the American public knew nothing about.
Although McNamara insisted that there was no intention to invade Cuba, documents obtained through Freedom of Information requests by the privately funded National Security Archive paint a different picture.
In fact, the press found the notion that the United States might be considering an invasion of Cuba so outlandish that the question was not addressed.
This failure by the press seems all the more remarkable in light of the fact that in 1962 some prominent Republicans had been openly calling for an invasion.
Homer E Capehart of Indiana, for example, had demanded either a blockade or an invasion of Cuba in his reelection campaign to a point where Kennedy attacked Capehart as irresponsible.
The minutes of ExComm meetings show that officials were concerned that the public might not see any difference.
LeoGrande says the press never questioned the administration's premise.
Clearly the administration did not want the public to know that it was ready to make a deal on the Turkish missiles.
Robert Kennedy assured Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States, that the missiles in Turkey would be removed when the heat was off.
It was yet another public relations triumph by the Kennedy administration, which took the public position that the Soviets backed down in the crisis while the United States gave nothing.
When the missiles in Turkey were withdrawn soon after the crisis, without fanfare, the press paid little attention, perceiving no significant connection. n his televised speech, Kennedy characterized the discovery of the missiles as an unacceptable military danger to the United States, yet there are questions about the degree to which there was a significant new threat.
Top United States officials never believed the balance of power was affected by the Soviet move.
In fact, according to McNamara and Raymond Garthoff, a State department expert on the Soviet military at the time, United States superiority was about 17 to one in deliverable nuclear weapons – just what the Soviets had believed.
Garthoff estimates that the Soviets had 44 intercontinental ballistic missiles at the time of the crisis while the United States had several thousand nuclear weapons.
Many historians now believe that top officials of the Kennedy administration, who were retained by Lyndon Johnson after Kennedy's assassination, concluded that the threat of force worked in dealing with the communists, thus setting the conceptual stage for the Vietnam War.
It is also a matter of record now that the Soviets drew another conclusion – that they must build up their nuclear forces.
They began to do exactly that soon after the crisis, leading to an uncontrolled nuclear arms race that, by the 1980s, had produced more than 50,000 nuclear weapons on both sides.
Yet the myth lives on, in part because of the brilliance of the Kennedy administration's public relations machine, in part because the full story was hidden for so many years by government secrecy, and in part because the press didn't do its job at the time – and has failed since to reexamine history as the true story became known.
The American press corps substantially supported the Vietnam War through all of its early stages.
It was not until after the Tet offensive in 1968 that the mainstream press began to ask critical questions.
But by 1975 that edge had dulled when President Ford tried to rescue the merchant ship Mayaguez off the Cambodian coast.
More United States soldiers died than the number of merchant seamen who were saved, but the operation was greeted in the press as a great American victory.
Years later, President Reagan's 1983 invasion of Grenada – certainly questionable in retrospect – was also viewed as a triumph.
A careful examination of the role of the press in the Persian Gulf War raises the same kinds of questions.
As is well known, the military imposed the tightest controls on the press in American history, making accurate reporting on the scene improbable if not impossible.
We still know virtually nothing about why Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait or why the administration so drastically overestimated Iraq's military capabilities.
Much of the press in the Persian Gulf was still buying whatever the administration had to say as fact, still failing to probe deeply into the causes of the war.
For the press, there are dramatic lessons in the unfolding story of the Cuban missile crisis.
Another lesson is that the press has grave difficulty in questioning the basic premises of administration decisions to use force.
The power of the press is to raise issues, to ask questions, to stimulate public discussion and debate.
William LeoGrande believes he knows why these questions weren't asked, at least in part.
But the Cold War was over by the time of the Persian Gulf War and the press still had not produced a declaration of independence.
