PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS Army War College,Strategic Studies Institute,122 Forbes Avenue,Carlisle,PA,17013-5244 8.
Kennedy Launches Operation MONGOOSE.19 Khrushchev Decides to Put Missiles in Cuba.
Aerial Reconnaissance and ""The Photo Cap"".36 Opposition to U-2 Flights.
When Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided secretly to place offensive missiles in Cuba, he clearly did not believe President John Kennedy would use military action to enforce United States policy warnings against such a deployment.
IX Lacking hard intelligence to the contrary, the American Intelligence Community also issued a failed SNIE on September 19,1962, stating Khrushchev would not place offensive missiles in Cuba.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's secret policy decision to place SS-4 medium and SS-5 intermediate range missiles in Cuba was based on an erroneous assessment that once the missiles had secretly been emplaced, President John F Kennedy would accept them as a fait accompli.
When these erroneous assessments were contradicted by intelligence from a highly valuable and reliable espionage agent.
Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, a Soviet Military Intelligence officer jointly run by the Central Intelligence Agency and British intelligence , this information was not given the credibility it deserved until it was subsequently confirmed by our first generation Corona satellite reconnaissance.
National Security Advisor) McGeorge Bundy knew about Penkovsky or the importance of his information.
Dulles's successor, John McCone, continued to keep the President informed of the status of this case after he became DCI in November 1961.
After a show trial in Moscow, Penkovsky's execution was announced on May 17,1963.
There is evidence of at least 51 meetings between Kennedy and Bolshakov between May 1961 and December 1962.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric gave a speech to the Business Council at White Sulfur Springs, West Virginia.
But Khrushchev also admits elsewhere, ""Pm not saying we had any documentary proof that the Americans were preparing a second invasion; we didn't need documentary proof.
He did not return to Washington until after his honeymoon in southern France on September 23.
FINAL COMMUNICATION WITH PENKOVSKY On August 27,1962, Penkovsky exchanged packages with a CIA officer during a reception in the Moscow apartment of an American agricultural attache.
The next day, Penkovsky appeared at the British Science and Cultural Attache offices for a film showing.
In a series of cables between McCone in France and acting DCI Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter in Washington (which became known as the honeymoon cables), McCone continued to warn about the possibility that the Soviets would place offensive missiles in Cuba.
Then, depending on the United States reaction, they would move to place offensive missiles in Cuba.
The author recalls that no one at the meeting took or supported the DCFs position.
The consensus was that there was not enough convincing information or evidence to support the DCFs view.
Not only did it fail to spot the ominous indicators of missile emplacement, but over and over again it made fools of ground observers by proving their reports inaccurate or wrong.
But there were no U-2 flights over western and central Cuba from September 5 until early October.
President Kennedy requested that such information be withheld until after the United States elections.
Although this analytical mind-set was formed by an incorrect interpretation of the DCFs instructions, it did result in delaying the dissemination of human source information pending the receipt of U-2 photography.
After the crisis, Ray Cline asked both Robert Kennedy and McGeorge Bundy if they would assess ""how much that single evaluated piece of photographic evidence [the San Cristobal SS-4 sites] was worth. . . . hey each said it fully justified all that the CIA had cost the country in all its preceding years.
He thought that the best course for the President was for him to get a good night's sleep after a strenuous campaign weekend.
On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962, President Kennedy was briefed on the discovery.
The EXCOM met secretly beginning on October 16 to advise him on how to respond to the crisis.
The President tape recorded the meetings without the participants' knowledge, and transcripts are now available.
Others who participated in the EXCOM either as experts or in place of their superiors were Latin 54 America Assistant Secretary of State Edwin M Martin, Deputy Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs U Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Paul H Nitze, Deputy Director of the CIA General Marshall Carter, Kenneth O'Donnell, Adlai Stevenson, and United States Information Agency Deputy Director Donald Wilson.
Although a member of the EXCOM, Vice President Johnson was not present for EXCOM meetings during the first week of the crisis.
He returned to Washington from a campaign trip to Hawaii on October 21 and was briefed that day by McCone and Lundahl on the discovery of the missiles.
The author recalls no retreat from that unshakable policy commitment throughout the crisis.
Also on October 17, DCI McCone went to Gettysburg to brief former President Eisenhower and to get his views on what to do.
He thought this might be done by airborne divisions, but was not familiar with the size of the Cuban forces in the immediate area or their equipment.
Kennedy displayed a remarkable calm during the TV and photo coverage of that White House visit, as he listened to the Soviets lie to him 2 days after he received the U-2 photos of the MRBM site in western Cuba.
ESTIMATES LEAD TO POLICY DECISIONS The President departed Washington on Friday, October 19, for campaign appearances in Chicago.
As noted earlier, FROG is the NATO designation for the Soviet FUNA Tactical Missile.
It is interesting to note that only after U-2 photography confirmed the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba, was reporting on the Soviet military build-up from human sources 58 such as espionage agents and refugees given serious credibility.
Another SNIE was written on Saturday, October 20, to assess the major consequences of certain United States courses of action with respect to Cuba.
The estimate also reported 12 Komar cruise missile patrol boats; all were probably operational or nearly so.
It is interesting that Secretary McNamara expressed his opinion at an EXCOM meeting on October 17 that if nuclear warheads were supplied to the MRBMs, then the Soviets would also supply nuclear bombs for bombers with offensive capability.
THE PRESIDENT DECIDES TO BLOCKADE After a telephone call from Robert Kennedy, the President returned to Washington that Saturday from a campaign trip to the mid-west feigning a cold.
The President decided to delay the quarantine to permit consultation with our allies.
McCone urged the President to indicate publicly the intention to remove the missiles and other weapons by ""means and at a time of his own choosing,"" if surveillance proved that the Soviets and Cubans were not removing them.
BRIEFING IKE, LBJ, AND ALLIES On Sunday, October 21, 1962, the DCI briefed Eisenhower a second time, at McCone's residence.
However, the Vice President agreed 63 reluctantly to a blockade after learning of Eisenhower's support.
According to Kent, de Gaulle was both satisfied and supportive of the intelligence briefing and of President Kennedy's decision.
THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS AND DEFCON 3 President Kennedy made a television address to the nation that Monday evening, October 22,1962.
We were now ready as a government and as a people to unite in confronting this nuclear 65 threat to the security and the existence of our nation and potentially to all other nations of the free world.
On that same day, the Pentagon placed the entire United States military establishment on Defense Condition 3, an increased state of alert.
The Soviets would intercept these communications and would thus fully understand the scope and seriousness of the growing United States military response.
The alert lasted for 30 days of continuous flight operations —2,088 sorties in 48,532 continuous hours of flying time, in which 20,022,000 miles were flown without a fatality.
Over 70 million gallons of fuel were transferred in flight by the KC-135 tankers.
General Lemay may well have been one of the most important and most under-rated players in the missile crisis.
Secretary McNamara received word in the evening of October 22 that 91 Atlas and 41 Titan liquid-fueled ICBMs were being readied for firing.
Matador and MACE tactical cruise missiles in West Germany were brought to combat-alert status.
Although no racing program was going on at Gulf Stream, troops enjoyed lining up along the rails to watch the thoroughbreds work out during the early morning hours.
This would add further credibility to the stated United States policy of not allowing offensive missiles to be established in Cuba.
DEFCON 2 President Kennedy signed the order for the naval quarantine on Tuesday, October 23, 1962.
That same day, Secretary of State Rusk obtained a unanimous concurrence from the OAS to support the naval quarantine of Cuba.
Also on October 23, Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky, following an emergency meeting with Khrushchev and the Soviet Council of Ministers, placed the Soviet armed forces on a war footing.
Later on that Tuesday evening, NSA flashed word to the CIA watch office that its directionfinding efforts indicated that Soviet ships bound for Cuba that were suspected of carrying missiles, had not only changed course, but were probably on their way back to Russia.
Late that Wednesday evening, President Kennedy called Secretary McNamara to confirm when our forces would be ready to invade Cuba.
That same day, the official world reaction showed a generally favorable response to the United States action, particularly in Latin America.
But existing MRBM and IRBM sites in Cuba were being rapidly completed, as were buildings believed to provide storage for nuclear warheads.
Aerial photography of Cuba on October 24 and 25 clearly showed that work on the missile sites was moving ahead rapidly, even faster than before.
Two IL-28 Beagle bombers had been assembled, three more were in the process, and crates for an additional 20 bombers were at San Julian airfield.
DCI McCone reported that as of 6 o'clock Thursday morning, October 25, at least 14 of the 22 Soviet ships that were known to be en route to Cuba had turned back.
This gave the Soviets more time, but simultaneously demonstrated that the United States meant business.
That same day, Aleksandr Semyonovich Feklisov , the KGB resident in Washington, replaced Bolshakov as the conduit between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Fie asked for a meeting with John Scab of the American Broadcasting Company and asked if the United States would accept a deal whereby the USSR withdraws all offensive missiles under UN supervision and the United States agrees not to invade Cuba.
Also on October 26, Khrushchev sent a long emotional message to Kennedy with the same offer as was conveyed by Feklisov to Scab.
Khrushchev sent a second message on Saturday, October 27, broadcast publicly on radio, adding the condition that the United States withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
It stated that if the Soviet missiles and offensive weapons were removed from Cuba 71 under UN inspection and verification, the United States would agree with the rest of the Western Hemisphere not to invade Cuba.
THE DARKEST DAY Saturday, October 27,1962, was the darkest day of the crisis.
A few would probably criticize such military action publicly, but would most likely support it privately.
That we had been asked on such short notice to draft this SNIE was another strong indicator that the United States was indeed preparing to bomb and invade Cuba.
The next day, Sunday, October 28, Khrushchev announced publicly that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba.
On Saturday, five of the six MRBM sites were believed to have a full operational capability.
Aerial photography from October 25 confirmed the presence of a FROG missile launcher in a vehicle park near Remedios.
There was so far only fragmentary mixed reaction to the President's rejection of Khrushchev's Cuba-Turkey proposal.
Khrushchev publicly agreed on Sunday, October 28, to remove the missiles in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
There was an implicit promise to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey later.
AFTERMATH The Special Group called a halt to the sabotage component of Operation MONGOOSE on October 30.
On November 2,1962, two voiceless telephone calls were made in Moscow to a telephone number given by the CIA to Penkovsky for his use to indicate that he had loaded a dead drop.
Jacob was declared persona non grata and departed 75 the Soviet Union on November 6.
The following day, DCI McCone briefed President Kennedy on the ambush of Jacob and Penkovsky's probable arrest.
On November 20,1962, the Soviets decided on their own to withdraw the IL-28 bombers, their six nuclear bombs, and the tactical nuclear weapons.
The CIA published a memorandum on November 29 concerning the deployment and withdrawal of Soviet missiles and other weapons in Cuba.
The CIA had no evidence of any preparations in Cuba to withdraw these elements.
Nuclear warheads were not actually seen in Cuba until the post-crisis review of aerial photography taken during the crisis period.
Sergei N Khrushchev, son of Nikita Khrushchev, said that the 20 nuclear warheads in Cuba were never mated to the missiles but easily could have been.
MISSILES IN CAVES There was a surge of intelligence reporting after the crisis, mostly from refugees, that the Soviets had secreted some of the offensive missiles in caves.
Such inspections, however, were never agreed to or permitted by Castro.
On February 6, 1963, Secretary McNamara introduced an unclassified briefing in the State 77 Department auditorium.
After this introduction, John Hughes, the Special Assistant to the Director of DIA, presented a detailed photographic review of the introduction of Soviet military personnel and equipment into Cuba, and of the removal of offensive weapons systems.
The Special Group should have been informed of the delay in overflights and should have had a mechanism to discover automatically such reporting omissions.
On March 7, Bundy sent a copy of the PFIAB report and the DCFs February 28,1963, memo response to the President to President Kennedy's secretary for filing.
We have no indication the report was changed, and there were no resignations.
This malfunction diminished the effectiveness of policy advisers, national intelligence estimators, and civilian and military officers having command responsibilities.
The Board attached 35 examples of such indicators as an annex to its report.
After this injunction, even the President's Intelligence Checklist prepared by the CIA failed to include information from any of the refugee or agent reports on the sightings of offensive missiles in Cuba.
The Board noted, however, that the photographic evidence from the October 14 and subsequent overflights was promptly processed and submitted to the President in time for decisive action before the Soviet MRBM and IRBM systems became fully operational.
If our deliberations had been publicized, if we had had to make a decision in 24 hours, I believe the course that we ultimately would have taken would have been quite different and filled with far greater risks.
While McNamara gives Robert Kennedy much of the credit for this performance, the President made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for the administration.
This will alway be one of the keys to successful national security leadership.
KHRUSHCHEV RESIGNS On October 13,1964, 2 years after the missile crisis, Khrushchev resigned all of his party and government offices.
It was resented as a Soviet humiliation, not as a victory as Khrushchev had earlier proclaimed.
Conversely, the mind-set of United States leaders led them to conclude that the Soviets would certainly realize the seriousness of their actions, and would believe and heed the seriousness of President Kennedy's warnings about the missiles.
It was ironic that on the same day President Kennedy made his speech to the nation.
Above two paragraphs from Schecter and Deriabin, 336; Helms, 216; and the author.
John Mack Earagher, Mari Jo Buhle, Daniel Czitrom, and Susan H Armitage, Out of Many-A History of the American People.
Our last operational contact with him was August 27, 1962, at a reception in the apartment of the American Agricultural Attache in Moscow.
