The inevitable or necessary fate to which a particular person or thing is destined; one's lot.
A policy of imperialistic expansion defended as necessary or benevolent.
It was the concept of United States territorial expansion westward to the Pacific Ocean.
The phrase was coined in 1845 by the editor John L O'Sullivan, who described the United States annexation of Texas and, by extension, the occupation of the rest of the continent as a divine right of the American people.
The term was used to justify the United States annexation of Oregon, New Mexico, and California and later United States involvement in Alaska, Hawaii, and the Philippines.
I don’t see how you could believe in one without believing in the other.
I believe that those of us who write Patriot Fiction mostly believe in destiny.
A predetermined course of events considered as something beyond human power or control.
There were other weapons including the neutron bomb, generally referred to as enhanced radiation devices.
Before the world stopped making nuclear weapons, it had over 40,000, divided among 8 countries, 7 declared and 1 undeclared.
Two more countries were doing their best to build nuclear weapons and one country that had tested them, no longer made them, South Africa.
That’s one ball that you really don’t want to get rolling toward the pins, you probably won’t get a gutter shot.
Plus it tends to turn Biblical on you, a beget b, b beget c, until the bombs are all gone.
The good news is there won’t be anyone around to build anymore for a very, very long time.
On the other hand, using up the existing supply really puts the world’s population in a bind, even if they’re not a target.
The majority of the weapons will be detonated in the northern latitudes.
Like the US, Europe, Russia, India, Pakistan and China and somewhere^) in the Middle East.
If an author waxed and waned philosophic about nuclear warfare and didn’t build a story around it, no one would read more than two pages, although sometimes that’s all they read anyway.
There are a lot of very good authors out there who haven’t written themselves into a corner.
After the floods of 2008, he found himself selling wheat and oats in addition to corn.
Many of the Midwestern areas didn’t have enough growing season left to replant and grow corn.
In any event, they had to wait until they could get into the field to plant and for some... the corn that was supposed to be knee high by the 4 th of July wasn’t in the ground.
Corn needs over 80 days to grow and mature and it has to happen before the first frost.
He even made a bit more than previous years, partly due to inflation, but he needed to, because of inflation.
Midwestern gas prices had managed to stay just below $3 a gallon, but the diesel the tractors used was a half dollar higher.
I told him I’d have to think about it because we didn’t have a freezer.
He said the locker plant double wrapped the meat, first in plastic and then in Kraft paper.
We can order chickens by the case from the grocery store and get turkeys when they have them on sale.
When the farmers harvested their wheat oats and corn, I bought a pickup load at a time and put it in Mylar bags inside of 6-gallon pails.
Sara began to pay more attention to the sales and we added hams, bacon, turkeys, beans and rice.
We also got a supply of Mountain House food, enough for two people for one year.
After we were into prepping, both Sara and I found time to visit Preparedness Websites and read the Patriot Fiction.
The stories and the various Forums were full of ideas and there wasn’t total agreement among the various authors or various posters.
One guy believed in a Main Battle Rifle, the civilian version of the Ml 4, a Taurus PT1911 .45acp semi-auto pistol and a special purpose shotgun made by Mossberg.
In our County, the Sheriff was pre-disposed to not issue non-professional concealed carry permits.
The only guy in our area that sold the Springfield Armory rifles was a guy named Smith in Des Moines.
The MIA was a bit hefty for her, but she did like the Ruger Mini-14 rifle.
We had applied for and been issued handgun purchase permits when we went to the Sheriff to see about CCWs.
We hadn’t driven all the way to Des Moines to just return home empty handed.
When he added it up, I told him I’d write a check and he could call our bank to verify that we had sufficient funds to cover the check.
We had substantial savings and I had gone online the day before and transferred more than enough to cover any purchases.
I make money on every bag of seed I sell which is the reason I sell it to begin with.
Most seed salesmen have a second job because the seed selling season is so short.
I farmed 80 acres most years but didn’t get in a crop this year and seeded alfalfa.
A hay crop could always be sold and some of our neighbors would cut and bale it for a portion of the hay.
With the very late spring, we only got two cuttings, but it sold very well.
Around Thanksgiving, as the freezer began to have more available space, we added several of the small Butterball turkeys.
We were once a month customers of the Wes Des Moines Costco and when we could, purchased a little extra.
Buying the firearms magazines and ammunition cut into that, but the sale of the hay replaced a portion and one more spring would likely see us close to our previous level of savings.
I knew John Brentwood in passing; he was one of the managers at the West Des Moines Costco.
More than once we arrived late in the day and I see him going through the checkout lane with cases of Folgers and sometimes with multiple bags of beans or rice.
One day, by chance, we were in the checkout line when John came up pushing a flatbed of beans and rice.
When we got home, I help Sara unload and forgot entirely to look up the Cummins generator.
We talked about it and decided we had two choices, a small portable generator just large enough to power the freezer and refrigerator or a home standby unit.
I couldn’t imagine a situation where 1,000-gallons of propane wouldn’t be enough.
One of the authors I read a lot of had pointed my way to the MIA and he had strong opinions on how much fuel you needed to have, what you needed to do to preserve it and how long you should plan on a power outage.
I believe that maybe John also writes Patriot Fiction, he said something about weaponized Ebola.
After checking, we realized that the RS 12000 was a 3,600rpm generator.
The RS 15000 was 1,800rpm, put out all the power we could use and was much more expensive than the RS 12000.
After it was installed, we notified the power company as Cummins recommends.
We/I didn’t do anything else; we didn’t install a large propane tank, etc.
We did go to a range and become very familiar with our new rifles, handguns and shotguns.
There were allegations of irregularities in Florida, Ohio and even Illinois, which Obama won by a slim margin.
It didn’t make it all the way to the Supreme Court, but there was speculation that it could.
In Illinois and California, the suits bought by the NRA had been heard and were awaiting judgment.
The gun lobbys’ suits would no doubt make it all the way and with Obama filling vacancies, the next ruling might go 6-3 or even 7-2.
Joel Rosenberg had predicted the war with Iran would break out in November, 2008.
At the top of the list of pending Iowa Legislation for the coming session was the shall issue bill on CCWs.
We rounded out our armory with a .22 rifle and a long barrel for one of the special purpose shotguns.
I had a very good season selling seed corn, oats, beans and wheat for the 2009 planting season.
I got the fields plowed, disked and dragged and one of my neighbors planted all 75 tilled acres in corn.
Apparently the new canner lacked a seal that could go bad and was bigger.
A spring thunderstorm took out power and it was two days before it could be restored.
The generator kicked right in and we didn’t miss power for more than a minute or so.
About the only non-modern thing we had was the old Chevy pickup I’d bought and restored.
I didn’t rebuild the engine; I pulled it and the transmission and had them rebuilt.
I sanded it down, added some body putty and when it was ready, took it in to be repainted.
Whatever happened in the future was beyond our control; nature was under God’s control and something like WW III was under the control of the leaders of the countries.
It seemed to me that the United States government had long since ceased to care about the real political power, that of the people, and lived in a little world called Washington, wearing rose tinted glasses.
I have lots of free time while the corn is growing and I only have to cultivate it a couple of times.
If we could get a hole excavated I could form up a slab and lay block walls.
It’s not a problem now, but when we get older, it might be nice to have stair steps rather than a ladder.
Foster children usually come from broken homes and bring their own problems with them.
I wanted something large enough for more than just the two of us, yet no so large we’d end up with a white elephant that put us in the poorhouse.
I found one and he didn’t care why we wanted the hole; he only wanted to know if we could pay for it.
I reassured him that it was the least of our worries and he scheduled the dig for the following week.
If he dug out the soil and piled it, he wanted one price; but, if he had to haul it off, he wanted a whole lot more.
I told him to pile it and I’d spread it on the field with a manure spreader.
The wall of the shelter was basically 124’ feet of wall 9’ high with a door and holes for cables and whatever.
After the hole was excavated, I put up 2x4s for forms and stopped to reflect on what I was doing.
I wanted to add a shower, sink and toilet plus a kitchen sink and that meant grey/black water.
We’d need a catch tank and a sewage pump to get the output to our septic system.
Had I been thinking, I’d have had the excavator dig out a little more, but I hadn’t and I wasn’t about to pay extra for a few yards of soil.
I went up to Des Moines and got a tank and the sewage pump plus piping to connect it to the septic system.
I had to leave an 9 access to the tank just in case the pump ever failed and it had to be replaced.
I was sure that Sara would want to know why we had a manhole cover in one corner of the shelter.
Once the tank was installed, the sewage pump installed, connected to the septic system and plumbing pipes installed, I finally got the concrete poured for the floor and the stairwell.
A portion of the stairwell would be covered over before I finished, but for now, it wasn’t necessary.
For a few weeks I concentrated on laying the blocks and cultivating the corn.
I built my own door by layering sheets of road plate and welding it together.
It was a heavy sucker and I had to tinker with it until I had it perfectly level.
We bought a used storage cabinet to use as a gun safe and added the bathroom fixtures, and the little 5 in 1 combination kitchen with refrigerator, sink, 4-burner stove, oven and microwave.
I wasn’t done, but had to wait until the corn was harvested and sold to have more money to finish the shelter.
Sara and I put up shelves and moved the majority of our food down there.
I could empathize; I was a part time seed corn salesman and a part time farmer and lately, a stone mason.
I used laminated 2x12s to build the overhead and welded the plates together.
On one of our shopping trips to Costco, I bumped into John and mentioned our new shelter.
I explained the LUWA system built in Switzerland especially for fallout shelters and added that we could add manual valves to use in case of a tornado.
And, I didn’t 10 even consider my fuel costs because they wouldn’t come into play until I refilled the farm tank.
This year, doing so would prove to be expensive with gas at $3 a gallon.
Because of the bountiful harvest, I got the excavation contractor back to fill the hole in and compact the soil.
I also contacted Utah Shelter Systems and ordered an AV-150 air filtration system with extra filters.
I also needed blast valves for the generator and AV150 so I ordered 4 3-bar valves and an overpressure valve to maintain a positive pressure in the shelter.
We assumed that even compacted, the soil would settle so we left a mound about 2’ high over the shelter and I got some seed off a TV ad that promised to cover 1,000ft 2 for only $19.95 plus shipping and handling.
Last week and I have it connect to the TV antenna with a signal booster.
The only thing that I wished I had was a supply of gold and silver coins.
We could trade flour if we had a grain mill to mill the wheat and corn.
Neither of us had so much as a speeding ticket, so we paid the fee, got our fingerprints taken, signed up for the mandatory training course and sat back to wait.
This County offered the course 4 times per year, thus it was 4 months before we actually received our CCWs.
We were also given a hand out listing all the places we couldn’t carry a concealed weapon.
My holster was a Bianchi paddle holster and I had a carrier for two extra magazines.
We put over forty grand in our saving account after we’d paid for everything else.
Our next task was to do an inventory of our food stuffs, ammunition and other supplies.
I had 5V2 gallons of remaining PRI-G after stabilizing the gas in the new 1,000-gallon farm tank.
I added a few odds and ends spare parts for the Chevy pickup and bought a good used trailer and hitch.
The cheapest source I found for PRI-G was Battery stuff in 12 Grants Pass, Oregon.
A bit further south in Medford, Oregon lived a guy who sold flechette shells for the 12-gauge shotguns.
The real advantage, if any, was the ability of the rounds to pierce soft body armor.
When it came time to replace the 7.62x51 mm and the 5.56x45mm ammunition, I got it from Ammoman, some guy in New Jersey, whose price included shipping, not leaving you guessing.
Smith sold us 124gr and 200gr Speer Lawman and we got 124gr +P and 2300gr +P Speer Gold Dot, hollow point ammunition.
The one thing that I failed to understand was the prices of the handguns.
With hollow points the handguns were about equally effective, although, the .45 had more stopping power.
If you believe in destiny or fate, it means that you’re powerless to stop whatever is coming next.
However, that doesn’t mean that you can’t place yourself in a position of avoiding the worse of the potential disaster.
I also became aware that it didn’t really pay to advertise what you had, lest it attract unwanted attention.
With that in mind, I ordered additional filters directly from Cummins and bought the Valvoline one case at a time from assorted outlets.
So, when we did, Sara and I had a brief discussion about the propane tank.
I may be a crackpot, but I was beginning to believe that bigger and more should become part of our vocabulary.
I bought a used, propane tank, with a new pressure relief valve, which could hold a desert fill of 10,000 gallons.
AmeriGas was willing to install it, for a fee; their fee included the cost of the cradles.
About $20,000 later, we had 10,000-gallons of propane and could cook and heat for several years.
More importantly, we could live off the grid for a year provided we were careful with our usage of electricity.
The new tank was connected to the rented tank, giving us 11,000 gallons of propane and the regular tank was filled by Ferrellgas.
Dennis Haysbert describes all those bad things that can happen and then asks if you’re in good hands.
For what we pay, we should be; but I rather expect some things aren’t covered and I been reading our policies from time to time, looking for the loopholes.
Considering how much we’d spent on preparations, our saving balance wasn’t all that bad.
Sara had joined a quilting circle made up of 13 many of our neighbor ladies and wanted a somewhat fancy sewing machine.
She deserved it, much of the food we ate came from her garden and it saved us untold money that we’d have spent at Costco or somewhere else.
I had a good rifle and wanted some match ammo; figure about a buck a round.
I was also thinking about adding a scope to my rifle, maybe a Nightforce variable and a Harris bipod; plus a muffler if I could come up with one.
That might be difficult; the state of Iowa took a dim view on NFA weapons.
There were at least a dozen brands available for my MIA, but only one was guaranteed for 30,000 rounds and its price reflected that.
Keep in mind, that you don’t buy a huge propane tank every year and all the extra propane to fill it the first time.
In the thereafter, all you need to do is keep it topped off and you aren’t buying any more propane than you’ve previously purchased.
Also keep in mind that you don’t build and equip a new shelter every year.
Finally, if Sara and I had children, there would have been no way to afford what we wanted or the time to enjoy them.
As mentioned we had a fair amount in savings and there was Christmas to consider.
I quizzed her until I had all the details, like make and model and where she intended to buy it.
His military commanders met with him and outlined what they thought was a reasonable drawdown.
He agreed with them and met with Congressional Leaders to garner support for the plan.
Congress was pleased to have a definite drawdown plan, but Obama cautioned that if word leaked out, the deal was off and he and his commanders would be forced to revisit the situation.
Obama was careful in that he didn’t meet with the Congressional leaders as a group, but rather individually.
Each Congressman was given a different day when the drawdown would be complete.
Now, if the information appeared in the MSM, he’d know who leaked it to the press.
Almost by chance, they discovered that Obama had given each of them a different date.
They decided that any statements to the press would be limited to stating that an agreement had been reached and a drawdown would begin soon.
The opposition party controlled both houses of Congress and Obama ended up having two vacancies on the Supreme Court to fill.
The vacancies were justices who had always voted against the people, in his view, and he aimed to rectify that.
He knew that if he selected two liberals, the Senate would refuse to consent to the nominees.
His appointments appeared, for all practical purposes, to be middle of the road, more than he was, both women.
If Congress accepted his appointments, the gun lobbies would be concerned when the 2 nd Amendment came up again.
As you know, Congress reviews a judicial nominee in terms of his/her past decisions, among other things.
Obama’s popularity soared when the drawdown was announced although he failed to say when it would be complete.
It soared further with his nominees to fill the vacant positions on the court although no one really knew his nominees.
Obama was supporting a new program and seemed to think he had the needed votes in Congress because of the economy.
A new weapons program would funnel funds to certain Congressional Districts that opposition leaders represented.
Boeing's director of global strike integration, Rich Parke, was first quoted about the ""B-1 R"" bomber in Air Force Magazine.
Its new top speed of Mach 2. would be purchased at the price of a 20% reduction of the B-1 B's combat range.
For the bomb-truck role Boeing proposes the modification of existing external hard points to allow them to carry multiple conventional warheads, dramatically improving overall war load.
For the air-to-air role, both defensive and offensive, they propose to add active electronically-scanned array radar and allow some of the hard points to carry anti-aircraft missiles.
Even with its somewhat reduced range as compared to the original B-1 B, its fuel capacity remains quite large.
This would allow it to escape from unfavorable air-to-air encounters by simply running away; there are few enough aircraft capable of Mach 2+ performance in general, and those that are deployed can maintain these speeds for only very short periods of time.
In general terms the B-1 R most closely resembles the original F-111 concept, as opposed to a pure bomber role.
Flowever, it would be able to carry out these missions at ranges even greater than the F-111.
The B-1 R was essentially a B-1 B with greatly enhanced electronics, many of them already used in the F-22, plus the F-22s engine.
The original B-1 A was dropped by Carter for three reasons, spiraling costs, the MiG-31 and knowledge that the Air Force was working on the F-117A Nighthawk.
With the engines from the F-22, the B-1 R could support the F-22s, delivering heavy loads of air-to-air missiles.
And, we didn’t have to start from scratch, just upgrade our existing airframes.
Retired airframes could be modified and replace in service aircraft without reducing the number of active planes.
It seemed clear that the administration would continue to confront Iran over its nuclear program.
It was equally clear that the United States would not attack Iran because of the threats issued by both Russia and China.
We heeded the threats; the Israelis assumed that they had nothing to lose.
They had made their own threats the year before off the coast of Greece.
Intended to make Ahmadinejad think twice, all they succeeded in doing was cause him to increase his rhetoric.
If either Israel or the United States made on move to attack Iran, Iran would defeat them and then China and Russia would bomb them back to the Stone Age.
According to Debkafile, on July 1 the previous year, Israel had no choice except to destroy Iran’s nuclear program if they acquired enough material for the bomb.
The unusual publicity given to Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s visit to Israel’s nuclear reactor at Dimona, in the southern Negev region, on July 1 albeit after the fact is a more than gentle hint to Iran of Israel’s determination to pre-empt a nuclear-armed Iran.
The Negev Nuclear Research Center is an Israeli nuclear installation located in the Negev desert, about ten kilometers to the south of the city of Dimona.
The Dimona reactor went on-line sometime between 1962 and 1964, and with the plutonium produced there, perhaps together with enriched uranium, the Israel Defense Forces most probably had their first nuclear weapons ready before the Six-Day War.
When the United States intelligence community discovered the purpose of Dimona in the early 1960s, it demanded that Israel agree to international inspections.
Israel agreed, but on a condition that US, rather than IAEA, inspectors were used, and that Israel would receive advance notice of all inspections.
Some claim that because Israel knew the schedule of the inspectors' visits, it was able to hide the alleged purpose of the site from the inspectors, by installing temporary false walls and other devices before each inspection.
The inspectors eventually informed the United States government that their inspections were useless, due to Israeli restrictions on what areas of the facility they could inspect.
By 1969 the United States believed that Israel might have a nuclear weapon, and terminated inspections that year.
The Dimona reactor was overflown by unidentified jet aircraft in the days before the SixDay War in 1967 which increased tensions and may have helped spur on the conflict.
Recent documentation released by Russia suggests the jets may have in fact been Soviet in origin, and not Arab as previously thought.
It’s only important if one realizes that history repeats itself; over, and over, and over.
The last time the United States had a nuclear confrontation with Russia, Nikita Khrushchev blinked.
Iran didn’t actually have the nuclear material to build the bomb until late 2009, they were seemingly always behind schedule.
When Mossad learned that they possessed the material, they decided to go ahead with their pre-emptive strike.
Rather than be the first country to use nuclear weapons since 1945, they made conventional attacks on multiple sites.
They must have practiced a lot because they had the same results as they’d had when they bombed Osiraq.
MSM immediately jumped on the fact that his statement failed to disclose any original thinking.
The Israelis were pleased with his statement although they agreed that it lacked originality.
Your best bet to reach our place would be to go south on 1-35 and exit west United States 34.
The answer is, we’re so close to Omaha and Lincoln, we’re sure to get some radiation.
I doesn’t matter what speed the wind is blowing, especially if ‘they’ hit both places.
If it went down in the middle of the night, we might not know anything until the following morning.
NOAA All Hazards Weather Radio is a network of radio stations broadcasting continuous weather information directly from a nearby National Weather Service office.
It is operated by the NWS, an agency of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the United States Department of Commerce.
NWR broadcasts National Weather Service warnings, watches, forecasts and other hazard information 24 hours a day.
It also broadcasts alerts of non-weather emergencies such as national security, natural, environmental, and public safety through the Federal Communications Commission's Emergency Alert System.
Russia launched one missile carrying MIRV’D warheads against Israel at 8am Moscow time, 7am Jerusalem time.
Two additional warheads were off course, one striking Gaza and the other striking Beersheba and the final warhead was a dummy.
Minutes after the weapons struck Israel, the weather radio went off and the EAS issued 18 an Air Defense Emergency Alert.
By definition, an Air Defense Emergency could mean either bombers or missiles incoming.
If I get a choice, I’ll pick bombers because they have more missiles than bombers; and, we could shoot down all of their bombers.
Many of the Russian bombers are equipped with missiles in lieu of bombs.
Actually it didn’t take that long to get dressed and I went with denims and a work shirt plus my Wally World boots.
I had to remember to get my Pioneer Hybrid hat, wouldn’t want my head to get cold.
Sara was busy loading underwear, socks, shirts and more jeans plus about the same for her into a suitcase.
All of our guns and ammo were in the shelter except for one shotgun and our pistols.
When we got down there, she turned up the heat and I went back for the shotgun, pistols and anything else we might have missed.
There wasn’t anything that we didn’t already have in the shelter, but on a hunch, I grabbed the laundry detergent and fabric softener sheets.
I’d guess that if an attack actually comes, we’ll lose power and that should help to warm this place up.
I’m awake now; I think maybe I’d like a cup of tea before we try to get some sleep.
We made the beds; Sara crawled into the lower bunk and was gone in minutes.
I dimmed the lights, but a short time later, they flicked out and I could hear the generator kicking in.
I also turned on the power to the AV-150 although the shelter contained enough cubic feet of air for more than 12 hours.
We could measure both carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide and had scrubbers, if needed, to reduce the carbon dioxide.
Carbon monoxide is a 20 product of combustion and the generator intake and outlet pipes were both schedule 40 6” steel pipe.
Reading usually makes me sleepy, so I fired up the laptop and opened the file.
I should point out that I already had the CD V-717 set up to allow me to monitor the radiation level.
On Point II discussed Operation Iraqi Freedom, picking up with the fall of Saddam and moving to 2005.
I didn’t get far into the report before it became boring and I started to nod.
I checked everything in the shelter, barred the blast door and turned in.
I awoke to the smell of fresh brewed coffee and Sara was in the shower.
I laid out a change of clothes from the suitcase and prepared to get in the shower after Sara finished.
More than anything, I wanted to just wash the memory of what had happened the night before.
I tried to soak off the despair I felt, but only succeeded in washing off the dirt.
I’ll put the reading in a spreadsheet I got and we’ll be able to tell how long we have to stay down here.
There is a large paper bag containing a pattern, the material, thread and batting you need to make your first quilt.
She put up a good front, although I knew that making a baby quilt bothered her.
She’d have 45 days to work on it and not only would she be passing the hours she’d be learning the tricks of making quilts that she hadn’t picked up from the quilt circle.
Most of them had a good storm shelter and some used it as a fruit cellar.
We’d lost electricity often enough that nearly ever farm had alternate power, usually generators.
Although the warning came after we’d gone to bed we didn’t know exactly when we’d been hit.
One might say we had launched on warning, heading to the shelter the moment the Weather radio went off.
I wasn’t totally sure we’d taken a strike until the survey meter needle started to rise.
The only thing I could say with certainty before that was 22 that we’d lost power.
It doesn’t click, you know; all that happens is the needle starts bumping up and down and continues, rising with time.
Sara started cutting up blocks for the quilt and I sat back down to watch the survey meter.
I wanted to be sure that we didn’t get a second peak as might happen if they also nuked Lincoln.
Sara really started to get involved with cutting and sewing, slowly assembling the quilt.
At the end of the day, we’d eat dinner and put a DVD in the player so we could watch a movie.
Other than the fact that we were locked in a bomb shelter, it wasn’t all that much different from we’d done before.
Usually, she’d turn in after the movie and I’d get on the ham radio to pick up what news I could.
At first I only picked up locals but when they mentioned frequencies where they’d talked to others, I wrote them down to try later.
No one was certain about the measures we’d taken except for one fella near Minot who said he saw those missiles fly.
I assumed that if large numbers of nuclear weapons were detonated in the northern latitudes, we’d get the speculated nuclear winter and if it was bad enough, it could spill into the southern latitudes.
I gather everything in a notebook I’d purchased exclusively for the purpose of recording information in case it ever came to this.
The pages were filling rapidly and by the end of the 45 days, Sara had the quilt nearly finished and I was looking at starting volume 2.
With the radiation well below 10OmR, I put on the protective suit, the gas mask and ventured forth to see how we stood.
Nothing looked different except for the sky; it was dark and foreboding.
Snow was deep and we’d have to mount the blade and loader on the tractor and try to clear the driveway.
I dressed more appropriately for the weather and overall lack of radiation and spent half a day mounting the loader and blade.
While we had small implements, we had to hire some things done because we had few large implements.
It then took the rest of the day to plow out the driveway and access to the buildings.
When we bought the place, it had a corn crib, barn, machine shed and a well house in addition to the two story house.
There was so much snow; I barely got it cleared away from the buildings.
It was nearly two weeks by the time I’d been able to check with our near neighbors.
They’d all made it; some because they had weather radios turned on, like we did, and some because they found out about the attack when they got up in the morning and discovered they were running on generator power.
Among us, we’d cut a single lane for traffic on United States 34 that stopped well short of 1-35.
We swapped experiences of the night of the attack and information gathered about the aftermath.
We concluded, collectively, that about half of the United States population was gone.
We also concluded that, collectively, we could get through this and, with a little salvaging effort, could cover our bases.
Nobody was particularly short on food and our greatest need would be propane, gas and diesel.
More often than not, my neighbor’s armories consisted of a .22 rifle and 12-gauge shotgun.
In time, we’d try to remedy that and add at least a bolt action .30-06 or possibly a semi-auto 7.62x51 mm.
If we wanted to drive to Des Moines, Smith’s store stocked about a half dozen Ml As.
From that point on, Sara seemed to have at least one constant companion.
It rapidly became apparent that we wouldn’t be going anywhere until the snow melted and we most likely wouldn’t be able to plant a crop this coming summer.
While it should mostly germinate, you couldn’t harvest the seed and use it the following season.
Pioneer Hi-Bred has heirloom seeds that they use to crossbreed their hybrids.
It was founded by Henry Wallace, later Truman’s VP, and a group of Des Moines investors.
Roswell Garst, who grew seed for Pioneer, was perhaps most well-known for hosting Nikita Khrushchev on his farm in Coon Rapids, Iowa on September 23, 1959.
Prior to Pioneer, farmers kept a portion of their harvest and planted it the following year.
Before the war, Pioneer produced, marketed and sold hybrid seed corn in nearly 70 countries worldwide.
The company also marketed and sold hybrids or improved varieties of sorghum, sunflower, soybean, alfalfa, canola, rice and wheat, as well as forage and grain additives.
Worldwide, Pioneer sold products through a variety of organizations, including wholly owned subsidiaries, joint ventures, sales representatives, and independent dealers.
She commented that, except for the heavy snow, it was hard to tell that the country had been attacked.
In addition to her usual homemaker chores, she and the ladies of the quilt circle began to make a quilt for our king sized bed.
When the snow had melted enough that we dared risk the trip, we headed to Ingersoll Boulevard in Des Moines, the location of a certain firearms dealer.
A bit further, United States 65 north to United States 30 and then east.
On the way back, we stopped by two places in Johnston, Camp Dodge and Pioneer.
We only took a few small arms, M9s, Ml 6s, M203s, and an assortment of hand grenades and 40mm grenades.
A visit to a local lawn and garden store proved to be worth the trip, we came away with heirloom seeds.
We’ve been through a war and we’re expecting our first child; I have a whole new set of responsibilities.
I only bought 5,000rounds of Black Hills ammo because it’s a buck a round.
The scope is mounted on the MIA, but only sighted in with a laser bore sight.
I haven’t had the chance to shoot the McMillan yet, it only came in a week before the balloon went up.
I read the McMillan manual down in the shelter and sighting in that rifle should be a snap.
With all the people living in large cities, like Des Moines, and just in time delivery, I’d speculate that the grocery stores must be empty or close to it.
The survivors will be looking for food and anything else they might think will benefit them.
That said, none of us will allow anyone to come in and take what we have.
People who lacked the foresight to prepare will become very aggressive when they’re hungry.
We have an assortment of grenades ranging from smoke to concussion to fragmentation.
The ground was too cold to plant a garden and some of us tried to grow a few plants inside.
We’d seen what fate had in store for us and my thoughts, naturally, turned to our destiny.
Fate is so negative, while destiny would be the natural outcome of what we had just experienced, good or bad.
Our first task, as a group, was shooting, as in sighting in rifles, learning to dismantle and clean them, learning to make them an effective tool.
There was no time like the present because we couldn’t plant our fields and our activities were limited.
Not that I had ever intended to become a marksman or a sniper, but I had the tools for the job and it just naturally fell to me.
When I switched from the Ml A to the McMillan, the range increased to about a mile, 1,800-yards.
The M9 has a maximum effective range of 50 meters; however, we used a maximum effective range of 50 yards.
We didn’t assume we’d get any second chances and if a weapon was needed, the situation was desperate.
Sara was excluded from being an active participant due to her pregnancy.
She even had one of the other ladies try to talk her into trading her Browning for the M9, but she cut her off at the pass.
One of the guys asked if I wanted a suppressor for the Tac-50 and I said I had one.
I wasn’t in bad shape, all things considered, but I tended to walk more and tried to improve my muscle tone.
During 2008, they had increased the length of basic training by a week to improve the fitness of our soldiers.
Marine Corps training was longer than Army training, so I presumed that the Marines were generally more fit.
One of the men had seen combat, as a Marine, in Vietnam and two others had been in the Army during peacetime.
I was always a civilian although once I got interested in preps; I collected Army and Marine Corps Field Manuals on my laptop.
Flenry ‘Hank’ Johnson was our combat veteran Marine and more or less took over our little group.
He was prodding and gentle, working us into good shape, and he accomplished his task.
I don’t know that I could go 40 miles with a heavy pack but I had my Chevy so I didn’t have to.
Sara and I had Tac Force vests that I’d acquired from Trading Post Supply.
And, that’s how I ended up becoming the sniper for our small group of survivors.
Anyone could learn to control his/her breathing and hold a rifle steady; knowing when to squeeze the trigger is more important because the rifle waives oh so gently while you’re holding on the target.
Some authors described it as a figure eight pattern while I just called it wobbles.
Speculation was rampant and woulda, coulda and shoulda were having a heyday.
I believed in my heart that Obama wasn’t doing that bad of a job and he would have been reelected.
However, it’s mid-2010 and I’m sure many adventures await us getting from here to the point where the question becomes important.
In the coming days, we will have discussion with each states leadership and activate their local National Guard units to assist the citizens of the states.
After much consideration, and discussion with my advisers, I am implementing the following measure based on the Supreme Court’s finding in Heller.
Justice Scalia, writing for the majority, emphasized the right to self-defense while leaving several questions unanswered.
The most important aspect of the Court’s decision was the recognition of an individual right to keep and bear arms.
Accordingly, I am issuing an Executive Order suspending various firearms laws and regulations for the duration of this national emergency.
The provisions of the National Firearms Act, the Gun Control Act and the Firearms Owners Protection Act are herewith suspended for the duration of the emergency.
However, no convicted felon or person found to be mentally defective may possess a firearm.
Additionally, any state laws failing to conform to the 2 nd Amendment by virtue of the 14 th Amendment shall be subject to the federal government withholding federal aid and grants from the states not in compliance with this directive.
It will allow our citizens the ability to use reasonable and necessary force and weapons for the protection of themselves and family members.
Any regional group formed to act collectively to protect a local area shall be recognized as an unorganized militia pursuant to Title 10 section 381; provided notice is provided to local law enforcement officials of their intent to so act.
You government is assembling food and medical supplies to distribute on an as needed basis using primarily rail transportation.
No exports of grains or other food supplies have occurred since the war and those stockpiles will be made available.
Never in our history has this nation suffered such an egregious attack.
We have a significant percentage of our military that was enroute home from Iraq and they will be pressed into service assisting local National Guard units.
They will not, I repeat will not, assume the duties of local law enforcement.
Our first order of business will be to get through the coming winter which the National Weather Service expects to be severe.
We can gather everyone in the group up and ride to town in a single vehicle.
Half an hour later we were standing in the Sheriff’s office In Osceola.
We asked if he’d seen Obama’s address and he said he missed it but the Sheriff had seen it.
We saw the President’s address and we’re here to notify you of our militia unit.
With the phone lines not working and the potential for trouble, I’ll go with it for now.
An Ml6 is essentially an AR15 with extra features and a casual glance wouldn’t disclose the difference, unless it had a M203 mounted.
The declaration temporarily made full auto weapons legal again although that might not include weapons belonging to the Iowa National Guard in the hands of civilians.
In the past when our troops had been shipped to Afghanistan or Iraq, it had been necessary to issue them new weapons.
Fortunately, we had been selective, trying to get the few good Ml 6s available and the ones we had were A3s that had seen much less use than the older Als and A2s available.
The ammo we found for the rifles was the M855 and we had taken all we had room for.
There were belts of 7.62x51 mm ammo for the M240s and we had taken it intending on delinking it for our MBRs.
We had almost unlimited free time the summer of 2010, allowing us to assume what Hank called, a proper military bearing.
The 7.62 NATO was unlinked and the M62 tracer rounds set aside with the M80 ball being evenly distributed.
We practiced, the ladies practiced and the neighbors dogs were taught to guard.
With a belly on her that looked like she was carrying a full basketball team, Sara couldn’t shoot prone or kneeling, but she managed to do fairly well offhand.
Towards the end of summer, Sara presented us with first a girl, Tracy, and then a boy, William.
They weighed, give or take, around 6 pounds, and had very healthy lungs.
We had cotton diapers, courtesy of the neighbor ladies, a pair of high chairs that were old but serviceable, diaper pails, diaper bags and formula, just in case.
However, Sara’s body responded well and the twins weren’t going hungry.
She didn’t quite regain her figure claiming that she’d put on more weight than she planned.
A diet would fix that, she said, but it would be slow because she was nursing.
With farms stung along United States 34, we anticipated more traffic than we got.
I suppose we thought that survivors would boil out of Des Moines and approach small towns or farms looking for food.
A few were lost and looking for directions, others offered to buy food with only a very few even hinting at being aggressive.
Those few were more likely to comment on the handguns strapped to our waists or the weapons slung over our shoulders.
Even an idiot could figure out a pump shotgun in a few minutes, but they’d probably load no Th shot because it sounded like bigger shot than no 4.
I suspect the main problem was the lack of gasoline; people get so used to just pulling up to a pump zipping their card and squeezing the handle.
If you reach twenty dollars before your tank is full, the pump shuts off.
On the subject of fuel, we needed diesel, gasoline and propane as I said before.
We didn’t dare get it in Osceola, not with the Central Clarke County Militia being formed.
Most of the fellas had experience driving large trucks and I assumed I could handle a propane truck.
The railroad stored a lot of diesel fuel for their engines, but it was piped in via pipeline.
There was more than enough in the storage tanks if we could find tankers.
It took almost 4 hours to find enough tankers; Iowa doesn’t use those double bottomed rigs.
We hauled back 4 loads of 9,000-gallons each, enough for the generators and the tractors.
The following day we knew where the tankers were and picked up 18,000gallons of gasoline and 6,000-gallons of propane.
After filling our propane tanks the following morning, we went back and loaded up again.
This time we had some left over and would wait a few weeks before we returned, it was best to top off right before winter.
The local stations partially restored forecasts, maybe they just read the Farmer’s Almanac, so we were warned that winter would come early and be severe, again.
Although most of the news was local for the Des Moines area, communities within their broadcast range were included and we got some Osceola news.
One popular story discussed the Central Clarke County Militia and disclosed that units had also been formed for Eastern and Western Clarke County.
Aid was slow in coming; although Iowa was a significant part of the nation’s breadbasket; its population was, relatively speaking, small.
At first, there was an increase in people trying to buy food or asking for a hand out.
We were organized and had spent dozens of hours on the range learning to take full advantage of the MBRs we had.
We had Hank trying his best to turn us into Marines, with only modest success.
Like the Future Combat Systems the military dreamed to have, that were highly mobile, we too were highly mobile; thanks in no small part to salvaging fuels from in and around Des Moines.
The final element that led to our success was our secure communications; only the military could intercept them and then only if they knew which of the 2,000 or so encryption 34 keys we used.
However, he had a ham radio preset on 28.250mHz so the subject never came up.
They came from the east; from 1-35 rather than Osceola, would be my guess.
As he later described, they flooded into his farmyard, firearms in plain sight, looking to shoot anything that moved.
In due course, maybe a minute later, Sara was talking to the Sheriffs office requesting assistance while the rest of us were hauling butt east to Hank’s.
Some of those people actually knew how to use a gun, maybe one per vehicle.
Strangely, those were the people who had the MIA rifles, probably courtesy of Smith’s store.
We assembled just to the west of Hank’s on United States 34 and radioed that we were coming in.
His reply was that they had shot at the house and he was trying to take out the drivers.
His suggestion was to encircle them and shoot them like so many fish in a barrel.
Fish don’t have firearms; and, if they did, they don’t have hands to pull the triggers.
They restored to spray and pray because they couldn’t determine our locations.
It is very difficult to display any degree of accuracy when you’re pulling the trigger on an AR15 as fast as you can.
I concentrated on the individuals with the MBRs, they were the real danger.
Over a course of maybe 5 minutes, I had them all down without revealing my position.
As we cut them down, their resolution waived and soon, they were throwing down the firearms and raising their hands.
To avoid anyone suggesting we simply executed them, none of them was shot in the head with a handgun.
I had collected the Ml As and the Garand, a 7.62, and had moved them to Hank’s bam.
I ignored them and continued with my task, we needed to replace those damned Berettas.
We left the others weapons lay, the Sheriff would have to get something out of the deal and no doubt the Central Clarke County Militia could use the weapons.
We spent the next two hours explaining, as a group and individually, what happened.
The Sheriff was concerned that there were no survivors among the attackers to verify our story.
However, there weren’t any close-up head shots or powder burns 35 around the body shots.
They collected the bodies, unceremoniously dumped them in the backs of the trucks, collected all firearms and left.
Hank took the Garand as a backup weapon, I took the Super Match and the 2 Ml As were distributed by drawing lots.
I hadn’t recovered all of the MIA magazines because the Calvary arrived too soon.
These magazines were among those collected and the Sheriff said it would be easier to give you the magazines than to try and get you to give up the rifles.
There are some .45 magazines in there too, way too many for the single .45 we found.
Y’all probably think you’re a bunch of real bad asses, being you won your first battle.
We have the whole town out salvaging what we can to get through the coming winter.
Sara tended to make the sauce separate from the spaghetti noodles and pile it on top.
I favored breaking the noodles into quarters and adding the sauce after the pasta was done and stirring up the whole mess.
I washed up and got the water started and browned the meat in a pan while I heated the jar of sauce in another pan.
I also sliced some thick slices of bread, spread them with butter and topped them with garlic powder.
With the kids burped and down, I finished dinner while Sara set the table.
The sauce is good and the spaghetti is good so I can’t honestly say it’s bad.
You sometimes ask if I got enough to eat and since I did, I can’t complain about that either.
I’ve thought about it and I believe it’s because they were shooting at me.
That’s not to say that I wasn’t frightened; I was terrified, but had to keep that in check so I could use my firearm.
Hank said that you sort of get used to it.” o There are few class 3 dealers in the state of Iowa.
A web search would reveal one in Ottumwa and he didn’t carry Surefire suppressors.
In Iowa, only law enforcement and military may possess class 3 weapons, excluding the dealers.
Surefire used to list only the M-25 White Feather as having an available adapter.
He can frequently see their eyes in his scope and everyone he shoots stays with him.
I’ve discussed sniping because it’s the most effective military action for one man or a team of two.
When TSHTF, you’ll need some kind of MBR ala .30 caliber, preferably 7.62x51 mm; they’re highly accurate and the military has the ammo all over the place.
You’d be surprised how many requests I get for the seven_ten_rule.xls spreadsheet.
There was a bunch of MPs carrying shot38 guns and Ml carbines and many of them have large mean-looking German Shepherd’s.
Consequently, Powers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded messages to SAC commanders noting that SAC plans are well prepared and that the alert process is going smoothly.
I did the next best thing and bought a CD from Fleataxi that had a lot of stories and the spreadsheet.
Thanks to those many Patriot Fiction authors that I had read, Sara and I managed to be prepared.
We held an after action session to discuss what we could have done differently.
We decided we’d done the best we could after we considered our numbers and how spread out we were.
Both the guns and ammo were heavier; offset by the fact they were much more powerful than the Ml 6s.
We took the ammo in the captured rifles out and set it aside, replacing it with newer Lake City production.
Aside from needing a thorough cleaning, the rifles were in fine condition.
There was a standard model with a walnut stock, a loaded with the black fiberglass stock and a stainless Super Match with the mossy oak camouflage.
I considered it best if I used it as an anti-material rifle as opposed to an anti-personnel rifle.
If the only time I ever had to shoot it was on our range, it would suit me just fine.
The problem was that they didn’t have survey meters and came out too soon.
Most of the others in our group had a storm shelter, a fruit cellar or stayed in their basements.
You can live 3 minutes without air, 3 hours without shelter, 3 days without water and 3 weeks without food.
We can plant a crop one year to harvest for seed and from then on out, everyone can grow their own seed, like they did back before hybrid seeds.
Operational costs will be paid by Norway and the Global Crop Diversity Trust.
I told him we had the heirloom seeds from Pioneer but somehow forgot to mention the heirloom seeds we’d picked up at the lawn and garden after we’d learned Costco had been cleaned out.
He used to really get my goat, but when he allowed us CCWs and gave tacit approval to our little group, I decided to cut him a little, as in very little, slack.
When he made that crack about Sara and me being survivalists, I basically changed the subject and we stopped talking about firearms.
Hard to criticize those folks; on-the-other-hand, law enforcement is under no legal obligation to protect you and neither is anyone else.
That’s your responsibility protecting your wife, kids, family members and yourself.
We began to wonder if we had enough food stored to get us past the nuclear winter.
The question applied not to Sara and me plus the twins, but to everyone in our militia or unofficial mutual aid group.
I wouldn’t assert that one family couldn’t make it on its own, it could be possible, however there’s security in numbers.
Clarke County now had three militia groups, not affiliated except through the good offices of the Sheriff.
The Sheriff and the Central Militia was best positioned to respond to problems in either direction.
It was just short of 20 42 miles from Ottawa to our location and by the time they could arrive to help us, or, we could arrive to help them, the battle would probably be over.
With but a single experience under my belt, I sure wasn’t a combat veteran.
I think a lot and as I thought about that battle, I realized that fifty yards wasn’t very far; and, it was likely that most of our battles, if any, would be fought at a similar range.
That McMillan that I wanted so badly wouldn’t be of much use at these close ranges.
The .223-caliber cartridges recoil is negligible compared with the .30-caliber cartridges fired in the Springfield, Ml Garand and Ml 4 rifles that were used by American troops from 1903 until 1966.
Soldiers have persistently criticized the round for its lack of stopping power.
The small-diameter bullet travels at high speed, and frequently passes through enemy soldiers without inflicting immediately visible injury.
The M16A1 fired the low velocity, solid lead Ml 93, which can't pass through more than 1 mm of RHA steel.
The Ml 6A2 fires the high velocity M855, which can pass though 6mm of RHA steel.
The 5.56mm NATO cartridge may be identified by its appearance, the painting of projectile tips, the stamping of the manufacturer's initials and year of manufacture on the base of the cartridge case, and the markings on the packing containers.
When removed from the original packing container, the cartridge may be identified by its physical characteristics.
The Ml 93 and Ml 96 cartridge for the Ml 6 can be fired with the M249, but accuracy is degraded; therefore, it should only be used in emergency situations when M855 or M856 ammunition is not available.
There was nearly an unlimited selection of frangible pistol and revolver rounds.
I got my frangible 5.56 from Ammoman, and bought a lot of other stuff from Cheaper Than Dirt, a misnomer, because they weren’t really cheaper than dirt; pretty good selection, though.
The frangible rounds were for those situations where l/we might end up inside of a building in a close quarters fight.
We weren’t fighting insurgents in Fallujah, but might someday end up in defending a building, from the outside in.
In the second place, a person could be so blinded by their desire for vengeance that they might end up getting their butt shot off.
I preferred the Klingon proverb that tells us revenge is a 43 dish that is best served cold.
Except that it wasn’t a Klingon proverb, it was a Sicilian proverb that first appeared in print in The Godfather by Mario Puzo.
The 2,000 year old expression remained in the hearts and minds of many of the survivors; which is not to say that we/they would be above shooting someone in the back if the situation called for it.
The proverb suggested that you could take your sweet time and take your revenge when it suited you and you had thought it out.
We don’t have phone or internet so there is no way to contact them and order one.
We won’t need a floor, but I think we should put in a foundation for the 2x4s to rest on.
It took 168’ of 1 ’ deep ditch about one spade width wide to dig the hole for the foundation.
I had to ask for help from the others because while I could frame up a 72’ long wall, I couldn’t lift it into place, get it straight and anchor it all at the same time.
I offered each of them some space in the greenhouse in exchange for helping me erect it.
The next stop was Des Moines for Plexiglas or Lexan and the proper fasteners.
It might not be up to the building code, but I’d built the greenhouse using studs 24” on center.
After we had the Plexiglas, we attached the 4’x8’ sheets on their side, staggering them to provide additional bracing.
We ended up with a 45“pitch to the roof and it took 2 sheets to get near the top.
Besides, Hank, we can grow year around once I get some grow lights installed.
Just about anything beats a sharp stick in the eye, so my statement was irrelevant.
I just guessing, but after cleaning out the stores and failing to grow much food on their own, they went looking, probably in all directions.
This group only had two Ml As and assorted hunting arms ranging from .22 rifles to 20-gauge shotguns.
I put on my Tac Force vest with the magazines of Black Hills 175gr BTHP and grabbed the second case that contained both my MIA and 590A1.
I only had 8 magazines in the vest, and the grenade pockets now held grenades.
Last time this happened, five of us surrounded the people attacking Hank’s house; this would be Ralph’s turn to be in the middle.
The problem with being in the middle of the melee was that you had both the bad guys and the good guys generally shooting in your direction.
For that reason, we practiced and the guy in the middle had a pretty good idea where everyone would locate, just not who would be in any particular position.
When I reached my position, I began to shed my gear, dropping the bandoleer, the chest vest and getting my MIA out of the case.
It was far more than a pop, definitely not a bang, but my rifle was far from silent.
My rifle couldn’t really be heard above the din of the attacker’s weapons, but when Hank and the others opened up, all hell broke loose.
Seventeen people required about thirty shots; thirty shots, not counting the no quarter shots.
The up46 side was that we rescued Ralph, gained two Ml As and about thirty magazines.
We also got a couple of .45s and the magazines before the Sheriff showed up, code 3.
My Sara has the Mini-14 target rifle and because the barrel is 22”, it has a bit more energy than a regular Ranch Rifle.
What I also failed to mention was that we had replaced the harmonic balancer on her rifle with a flashhider.
Those people who attacked Ralph’s didn’t have a chance, caught as they were between Ralph and us.
And, as always, we sat down to discuss our actions and determine if we needed to make changes.
Now, if you want a Ml A, I have two and would be more than happy to give you my Loaded.
We went out to the field and set up a target so Sara could try my pistol.
The riflescope I used had a bullet drop compensator and I didn’t bother with a Ghillie suit.
When I gave my Loaded to Sara to use, I switched everything to the Super Match.
That forced me to start all over, I had to dismount the suppressor fast attach mount and replace it with the flashhider my rifle came with.
It was easier to move the scope and 49 that left the task of sighting it in, plus replacing the flashhider on the Super Match with the FA mount.
The barrel on a Loaded is a medium weight air gauged barrel while the barrel on the Super Match is a heavy weight air gauged barrel.
I took the extra step so I kept the flashhider with the rifle it came on.
Our spare rifle was now her Ruger Mini-14 target rifle and our spare handgun the Browning Hi-Power.
Sitting at the kitchen table watching her feed the twins made me realize that we were short one rifle, one handgun and two shotguns.
Some of my 12gauge was reduced recoil so I figured when the kids were old enough to shoot the shotguns, they’d need 590A1s.
I could start them out with a .223 and 9mm and move them to the 7.62 and .45 when they became accustomed to the initial firearms.
Yeah right, in about 10 years, give or take, assuming I didn’t get my butt shot off.
While the 9mm wasn’t nearly the cartridge the .45 was, it was all right with the +P Gold Dot.
The reason I got Lawman and Gold Dot, beyond the savings, was that if the weapon was sighted in with one, it was practically speaking sighted in for both.
I was obviously getting ahead of myself by about 10 years, but a man can dream.
Since Sara and I had broken the long period of being childless, perhaps we’d end up with our own basketball team.
In a world where technology would fail and not be replaced, it meant a whole lot of manual labor, even with only 80 acres.
The Super Match proved to hold a slightly tighter group than the Loaded.
In the two encounters we’d had up to this point it wouldn’t have mattered.
Practice with the big rifle was limited but only because my supply of A-MAX was limited to the 3,000 rounds I’d gotten when I bought the rifle less what I’d used and not counting the Mk 211.
He was quick to say yes and my hunch was that it had something to do with my taking out my fair share and more of the MZBs.
However, I could only find two references to Tango; one was the dance and the second was the phonetic letter T If you asked me, they were simply buttholes.
As I’ve said, they didn’t bother to ask or even beg, they just tried to take.
In any discussion I’ve read about the difference between looting and strategic reallocation, we had been attacked by looters twice.
A suppressor is a device fixed on the end of a gun's barrel to suppress, hence the name, the sound of a shot going off from the weapon.
In real life, suppressed weapons are generally still semi-loud, but they also bring advantages such as greatly reduced muzzle flash, reduced recoil, and increased accuracy.
Suppressors are mistakenly called silencers; this is an incorrect term because it is almost impossible to totally silence a weapon and have it be effective.
They reduce the sound of gunfire by allowing the rapidly expanding gases from the firing of the cartridge to be temporarily diverted or trapped in a series of hollow chambers, known as expansion chambers.
The trapped gas expands and cools, and its pressure and velocity decrease as it exits the chambers.
Suppressors can fire super-sonic ammunition but this wears out the suppressor very quickly and is not as quiet as using sub-sonic ammunition.
The real advantages lay in the greatly reduced muzzle flash, altered recoil, and increased accuracy.
It was nearly a perfect flashhider, the felt recoil was significantly reduced and it added as much as Vi minute of angle improved accuracy.
Needless to say, the Super Match, in and of itself, was extremely accurate.
Sam and his wife Mary lived on the farm between Hank and Grace and Sara and me.
Ralph and Ruth lived to the far west and coming towards the east were Howard and Phyllis and between them and us, Jack and Shirley.
Anyway, the call was another call for help and Mary told Sara that she’d already called the Sheriff but he wouldn’t be there for at least 15 minutes.
This was round three for us and our homestead was close enough to Sam’s that I set up the Tac-50 and started picking off those that I could see.
This was a smaller group and at this distance, I couldn’t really make out their weapons.
Ralph and Jack flew by on the way to Sam’s and I presumed that Hank was coming in from the east.
This was a smaller group from what I could see and maybe they had some kind of body armor because the Mk211 rounds were occasionally detonating.
Well, I finally got a chance to use my big rifle and it was every bit as good as advertised.
With my agenda of getting more rifles and pistols for Bill and Tracy, I jumped into my Chevy and arrived about the same time the Deputy did.
However, Sam winked at me and I had a feeling he may have done some strategic reallocation of his own.
We’d just have to wait until they asked their questions, hauled the bodies off and the Deputy left.
You hit them at an oblique angle and between the two, those bullets really churned up their insides.
No man is an Island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the Continent, a part of the main; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a Promontory were, as well as if a Manor of thy friends or of thine own were; any man’s death diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankind; And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; It tolls for thee. John Donne 52 The point of the quote is that none of us could do this alone; we had security in our number, provided we weren’t attacked by a very large force.
Near as I could tell, they had been manufactured by PMI, one of the better manufacturers of aftermarket magazines.
I’d never seen a Mini-14 in the parkerized finished, but here they were.
As long as people kept getting in our face, I intended to continue build my gun collection.
I get invited in for a cup of coffee and always had a chance to learn a new trick or two from our older neighbors.
Those with livestock composted manure so we had planting material for the greenhouse.
The greenhouse was doing well, what with the kerosene heater for heat and the fluorescents for sunshine.
The years came and went with the weather gradually returning pretty much back to normal.
We were only attacked on one more time and this arrack came against our place.
They sort caught me flat footed and I ended up with one bullet in my left shoulder and a second in my left femur.
Sara really gave them hell until the others arrived and the Sheriff finally showed up.
She got the war trophies this time, one Loaded and one Super Match MIA plus two genuine Colt Ml911 Tactical pistols.
I was a long time healing, maybe because the doc had to rebuild both my femur and shoulder.
Our six farms produced seed corn, oats, wheat and soybeans and I was still the seed man once things began to return to normal.
In the early years after the war, fuel was only available if you were able to salvage it.
The government didn’t get a refinery online for 10 years and the second took another 3 years.
We had more crude than we had refining capacity and it was all American crude.
For a few years, we were forced to farm like our grandfathers did, at least until diesel became available.
The REAs eventually got power restored using coal to generate the stream.
Most trucking was strictly local delivery, from the railroad station to the stores.
Our rail system was in such a state of disrepair, that they still haven’t gotten high speed trains.
I took my time and trained them starting with the Mini-14s and evolving to Ml As.
Both became expert marksmen with every firearm they were taught to use, including the McMillan.
Speaking of which, I got one last chance to go to Camp Dodge and get more Mk 211.
Sara home schooled the kids until the school system was back up and running.
Well, after the lights came back on, I had the generator rebuilt, we haven’t stopped having storms or having the lights go out.
As our older neighbors began dying off due to advancing age, I had the funds and bought up their gun collections.
As to our neighbors, sometimes there was no living relative to inherit the farm.
In other cases, the surviving children could have cared less, they just wanted to sell the farm off and get on with their lives.
Sara and I thought they were foolish and fortunately, we were able to acquire each of the farms as they came on the market.
We had a strip about a mile deep north of United States 34 running just under five miles wide.
It was too much land to buy and just leave fallow and I continued the seed corn business from the growing end.
A salesman at heart, I didn’t want to run the operation and Sara and I hired a manager who took care of the operation including equipment, staff, planting to harvesting and bagging.
There’s pretty good money in the operation if you or your employees do the whole thing; enough so that our children never wanted for any material thing.
They also didn’t want for attention, love or a proper church upbringing.
The new President tried to lift the suspension that Obama had done to our firearms laws during the crisis.
The laws were suspended by means of an Executive Order and could be put back in place by simply rescinding the Executive Order.
Never happened; mainly I suppose because crime diminished dramatically.
After the early years about the only crimes were a rare murder and an occasional robbery.
