Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis.
During this time, the United States and the Soviets were engaged in the Cold War , an ongoing series of largely political and economic clashes.
After the failed United States attempt to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba with the Bay of Pigs invasion, and while the Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose, in July 1962 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter.
Three Men Go to War” focuses on three central figures in the crisis: President John F Kennedy, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
The hardliners in his government and some of his advisers wanted him to turn back Communism.
This was a dangerous, high risk strategy which could have resulted in nuclear war.
The paramilitary group that led the invasion took its name from the serial number of one of its members.
Early in 1960, President Dwight D Eisenhower authorized the CIA to recruit Cuban exiles living in Miami and train them for an invasion of Cuba.
On February 15, 1898, a mysterious explosion sank the battleship USS Maine in Havana Harbor, triggering a war between the United States and Spain.
The Maine had come to Cuba to protect American citizens while Cuban revolutionaries were fighting to win independence from Spain.
Prior to the assault, an air strike by B-26 bombers on Cuba’s main airfields on 15 April failed to destroy all of Castro’s air force.
Then, when the Cuban exile fleet approached Cuba, coral reefs damaged the boats.
The russians removed the missiles and we removed the missiles from Turkey that were pointed towards the USSR. everyone in the USA had a bomb shelter. the american and USSR leaders had easy communication with one another.
In a public message to President Kennedy broadcast on Moscow radio, Khrushchev agrees to the removal of all missiles on Cuba and their return to the Soviet Union.
