Home Author Share Menu Free Speech Culture Business Latino Latest Dark Mode Donate About Us Contact Us CONNECT Sign up for our NB Daily newsletter to receive the latest news.
President John F Kennedy is popularly depicted as a courageous leader who forced the Soviet Union to withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba pointed at the United States.
Kennedy did convince the Soviet government to remove their nuclear missiles.
But America also removed its own nuclear missiles, based in Turkey and Italy and pointed at the Soviet Union.
Kennedy’s supposed assertion of American resolve against Communism was in reality a negotiated compromise with the Soviet Union.
However, as the event is recounted in commonly used American history textbooks, the Soviet Union removed their missiles in the face of President John F Kennedy’s iron determination without forcing any concessions from the American government.
Five out of six textbooks the Media Research Center’s Culture and Media Institute examined failed to mention Kennedy’s secret compromise with the Soviet government preferring instead to perpetuate the myth of JFK’s.
Crisis and Compromise A series of international incidents caused relations between the United States and the Soviet Union to steadily deteriorate prior to the crisis.
The Soviet Union shot down a United States U-2 spy-plane making a reconnaissance flight over the USSR in May 1960.
America supported an army of Cuban exiles in a failed attempt to retake Cuba from a Communist government led by Fidel Castro in April 1961.
A disastrous June 1961 summit meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchev in Vienna convincrd the Soviet premier that Kennedy was “too intelligent and too weak,” to effectively oppose an aggressive Soviet posture.
Two months later, Communist East Germany built the Berlin Wall to prevent citizens from fleeing to free West Berlin.
In 1962, Soviet authorities met with Cuban Communist leader Fidel Castro about the possibility of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba; construction of missile sites began in July.
On Sept., 1962, the Soviet government declared that an American attack on Cuba or Soviet ships supplying Cuba would be treated as an act of war.
The United States government grew increasingly suspicious that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba; on Oct., 1962, a U-2 spyplane obtained photographic proof.
On Oct., Kennedy gave a speech announcing those findings to the world, and declared his intention to “quarantine” ships to Cuba.
Any ships bearing offensive weapons, Kennedy warned, would be turned back by the American navy.
At the time, Soviet ships, including ships carrying military equipment, were sailing toward the American blockade – raising the possibility of nuclear war.
The Soviet government, led by Nikita Khrushchev, sent two messages to the United States government broaching the possibility of removing missiles from Cuba.
The Soviet government first sent Kennedy a message on October 26, offering to remove their nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
The next day, the Soviets sent Kennedy a second message, declaring that they would remove their missiles if the United States removed nuclear missiles pointed at the Soviets based in Turkey and Italy.
However, in a secret agreement, the United States also agreed to dismantle nuclear missiles pointed at the Soviet Union based in Turkey and Italy.
The United States won a propaganda victory, and that’s how the history textbooks still treat it.
The Legend According to Textbooks According to American history textbooks, Kennedy uncompromisingly stood up to the Soviet Union.
Two textbooks made it seem like the Soviet Union backed down completely, without mentioning any concessions made by the United States.
Kennedy ordered the navy to blockade, or close off, Cuba until the Soviets removed the missiles.
He threatened to destroy any Soviet ship that tried to break through the blockade and reach the island.
The United States would respond, he warned, with a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union.
As the two superpowers neared the brink of nuclear war, people all over the world watched nervously.
For the next week, the world nervously awaited the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis.
Three other textbooks left readers with the impression that the United States only promised not to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet removal of missiles from Cuba.
He wanted to be prepared for war and to show Khrushchev the seriousness of the situation.
As the world nervously watched and waited, several Soviet ships carrying missile parts continued towards Cuba.
Then, on October 24, as they neared the United States blockade, they turned back.
Two days later, Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev offering to remove the missiles if the United States pledged to never invade Cuba.
The next day he received a tougher letter from Khrushchev demanding that the United States remove its missiles from Turkey.
The Ex Comm advised Kennedy to ignore the second letter and accept the offer in the first letter.
They began to move ballistic missiles and nuclear warheads into nearby Cuba.
On October 14, 1962, clear pictures of Soviet missile sites under construction were obtained by one of our U-2 spy planes.
The policy of deterrence seemed to depend upon making the Soviet Union really believe the United States would fight if it was pushed too far.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an invasion to seize the missiles and bring down Castro.
At the very least, they wanted a general air strike – at targets all over the island.
Then, at an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council, our Ambassador Adlai Stevenson proved with photographs that the missiles were there.
On Friday, the Russians began to signal that maybe the question could be negotiated.
He decided, on the advice of his brother Robert, to answer the one that held out some hope of peace.
On Sunday Khrushchev broadcast that he had ordered the missiles to be dismantled and removed from Cuba in return for an American pledge not to invade the island.
Pathways to the Present was the only textbook to mention the United States removal of missiles from Turkey: “The crisis was not yet over, however.
On October 26, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a long letter in which he pledged to remove the missiles if Kennedy promised that the United States would end the quarantine and stay out of Cuba.
A second letter delivered the next day demanded that the United States remove its missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
He responded to the second note through secret negotiations and eventually met the demand.
Such a war would have caused unimaginable death and destruction – far more, for example, the atomic bombings of Japan in 1945, in part because more-powerful hydrogen bombs had replaced those early atomic weapons.
He had stood up to the Soviets and shown that the United States would not be pushed around.
Kennedy Hagiography as History Hagiography of President John F Kennedy is a staple of modern journalism – media figures effusively praise his presidency, whitewash his flaws, and portray him as an uncompromising leader of the free world.
This lionization of Kennedy appears to be present in American history textbooks, as well.
It is disingenuous to assert that Kennedy adamantly forced the Soviet government to withdraw nuclear missiles through sheer force of will.
Kennedy and his Cold War legacy aren’t the only historical subjects the textbooks of today get wrong.
CMI previously examined textbooks’ coverage of the Three Mile Island incident and their treatment of recent Supreme Court appointments.
