As an analyst for the CIA, your job is to write a memorandum explaining to President Kennedy why these missiles are a threat.
I will say, my understanding's that let's just say that...they get these in there and then...they get sufficient capacity so we...don't want to knock 'em out ...there's too much of a gamble.
I would say this, Mr President, that if you've made a public statement, you've got to move immediately, or you're going to have a in this country.
ICBMs typically had a range of more than 3,500 miles, so that if launched from the Soviet Union they could reach targets in the United States, and vice versa.
By the 1960s both the United States and the Soviet Union had large numbers of these weapons armed with nuclear warheads, thus leading to fears that much of the civilized world would be destroyed if war between the two powers ever broke out.
A Soviet jet bomber built by Ilyushin, a bureau of the Soviet Government responsible for building military aircraft for the Soviet Union.
First entering production in 1948, the IL-28 saw widespread use in many conflicts, since the Soviet Union exported large numbers of these to friendly powers around the world.
This aircraft was considered one of the most successful of the Ilyushin models, and remained in service in the Soviet air force well into the 1980s.
MiG, short for Mikoyan-Gurevich, was the arm of the Soviet Government responsible for producing jet fighter aircraft for the Soviet Union.
The MiG-21, on the other hand, represented the state of the art in Soviet aircraft design, and was still being used as late as the 1980s.
An acronym for “medium-range ballistic missile,” a weapon designed for use against enemy cities.
An acronym for “surface-to-air missile,” a weapon designed for use against enemy aircraft.
The name used by the United States and its allies for what the Soviets called the S-75, the most widely used surface-to-air missile in history.
First deployed in 1957, these missiles were exported to virtually every country friendly to the Soviet Union, particularly to East Germany.
These weapons were capable of striking aircraft at very high altitudes, and in 1960 had been used to bring down a United States reconnaissance plane over the Soviet Union.
The name used by the United States and its allies for what the Soviets called the R-12, a medium range ballistic missile that first entered service in 1959.
With an effective range of over 1000 nautical miles, an SS-4 launched from Cuba was capable of reaching targets as far away as Cincinnati, Ohio, and San Antonio, Texas.
Start by examining the five options you have available for responding to the Soviet missiles in Cuba—you will find these in the upper left-hand corner.
As names of your advisers appear click on them and see what they have to say about the various options.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman General Maxwell Taylor Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 4 National Security Advisor MacGeorge Bundy Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon CIA Director John McCone Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Next click on the tab labeled “Special Intelligence Estimate” to get a report prepared by the CIA on this question.
After you have read the report, choose one of the five options in the upper left-hand corner.
Using the following excerpts from that speech, answer the questions below.
Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country, and to secure their withdrawal or elimination from the Western Hemisphere.
He has an opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction—by returning to his government's own words that it had no need to station missiles outside its own territory, and withdrawing these weapons from Cuba—by refraining from any Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 7 action which will widen or deepen the present crisis—and then by participating in a search for peaceful and permanent solutions.
No one can see precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred.
Many months of sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead—months in which our patience and our will will be tested—months in which many threats and denunciations will keep us aware of our dangers.
The fact of this minimum response should not be taken as a basis, however, for any misjudgment on your part.
Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 10 Consequently, Mr President, let us show good sense.
Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 12 2.
