In the past five years, the history of the events of October 1962 has been profoundly revised despite continuing resistance by the government to declassify top-secret documents long after the need for confidentiality has passed.
A series of conferences in the United States, Moscow and Havana has brought together historians and former government officials from all three countries to pool their knowledge and recollections.
At the same time, a six-year lawsuit, brought by an ad hoc coalition of lawyers, academics and the National Security Archive, a public interest group, has forced the United States government to declassify thousands of relevant documents, including top-secret correspondence between President Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
The combination of testimony and documents has altered the conventional wisdom about the crisis.
One view of just how close the United States and the Soviet Union came to nuclear war was revealed at a conference held in Havana last January.
Soviet Marshall Anatoly Gribkov claimed that, in addition to the recently installed ballistic missiles, nine nuclear warheads had been shipped to Cuba for Soviet short-range tactical missiles.
Sheryl Walter is general counsel of the archive. manders had authority to fire those missiles without further direction from the Kremlin.
McNamara, also attending the Havana conference, responded, “No one should believe that United States troops could have been attacked by tactical nuclear warheads without the United States responding with nuclear warheads.
O n perhaps the most important puzzle of the crisis, namely, what motivated the Soviets to put missiles in Cuba in the first place, the new documentation is also suggestive.
Recently declassified military histories of the Jupiter missile program in Turkey reveal that United States rockets deployed along the Soviet frontier became operational in April 1962.
That fact may have prompted Khrushchev to propose that same month the deployment of similar weapons in Cuba.
The new information about the missile crisis may also lend credence to Khrushchev’s claim that a primary motivation was to deter a United States invasion of Cuba— a claim that United States analysts have always dismissed out of hand.
Yet a “basic action plan,” drafted in February 1962 by the legendary Gen.
Edward Lansdale, called for a series of covert operations inside Cuba that would culminate in an internal uprising in October 1962, supported by a United States invasion.
Whether President Kennedy intended to launch an invasion to overthrow Castro— McNamara and Schlesinger argue forcefully that he had no such intention — is beside the point.
The United States had contingency preparations for an invasion ana Knew inai sucn preparations would be perceived by both Cuba and the Soviet Union as threatening.
With the declassification of the KennedyKhrushchev letters, it became clear that the missile crisis lasted more than the “13 days” memorialized in Robert Kennedy’s book.
Accounts of the missile crisis have traditionally begun with the discovery of the Soviet missile sites on Oct. and ended on Oct. with Khrushchev’s decision to remove the rockets.
The new letters, which date from Oct. through Dec., 1962, make clear that tensions did not immediately abate.
The United States issued an additional demand that the Soviets withdraw a number of bomber planes from Cuba.
When the Cubans resisted, the Americans continued to prepare for a possible invasion.
On Oct., the day after the crisis ostensibly ended, the head of the Atlantic.
Command requested permission to arm the invasion force with tactical nuclear weapons, a request denied by Secretary of Defense McNamara.
The documents that have made a fuller understanding of October 1962 possible would still be gathering dust in a storage room on the seventh floor of the State Department.
Able to pinpoint the exact location of these secret files, the archive avoided a roadblock faced by many FOIA users— the government's claim that the requested documents cannot be located or do not exist.
By law, governmental agencies must ' respond to requests for documents within 10 working days; in practice this rarely happens.
The State Department regularly takes up to several years to declassify documents; the CIA has been known to delay ior yeais.
After the archive filed suit in federal court, the State Department took nine more months to release about 2,000 documents, but it refused to declassify hundreds more, including many of the historically important ones such as 11 Kennedy-Khrushchev letters.
After 26 years, United States officials maintained that their release would damage the national security of the United States.
With pro bono assistance from the law firm of Crowell and Moring, the archive continued to press its case in court.
In April 1991, the Russian government, after learning about the court battle over the documents, sent a diplomatic note to the State Department stating that it had no objection to the release of the Kennedy-Khrushchev letters.
It still took the State Department bureaucracy nine more months to release the letters, and then only because of the pressure of court proceedings.
In January 1992, the State Department finally complied, releasing the correspondence on the eve of the Havana conference.
Margaret Tutwiler, then spokesman for the State Department, declared that the United States was “pleased to be able to work with the Russian Federation to make the complete historical record of this correspondence available publicly”— as if the State Department had not resisted disclosure every step of the way.
