Page 1 of 4 5 The Cold War Thaws MAIN IDEA WHY IT MATTERS NOW TERMS & NAMES EMPIRE BUILDING The Cold The United States and the • Nikita • détente War began to thaw as the countries of the former Soviet Khrushchev • Richard M Nixon superpowers entered an era of Union continue to cooperate • Leonid Brezhnev • SALT uneasy diplomacy. and maintain a cautious peace.
These countries were Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, and East Germany.
The Soviet Union did not allow them to direct and develop their own economies.
Instead, it insisted that they develop industries to meet Soviet needs.
TAKING NOTES Soviet Policy in Eastern Europe and China Outlining Organize main ideas and details about More moderate Soviet leaders came to power after Stalin’s death.
They allowed the Cold War thaw. satellite countries somewhat more independence, as long as they remained allied with the Soviet Union.
During the 1950s and 1960s, however, growing protest I Soviet Policy in movements in Eastern Europe threatened the Soviet grip on the region.
Eastern Europe and China Increasing tensions with China also diverted Soviet attention and forces.
A Destalinization and Rumblings of Protest After Stalin died in 1953, Nikita B Khrushchev became the dominant Soviet leader.
From Brinkmanship Khrushchev denounced Stalin for jailing and killing loyal Soviet citizens.
His to Detente speech signaled the start of a policy called destalinization, or purging the country of Stalin’s memory.
But this new Soviet outlook did not change life in satellite countries.
In October 1956, for example, the Hungarian army joined protesters to overthrow Hungary’s Soviet-controlled government.
Storming through the capital, Budapest, mobs waved Hungarian flags with the Communist hammer-and-sickle emblem cut out.
A popular and liberal Hungarian Communist leader named Imre Nagy formed a new government.
Thousands of Hungarian freedom fighters armed themselves with pistols and bottles, but were overwhelmed.
A pro-Soviet government was installed, and Nagy was eventually executed.
He he was captured by the Soviets and moved rapidly up through its ranks, recruited into their army.
Responding to the spirit of change in v Nagy held several posts in his the 1960s, Dubc ek instituted broad country’s Communist government, but reforms during the so-called Prague his loyalty remained with the peasants.
The Soviet Union reacted Because of his independent approach, by sending tanks into Prague to suppress he fell in and out of favor with the Soviet a feared revolt.
After the Soviets forcefully political prominence in 1989, when the put down the uprising, they tried and Communists agreed to share power in a executed him. coalition government.
When In 1989, after Communists lost control ▲ Czech demonstrators fight Soviet Czechoslovakia split into two nations in v of Hungary’s government, Nagy was tanks in 1968.
His replacement, Leonid Brezhnev, quickly adopted repressive domestic policies.
The party enforced laws to limit such basic human rights as freedom of speech and worship.
Khruschev removed Brezhnev made clear that he would not tolerate dissent in Eastern Europe either. from power in His policy was put to the test in early 1968.
This period of reform, when Czechoslovakia’s capital bloomed with new ideas, became known as Prague Spring.
On August 20, armed forces from the Warsaw Pact nations invaded Czechoslovakia.
Brezhnev justified this invasion by claiming the Soviet Union had the right to prevent its satellites from rejecting communism, a policy known as the Brezhnev Doctrine.
The Soviet-Chinese Split While many satellite countries resisted Communist rule, China was committed to communism.
In fact, to cement the ties between Communist powers, Mao and Stalin had signed a 30-year treaty of friendship in 1950.
The Soviets assumed the Chinese would follow Soviet leadership in world affairs.
As the Chinese grew more confident, however, they resented being in Moscow’s shadow.
In 1959, Khrushchev punished the Chinese by refusing to share nuclear secrets.
The Soviet-Chinese split grew so wide that fighting broke out along their common border.
After repeated incidents, the two neighbors maintained a fragile peace.
From Brinkmanship to Détente In the 1970s, the United States and the Soviet Union finally backed away from the aggressive policies of brinkmanship that they had followed during the early postwar years.
Brinkmanship Breaks Down The brinkmanship policy followed during the presidencies of Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson led to one terrifying crisis after another.
Though these crises erupted all over the world, they were united by a common fear.
In 1960, the U-2 incident prevented a meeting between the United States and the Soviet Union to discuss the buildup of arms on both sides.
The crisis ended when Soviet ships turned back to avoid a confrontation at sea.
PRIMARY SOURCE In the face of an air attack and in the face of the probability of a ground Analyzing Primary attack, it was certainly possible, and I would say probable, that a Cuban sergeant or Sources Soviet officer in a missile silo, without authority from Moscow, would have launched Do you think one or more of those intermediate-range missiles, equipped with a nuclear warhead, that Robert against one or more of the cities on the East Coast of the United States.
McNamara’s view ROBERT MCNAMARA, quoted in Inside the Cold War of the Soviet threat in Cuba was justiTensions remained high.
Committed to stopping the spread of commu▼ United States president nism, President Johnson escalated United States involvement in the war in Vietnam.
Nixon visits The United States Turns to Détente Widespread popular protests wracked the China in 1972, accompanied by United States during the Vietnam War.
And the turmoil did not end with United States withChinese premier drawal.
As it tried to heal its internal wounds, the United States backed away from Vocabulary Zhou Enlai . its policy of direct confrontation with the Soviet Union.
Détente is a French Détente, a policy of lessening Cold War tensions, replaced word meaning “a loosening.” brinkmanship under Richard M Nixon.
President Nixon’s move toward détente grew out of a philosophy known as realpolitik.
In practice, realpolitik meant dealing with other nations in a practical and flexible manner.
While the United States continued to try to contain the spread of communism, the two superpowers agreed to pursue détente and to reduce tensions.
Nixon Visits Communist Powers Nixon’s new policy represented a personal reversal as well as a political shift for the country.
His rise in politics in the 1950s was largely due to his strong anti-Communist position.
Twenty years later, he became the first United States president to visit Communist China.
The visit made sense in a world in which three, not just two, Page 4 of 4 superpowers eyed each other suspiciously.
Three months after visiting Beijing in February 1972, Nixon visited the Soviet Union.
After a series of meetings called the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks , Nixon and Brezhnev signed the SALT I Treaty.
This five-year agreement, limited to 1972 levels the number of intercontinental ballistic and submarine-launched missiles each country could have.
In 1975, 33 nations joined the United States and the Soviet Union in signing a commitment to détente and cooperation, the Helsinki Accords.
The Collapse of Détente ▲ Ronald Reagan's Under presidents Nixon and Gerald Ford, the United States improved relations with 1980 political button highlights China and the Soviet Union.
In the late 1970s, however, President Jimmy Carter the strong patriotic was concerned over harsh treatment of protesters in the Soviet Union.
This threattheme of his ened to prevent a second round of SALT negotiations.
Concerns mounted as more nations, including China and India, began building nuclear arsenals.
Reagan Takes an Anti-Communist Stance A fiercely anti-Communist United States president, Ronald Reagan, took office in 1981.
He increased defense spending, putting both economic and military pressure on the Soviets.
In 1983, Reagan also announced the Strategic Defense Initiative Contrasting , a program to protect against enemy missiles.
It was not put into effect but In what ways remained a symbol of United States anti-Communist sentiment. did Nixon’s and Tensions increased as United States activities such as arming Nicaragua’s Contras pushed Reagan’s policies the United States and Soviet Union further from détente.
Meanwhile, as you will learn in the next chapter, developing countries continued their own struggles for independence.
WRITING ACTIVITY REVOLUTION Write a short poem or to Detente song lyrics expressing protest against Communist rule by a citizen of a country behind the Iron Curtain.
CONNECT TO TODAY WRITING A SUMMARY Look through a major newspaper or newsmagazine for articles on Eastern European countries.
