Drawing on declassified sources from the archives of various countries—Brazil, the United States, Great Britain, Canada, Russia, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Serbia—that inquiry illuminated a mostly hidden effort by the Brazilian government of President João Goulart to mediate, at Washington’s behest, between the United States and Cuba at the height of the crisis.
Climaxing with Goulart’s sending of a personal emissary (his military aide, General Albino Silva) to Havana to deliver to Fidel Castro a proposal (secretly approved by Washington) to resolve the U.S.-Cuba conflict, the missile crisis mediation bid culminated three years of quiet Brazilian attempts to broker exchanges between Washington and Havana after Castro seized power in 1959 and U.S.Cuban relations rapidly deteriorated, leading to their rupture in the last weeks of the Eisenhower administration.
In October 1962, amid the superpower brinkmanship, the episode was barely noticed and was shrouded in secrecy , which concealed the role of John F Kennedy and his specially formed Executive Committee in the matter.
The attempted mediation was rendered moot by Nikita S Khrushchev’s decision, the day before Goulart’s emissary met Castro, to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Yet, probing the event decades later can shed light on Kennedy’s handling of the crisis and add a new twist to its international dynamics.
Declassified Soviet documents were used for my earlier article, especially from the Soviet embassy in Havana—the Soviet ambassador’s record of a 31 October 1962 conversation with Castro about the Brazilian envoy’s visit 1.
The Soviet records suggest that in conversations with Moscow’s envoy, Goulart seemed significantly more sympathetic to Khrushchev and Kremlin foreign policy than in his concurrent conversations with Washington’s ambassador, when he ebulliently praised Kennedy’s conduct.
They thus illuminate the Brazilian leader’s attempt to perform a complex balancing act between the superpowers—with mixed results.
Before examining events in the fall of 1962, a review of prior SovietBrazilian ties provides necessary context.
In the 1930s, under Getúlio Vargas, security forces harshly cracked down on leftist forces.
Dispensing with democratic trappings, Vargas established the dictatorial, fiercely anti-Communist Estado Novo with sharply increased power and openly sympathized with fascist powers even while preserving vital economic links with the 2.
A vast Brazilian biographical literature on Goulart exists, though it does not use Soviet archives.
However, when Brazil, after initial hesitation, joined World War II on the Allied side, sending soldiers to fight in Italy, its opposition to the Axis gradually fostered improved links with the USSR, especially after the Soviet Union unexpectedly resisted the German onslaught and Iosif Stalin disbanded the Comintern, which Vargas and his associates had routinely castigated for backing Brazilian subversion.
Yet, as Cold War tensions rose between Washington and Moscow, strains correspondingly also grew between Moscow and Rio.
In late 1947—after re-outlawing the PCB, driving it back underground—President Eurico Gaspar Dutra’s government severed Soviet-Brazilian relations, indignantly protesting what it called an insulting article in a Soviet publication (mocking Brazil’s army and sternly anti-Communist president, formerly Vargas’s war minister).5 Such actions firmly aligned Brazil with the United States.
By the late 1950s, however, Latin American countries felt increasingly neglected by Washington, which had devoted most of its Cold War attentions (and dollars) to countering Communism in Europe and East Asia.
At the same time, facing financial travails, Kubitschek warily explored increasing commerce with the Soviet Union (e.g., bartering Brazilian coffee for Soviet oil and machinery) to complement Brazil’s diplomatic ties with two Soviet allies, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Kubitschek’s cautious step toward trade with the USSR marked a partial victory for Moscow.
The offending article, “Hitler Rewarded Him,” appeared in the 4 October 1947 issue of Literaturnaya Gazeta.
Mexico contributed to the struggle against Japan by sending a fighter squadron to the Pacific late in the war.
Although Quadros, the former São Paulo mayor and governor, was known as an economic conservative, during a summer 1959 trip to the Soviet Union he made a bid for leftist voters in the upcoming presidential race by warmly endorsing a renewal of Brazilian diplomatic relations with Moscow and securing a friendly audience with Khrushchev.
After a Quadros/Goulart ticket was elected in October 1960 to succeed Kubitschek, Goulart visited Moscow and Leningrad in December , expressing hope for the rapid establishment of good Soviet-Brazilian relations under Quadros in pleasant conversations with First Deputy Premier Aleksei Kosygin and the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Leonid I Brezhnev, though Goulart failed in his repeated, insistent appeals to see Khrushchev.
During the visit, Soviet documents show, Goulart had long talks with Prestes and with Cuban National Bank President Ernesto Guevara, who happened 8.
After a late-night session with Guevara at the Sovetskaya Hotel, Goulart reportedly told associates that Castro’s victory in Cuba was “very important both for the Soviet Union and for the peoples of Latin America, for whom Cuba is a living, illustrative and infectious example,” and expressed his hope that Moscow would provide “all possible assistance” to Havana.
Although Goulart claimed to be more eager than the incoming president to restore bilateral relations with the USSR and thus was hoping for a personal meeting with Khrushchev , Soviet officials had a guarded assessment of the Brazilian.
Goulart’s vows to “speed up the process of normalizing relations” remained vague, they noted, and his trip “had the character of a probe and was partly dictated by the desire to raise his personal prestige” and to neutralize Quadros’s own visit to the USSR a year earlier (“they clearly dislike each other,” one official inferred).12 After becoming president in January 1961, Quadros moved more briskly than Kubitschek toward renewing ties with Moscow, against the backdrop of Castro’s revolution consolidating power in Cuba and “neutral” countries in the Cold War forging a nonaligned movement.
Quadros vowed to pursue an “independent”—that is, not U.S.-dominated—foreign policy that would feature outreach to the Communist world.
While outwardly aimed at increasing commerce, the new policy direction had obvious political implications that irritated and alarmed Washington.
Khrushchev, for his part, diligently worked o renew ties with Brazil, sensing a chance to expand Soviet influence in the hemisphere beyond the Cuban foothold.
In the spring of 1961, besides resisting United States pressure to endorse anti-Cuban measures that climaxed at the Bay of Pigs, and enhancing exchanges with the People’s Republic of China, Quadros sent special emissaries to Eastern Europe to lay the groundwork for new diplomatic relations with Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, and Albania as well as the USSR, and even took the controversial step of establishing economic and political ties with East 11.
B Tokmakov, Report on Goulart Visit, 19 December 1960, in F 7523, Op.8, D 228, Ll.
Although ostensibly in Moscow only to spur trade, Quadros’s envoy told Khrushchev that the Brazilian president had entrusted him with a secret mission to pave the way to restore normal Brazilian-Soviet diplomatic links.
The Soviet leader eagerly agreed, dangling the prospect of substantial Soviet economic aid.
In the summer of 1961, Moscow sent an economic mission, a “goodwill” delegation, and cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin to Brazil.
Quadros then resigned suddenly and mysteriously on 25 August, before formally renewing Soviet-Brazilian relations.
To placate domestic critics suspicious of his past Communist fraternizing, Goulart named as Brazil’s ambassador Vasco T Leitão da Cunha, a respected senior diplomat who five months earlier had quit his post as the number two in the foreign ministry in a spat with Quadros over a presidential envoy’s visit to East Berlin, which threatened to derail an important pending economic deal with Bonn.
Before that, da Cunha was Brazil’s ambassador in Havana during the Cuban revolution.
He had initially sympathized with the anti-Batista revolt but after a short honeymoon with the barbudos grew disillusioned with Castro’s rule, to the point where he saw it as a Soviet-aligned menace to the hemisphere.
United States officials watched the Brazilian-Soviet rapprochement with concern, not opposing the restoration of relations outright but warning Brazil that the Soviet Union might exploit any diplomatic presence in Brazil to promote espionage or subversion.
Vasco Tristão Leitão da Cunha, Fidel Castro , and Brazilian-Cuban Relations, 1956–1964,” paper presented at the “New Perspectives on Latin America’s Cold War” panel during the International Studies Association / Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales Conference, Buenos Aires, 23 July 2014.
Czechoslovakia, which retained diplomatic relations with Brazil, used its embassy in Rio to engage in espionage operations and promote Soviet and Communist objectives.
Welcoming Goulart’s diplomats, Khrushchev praised Brazil’s potential and pledged Soviet support for its development, suggesting that expanded bilateral commerce could reduce Brazil’s dependence on the United States.
After receiving the Brazilian’s congratulations on the latest Soviet space feat, he, too, discussed building a hydroelectric plant or subway in Brazil.
Soviet-Brazilian discussions of the possibility that Moscow might bankroll massive construction projects reflected the two countries’ shared belief, at that juncture of the Cold War, in economic development, especially in the Third World, through large-scale, rapid industrialization.
His appointment by Khrushchev was preceded by a visit to the country by the Soviet leader’s son-in-law, Izvestiya editor Aleksei Adzhubei.
Chernyshev’s instructions included, besides promoting Soviet interests and Soviet-Brazilian relations in general, preparing for a major Soviet industry, culture, and science fair in Rio de Janeiro—which would be Moscow’s largest ever in Latin America, attended by an estimated half million people.
Another task was to support Brazilian resistance to United States anti-Cuban prodding, an aim the Soviet Union also pursued covertly.
KGB agents based at the Rio embassy joined and soon took over, a Czechoslovak intelligence operation to enhance Havana’s status and the broader cause of revolution in Brazil.
Goulart, effusively greeting Chernyshev, said he ardently sought greater Brazilian-Soviet economic links, even though “our northern neighbor” feared and discouraged them, hoping to worsen their relationship.
Both agreed, however, that they should develop their ties warily, to avoid provoking anti-Communist forces, whether domestic or external.
Chernyshev, who had told a Polish colleague he would not be “overly active,” spent much of his first months in office promoting the Rio exhibition and a bilateral trade deal signed by a visiting minister.
Despite this caution, the new Soviet ambassador and his aides, while taking “necessary precautions,” also quietly but repeatedly conferred with top Brazilian Communists, including Prestes, despite the PCB’s formally illegal status.
Kraenski and Petrilák, 1964, ch.; and Pelant, “Czechoslovakia and Brazil, 1945–1989,” 101.
The trade accord (providing for turnover up to $100 million in 1962) was signed on 7 May 1962 by Soviet Foreign Trade Minister Nikolai Patolitchev and Dantas.
Chernyshev relayed friendly messages from Khrushchev, sought Goulart’s support on nuclear issues (Brazil belonged to the Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament), and tried to firm up Brazilian defiance of United States pressure to take a hard line against Cuba.
Through various means, the embassy labored to counter Brazilian “reactionary circles” opposed to Goulart’s foreign policy, especially his friendliness toward both Havana and Moscow.
Talking with Chernyshev on 4 October, he raised anew the idea of Moscow launching a large-scale construction effort in Brazil (comparable to what the Kremlin had done in, say, Egypt or India), sending shipments of wheat or oil, greater technical cooperation, and a possible visit by Khrushchev to “lay the first stone” for a prominent project.
Mulling a new five-year bilateral trade pact to replace one signed in 1959, Goulart said he would put his military aide, General Silva, in charge of negotiating a new agreement and speeding up the matter.
On Cuba, Goulart vowed that Brazil would not alter its stand against interference there, despite 33.
Chernyshev cautioned that the United States risked provoking World War III if it committed or backed aggression against Cuba, noting a recent TASS warning against any attack.
Latin American foreign ministers met in Washington, DC, at United States urging, to consider the Cuba problem; the United States Defense Department was stepping up contingency planning for potential action against Havana, and United States Intelligence agencies were under pressure from the White House to step up the “Mongoose” program of anti-Castro covert operations; and the Soviet Union was secretly deploying in Cuba mediumand intermediate-range missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
On 14 October, a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane photographed missile sites under construction in Cuba.
The crisis flared into public view at a moment of turmoil for the Soviet embassy in Brazil.
On 21 October—the day before Kennedy announced that Moscow was installing nuclear missiles in Cuba—Chernyshev, along with a junior embassy staffer, drowned while swimming “in heavy surf ” off Barra 36.
The embassy said the 50-year old ambassador, who died before emergency medical first aid could be given, had suffered a heart attack .40 The 44-year-old chargé d’affaires, Andrei A Fomin, who had worked for years at the Soviet UN mission and briefly as the chargé in Leopoldville as the Congo gained independence from Belgium, became acting ambassador.
On Monday afternoon, 22 October, President Goulart, Premier Hermes Lima , and other Brazilian officials and dignitaries visited the Soviet embassy to pay respects and express condolences on behalf of Brazil’s government and people.
However, for the first few days after Kennedy’s speech that evening, Brazil’s leaders, including Goulart and Lima, apparently eschewed substantive conversation with Soviet diplomats—whether because of disarray at the embassy, the lack of any particular reason or need to consult with Moscow’s representative, or both.
Instead, the most crucial Soviet early influence on Brazilian conduct during the crisis—as recounted from Brazilian sources in my previous article— resulted from a talk in Moscow between Brazil’s ambassador and a senior Soviet official.
There is no evidence that Leitão da Cunha had any such highlevel contacts with Soviet officials during the crisis.
In fact, he was then engaged in a minor dispute with them, over an Izvestiya article the month before, on the occasion of Brazil’s national independence day , that he believed stated that “American companies” determined the actions and statements of Brazilian politicians and diplomats.
Indignant, the Brazilian envoy had written to the newspaper’s editor-in-chief, Adzhubei, protesting the article’s implicit questioning of Brazil’s independence, and on 22 October (hours before Kennedy spoke in Washington), Izvestiya editors met with him and denied that the article had contained any disparaging remarks, noting that 39.
Rumors circulated that the ambassador had been killed in an inside job, with one of his underlings giving him a poison that caused him to collapse while swimming.
However, Moscow made no claim of foul play, and an internal Soviet report on the drownings did not insinuate anything other than an accident.
Da Cunha diplomatically conceded that his objections may, in part, have stemmed from a misunderstanding, and the contretemps was smoothed over.
Far more significant was a lunch Leitão da Cunha had, shortly before the crisis erupted, with Frol Kozlov, a senior Khrushchev deputy and member of the CPSU Presidium.
In that conversation, Kozlov apparently indicated that Moscow could support a proposal, which Brazil’s UN delegate presented in a speech on 20 September to the General Assembly, to create a nuclear weaponsfree zone in Latin America.
First, Lima checked by telegram directly with da Cunha, who on 25 October suggested pushing the proposal 43.
In early November, Brazil’s ambassador in Warsaw reported that the Poles favored the Latin America NWFZ plan.
In the coming days, the Brazilian NWFZ scheme became a focal point of crisis diplomacy, with the United States even endorsing it, in principle, as a means to escape the crisis—albeit grudgingly, given the military’s aversion to provisions that might threaten United States rights to transport or station nuclear weapons in Puerto Rico, Guantanamo Bay, or the Panama Canal Zone, objections the Brazilians took into account when modifying their proposal.
Also, for a time, Cuba secretly hoped to retain the tactical nuclear weapons that the Soviet Union had deployed to the island.
Faced with Castro’s refusal to reconsider his position, Brazil reluctantly withdrew the proposal in December—yet the debate spurred consideration of the concept of a Latin American NWFZ, a process that culminated five years later in the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
After arriving in June, he had tried to monitor relations between the Communist countries of his new and prior postings, tapping contacts he had encountered in Cuba, including his former Soviet counterpart, Sergei Kudryavtsev, now in the Foreign Ministry.
However, the Brazilian also surmised that Khrushchev felt pressure from the ongoing Sino-Soviet “tug of war” for influence in Havana to prevent Mao Zedong from “outbidding him” for Cuban sympathies.
The UK foreign office disputed this analysis, doubting that Khrushchev was motivated by concern that the Chinese might bring the Cubans into their camp, and the British ambassador in Havana also did not see evidence for a Sino-Soviet “tug of war,” while hedging that the Brazilians sometimes enjoyed unusual access to informed sources, sometimes through asylees at their embassy.
Itamaraty’s ambassador in Havana, Luís Bastian Pinto, spoke several times with high-level Cubans, such as Foreign Minister Raúl Roa.
Leitão da Cunha conferred with Western colleagues, such as United States Ambassador Foy D Kohler, but apparently did not meet any high-level Soviet personnel during the crisis.
Instead, the most crucial high-level Soviet-Brazilian exchanges, illuminated by the new Russian evidence, occurred through Moscow’s recently opened embassy in Rio.
On Thursday evening, 25 October—a day remembered for the UN Security Council confrontation between Adlai Stevenson and Valerian Zorin— Goulart called for the acting Soviet ambassador.
Fomin saw the Brazilian president around 7m., an hour after getting an urgent telephone summons via the editor of Última hora, a leftist Rio tabloid.
Goulart immediately made clear that he wanted to discuss the Cuban situation—and the ensuing conversation began a delicate balancing act by Brazil’s president, both in private and for public opinion.
He said Brazil had been bound to do so based on its obligation to past OAS declarations and agreements, most recently in January at Punta del Este, but had insisted that measures taken to stop the delivery of arms not violate Cuba’s sovereignty.
Goulart was replying here to a letter from Kennedy that Gordon had delivered to him on the morning of 25 October 1962.
In that letter, Kennedy had informed Goulart that the Cuban crisis was forcing him to cancel his planned upcoming trip to Brazil.
Goulart also commented, “with obvious disdain,” that other Latin American countries had obeyed Washington’s dictates.
Goulart also repeated the story, widespread in the press, that Brazil’s OAS delegate, Ilmar Penna Marinho, “did not follow the government’s orders,” for which he had been immediately recalled.
However, Fomin noted, Goulart “declined to elaborate on how the representative deviated from his instructions,” and Itamaraty documents that were declassified decades later fail to support the contention that Penna Marinho violated his orders.
In fact, while favoring the blockade resolution, the Brazilian envoy carefully, like the Mexican and Bolivian delegates, abstained on the sentence authorizing the use of armed force not only to block the sending of offensive weapons to Cuba but also to “prevent” the missiles from becoming an “active threat” to the hemisphere—ambiguous language that might be construed as tacit approval for an attack on Cuba itself.
If Cuba continued to reject inspection and the United States bombed the alleged sites, Goulart vowed to express strong opposition to military action, saying he had already affirmed that stand to United States officials.
Flattering Goulart, Fomin insisted that the Brazilian president underestimated his nation’s “role and prestige” and that, together with other countries, it could make “a major contribution to the preservation of peace 57.
Continuing this topic, Goulart said that the world is aware of the peaceful foreign policy of the Soviet government, which is constantly fighting to maintain peace in the world.
It is the monopolist circles in the USA, Goulart continued, that wish for the outbreak of war to find their way out of the contradictions inherent to the Capitalist system.
Their anger is that Cuba is showing other Latin American countries a prime example.
Precisely in this is the main concern of the USA and that the Americans are unlikely to come to terms with the existence of an independent socialist Cuba, he said.
Buenos Aires had abruptly turned rightward in 1962 when hardline anti-Communists, upset at the government’s defense of Cuba, ousted President Arturo Frondizi in a military coup.
Fomin asked whether Brazil was prepared to propose any ideas on the Cuban crisis, and Goulart said he would be sending a delegation headed by Santiago Dantas to the UN in the next few days to suggest a draft proposal resembling the neutralization idea the foreign minister had pushed at Punta del Este.
Goulart also told Gordon he was considering sending Dantas to bolster the diplomacy of Brazil’s UN ambassador, Afonso Arinos de Melo, and Dantas likewise told Gordon he might join Brazil’s UN delegation to promote a plan to neutralize Cuba, but there is no indication he was in fact sent.
Prolonging the conversation, Goulart raised the issue of bilateral economic and technical cooperation, recalling his “high hopes” for greater aid from Moscow, based on his exchanges with Chernyshev, which might be “essential” not only to improve Brazil’s economy but also to loosen Washington’s grip.
Seeing mixed results in the recent parliamentary elections, Goulart applauded the defeat of candidates favored by anti-Communist Carlos Lacerda in the state of Guanabara, lamented victories by “reactionaries” in São Paulo state gubernatorial voting, and stressed the importance of leftist Miguel Arraes’s election as governor of Pernambuco state in Brazil’s northeast.
As a parting shot at the United States, Goulart disparaged United States Ambassador Gordon in comments that were at odds with the impression the Brazilian president had given the United States diplomat on the night of 22 October, when the Cuban crisis broke.
Gordon and Walters had huddled with Goulart and Lima at Laranjeiras Palace late into the night, long enough to hear Goulart pledge Brazil’s support at the OAS in telephone calls with his diplomats in Washington.
In the ensuing days, Goulart had taken some actions that annoyed Washington—“the Brazilian official line abounded in equivocations and contradictions during the crisis week,” a State Department postmortem concluded—but Gordon had not reported any personal animus on the president’s part.
This was not the first—or the last—time that Brazil’s president, perhaps seeking to ingratiate himself with Khrushchev’s diplomatic representative, lambasted Kennedy’s envoy.
Goulart’s criticism of the United States undoubtedly pleased Fomin, but the Soviet diplomat did not let down his guard.
After this conversation lasting an hour and 40 minutes, Fomin suspected that the Brazilian had “deliberately stretched out the meeting” so he could tell the press he had spoken at length with both Washington’s and Moscow’s ambassadors—and press reports to that effect indeed soon appeared.
By the time the talk ended, a little before 9:00 PM Rio time, it was the predawn darkness of Friday, 26 October, in Moscow.
Fomin would have needed several hours to compose a cable, which would then have been encrypted and sent to Moscow to be decrypted at the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Presumably, his report on the conversation with Goulart and on Brazil’s potential peace initiative at the United Nations, was in the telegram circulated at the outset of the CPSU Presidium meeting on Saturday, 27 October.
Fomin next met Goulart at Laranjeiras on Monday evening, 29 October—the day after Khrushchev had agreed to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba, ending the most acute phase of the crisis, although 63.
This time, the Soviet diplomat was summoned urgently by Goulart’s protocol chief (rather than by a newspaper editor), and the two sat down at 8:00 PM in the presidential palace.
Gordon was disturbed to hear that Goulart had sent his military aide, General Silva, to Cuba to deliver the message to Castro that the United States had conveyed two nights earlier.
United States officials, disdaining Silva as too “leftist” and “anti-American,” preferred that Brazil’s ambassador in Havana, Bastian Pinto, a career diplomat whom they trusted as firmly anti-Communist, speak to the Cuban leader.
Still, Gordon seemed satisfied at the envoy’s “not bad” instructions and was presumably pleased by the compliments lavished on Kennedy for his handling of the crisis and its outcome by a leader whom Washington had increasingly come to distrust.
Goulart offered a very different appraisal when Fomin called a few hours later, according to the Soviet record of their conversation.
Khrushchev for the humane and forward-looking actions, resulting in the extinguishing of events in the Caribbean Basin, which could have started a new nuclear war, which would bring untold misery to the entire civilized world.
He stressed that this gratefulness came from not only himself as president, but also the official position of the whole Brazilian government.
Khrushchev in the prevention of armed conflict in this part of the world.
Khrushchev was a tireless fighter for peace, who did not spare any ounce of his strength or energy to achieve this lasting goal.
Shortly after toasting Kennedy’s “victory” with Gordon, Goulart was scoffing at “the American press and the reactionaries in his own country’s press” who 66.
He also stressed that Brazil’s government and he personally considered the outcome of the crisis “a new, extremely important victory” for Soviet foreign policy.
After Fomin thanked the Brazilian president for his kind words, which he promised to pass along to Moscow, Goulart briefed the Soviet ambassador on the latest Brazilian diplomatic steps on the Cuban situation.
However, when Fomin asked which countries, specifically, had made such a request, Goulart mentioned only the United States.
Concerning the mission of his military aide, who had left for Havana that afternoon and was likely meeting with Fidel Castro as they spoke, Goulart explained the choice to Fomin with more candor than he had to Gordon.
When the United States ambassador had asked why Silva, rather than Bastian Pinto, would converse with Castro, Goulart had merely indicated that he had instructed his military aide to convey his personal dismay that Cuba had acted as a “Russian satellite,” mere Soviet “merchandise,” which Moscow had sought to swap for United States missiles in Turkey.
In fact, Brazil had collaborated loosely with Josip Broz Tito’s Yugoslavia, but the only known specific mediation request came late Saturday night, 27 October, when Gordon came to Lima’s apartment with the ExComm-approved proposal for Rio to relay, as a Brazilian scheme, to Fidel Castro.
The proposal essentially suggested that if Havana ordered the Soviet troops and missiles to be pulled out, then Cuba would be welcomed back into the OAS and many positive results would flow in terms of relations with the United States.
Goulart told Fomin not only that he had chosen Silva as his special envoy because he was a confidant who “fully shared” his own views on Cuba but that he was “holding back” from entrusting sensitive missions to the Foreign Ministry, especially after Penna Marinho’s supposedly erroneous OAS vote.
Besides Silva’s mission to Havana, Goulart said Brazil intended to submit to the UN General Assembly a resolution to create a Latin American NWFZ and also to guarantee non-aggression against Cuba and respect for its territorial integrity and people’s right to self-determination—mainstays of Brazilian policy since Quadros and stands to which Goulart pledged to adhere, albeit with adjustments after the direct consultation with Castro.
Goulart said the United States and Cuban ambassadors in Rio had also been told of these plans, but Fomin sensed that the president was unaware of details being worked out by Dantas and other aides the Soviet Union was in touch with.
When Fomin pressed for more information on the United States position on Brazil’s efforts, Goulart claimed that, before authorizing Silva’s mission, he had demanded and received assurances from Washington that it would not take any “direct actions” against Cuba that could “frustrate or substantially obstruct” the mediation bid.
Requesting Moscow’s “opinions and suggestions” on Brazil’s proposals, Goulart promised to inform Fomin of the results of Silva’s mission to Havana as soon as the general returned in a day or two.
Besides lavishly praising Khrushchev at this meeting, Goulart again criticized Kennedy’s representative.
In Moscow, the Soviet Foreign Ministry summarized Fomin’s telegram reporting the talk and proposed a response to the CPSU Presidium.
Slightly walking back Goulart’s comments , the aide said Penna Marinho correctly favored preventing offensive arms shipments to Cuba but should have voted against rather than abstained on the passage implying authorization of force or intervention against Cuba itself.
However, he also said no consensus existed within Itamaraty and the government over whether Penna Marinho had violated his instructions, given the “atmosphere of haste” and “complexity and confusion” at the OAS meeting.
On Friday, 2 November, after Silva returned to Rio, Fomin came to his residence for an hour-and-forty-minute meeting.
Before hearing Silva’s report on his two-day trip to Havana, Fomin orally delivered, for the military aide to pass 72.
Strikingly, the mission Silva said Goulart had given him to take to Cuba—and the message he said he had delivered to Fidel Castro—varied considerably from the one Gordon had transmitted to the Brazilians late on Saturday night, 27 October, and that Washington believed his courier had carried to Havana.
Lima, in agreeing that the United States proposal fit Brazil’s own thinking, had said that Goulart would send a courier, most likely General Silva, to deliver the idea, staying mum on the United States role and observing that it was in Castro’s own interest to avoid being cast as a slavish Moscow ally like Hungary’s János Kádár or East Germany’s Otto Grotewohl and instead to adopt a more independent posture comparable to that of Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito.
With nary a word about the idea that Cuba should cut or at least sharply reduce its military ties to Moscow—the essence of the U.S.-fashioned proposal Gordon had given Lima to pass to Castro—Silva told Fomin that Brazil’s position was based on two propositions, which he stressed extended beyond the current crisis.
Second, Brazil continued to insist that any resolution recognize guarantees of “non-aggression” against Cuba , non-interference in its internal affairs, and its people’s right to choose their own political regime.
Stating the obvious—that resolving the broad Cuban problem required agreement by the countries most directly involved, “especially the USSR, USA, and Cuba,” and then UN approval—Silva suggested that Brazil would not immediately press its own proposal and instead would await a likely UN deadlock, although he did not exclude an earlier effort to terminate the United States blockade if it did not end soon.
Asked by Fomin how Brazil’s idea related to Castro’s “famous five points”—demands, issued on 28 October, for concessions to Cuba, including the return of the Guantanamo Bay naval base—Silva insisted that they did not seem “fundamentally” incompatible, as even the Cuban demand that the United States liquidate Guantanamo could be subsumed in a broader accord on the “demilitarization” of the Caribbean region.
While in Havana, Silva had also met with acting UN Secretary General U Thant , and Fomin reported that the Brazilian emissary did not seem overly impressed with the UN chief.
Silva termed Thant’s mission “very one-sided and narrow,” confined to convincing Castro to accept international inspection of the dismantling and departure of the Soviet missile sites.
The Brazilian general said he had bluntly expressed such criticisms directly to Thant, in particular stressing that the United Nations, in addressing the immediate crisis, must not ignore the Cuban people’s right to self-determination.
The UN statesman, in reply, did not rule out putting that idea before the UN, but insisted that the main thing now was to “buy time,” enabling Kennedy to pursue a more flexible policy after the impending midterm congressional elections on 6 November.
On 16 November 1962, Goulart showed Gordon Albino’s “fourteen-page handwritten letter” reporting the talk with Fidel Castro.
The United States ambassador reported that the “well written” letter indicated that Silva had placed “more relative emphasis on acceptance UN observers and less on detaching from Soviets, but main points were apparently presented,” albeit in a “perhaps more cordial” tone than Bastian Pinto would have used.
Recognizing the negative impact of the crisis on Brazilian public opinion toward both Cuba and the Soviet Union, Silva stressed the urgency of intensified Soviet and East European support for Cuba to strengthen Castro’s regime in view of the damage his political prestige had sustained in Latin America.
Silva frankly attributed Castro’s drop in prestige to the appearance of the missiles in Cuba, which had seemed to vindicate United States charges that Castro was turning the island into a Soviet military base.
Although the weapons were not in Cuban hands, many believed the Soviet Union might use them for offensive purposes.
Further bowing to realism, Silva said that Goulart’s government, in determining its stance on the Cuban issue, had to take account of “quite strong opposition” in Brazilian public opinion to the Soviet missile deployment to Cuba.
Wrapping up the conversation, Silva expressed his willingness to hold further discussion on Cuba but emphasized Goulart’s assignment to focus on Soviet-Brazilian economic issues.
In the ensuing weeks, as Fomin completed arrangements for the succession at the embassy and was formally appointed by Moscow as the new Soviet ambassador to Brazil, he returned his attention to expanding bilateral commerce, especially after Goulart relayed specific Brazilian proposals for conspicuous, large-scale construction projects.
Goulart did so when Fomin formally presented his credentials as Soviet ambassador.
Perhaps most vital to recipients of Fomin’s report, Prestes said he had heard that the Soviet government’s oral reply to Goulart’s request for information had bolstered the president’s determination to resist United States pressure.
Although the Kennedy administration would have been furious if Brazil had refused to go along with the blockade at the OAS and, in general, stand firmly beside Washington in the crisis—especially against the backdrop of other tensions in bilateral U.S.-Brazilian relations—no evidence has surfaced to indicate that Washington explicitly threatened to cut aid.
Moscow’s evolving position on the Latin American denuclearization proposal Brazil was pushing (with cosponsors Bolivia, Chile, and Ecuador) in a UN General Assembly committee.
As a result, the United States, Britain, several Latin American countries, and even some nonaligned countries that had previously signaled support were backing away, too.
Brazil, Carlos Bernardes said, was in a “predicament” because the Cuban reservation had triggered a chain reaction of likely abstentions and left Washington “very cold” to the draft resolution.
A couple of days later, Soviet Ambassador Zorin at the UN confirmed to his Brazilian colleague that the Soviet Union, unable to diverge from Cuba, would abstain on the resolution in its current form.
Both Zorin and Havana’s delegate, Carlos Lechuga, who had earlier welcomed the Brazilian concept, advised Arinos de Melo to withdraw the proposal rather than introduce it only to see it fail.
On 10 December, Fomin returned to the Brazilians with Moscow’s most solid position yet on Brazil’s Latin American NWFZ proposal.
Deviating from what Zorin had said just a few days earlier, Fomin told a senior Itamaraty aide that the Soviet Union could support the Brazilian resolution, and Cuba could as well—but only if it explicitly included Puerto Rico among the territories to be covered.
Otherwise, Moscow and its allies would vote against the resolution and thus preferred that Brazil instead withdraw it.
U.S. officials had told the Brazilians they might consider including Guantanamo and the Panama Canal Zone if they were the only obstacles, but Puerto Rico was a nonstarter, so the Soviet stand put an end for the time being to the Latin American denuclearization effort.
Still hoping to entice Moscow, J A. de Araújo Castro (later Goulart’s foreign minister) told Fomin that Cuba’s participation in a regional denuclearization conference could boost Fidel Castro’s international prestige and aid his reconciliation with Latin American countries.
As for Washington, Araújo Castro claimed that Kennedy’s government seemed to understand the danger of military intervention against Cuba and could accept a peaceful settlement with Havana but “expects to achieve this” with a post-Fidel government.
This link functioned far more actively than that between the Kremlin or Soviet Foreign Ministry and Brazil’s ambassador in Moscow—the latter a symbol of Itamaraty, an institution Goulart mistrusted.
The tenor of the Goulart-Fomin talks contrasted markedly with the pro-American sentiment that Brazil’s president stressed during the crisis to Gordon, according to the United States ambassador’s reports.
Araújo Castro, head of Itamaraty’s department on international organizations, acknowledged opposition to a Latin American NWFZ in military circles in some Latin American countries with “reactionary governments” (e.g., Argentina, Venezuela, and the Dominican Republic), as well as also Brazil.
As for Goulart’s motives, Brazilian scholars differ as to whether he had genuine Communist ideological predilections or merely flirted with the far left for pragmatic political reasons.
As one of the journal’s anonymous reviewers noted, Moniz Bandeira, Carlos Fico, and Goulart’s biographer Jorge Ferreira favor the latter interpretation, especially given the significant Communist influence in Brazilian labor unions.
As he had to other Communist interlocutors, from Czechoslovakia’s Antonín Novotný to China’s Mao Zedong, Goulart spoke sympathetically about the plight of peoples and countries suffering under the yoke of capitalist/imperialist domination, and favorably about their eventual “emancipation” from “the oppression of American capital” to an independent and socialist future.
Even before the missile crisis, United States officials were suspicious of Goulart’s leftist tilt and links, and the Kennedy administration had soured on him after his April 1962 visit to Washington, when the Brazilian had been feted as a potential poster boy for the Alliance for Progress.
When the crisis erupted, Kennedy leapt at the chance to defer indefinitely a reciprocal visit to Brazil, not wanting to seem unduly supportive of a leader unwilling, in Washington’s view, either to manage his economy effectively or to control leftist or Communist influence within his own government.
Around the time of the crisis, coincidentally, a high-level United States government “survey group,” headed by General William H Draper, visited Brazil.
In early November it issued a damning report to Kennedy, complaining of the excessive yet tolerated influence in Brazil’s government of anti-American “communists and ultranationalists” and Goulart’s “demagogic,” opportunistic, incompetent leadership .85 After the crisis, the State Department’s top analyst sent Rusk a scathing indictment of Goulart’s “equivocal” conduct during the missile crisis, both public and private, variously terming it “erratic and 83.
On 11 December, Kennedy’s ExComm debated the option of plotting Goulart’s ouster, possibly via a military coup; it opted instead to send the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to deliver a virtual ultimatum—to warn Goulart, above all, to purge Communist-leaning, radical, anti-American figures from his administration.
However, the hastily organized meeting on 17 December in Brasília went nowhere, and Robert Kennedy came away manifestly unimpressed.
Grudgingly, Washington concluded it had to tolerate Goulart’s continuation in office, at least for the moment, but began more intensively to cultivate contacts with his opposition, especially in the military, fearing yet anticipating continuing turmoil under Goulart that might lead Brazil either to a leftist dictatorship and the Soviet bloc or, conversely, to an anti-Communist 86.
Although it is impossible to know for certain, such a consequence seems plausible.
On the other hand, knowledge of Goulart’s cozy dealings with Fomin might merely have confirmed, in more damning detail, the negative view of the Brazilian leader they already held.
Goulart performed his high-wire balancing act for another sixteen months, oscillating between protestations of friendship with Washington (and pleas for United States economic support) and nods to leftist public opinion in domestic and foreign policy (refusing to break ties with Havana, increasing trade and private affirmations of sympathy with Moscow), ultimately veering in the latter direction before being toppled in a military coup.
However, the new regime, which took power in April 1964, while severing ties with Castro’s Cuba and taking an unabashedly pro-American, anti-Communist line, kept diplomatic and trade links with the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies.
To that extent, even while jettisoning Goulart’s ambivalent diplomacy toward Washington and Moscow—as practiced during the missile crisis—Brazil’s dictatorial rulers retained elements of the “independent” foreign policy their predecessors had advocated and attempted to conduct in the early 1960s.
In December 1962, he predicted to a Cuban visitor that “Brazil and other countries” might “enter into revolution” by the end of Kennedy’s (expected) second term.
