Originally they send advisers  Mujahidin, backed by Khomeiand equipment.
Concerns ni in Iran, form to fight back. about a pro-USA state means they send tanks by December 1979.
The Afghan War involvement in the region Funding of mujahidin by powerful sparked resentment countries —> branch off into Al Qaeda  Osama Bin Laden, an Roots: Bin Laden and Abdullah Azzam affluent and influential figure Charismatic leaders, strong antifounded the group out of Western beliefs which gained support. mujahidin fighters.
USSR send $100 million in aid + miliruled by United States backed, corrupt dictatary and technical advisers to Cuba tor Batista.
United States U2 spy plane flies over Cuba and takes photos showing missile sites being built.
Removed United States missiles from Turkey  Khrushchev sends a 2nd letter chang Hotline is created between Moscow ing his proposals, which JFK ignores. and Washington.
The Japanese ran it weapons and equipment from comduring the war, very harshly. munist China.
Vietcong took United States by USA problems: surprise during the Tet festival.
The United States destroyed  Very unpopular tactics which Hue, an ancient city, and 116,000 civilians lost their homes.
Americans started to question why $29 bilkilled over 1 million lion dollars a year was being wasted.
Churchill’s self promotion: Historians: Popular view of the public. keen to be remembered as the one who spoke against a failed policy.
Churchill wanted to suggest Britain should stand up to Popular Political: 1939-1948 Stalin Key message: Appeasers caused war.
Churchill’s message in Context: During the war: appeasement The Gathering Storm became the had clearly failed by this stage. accepted Orthodox view due to his Historians: Journalists CATO wrote The status as a war leader.
Historical debate: The Context: Radical thinking: 1960s– nature of historical debate means traditional views were being historians challenge most recent questioned. work; many disagreed with Vietnam War: USA’s dislike of revisionist view as it let Chamberlain appeasement drew them into off the hook.
Late 1940s-early 1960s Revisionist: Mid 1960s-mid 1970s Key message: Key message: The USSR were to blame.
Everything in public attempting to build an empire. domain was influenced by propaganda Historians: William Appleman Historians: Bailey; Kennan Williams; Joyce & Gabriel Kolko; Paterson.
Early 1970s-1989 New Cold War historians: 1989-> Key message: Key message: Neither side understood the other: We still don’t know: polarised views caused by each side’s reactions back to orthodox/revisionist. based on mistrust.
Context: New Soviet sources released after collapse of USSR offered historians more Historical debate: A time of intense evidence for both orthodox and revidebate; Gaddis and others saw the sionist perspectives. orthodox and revisionist views as too The Reagan factor: Reagan’s fierce ansimplistic. ti-communism encouraged those who Détente: ‘thawing’ of the Cold War agreed and disagreed with him to find allowed historians to stand back evidence to support their claims. and consider from both perspecHistorians: Cox & Kennedy-Pipe; tives.
