Hold onto your hats — we’re about to dive deep into a micro-portion of United States history.
The fear of weapons sitting just 90 miles from United States boarders led to nationwide panic, and the launch of a Naval blockade of Cuba.
The event took place over 13 days and was dissolved when sitting president, John F Kennedy and Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev reached an agreement.
The United States would not invade Cuba , and the Soviet Union would remove missiles from Cuba.
Adlai Stevenson shows missiles to UN Security Council with David Parker standing.
The addition of missiles to Cuba was widely fueled by the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961.
The event convinced Fidel Castro that a United States invasion was imminent, and it strengthened his position with the Soviet Union.The United States learned about the missiles from aerial photos taken by a Lockheed U-2.
Fearing that such planes would be shot down, it took a high-altitude pass over the country but was still able to take images.We almost launched nuclear weapons.
On October 27th, 12 Navy ships found a Soviet Submarine outside of Cuba and began dropping explosives that would force it to surface.
Not having had communication in days, the Soviet submarine was unaware if the war had begun or not.
Soviet protocol required agreement by three onboard officers in order to launch a nuclear weapon.
The Submarine’s captain wanted to respond with a nuclear torpedo, however, another member, officer Vasili Arkhipov would not consent.
It’s widely agreed that having done so would have started a nuclear war.
Before enacting a trade embargo with Cuba in 1962, JFK obtained more than 12,000 Cuban cigars.The end of the crisis also ended Khrushchev’s political reign.
The Soviets disliked backing down from an event they say their leader initiated.
Khrushchev held office for two more years, but the event is said to have weakened his power and trust from the people.
This weakened the relationship between Cuba and the Soviets, with Casto angered he hadn’t been involved.Because of the crisis, the White House added a phone line that went directly to the Kremlin, a fortified city in Moscow and where the Soviet party kept its headquarters.
Today, the access operates by lightning-fast email/chat and is called Washington–Moscow Direct Communications Link.
It was the only time the United States has been at DEFCON 2 — that’s Defense Readiness Condition.
