If Russia were to move in that direction, we would deal with it decisively.
Russia has announced the possibility of a military deployment to Cuba and Venezuela, if talks with the West on Ukraine fail to go their way while warning the latest discussions with NATO were hitting a dead end.
The Biden administration responded to threats from Russian officials vowing a decisive response if it sees any evidence that the threat is real.
In an apparent attempt to up the ante with the Biden administration, Sergei Ryabkov, who led Russia’s delegation in a meeting with the US, told Russian television he could neither confirm nor exclude sending military assets to Cuba and Venezuela if talks fail.
Speaking in an interview with a Russian TV, Ryabkov noted that “it all depends on the action by our U.S. counterparts,” pointing to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s warning that Moscow could take military-technical measures if the United States provokes the Kremlin and turns up military pressure on it.
While voicing concern that NATO could potentially use Ukrainian territory for the deployment of missiles capable of reaching Moscow in just five minutes, Putin noted that Russian warships armed with the latest Zircon hypersonic cruise missile would give Russia a similar capability if deployed in neutral waters.
Zircon, which Putin said flies at nine times the speed of sound to a range of more than 1,000 kilometers, is hard to intercept and could be fitted with conventional or nuclear warheads.
It’s set to be commissioned by the Russian navy later this year and installed aboard its frigates and submarines.
At the end of a week of diplomacy that appears to have produced no progress, the United States national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said the US had intelligence that Russia was preparing to fabricate claims of an imminent Ukrainian attack on Russian forces as a pretext for invasion.
They are preparing this playbook again,” Sullivan said that the administration would share more of the intelligence in the following 24 hours.
We’re in communication with the Russians, and we’ll see what comes next.
That wasn’t raised in the discussions at the Strategic Stability Dialogue.
Tensions have been rising between Washington and Moscow since December when Russia began amassing tens of thousands of troops on its border with Ukraine.
Russian officials, including President Vladimir Putin, have not ruled out an invasion.
Talks have taken place among Russian, American, European, and NATO officials over the past three days across Europe, but officials have not reported any breakthroughs.
Sullivan said that the Russian diplomats had not mentioned the prospect of military deployments in Cuba or Venezuela during their meetings.
That crisis ended after then-US President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed that Moscow would withdraw its missiles in exchange for Washington’s pledge not to invade Cuba and the removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
Some Cuban exiles have been closely watching the Biden administration’s standoff with Russia and China, with the hopes that a new geopolitical realignment would entice the Biden administration to claim Cuba in the United States circle of influence and more actively seek regime change on the island.
Ryabkov’s comments could add to the speculation that the Caribbean island could again become entangled in a replay of the Cuban missile crisis.
The governments of Cuba and Venezuela have not publicly responded to the comments.
The Cuban Embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
As tensions grew between Havana and Washington during the Trump administration, Russia has become closer to the communist island, approving loans and increasing military cooperation.
A senior-level official of the Russian Ministry of Defense quoted by the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council estimated that a “robust” presence in Cuba would bring millions in spending for infrastructure upgrades of airports and ports.
The Russian official estimated that the economic impact of having up to 2,500 Russian civilian and military forces in Cuba could bring $100 million annually to the Cuban government.
Russia could also pay an additional fee to Cuban authorities as it did in the past for hosting the Lourdes intelligence listening post near Havana.
In December 2018, Russia briefly dispatched a pair of its nuclear-capable Tu-160 bombers to Venezuela in a show of support for Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro amid Western pressure.
Russia also increased its economic involvement in the oil sector in Venezuela, helping the country skirt United States sanctions.
According to U.S. officials at the time, Russia also played a role in convincing Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro to stay in power when the opposition attempted to flip top military leaders in 2019.
Venezuela’s interim government led by Juan Guaidó, which the United States recognizes as the country’s legitimate authority, rejected Ryabkov’s comments in “categorical” terms.
In Moscow, the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said there could be a complete rupture in US-Russian relations if proposed sanctions targeting the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and other top civilian and military leaders were adopted.
Senate Democrats have also proposed targeting leading Russian financial institutions if Moscow sends troops into Ukraine.
Peskov criticized the proposals as an attempt to up the pressure on Moscow during the talks, saying it wouldn’t work.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov also denounced the proposed sanctions as a reflection of United States “arrogance,” adding that Moscow expects a written response to its demands from the United States and NATO next week in order to mull further steps.
Peskov rebuffed the West’s calls for Russia to help de-escalate tensions by pulling back troops from areas near Ukraine, noting that the country is free to move them wherever it wants on its own territory.
He said, “It’s hardly possible for NATO to dictate to us where we should move our armed forces on Russian territory.
On the other side, NATO said it was willing to talk to Russia about arms control and missile deployments to avert the risk of war in Europe, but Moscow said the situation was ""very dangerous"" and the way forward was unclear.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was willing to hold arms talks but would not allow Moscow to veto Ukraine's ambition to join NATO one day a core demand on which Russia says it will not yield.
With tens of thousands of combat-ready troops, armed with heavy capabilities.
Recently, NATO Foreign Ministers called again on Russia to remove its forces from Ukraine and from your Ukraine’s borders.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Grushko said Moscow was ready to talk about weapons deployment and verification measures, but would not allow its proposals to be cherry-picked.
At a lengthy news conference, Grushko said Russia could not take seriously NATO's claim to be a defensive alliance that posed no threat to it, and said it would respond symmetrically to any attempt to contain or intimidate it.
Russia denies planning to invade Ukraine but says it needs a series of guarantees for its own security, including a halt to further NATO expansion and a withdrawal of alliance forces from central and eastern European nations that joined it after 1997.
Consequently, Russia has strongly repeated its demand that NATO will not expand eastwards, despite the rejection of that by the military alliance amid a Russian troop buildup near Ukraine.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov described Moscow’s demands that NATO will neither expand nor deploy forces to Ukraine and other ex-Soviet nations as essential for the progress of diplomatic efforts to defuse soaring tensions over Ukraine.
He argued that the deployment of NATO forces and weapons near Russia’s borders poses a security challenge that must be addressed immediately.
