The crisis was boththeoutcomeof yearsofcold warcompetitionandacontributingcauseof subsequent events, since later actions were influenced by perceptions of what had happened and why.
As the crisis recedes into history and becomes part of our national mythology, the messages people derive from it continue to influence our expectations about how national leaders should behave.
If the crisis was, as some have claimed, President John F Kennedy’s ”finest hour,“ then other presidents should emulate his behavior.
My sense is that the “finest hour” interpretation is the dominant one and that what is seen as especially fine about Kennedy’s actions is his courage, resolve, and fearlessness in facing the Soviet Union.
The image of the President as fearless leader remains a powerful force in our political culture.
Given the vast destructive powers of both nuclear and conventional weapons and the urgent need for global cooperation, I believe that this image is a dangerous and destructive one.
Even with the end of the Cold War, this image remains as a stimulus to reckless deeds and an obstacle to actions that are necessary to secure peace.
Its power is evident in popular reactions to President George Bush’s policies in Panama and the Persian Gulf.
For these reasons, I think it is important to continue to assess Kennedy’s actions during the Cuban crisis and to try to derive the proper lessons from this assessment.
I believe that Kennedy acted well in certain respects and badly in others, and this makes it important to separate out those positive aspects of what he did from other, negative aspects.
If Kennedy is to be emulated, let it be selective emulation, and if he is to be criticized, it is necessary to make clear what he is being criticized for.
The crucial fact about the Cuban missile crisis is that there was a serious risk of nuclear conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union.
A central question in assessing Kennedy’s actions is whether this risk was justified or not.
In thinking about Kennedy’s actions, one might expect that those who believe that the risks that he ran were justified would hold that he acted admirably, while those who think that he ran unnecessary risks would think that he acted in a way that should be condemned.
Kavka’s discussion is of specialinterestbecause he both assesses Kennedy’s actions and tries to shed light on the role of moral reasoning in political decision-making.His views raise central questions about the relationship between politics and morality and have, therefore, a broader relevance that goes well beyond our understanding of a particular historical event.
First, he wants to evaluate Kennedy’s actions from a moral perspective.
Second, he wants to explain Kennedy’s actions by showing that political decision-makers operate with a different mind set from that of moralists.
Recognizing this fact, Kavka thinks, is necessary in order to understand and assess Kennedy’s actions properly.
For Kavka, the explanation of the political decision-maker’s mind set and its distinctness from a purely moral perspective is necessary because if one overlooks this KENNEDY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 95 distinction, one will simply condemn Kennedy for ‘what he did.
Kavka wants to shield Kennedy from such condemnation and even to praise him for an admirable performance, in , spite of the fact that he condemns Kennedy’s actions for their morally unjustified riskiness.
Kennedy’s Performance I agree with Kavka that Kennedy’s performance during the crisis was in many ways admirable.
Kennedy resisted pressures to initiate an immediate air strike against the missile sites, partly because he wanted to avoid large scale casualties, partly to avoid escalation, and partly to avoid putting the Soviets in a position where they would be forced either to retaliate or face humiliation.
When an American U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba, he resisted pressures to retaliate against anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba.
He ignored a second, more demanding letter from Khrushchev and replied to an earlier, more conciliatory one, and after the Soviets agreed to withdraw the missiles, he praised Khrushchev for statesmanlike behavior.
Throughout the crisis, he tried to think through the implications of his actions and took many precautions to avoid accidents or misunderstandings that would escalate the conflict.
Kennedy could have done nothing about the Soviet missiles-which some believed did not genuinely threaten the United States.
He could have initiated private talks with the Soviets or worked through the United Nations to have the missiles removed.
Instead, he ordered a blockade, which is an act of war, and announced it to the world prior to any attempt to negotiate with the Soviets.Moreover, he turned down the offer of a public trade of the Soviet missiles inCuba for US. missiles in Turkey, even though these missiles appeared to be as threatening to the Soviets as their missiles in Cuba were to us and even though Kennedy himself believed that the missiles in Turkey were obsolete and had little military value.
Finally, Kennedy seemed willing to initiate an air attack on the missile sites if the Soviets did not back down, in spite of his belief that this might well lead to nuclear war.
In short, Kennedy risked a possible nuclear war with the Soviet Union, even though there were less risky alternatives.
Given the extreme destruction that a nuclear war would have caused, avoiding such a war should have been the President‘s highest priority.
Yet, as Kavka notes, Kennedy gambled with the chance of nuclear war for the sake of international and domestic political gains.
For this reason, he can be said to have acted wrongly from a moral point of view.
Having evaluated these actions and concluded that they are condemnable from a moral point of view, Kavka then sets out to explain them.
First, since he does not believe that Kennedy and his advisers were ”bad people” , he wants to explain how they could have been led to run these serious and unnecessary risks.
Second, believing that they were not bad people, he wants an explanation of their actions that will shield them from a strongly negative moral judgment.
It includes characteristic ways of defining problems, searching for and selecting solutions, and interpreting the behavior of others, as well as assumed constraints on actions and policies.
Within different mind sets, different sorts of reasons are operative, and so, from a decision-maker’sperspective, there may have been good reasons for acting, even though these actions would be disapproved by someone operating from a “moralist’s”mind set.
In drawing this distinction and speaking about the ”moralist’s” mind set, Kavka seems to have in mind people like Bertrand Russell, who strongly condemned Kennedy for his actions.Kavka appears to think that moralists like Russell failed to appreciate the context of Kennedy’s decision-making, just as Kennedy failed to see the situation in the way that someone like Russell did.
Thus, reasons that are decisive within one framework may have little or no weight in others.
Moreover, people operating within different mind sets will have difficulty understanding one another and will reach different conclusions about issues in dispute.
Unlike Kuhn’s paradigms, Kavka’s mind sets are not entirely distinct or mutually impenetrable.
Indeed, Kavka discusses two possible models for how mind sets might interrelate.
For Kavka, mind sets may either be nested within one another or overlap with one another.
If the decision-maker’smind set is nested within the moral mind set, then political decision-making is just a special application of moral principles, and it could not turn out that an action is morally wrong but politically right.
He believes that the moral and political mind sets overlap with one another.
While they share some features, they are different enoughso that adecision might be justified within one mind set while being questionable or wrong within another.
The Decision-Maker’s Mind Set Kavka characterizes the political decision-maker’s mind set by spelling out three principles of international politics and one axiom of domestic politics, and he claims that they shaped Kennedy’s thinking during the crisis.
Having characterized the decision-maker’s mind set in this way, Kavka offers the following explanation of Kennedy’s decision to impose the blockade, rather than seeking a diplomatic solution or ordering an air strike.
Therefore, following the third norm, he felt a strong need to resist a challenge to the balance of power, and this justified strong action in response.
In spite of this need for decisive action, the second norm, prohibiting surprise attacks on smaller powers, counted against a military strike against Cuba.
By invoking the notion of a political decision-maker‘s mind set and by laying out some KENNEDY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 97 of the principles and axioms that constitute it, Kavka implicitly argues that Kennedy’s actions were justified.
Even though they fail to pass the tests laid down by the moralist, these actions were reasonable from the decision-maker’spoint of view.
Thus, a ”good person,” reasoning from this perspective, could be led to these actions, even though the actions are not those that moral deliberation would bring one to adopt.
If Kavka’s defense of Kennedy is to work, then a number of things must be true.
First, the principles that make up the decision-maker’s mind set must be reasonable principles.
If they are obviously outrageous and could not be adopted by a morally good person, then Kennedy’s following them will donothing to shield him from criticism.
Second, they must be distinct from moral principles, since they are supposed to be principles that a moralist would not use.
Third, they must either be unavoidable features of the decisionmaker’s situation or more appropriate for decision-makers to follow than are the principles that make up to the moral mind set.
If they are not, then we will simply reject the mind set and urge decision-makers to be moralists.
Finally, if Kavka’s explanation of Kennedy’s actions is to work, then Kennedy must actually have acted in accord with these principles and not in accord with those of the moralist.
First, on the interpretations that make them most reasonable, the principles Kavka describes do not differ from ones that are part of the moral mind set.
Second, where they do differ, the moral perspective is the superior one.
In some respects, Kennedy’s performance was more opportunistic and less principled than Kavka suggests.
In other respects, Kennedy’s approach was more like that which Kavka thinks would be recommended from the moralist’s point of view.
Preserving the Balance of Power The first of Kavka’s “principles of international politics’’-that great powers should not suddenly upset the balance of power-sounds reasonable in the abstract and does seem to explain both Kennedy’s reaction to news of the missiles and the nature of his response.
As Kavka sees it, the Soviets violated this principle by placing the missiles in Cuba.
By invoking the principle forbidding sudden alterations in the ”status quo balance of power,” Kavka suggests that a balance had existed and that its existence had contributed to peace and stability.
Hence, upsetting the balance was wrong because it increased the danger of war.
In fact, however, there was neither stability nor a balance of power in 1962.
The U-2 affair and the failed summit between Eisenhower and Khrushchev were just a few years past.
From 98 STEPHEN NATHANSON their point of view, they were trying to correct an imbalance of power.
Moreover, Kennedy and his advisors recognized this as a possible Soviet motive for placing missiles in Cuba.
Rather what he and his advisers sought to preserve was United States nuclear superiority and unchallenged political dominance in the Western hemisphere.
As for nuclear superiority, Kennedy and his predecessors had achieved this, even though Soviet bluffs had obscured this fact.
By 1962,however, Kennedy knew that the US. had a distinct advantage, and he was committed to maintaining that superiority.
As for political dominance, the Castro government called this into question, but it did not upset a balance of power.
While Kavka’s third norm calls for strong actions against upsetting the balance of power, what was involved in the missile crisis was resistance to actions that tended to equalize the relation between Soviet and American forces.
The norm that Kennedy acted on called for sustaining US.advantages in the distribution of power.
That may be reasonable, but it is not as uncontroversial as the idea of perpetuating a balance, which carries an aura of fairness and stability with it.
In this sense, the balance of power is simply the current distribution of power.
If power is badly distributed so that some can dominate others or so that instability exists, then there is no reason to be committed to preserving the balance.
Then, maintaining it could be supported by appeal to justice, to the idea that all should possess the degree of power that justice recommends.
Moreover, if all have their fair share, this may well contribute to peace.
Preserving a balance in this sense has much to recommend it.Note, however, that there is no inconsistency between this principle and the way of thinking that we might attribute to moralists.
In this form, the balance of power principle would be supported by moralists since it is justified by appeal to both justice and peace.
On this interpretation, there would be no serious difference between the moral and the political mind sets in their response to maintaining a balance of power.
To preserve the distinction, one might argue that this notion of a balance of power is not one to which decision-makers are likely to be committed.
Perhaps decision-makers are committed to acquiring and preserving the most favorable balance of power that they can obtain for their own country.
That would be a principle that moralists might have a hard time accepting and yet that we might reasonably expect decision-makers to hold to.
As I have argued above, what he sought was military and political superiority.
Thus, to restate my earlier conclusion, appealing to a principle involving the balance of KENNEDY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 99 power will be acceptable to persons making moral judgments if balance is an ideal that is conducive to peace.
If it means a distribution of power that favors one side, then it is not obvious that it is an acceptable principle, even if leaders adhere to it.
If that is what Kennedy pursued, however, then Kavka should simply say that Kennedy pursued a policy of maintaining superiority.
Such a policy might be justified if it were the only way to preserve other important values, or it might be justified if one were actually at war and seeking victory.
In fact, Kennedy and other leaders did see the United States as involved in a long term war with the Soviet Union, and much of United States policy during the Cold War rested on just such an assumption.
To the extent that this assumption was important to Kennedy’s choices , Kavka’s failure to include it is a serious omission from his explanation.
Kennedy and his main advisors did not think that the missiles in Cuba produced a serious alteration in the military balance.
What it did affect, however, were perceptions of power, and this was undoubtedly a concern to the President.The problem here is that it is hard to see how anyone would think that risking a nuclear war was justified by the need to maintain perceptions of power.
The more this factor is emphasized, the less reasonable do Kennedy’s actions look.
Finally, let me turn to Kavka’s claim that Kennedy did not order the air strike because of a principle forbidding the carrying out of attacks on a small ower.
Nonetheless, it is hard to believe that this was a norm that either Kennedy adhered to.
President Kennedy authorized the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, and after its failure, his administration continued to support covert attacks on Cuba, including sabotage and assassination attempts against Fidel Castro.
In addition, the proposed air strike against the missiles was supported by many of Kennedy’s advisers and was widely seen as the next step for the United States to take.
Robert Kennedy told Ambassador Dobrynin that an air strike would be launched within twenty-four hours if the Soviets did not announce that the missiles would be removed.
Kennedy was both more opportunistic and less principled than Kavka’s description of these norms suggest.
From another point of view, however, Kennedy may have been more of a moralist than Kavka believes.
In March of 1987, after the publication of Kavka’s paper, Dean Rusk, Kennedy’s Secretary of State, revealed that Kennedy was willing to make a public swap of Cuban for Turkish missiles.
If Khrushchev had not agreed to remove the missiles, an intermediary would secretly have contacted U.N.Secretary General U Thant and asked him to propose the missile swap.While Kennedy would not agree to a Soviet demand to remove our missiles from Turkey, he would agree if this were proposed by a neutral source.
That Kennedy might have been willing to make a public swap of missiles in Cuba for those in Turkey in order to avoid a nuclear war was unknown even to Kennedy’s advisers until recently.
It indicates that Kennedy may have been willing to take domestic political risks if that were necessary to avoid nuclear war.
If this was his plan, it also shows that at the crucial time, Kennedy, like Khrushchev, was willing to blink, that he realized that none of the political gains or losses involved in the crisis could justify a nuclear war.
In the end, the reasons that count most for Kavka’s “moralist” may have counted most for Kennedy as If this is so, it casts further doubt on Kavka’s description of the different mind sets.
The Axiom of Domestic Politics The lack of a sharp distinction between moral and political perspectives becomes even clearer when we look at the aspect of the decision-maker’s mind set that Kavka calls an axiom of domestic politics.
More than any of the principles that Kavka formulates, this one seems to reveal an especially sharp dichotomy between the moralist’smind set and that of the political decisionmaker.
It suggests that an option that is backed by morally compelling reasons may be completely ”eliminated from consideration” for political reasons.
A reason that might count decisively for the moralist may carry no weight at all for the decision-maker.
Moreover, the description of the axiom suggests that the political decision-maker’s approach, unlike the moralist’s, is opportunistic, unprincipled, even amoral.
The relatively neat contrast that Kavka draws here depends, however, on oversimplifications of both the moral and the decision-maker’s perspectives.
Kavka assumes that the moral point of view is inherently globalist or universalist, while the decision-maker‘s perspective is nationalist.
His main discussion seems to assume both that a decision-maker’s specialconcern for his or her own country is purely political and amoral and that the moralist, by virtue of his or her universalist perspective, cannot recognize moral obligations to particular persons or groups.Together, these assumptions lead to an overdrawn contrast between the moralist and the decision-maker.
In fact, political leaders do have genuine, nonglobal, moral duties, and the reasonable moralist will recognize that this is the case.
In short, Kavka’s contrast depends on an inaccurate portrayal of both moralists and decisionmakers.
We can accept Kavka’s view that moralists are committed to some version of universal morality without agreeing that moralists must condemn special obligations or fail to recognize the duties that go with specific positions.
A universal morality may permit or even require that parents devote special care to their own children, that children show special regard for their parents, that physicians make special efforts toward their own patients, etc.
Likewise, a president, by virtue of his position, has a duty to be specially concerned about the well-being of his own country.
That is not to say that he should be indifferent to the well-being of people in other countries.
Nonetheless, by accepting his office, he swears to devote his energies and attentions to his own country, and he has a higher duty to it than he does to others.
If they fail to do so, then they will ignore important considerations and will necessarily arrive at a defective moral assessment of a situation.
In a democracy, elected officials have a duty to be responsive to the will of the people.
The President is not supposed to possess the unlimited discretion of a Hobbesian sovereign in judging what policies to adopt.
Rather, he is supposed to consider what the citizens want or believe to be right.
He is supposed to deal with members of Congress, who are also elected to represent the views of the people.
Hence, from a moral point of view, it is ordinarily wrong for a president to take actions that have no political support, and he may be required to act in certain ways because they have broad ,support or are accepted as the policy of the nation.
Therefore, the fact that Kennedy might have dismissed certain options because they lacked political support or pursued others because they were widely supported does not show that he was acting from a perspective that is separate from or alien to morality.
Having said this, however, it is worth noting that in fact Kennedy made his own assessment of the public mood without any real opportunity for the public to express its views.
Perhaps the public at large would have preferred options that were different from those he thought would be preferred.
Perhaps the stakes were so high that Congress should have been consulted prior to initiating a blockade, since a blockade is an act of war and Congress alone has the Constitutional power to declare war.
If one believes in the importance of procedures for consultation and for democratic approval of actions, Kennedy might well be criticized for failure to act within the limits of his office.
Similarly, to the extent that Kennedy ran unnecessary risks of nuclear war, this can be condemned not only from the perspective of a globalist morality and a concern for all humankind, but also from the perspective of a concern for the real interests of the nation.
A president who unnecessarily risks nuclear war jeopardizes his own country and its citizens as surely as he threatens the well-being of other peoples.
My main point here is that Kennedy had a moral obligation to respect public opinion, and a reasonable moralist would recognize this.
The axiom of domestic politics is not necessarily in conflict with morality, as Kavka seems to suggest.
Second, however, Kennedy may in fact have been less deferential to public opinion and the national interest than he ought to have been.
Moralists and Morality Kavka’s analysis is valuable because it calls attention to the fact that decision-maker’s operate under special constraints.
For this reason, their practice may embody principles that do not normally enter into moral evaluations.
His sharp distinction between the two mind sets, however, seems to me both misleading and dangerous.
By using this term, he unintentionally suggests that morality is the special concern of a restricted class of people who have a narrow perspective on events and whose perspective may not be applicable to all decisions.
It suggests that decision-makers may ignore moral considerations because these are, after all, only the views of so-called “moralists,” people with a mind set that differs from that of decision-makers.
People who were appalled by the risks that were taken during the Cuban missile crisis were not special types of people.
They were simply people who thought that the pursuit of national power or ideological victory did not justify the risk of millions of people being killed.
That prudence and morality both counsel against such risks indicates that political decision-makers should avoid taking them.
Since Kavka claims that the moral and political mind sets do overlap, he could accept many of the points I have made.
Nonetheless, his contrast between different mind sets and his use of the term ”moralist” may unwittingly lend support to the idea that an amoral perspective is part of the mind set appropriate to political decision-makers.
I do not think, however, that we ought to recognize these views as legitimate or justified.
At the least, morality places constraints on the means by which we may pursue our goals, and it may require the adoption of certain ends as well.
When officials become so narrowly focused on their special duties and lose sight of other moral obligations, this is a perversion and distortion of the inevitable specialization and role responsibilities that are part of life.
People who slip into these narrow perspectives and ignore important moral values may well be ”bad people,” even if, in some sense, they mean to do no harm and are acting for the best as they see it.
That such distortions are dangerous and need to be rejected was powerfully expressed by Khrushchev after the crisis.
Thus, Kavka must be right to talk about distinct mind sets, and any denial of this is implausible.
Moreover,he must also be right that the moral and the political mind sets overlap but only partially.
Political leaders do consider moral reasons in making decisions, but there are other factors that they consider as well.
Thus, the overlapping view, rather than the nesting model, must be correct.
This objection is at least partly correct, but it requires me to make my view more complex rather than to reject anything 1have defended.
I accept it as a plausible psychological claim that political leaders have characteristic ways of thinking about problems and tend to be psychologically attuned to certain kinds of factors in ways that non-politicians are not.
Philosophers, carpenters, nurses, and police officers, by virtue of their professional work, acquire habits of thought and tendencies to be aware or unaware of certain kinds of factors.
When they make decisions, these differing mind sets no doubt have their effect, and a full explanation of why someone acts in a certain way may well include some reference to these mind sets.
Notice, however, that this explanatory function of mind sets has no normative implications.
O It may explain their response to a situation without saying anything about whether it was justified.
Where Kavka goes wrong is in suggesting that mind sets play a genuinely normative, justificatory role when, at most, they can only explain what someone does.
Suppose that Kennedy did act according to the principles Kavka describes, and suppose further that these are characteristic of the political leader’s mind set.
In fact, one might point to this mind set as a kind of deformation that occurs when people are in political life, and one might lament the fact that political life makes people less moral.
So, it is possible to admit the truth of the mind set thesis as a psychological explanation without embracing what appears to be Kavka’s claim that because the moral and political mind sets only partially overlap, a political leader’s actions may only be partly assessable by moral standards.
In this connection, it is important to see that while the overlapping model may be correct psychologically, the nesting model is normatively correct.
For, in one sense, to say that political decisions are “nested within” morality is only to say that they--like all other decisions-are candidates for moral evaluation, that morality applies to them.
At the least, a knowledge of moral principles must be supplemented by factual premises and other beliefs that incorporate the political leader’s skills.
The latter don’t derive from morality itself and hence are not “nested within“ it.
It includes much that is not part of morality itself and in that sense is only partially overlapping with the moral mind set.
This does not imply, however, that the carpenter’sactions are free from moral assessment, and the same is true of the political leader.
There is one peculiarity of the political mind set that does tend to make political leaders look especially unprincipled, and that is the extent to which they are required to consider other people’s views of what is right or wrong.
Ideally, they possess this power not for themselves or in virtue of who they are.
Rather, they possess this power in order to be able to act on behalf of others who have their own views about what is right and wrong.
The traditional problem of whether representatives are supposed to do what their constituents approve or simply vote their consciences is one expression of the difficulties in this kind of role.
All these things add complexity to the question of what is right for the political leaders to do, but they do not exempt them from moral demands.
One might object that while the mind set hypothesis cannot be invoked to justify immoral actions, it is relevant to questions about the moral character of decision-makers.
If part of the explanation of their actions is that they have a distinct mind set, this may show that even though they have acted wrongly , they need not have been bad people.
Their persons and characters need not be negatively evaluated from a moral point of view, even if their actions are.
Mind sets, then, are relevant to the evaluation of agents, even if they are not relevant to the evaluation of actions3l According to this interpretation, the experience of being a political leader may alter one’s thinking or emotions in ways that make certain kinds of immoral actions more likely.
The fact that this has occurred may then be a kind of excusing condition so that acting badly does not show one to have beena bad person.
Political leaders may, for example, have certain pressures on them that the rest of us are free of,and this may make them more subject to certain kinds of temptations or errors.
In evaluating them as persons, so the objection goes, we need to keep these things in mind.
This objection urges us to be generous in evaluating our leaders when they do wrong, and there is surely something correct about it.
When we criticize leaders like Kennedy and think less well of them because of their wrongful actions, our criticism is not merely personal.
Personally, I have no desire to evaluate Kennedy the man, but I do think it is important for us to evaluate Kennedy the president.
The reason for this, as I suggested at the start of this paper, is that the way in which we evaluate political leaders is one means by which we create the standards and expectations that apply to current and future leaders.
Hence, there is an important political dimension to what may appear to be merely personal assessments of the characters of our leaders.
If we are too generous in exempting leaders from blame, we may help to create the standards that permit current and future leaders to act badly.
By being critical of past leaders, we create expectations for current leaders.
If we praise Kennedy for facing down the Russians, we tell current presidents that that is how we want them to behave.
If we criticizehim, we indicate that we do not approve of such risks as Kennedy took.
While I have been very critical of his use of this concept, I believe that it can be a valuable one.
In particular, I believe that it is useful for philosophers to apply their methods of analysis to filter out the presuppositions that underlie important policy decisions.
By exposing these presuppositions, we can then test them to see if they are sensible.
Kavka’s discussion is a valuable philosophical attempt to analyze and formulate the principles that underlie a decision of this sort.
Kavka is correct in thinking that the often unspoken and undefended assumptions may be the ones that crucially affect policy choices.
There are a few dangers that need to be avoided, however, if philosophers engage in this form of analysis.
One danger is that of falling into a kind of rigid, platonistic conception of a particular mind set, as if there were one and only one distinctive way that “moralists”, political leaders, or others think.
This error would obscure the fact that the very same person may shift from one mind set to another.
Such shifts come through very clearly in the transcripts of the meetings at which Kennedy and his advisors wrestled with the problems that faced them.
At the very first of these meetings, on the morning of October 16, 1962, the President’s mind set is distinctly military in orientation.
The missiles need to be removed, and the main choices are an air strike and an invasion.
At the end of the meeting, Kennedy appears to have settled on an air strike, though questions remain about a possible invasion.
The last words of the transcript record McGeorge Bundy injecting the idea that perhaps a “political track” might still be pursued.
Early in the crisis, even though there is some attempt to understand the Soviets’motives, the mind set is distinctly self-centered.
Kennedy shows little detachment from his own perspective or balance in thinking about the Soviets’ perspective.
This comes out in a somewhat ludicrous fashion in the following exchange during the evening meeting of October 16.
In contrast, later in the crisis, Kennedy has a much broader, more diplomacy-oriented perspective on the situation.
Mind sets are not permanent features of people and their approach to problems.
If this is so, we might do better to talk about ways in which people frame issues or problems, rather than to focus on allegedly permanent features of the people themselves.
Or a mind set might be seen as a tendency to frame problems in a certain way, but it would not be seen as excluding possible shifts of view as different features of a problem are given more or less prominence.
One would not want the mind set concept to blind one to the occurrence of such shifts.
There is another way in which the mind set concept might lead one to oversimplify.
By talking about the perspective of the political decision-maker or the moralist, one might take these as essential features of people in these roles.
To do so, however, is to overlook the crucial role of history and historical experienceon the ways in which people interpret both events and their own responses to them.
In particular, he overlooks the fact that the United States was engaged in a ""cold wnr"" against the Soviet Union.
Much of Kennedy's response to the crisis was, I think, dictated by the fact that he was the ""commander in chief"" and that we were engaged in a war with an enemy that we saw as powerful, dangerous, and bent on world domination.
Moreover, this enemy would exploit any opportunities and would only be deterred by threats of force and evidence of willingness to fight off any ~hallenge.
In the context of these assumptions and commitments, it is not surprising that diplomatic replies to the missiles in Cuba were rejected and that the risk of nuclear war was one that Kennedy was willing to incur.
Commenting on the dangers of this strategy, Dulles wrote, ""Some say that we were brought to the verge of war.
The key difference is that by the end, Kennedy seems to have been sobered.
He s e e m to have concluded that going to the brink was too dangerous and that crises needed to be avoided.
This represented an important shift in the assumptions about how the cold war was to be conducted, a shift in the cold war mind set.
I think it is, but in appealing to mind sets as explanatory devices, we need to remember both that there is an important historical dimension to mind sets and that individuals need not be wedded to any particular one.
Shifts and changes of perspective are possible, though they may be more difficult for some to achieve than others.
Where mind sets are especially dangerous is in their ability to block out considerations that are relevant to decision-making.One of the great dangers of appealing for unity on matters of foreign policy is that our prejudices go unquestioned and our blind spots become more firmly entrenched.
In answering these questions, I take it to be important that if Kennedy acted admirably, this is not because we judge him from a special perspective.
Rather, it is because in certain respects he took seriously the moral principles that applied to his decisions and acted on them conscientiously and skillfully.
If he is morally criticizable, it is because he failed to adhere to these same principles.
Since the Cuban crisis was a complex set of events in the course of which he performed many actions and made many decisions, it is not surprising that one might think that he acted well in some respects and badly in others.
Roughly, I would say that when he tookactions that increased the risk of nuclear war, he acted badly, and when he acted with caution and restraint, he acted well.
It avoids the paradox in part by simply denying that overall Kennedy acted admirably.
For a more sober and complex view, consider the following retrospective comments by Theodore Sorenson, Kennedy’s close advisor and speech writer. “ the past twenty-five years there has been a great deal of self-congratulation that a serious crisis was successfully resolved.
But let us not forget that what we did in the first place was to bring the world closer to the brink of nuclear destruction than it has ever been.
The first is that Kennedy did face a public that wanted tough actions against the Soviet Union and that would have reacted badly to accommodation of Soviet interests.
But it is important to see that Kennedy himself contributed to the creation and continuation of this public mood.
He and other cold war politicians promoted their own careers by feeding the public a steady diet of calls for toughness against the Soviet enemy.
When a crisis emerged, the President was faced with a public that demanded the toughness he had promised because it believed in the threat that had been described to them.
He was also faced with a public that saw things in stark black and white, good vs. evil terms.
Never were suggestions made or considered that the United States might be at all responsible for the long crisis.
In the end, Kennedy and his advisors were trapped by their own rhetoric and by the picture of the world that they help to convey to the public.
However much one might think that the Soviet missiles in Cuba represented a threat to the United States, the fact remains that the missile crisis only put off this threat for a few years.
Within a relatively short time, the Soviets increased both their force of intercontinental missiles and their force of submarine launched missiles.
The level of vulnerability created by the missiles in Cuba was simply created in other ways, and, like it or not, we came to live with that threat.
Given that the situation we tried to prevent in Cuba came about anyway and proved to be tolerable, it should be evident that it was not worth risking nuclear destruction to prevent (or to achieve) the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
This point, which Kavka accepts, remains the central moral fact about the missile crisis, and it is the one that “moralists” have correctly emphasized.
A successful resolution of the crisis required that at least one of the central decision-makers would come to accept this “moralist’s” assessment.
Notes For a good summary of the crisis and a valuable selection of conflicting interpretations and evaluations, see Robert Divine, ed., The Cubnn Missile Crisis, 2nd ed.
All page references in the text will be to this version of Kavka’s essay.
Roots of War ,ch., Richard Barnet describes “the operational code of the national security managers,” but his account is severely critical and is not meant to support the view that this mind set is a reasonable one.
This contains transcripts of the meetings of October 16 and summaries of later meetings.
In support of Somerville’s skepticism, it is odd that none of Kennedy’s other advisors, including his brother Robert, appear to have known about this initiative.
McGeorge Bundy thinks that a tightening of the quarantine-rather than an air strike or a public trade-was the most likely next step for Kennedy.
