They are what I believe to be the essential elements of his rise as outlined by Balfour.
To this effect, he promised to carry out a number of social reforms and eventually to hold elections; he had not lost his populist touch.
The promises could not have been more cynical, for he began his new rule by suspending constitutional guarantees such as the right to strike, and abolishing both Congress and political parties.
Yet the political system of Cuba had been so discredited by eight years of Autentico administration that many Cubans welcomed his coup.
A more serious split that led to punch-ups between members separated those who advocated peaceful resistance and others, led by Castro, who were campaigning for more violent methods.
The timidity of the Ortodoxo leadership increasingly exasperated Castro who was already organising a clandestine network and an underground press.
In a repeat of the Machado years, several middle-class underground organisations were set up; one of these, the Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario, tried unsuccessfully to carry out a coup within the army in April 1953 with the aid of some officers who were members of its underground network.
Inspired by several famous incidents in Cuban history, he and his co-conspirators planned to seize a military barracks in Santiago, the capital of Oriente province, calling on the people of Cuba to rise against the new dictator.
It was from here that the movements of independence had been launched against the Spanish colonialists occupying mainly the western provinces; the spark that had set alight the rebellions had been the seizure of barracks and the distribution of their weapons.
While the western provinces had been settled by immigrants, the east became Cuba's frontier land where escaped slaves and fugitives from the law found refuge.
It had also been the scene of numerous slave revolts, and more recently of sugar workers' uprisings.Geographical and Historical Causes of Discontent • In the fifties, it was the east that suffered the highest level of unemployment on the island; Oriente accounted for almost 30 per cent of the jobless.
Living standards were also considerably lower there than in the west and political dissatisfaction, consequently, was higher.
The rebels were to seize the Moncada barracks and distribute arms to the people.
If the uprising were to fail, the rebels would retreat into the densely wooded mountains of the Sierra Maestra, there to begin a rural guerrilla campaign.
Beginning of a Movement • The weakness of the plan rested on the faith that the people of Oriente would rise up spontaneously in response to the exemplary action of Castro's band.
Dressed in military uniform, Castro and his men were fired on and forced to retreat before they could penetrate into the barracks square.
Unlike many of their comrades, their lives were saved thanks to the resolute action of the black lieutenant commanding the detachment that discovered them; concerned to avoid their cold-blooded murder, he insisted on delivering them to the city jail rather than the Moncada barracks where an irate garrison awaited them.Castro’s Ideology • The attempted capture of the Moncada barracks on 26 July 1953 has been presented in some orthodox accounts as the first stage in a more or less defined strategy leading to the proclamation in 1961 of a Marxist-Leninist state.
It was likely therefore that he had already moved beyond a social democratic policy of radical reform within the existing political framework and envisaged an eventual clash with the established order.Ideology Continued • None of this proves, however, that Castro was inspired by Marxist ideas or Leninist strategy, as he later claimed.
History Will Absolve Me” • The 26th July Movement, as it soon came to be called, had popular roots, unlike all the other anti-Batista underground groups except the Communists, but it was not a working-class organisation.
A Historiographical Debate • The speech contained the blueprint of most of the social and economic reforms that the new regime would attempt to carry out after the victory of the Revolution in 1959.
A Historiographical Debate • They are right to point out the continuity of Castro's programme for reform.
But in 1953, he was a Marti follower, tendance Marx, not the other way round.Castro Brought Into Public Consciousness • The Moncada action and the trial brought Castro vividly into the public eye.
Batista was facing an upsurge of protest against his rule and responded by tightening his measures of repression.
His followers on the island set to work to build the organisation from scratch.
There was considerable support among Ortodoxo militants for Castro's strategy of armed resistance in contrast to the leadership's policy of political agitation.
By early 1956, Castro felt sufficiently strong to break publicly with the Ortodoxo leadership and declare the new Movement.Denying Communism • In jail for several weeks in Mexico City after a police round-up, the result probably of pressure from the Cuban authorities, Castro had an article published in the weekly Cuban paper Bohemia, rejecting a claim by Batista in the previous issue that he was a Communist.
But it also marked his distance from the PSP, which was calling for a non-violent, united-front policy of opposition to the dictatorship.Garnering Support • He took care also to spread wide his net of contacts.
Besides the flow of cash from the Movement in Cuba, several large contributions were made by wealthy sympathisers; not least among them was ex-President Prio, now in exile in Miami.
Their instructor, Alberto Bayo, was an expert in guerrilla warfare, a veteran of the Spanish military campaign against Moorish guerrillas in the twenties and a Loyalist general during the Spanish civil war.
Any postponement, moreover, might jeopardise the expedition that was now ready to set sail; the Mexican police had already been alerted to the activities of the Cuban oppositionists.
A continuous war was waged by the landlords' foremen to prevent them encroaching any further on their territory.Importance of the People of the Sierra Maestra • The mobility of these peasants, and their intimate knowledge of the people and the terrain of the Sierra enabled Castro's band to survive and begin to grow in number.
Success of Guerrilla Warfare • A two-year campaign that led finally to the defeat of the Batista regime.
The ability of the rebels to repel military units not only eroded the morale of the rank-and-file soldiers but also strengthened the belief that the army could be defeated by military means.
Since his student days, Castro had learnt the value of using the media to drawn attention to his ideas.
He had also become aware of the opportunities for agitation offered by radio broadcasting through his old mentor, Eddy Chibas.
Castro used its airwaves with great effect to put over his programme for reforms, and the regular news bulletins featured in the broadcasts gave a conscientiously accurate report of military engagements, in marked contrast to the triumphalist fantasies of the pro-Batista media.
Below them, the army attempted to lay siege but the flow of messengers, arms, and recruits to and from the guerrilla stronghold and the city slipped through the army patrols without undue difficulty.
Failure of the Strike • Most accounts of the strike of 9 April consider it to have been a total failure.
It failed to dislodge Batista, and indeed, encouraged the dictator to believe for a short while that events were moving his way once again.
According to the American Ambassador, 'Batista apparently felt he was in the ascendancy.
The campaigns in the urban centres of Cuba, whether they were sabotage, demonstrations, propaganda, or strike action, fatally weakened the Batista regime.
But both were more familiar with Marxist ideas of whatever tendency than Castro.
The Caracas Pact • Whatever his political definition at the time, Castro was taking care to avoid raising suspicions among the anti-Batista opposition and in the United States that he wanted to go beyond the framework of a restored democratic system in Cuba, the Presidential Palace or to stage a mutiny in the armed forces.
Instead, the document referred to the restoration of constitutional and democratic rights and made a vaguely worded promise of economic and social progress that could have issued from the Autenticos themselves.Causes of Castro’s Moderation • It was no coincidence that Castro's search for unity with moderate and conservative opponents of Batista occurred as the army launched a mass offensive against the guerrilla stronghold.
By March 1958 Castro had felt confident enough to establish new fronts in Oriente.
Twelve thousand troops, backed by the air force, had been sent to destroy the rebel forces in both Sierras.Failure of Batista’s Offensive • The failure of the offensive was the story not so much of the military strength of the guerrillas as of the moral weakness of the regular army.
But after the first shock, they will find it a boon no more thieving tax collectors, no plundering army chieftains or bribe-hungry officials to bleed them white.
Our revolution is as much a moral as a political one.Final Offensive • Having beaten back the army, the rebel forces launched their own general offensive.
Guevara's and Cienfuegos's units cut the island in half, preventing the flow of reinforcements from the West and then moved on Havana.
Meanwhile, a group of senior army officers were plotting to replace him with a mixed civilian and military junta, which, they were assured, would be recognised by the United States government.
On New Year's Eve Batista fled to the Dominican Republic.Castro Takes Power • The junta that replaced him enjoyed only a brief moment of power.
From his headquarters just outside Santiago, Castro issued a call for a general strike to overthrow the military coup that was answered by the vast mass of workers.
The next day, Castro entered Santiago in triumph and shortly afterwards, to widespread jubilation, Guevara and Cienfuegos took control of Havana.
But it also fell, just as it had risen to power in 1934 and 1952, because it did not represent any social class.Causes of Batista’s Fall • Even the military was sharply divided, as the Cienfuegos naval mutiny had shown.
Batista's closest advisers were officers who had risen from the ranks with him in the 1933 Revolution.
Only the top layer of the union bureaucracy still identified with the regime because it had nowhere else to go.Causes of Batista’s Downfall • Batista had lost his populist base, but he had not endeared himself either to the indigenous elites that controlled much of Cuba's wealth.
To the instability of the Cuban political system was added a growing sense of material insecurity among the middle class.
Per capita income in Cuba had fallen by 18% in the two years following the coup and by 1958 had dropped to its 1947 level.
A new economic downturn in the second half of 1958 created a generalised discontent while the tightening of economic competition and control from the United States encouraged sections of the middle class and the bourgeoisie to look favourably on the assertive nationalist policy promised by Castro.
He had seized power on the eve of general elections that favoured another candidate and had maintained his rule through repression; the two presidential elections of 1954 and 1958 were fraudulent exercises in democracy.
Castro managed to get no less than twenty-five denunciations of Batista published in Cuban periodicals.
The conservative parties had been too fragmented to be a focus of representation, while the Autenticos were discredited, having consistently reneged on their promises to end corruption.
A relatively well-developed society, Cuba could not carry through any much-needed and desired structural reforms while it was trapped by its sugar monoculture.
Filling the Vacuum • Castro thus stepped into a power vacuum that was not entirely of his making.
Manuel Urrutia was president, Jose Miro Cardona was prime minister, and Fidel was commander-in-chief of the armed forces.
Results of the Bay of Pigs • United States could no longer identify themselves as anti-colonialist and indeed caused concern among Latin American nations that the United States would engage in colonialism.
It is also possible Khrushchev did it in order to redress the embarrassment he received as a result of the Berlin wall • Gaddis and others suggest they were placed in Cuba as a response to the Bay of Pigs.
He wanted to protect communism in Cuba with the hope of it continuing to spread throughout Latin America and the missiles in Turkey were mere justification for placing the missiles in Cuba.Why The United States Was Obliged To Act • The USSR had first strike capability and the missiles range would’ve been much more effective than American missile in Turkey.
As well, without the permission of Soviet leadership, the Russian military in Cuba shot down a United States U2 spy plane – a sign of how easily things to spiral out of control.
Historiography Orthodox • Kennedy was right to respond to the crisis in a firm and forceful way, as the missiles represented a Soviet threat to alter the balance of power • The quarantine exerted maximum pressure on the Soviets and minimized risk of war.
