K\ The establishment of verification arranGenerts effective for as long as the Cuban Government is Cowcuniat-dominated which villi 1.
Reduce the ability of Cuba to enlace in military, paramilitary cr § subversive activities against Vtestern Hemisphere countrieei To whatever extent may be feasible, contribute to the development in Cuba of a government yhich pursues a course independent of Soviet or Chinese Communist interests, optimally one that is non-Communist and has representative government.
Cftnentt In absence Cuban and Soviet agreement ICRC would refuse to carry out.
Comment t Threat to do so could constitute pressure on Cuba and Soviets to a ree to continued ICilC 1 spection or other acceptable arrangements.
The military probler of dcimj so in the face of opposition would depend on the degree of continued Soviet participation in Cuban air defense, and especially whether surface-to-air missiles are maintained.
Thus, freedom of action ue as have under this assunption may be related to degree of ""guarantees"" we may have given under these circumstances « 1.
With the withdrawal of the Soviet military presence (and thus presumably the SAIIs) there should be no great military difficu in maintainirj effective air eurvoillanee.
Cuban attests at interference could be net by calculated measures of defense that would attrite Cuban air capabilities.
C Third Assumption t Cuba cooperates or acquiesces in control measures.
Comnentt The likelihood of such cooperation will in large part be dependent on Castro's. estimate as to whether such control measures will also operate so as to protect his regime.
The problem, tbsrefore, is to devise measures Walsh, while effective from the standpoint of our interest in ensuring against the reintroduction of offensive wjapona also will appear to Castro as constituting sous protection f cAia.There are tx.«o general types of ueasures, each of which can bo designed someuhat to serve both these purposes but each of uhieh have their difficulties.
Proposed Coarse of Action s Thero are several theoretically possible solutions t A continuing A continuing DH presence in Cuba placed tfaore by the Security Council.
Ibis arrangement would conf Ira and extend Soviet involvement in the Caribbean, and make the UK's inspection system in Cuba subject to Russian veto.
The most promising line of approach, therefore, is an arrangement that combines to the degree possible the virtues of all three of these propoeala and minimizes their vices.
The General Assembly passes a modified Brazilian resolution, praising the general idea of regional denuclearized zones for Latin America and Africa.
The United States (at a nation of the region) and the United Kingdom, France and the Hetherlands would also be invited to the meeting, 3* This meeting adopts a Belf-denying ordinance on the acquisition of nuclear weapons and delivery systems.
U« The European powers concerned undertake not to station nuclear^ weapons or delivery vehicles, or permit their introduction, into theia dependen territories in the zone* £« The ad hoc meeting would request the Secretary General to establish an Inspectorate to serve the sone fey inspection to the degree necessary to assure that all signatories of the self-denying ordinance were abiding by their commitment.
The Inspectorate, which would be or anizand appointed by the Secretary General of the United Nations, would have free oeeess to all of the countries of the sone and would -visit them j*-y either isn its own initiative or to investigate complaints of violation L '%£,. «f the basic agreement.
The ad hoe conference wo'^ld establish a continuing Conndttee to supervise adlberence to theT«*ment, to hear complaints (and also to screen out frivolous complaints), and to receive reports fron the I-sp ctorate Inspectorate on its work, '6.
