Starting April 5, the Research Room will be open Tuesdays and Thursdays by appointment only.
Dismiss Breadcrumb Home About Us News and Press Press Releases Threat of Nuclear War Brought Home in New Exhibit at JFK Library Boston, MA – The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum today announced that on April 12, 2013 it will unveil a riveting new exhibit about the thirteen days in October 1962 that brought the world to the edge of thermonuclear war.
To the Brink is the first special traveling exhibit to be featured in the Kennedy Library’s new 3,000 square foot gallery since the new wing was completed in 2011.
At six interactive listening stations, visitors listen in as the President and his advisers worked furiously to avert a nuclear catastrophe.
With the fate of the world hanging in the balance, the tapes remind visitors that no one knew what the outcome would be.
Original documents, artifacts, and photographs from the Kennedy Library and the National Archives complement the tapes in a dramatic presentation that draws the visitor into this milestone 20th-century event.
Watch this 3:38 minute video short to get a look at exhibit highlights and see an interview with exhibit curator Stacey Bredhoff.
It was created by the National Archives and the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum and made possible in part by the Foundation for the National Archives, the John F Kennedy Library Foundation, and the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T with special recognition to the Lawrence F O’Brien Family.
The exhibit was on display at the National Archives building in Washington, D.C. from October 12, 2012, through February 3, 2013.
The app is available for free download in the Apple Store and at www.JFKCMC.org, where Android phone and tablet users can also experience the exhibit.
Pei sits on a 10-acre waterfront site on Columbia Point offering panoramic views of Boston’s skyline and Harbor Islands.
General admission to the Museum at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library is $12.00.
The Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum is open daily from 9:00m. to 5:00m., with the exceptions of Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year’s Day.
There is free shuttle-service from the JFK/UMass T Stop on the Red Line.
For more information, call JFK-1960 or access www.jfklibrary.org on the Internet.
