After much debate in his administration Kennedy authorized a clandestine invasion of Cuba by a brigade of Cuban exiles.
The brigade hit the beach at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961, but the operation collapsed in spectacular failure within 2 days.
Kennedy took public responsibility for the mistakes made, but remained determined to rid Cuba of Castro.
In November 1961 Kennedy approved Operation Mongoose, a secret plan aimed at stimulating a rebellion in Cuba that the United States could support.
While the Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev secretly introduced medium-range nuclear missiles into Cuba.
U.S intelligence picked up evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up during routine surveillance flights and on September 4, 1962, Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba.
A U-2 flight on October 14 provided the first proof of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy called together 18 of his closest advisers to try to resolve the most dangerous U.S.-Soviet confrontation of the cold war.
Some advisers argued for an air strike to take out the missiles and destroy the Cuban air force followed by a United States invasion of Cuba; others favored warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
He sent a letter to Khrushchev calling upon him to remove the missiles, thus initiating an exchange of correspondence between the two leaders that continued throughout the crisis.
On October 24 Soviet vessels approached the quarantine line but turned back; 3 days later, the Cubans shot down a United States reconnaissance plane.
After these near flash points, Kennedy responded on October 27 to the first of two letters sent by Khrushchev on October 26 and 27 proposing various settlements of the crisis.
On the basis of those understandings, the Soviet Union agreed on October 28 to remove its missiles from Cuba.
The quarantine and the crisis lingered until the removal of the Soviet missiles was verified at sea on November 20, and the Soviet Union agreed to remove the medium-range Il-28 bombers it had also introduced into Cuba.
Exactly how close the United States and the Soviet Union came to nuclear war over Cuba remains one of the most keenly discussed issues of the cold war.
Updates | Frequent Questions | Contact Us | Email this Page | Subject Index | SearchThe Office of Electronic Information, Bureau of Public Affairs, manages this site as a portal for information from the United States State Department.
