Impair national seciinty 4 i emergency flrepardedness plaits _9, Violate a statute, treaty, or iiil CINCPAC FOREIGN GOVT %%%%*$$$$ STRATCOM OTHER OTHER Chapter 2 THE CUBAN CRISIS In only one respect—and that one a matter of degree— did the second half of 1962 differ from other comparable Cold War periods.
West New-Guinea, where the United Nations established temporary executive authority on 1 October.
In the United Kingdom on 22 October, one William Vassall received an 18-year prison sentence for* violation of the British Official Secrets Act, and on 20 December the first free elections in many years made Juan Bosch president of the Dominican Republic.
After a space voyage of oyer three months, this probe established contact with its target on 14 December, sending back.
Not too surprisingly, the French were ' wrapped up in. ah internal political discussion which was partly settled on 28 October when the voters endorsed de Gaulle in a referendum on the selection of future French presidents.
Starkly highlighting a major internal concern for the United States was the 30 September rioting in Qxford, Mississippi.
West Germany was both bemused and aroused by the uproar over items published in Per Spiegel ; starting about 10 October, this affair was still causing governmental repercussions in Bonn a month and more later.
Some of these. major events in the period leading into October 1962 were tangentially related to the.
The Laotian compromise was certainly a tactical victory for Comimunisim arid the West German bickering had overtones of espionage.
In a related sense, too, no conceivable delicacy could have eased the jolt received by the British in the 18.-21.
On any ""temperature"" gauge, Cold War tensions ran consistently above normal, fluctuating with Communist pushes and. relaxations at a score of known trouble spots around. the world.
In the late summer and early fall of 1962, then, the focus of international tension came to. rest upon the island of Cuba, an especially sensitive point because of its geographic proximity to. the. continental United.
Known since 1947 or earlier aS the entry port for Communist infiltration into Latin America, Cuba by mid1962 was firmly in the hands of Fidel Castro, who had publicly announced and demonstrated his Communist sympathies, dedication, and objectives.
By 14 October, however, the high-flying U-2 aircraft were able to bring back good photographs of unusual construction work on the island.
When it became apparent that a number of Cuba-bound ships would refuse to heed the warning and change course, the American quarantine went into effect on 24 October.
This continuing Kennedy-Khrushchev contact and the apparent Russian willingness to negotiate a settlement comprised probably the strongest single factor in alleviating the Cuban crisis, and the swift marshaling of American striking power certainly had something to do with the cooling of Cuban emotions.
It was midDecember before the American Government was publicly satisfied with the removal of offensive Russian missiles and jet bombers from Cuba, Cuban-American tensions reverted to a ""normal"" level.
American q surveillance continued, accompanied by a gradual, partial relaxation of the special military buildup in the United States.
Perhaps the clearest signal that Cuba and the Communists were on a new. tack was Fidel Castro's 24 December agreement to release the 1,113 -o prisoners captured at the Bay of Pigs, though the Cuban dictator's terms, made it obvious even to the most optimistic that this was no thoroughgoing ""thaw"" in the Cold War.
This background sketch of international events during the ""Cuban.crisis"" seiJ^^^i|^^u£poses.
Peoples and nations did not set aside their other preoccupations, though they did hold their breath for a momentary focus of attention on the dangers inherent in the Cuban situation.
Schriever that his research and development organization was in the front line of the Cold War, though the General's remarks had actually described the scientist's, and engineer's con3 tributions to the international struggle for technological supremacy.
All in all, the Systems Command could honestly evaluate its operation in the Cuban crisis as ""effective beyond expectation/' A Useful Preamble As preparation for the reality of combat operations, military training seeks to simulate as nearly as possible all aspects of the ultimate event itself.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the first of these practice projects; called HIGH HEELS II, it was designed to test command alert procedures throughout the Air Force.
In the process, the major commands' war plans received a good workout, and the effort included"" realistic practice runs on combat and combat support actions.
The personnel manning command posts and alert staffs derived profitable experience, in operational, administrative, and reporting procedures.
The simulated emergency also gave participants a firsthand appreciation of the command and control difficulties stemming from communications disrupted by a nuclear attack.
Experience in the two exercises suggested several changes and improvements in current procedures.
The Cuban crisis started so . soon after the 28 September end of HIGH HEELS II/SPADE FORK, ■ however, that. there was no time to translate the indicated improvements into formal revisions of existing plans and directives.
But the actual experience gained was invaluable when the real emergency came along, and the more important changes were introduced informally into operational procedures.
This move coincided with that evening's Presidential address, which informed the Nation of the serious situation in Cuba and revealed the accentuated alert status of United States military elements.
In accordance with prescribed Systems Command procedures, the move to ""Defense Conditions 3"" status on 22 October automatically activated the Commander's Alert Staff.
Later that night General Schriever had all field commanders contacted to confirm their actions, in increasing the local alert posture and in realigning their research and development missions in the face of the international crisis, 10 The following morning, 23 October, General Schriever met again with his senior staff and canvassed actions under way, in order to marshal the Systems Command's full resources in appropriate response to the crisis.
The vulnerability of communications to sabotage, the availability of emergency power, and an alerting phone network for key officials were checklist items, in addition, all elements of the Command should gear themselves to extended maintenance of the 24 -hour alert staff.
While reducing temporary duty to a minimum, the Command also prepared its plans for cancelling all leaves.
Command installations to support combat forces, including the presence of competent crews to fire missiles, if necessary, from the Atlantic and Pacific Missile Ranges.
Specifically, the downrange airfields of the Atlantic Missile Range had potential uses, though it was not immediately clear whether the international agreements governing those fields located on foreign soil would permit their use by active American tactical forces.
Another operational consideration was designation of an alternate headquarters for the Systems Command, to confirm the provision for this contingency already embodied in IfiifCommand's 1 continuity-of-operations plan.
Ground Center's 3201st Air Base Wing at Eglin, the Space Systems Division's 6594th Instrumentation Squadron at Westover Air Force Base, Massachusetts, and all Site Activation Task Forces of the Ballistic Systems Division.
The basic aim was to bring to an ""Emergency Combat Capability"" posture those missile sites already far enough along to have an ""Emergency Launch Capability"" status, on the correct assumption that these weapons could be added to the operational arsenal in a matter of days or. hours.
Systems Command units at Vandenberg Air Force Base and various sites brought 20 missiles to the desired state of readiness; 13 were weapons at incomplete. sites and 7 were at training or test launchers.
The Strategic Air 1 Command acquired temporary control over all 20 missiles, and this supplement added-at the peak of the crisis-71 megatons to the available nuclear striking force.
The smooth . operation of Project GOLDEN BULL elicited an Air Force SCEH64-308 Headquarters complime^f ""on 2' &''6'ctober,' and by 10 November 1962 the Systems Command again owned these weapons and prepared to 14 resume the interrupted test and activation work.
The list encompassed most features of the tactical and strategic posture, current or planned, and the net effect was a thoroughgoing blackout of specific military news.
The Missile Test Center assessed how effectively it could supply range stations with its own limited transport fleet, if the regular Military Air Transport Service airlifts of cargo and personnel were no longer available.
The Patrick evaluation also considered the possibility that tactical requirements might preempt the whole Patrick airfield complex; in this eventuality, the Missile Test Center concluded it could continue restricted downrange supportby operating its range flights out of the Melbourne Municipal Airport.
Illustrative of the varied priority requirements for support aircraft was an Air Force levy of 25 October which took three T-33's from the Systems Command and one U-3 each from the Headquarters and Logistics Commands, as well as three C-47's from the Strategic Air Command.
That same day the Flight Test Center reported 10 of its aircraft were not immediately available, because of modifications, maintenance, or other mechanical conditions; all other test and test support aircraft under Edwards control were in commission.
It is my desire that every commander personally see to the readiness of his command, and be prepared to exercise his capability to the utmost if the eventuality occurs that he must proceed on his own.
Such exercises as HIGH HEELS II and SPADE FORK had provided valuable practice in crisis .control pf the Systems Command and its important resources.
In addition, at least two more Miriutemen and another Titan I were on the verge of Emergency War Operation status.
In reporting on the availability of its aircraft that same day, the Proving Ground Center at Eglin applied a priority for. withdrawals.
Ort 26 October the Missile Development Center at Holloman Air Force Base assessed its ability to support combat units and concluded that it could, ""under austere conditions,"" accommodate one tactical fighter wing ortroop carrier wing 21 equipped with either C-123 or C-130 aircraft.
That same day the Systems Command reported that it had filled a critical gap in the national defenses, with the shift of the AN/FPS-49 radar at Moorestown, New Jersey, from its. space tracking mission to coverage of the Cuban horizon.
As early as 22 October the Pentagon had expressed concern about the lack of ballistic missile detection in that direction.
Under temporary Air Defense Command control, the FPS-49--a prototype of the ""BMEWS."" raders with an effective range of 1,500 nautical miles-went on a 24-hour day on 25 October.
Under the nickname ""Falling Leaves,"" the Air Defense Command in the next five days assembled a missile early warning network aimed at Cuba.
The FPS-49 returned to itsbasic research and development mission on 26 November.
TTrmr INCHES iMililililililililililili ihlililihlili ilililihhlil Still another Systems Command project checked out a special operational concept for possible Cuban requirements.
To one degree or another,, the entire Air Force Systems Command felt. the impact of the crisis, but four of the field agencies were affected most sharply.
Of these, the centers. at Patrick and Eglm were physically on the firing line and thus became bases and staging areas for the combat forces, at the same time trying to maintain ; useful test, schedules.
And the Electronic Systems Division at Hanscom Field, Massachusetts, guided the creation of the electronic systems on which modern military operations depended—whether for communications, command and control, surveillance and reconnaissance, or countermeasures.
Should the situation worsen, Patrick was ready to go to ""Defcon 2"" status, and there were plans for using ""hardened ... „ •, 25 disaster control and communication centers at Cape Canaveral.
Ballistic Systems Division response, also on 27 October, was equally reassuring.
The Systems Command had responded at once to the 26 October directive and had identified five B; 52H and one B-58A aircraft which could be transferred to the Strategic Air Command, By 28 October a review of the proffered bombers had determined that none were suitable for immediate use; accordingly, the Strategic 27 Air Command withdrew its request.
Another operational need dictated a special priority within the Systems Command program.
Intelligence reports early in the crisis had identified C-band radars among the Russian equipment functioning in Cuba.
An existing. project to provide C-band electronic countermeasures gear for all B-52 antedated the Cuban emergency, and on 29 October 1962 Air Force Headquarters directed a sharp acceleration of this endeavor.
One unusual episode in the Cuban story derived from a Systems Command project known as ""QUICK CHECK/' in which a contractor was building a multisensor reconnaissance system in a bailed YB-58 aircraft aircraft.
Cuba was an early inspiration, and on 25 October the Systems Command chaired a Pentagon meeting to explore the possibility.
By 29 October the Air Force had tentatively planned for the following day a reconnaissance flight along the northern coast of Cuba.
A cOn. tractor crew would fly the mission, since an estimated two weeks would be .necessary to orient an Air Force crew in effective use of the multiple sensors, and the Strategic Air Command would have operational control of the flight.
As. planned originally, the aircraft would fly two straight-line segments-east and southeast—no closer than 30. miles to the northern coast of Cuba and from one end of the island to the other.
The return flight would be direct-line to Fort Worth, Texas, or to Florida if fuel was low.
Following several unavoidable delays, the B-58 took off at 1830 hours on 30 October.
The flight was uneventful, and the aircraft was back at Fort Worth by 2240 hours.
Initial reports indicated the mission was about 80 percent successful in its data coverage and multiple sensing.
By 30 October the Cuban crisis was stilla Serious thing, but it had lost its fine edge of stark tension.
There was no public announcement to this effect, but there were such indications of lessened pressure as the Systems Command's 30 October directive calling on its Ballistic Systems Division to contact the Strategic Air Command and arrange an orderly, phased return of those ballistic missiles which had been temporarily added to the operational inventory.
The Strategic Air Command responded on 3 November by proposing the return of 14 sites--5 Minutemen and 1 Titan I at Vandenberg, and 4;AtlaS-F sites each at Walker and Plattsburgh Air Force Bases.
Temporary official visitors at Eglin at this time included 53 officers, 2 30 airmen, and some 770.
A significant element in the Systems Command performance , during the crisis was the ability of these centers and other units to. supports.emicombat condition and, at the same time, carry on their primary missions in research, development, testing, and evaluation.
An operational problem identified early was the danger of overruns by F^106 aircraft on Runway 20 at Patrick.
With no guarantee that the crisis was over, there could be no real relaxation.
To avoid misleading the missile warning network covering Cuba, the Center also arranged to notify the North American Air Defense Command of any planned Cape Canaveral test launches which would rise above 70,000 feet.
Operating under similar pressure, Eglin received the first 3 of 10 refuelers to augment the local capacity for servicing transient aircraft.
And in a financial footnote, the Western Contract Management Region estimated that 24-hour command post operation throughout the Region 33 would require an additional $39,718.62 monthly.
As early as 23 October the Pacific Air Forces had used the Cuban crisis to justify an imposition of its presumed authority over the 6594th--starting with the recovery unit's equipment.
When the Russians began to dismantle their offensive weapon Bites in Cuba, watchful wariness became the American password.
When the Proving Ground Center surveyed its ""radars available for airspace surveillance"" on 27 October, it had noted that Site D-8 of the Eglin Gulf Test Range would be used for.
There was some mothballed equipment at the Site, notably an S -band radar and communications gear.
In response to Defense Communications Agency inquiriesabout using this Site as a communications link with Key West, Florida, the Systems Command on 29 October estimated that D-8 could be made operational again in about three . daySi though the condition of the equipment-""pickled"" for over a year-could not be predicted.
Round-figure calculations suggested that reactivation and one year's 24-hours-a-day operation could require as much as $129,500.
Then on 3 November an operations order from the Air Force Security Service directed that a Systems Command ""emergency reaction unit"" establish itself at Cudjoe Key and begin operations to acquire ""intelligence information"" by the morning of 7 November.
The Proving Ground Center moved at ortce to assist in_ preparation of Site D-8 for this purpose.
Also on 3 November the Space Systems Division responded in detail to General Schriever's 25 October message and reported the accomplishment of all necessary steps to secure its Los Angeles installation.
If sabotage or infiltration became an unmanageable problem, there were plans to secure Army troops for extra support.
Other, potential problems included the vulnerability of land-line communications into the Los Angeles complex, a complete dependency upon municipal sources for water, and a minimal emergency power supply.
These would be critical items only if the situation deterio39 rated considerably.
Along with the rest of the Systems Command, the Rome Air Development Center had reviewed its program in the light of crisis requirements.
In the aftermath of Project GOLDEN BULL, Systems Command personnel proceeded to ""un-cock"" the ballistic missile complexes released from the firing line.
November the Strategic Air Command added seven more missiles (two at Walker and five at Pittsburgh), to be returned on. the request of site activation teams for resumption of the installation and checkout process.
In the days which followed, the Systems Command followed the pattern established after these first 15 days of the Cuban crisis-eo.nt'inued support of the alert forces and, insofar as resources permitted, an aggressive assault upon its own systems acquisition program.
On lTTNSyember, for example, there were identified, four Cuban sites each holding equipment for a small Russian armored regimental combat team.
Command to enlist Eglin help in a range test of napalm bombs which had been loaded for days or weeks on alerted aircraft in southern Florida.
On 28 November the Systems Command advised its field agencies that they might assume the ""Defcon 5"" attitude, though those elements directly supporting combat forces still deployed would continue to 48 reflect the readiness posture of the supported units.
A prolonged or intensified emergency, to be^ sure, would have reduced measurably the degree of accomplishment in the latter category; indeed, even the two-week crisis and the relatively slight. slippage in some programs imposed measurable additional costs on the Systems Command effort.
Too, earlier planning appeared to rely too much on the existence of post-attack communications; certain actions had to become automatic and be set in motion by specific events, regardless of communications failures.
And the voluntarilymanned Military Affiliate Radio System should not be counted upon as a primary emergency communications link.
The HIGH HEELS II/SPADE FORK exercise and the subsequent Guban crisis pinpointed defects and desirable alterations in the Systems Command's contingency plans.
In addition to the , specific events outlined in this narrative, .the sum total of accomplishments underscored the broad scope of the Command's participaetion.
Eglin took care of as many as 1,141 people from tactical, strategic, and transport units, while Edwards accommodated-as noted-a deployed B-47 task force.
Beyond those already noted, the special technical problems attacked and solved by the Systems Command included several accomplishments in electronic engineering.
The Pentagon on 25 October identified a singular requirement to which the Systems ""■ Command responded by modifying an AN/FPS-35 frequency diversity radar at Thomasville, Alabama, a part of the Semi -Automatic.
Working from a 24 October requirement, the Systems Command had modification kit ready for shipment on 2 November.
As these pages indicate, this response went-effectively 'and eommendably--well beyond a bare, minimal fulfillment of the Command's mission requirements.
The net result was to add a bright new chapter to 50 the history of Air Force research and development.
See also, Dept of State Publication 7449, ""The United States Response to , Soviet Military Buildup in Cuba,"" Pres.
See the feature Story in the magazine section, The Washington Post , 2Q Oct 63, concerning a commemorative silver calendar for Oct 62.
Operational planning, anotherelement in this picture anticipates possible courses of action.
Secret classification, but the key data have been assembled in quantity-from the Historians of AFSC field organizations and from within Hq AFSC This . abbreviated discussion of the event is dictated by limited resources in time and personnel.
Msg, SCEP-23-10r55 J Hq AFSC to-ALAFSC, 2 3 0ct 62; msg, SCE-23-10-56, Hq AFSC to ALAFSC, 23 Oct 62; SCMO Log, 20 Nov 62.
Transportation and the Cuban Crisis, 13 Dec 62; Welsh interview, 6 Feb 64, 17.
Status of AFSC Sensors in Support of Cuban Crisis, 29 Nov 62;. msg, ADOOP-ES 2942, Hq ADC td CofS USAF, 30 Oct 62. , 23.
AFSC toCote USAF, 27 Oct 62; msg, SCE-1-ll-l, Hq AFSC to ALAFSC, 1 Nov 62.
Msg, APEX SITREP 22, Hq APGC to Hq AFSC, 20 Nov 62; msg, APEX SITREP 23, Hq APGC to Hq AFSC, 26 Nov 62.
