For my parents’ generation, November 22, 1963, is the infamous day that everyone remembers where they were when they heard the news that President Kennedy had been shot.
The assassination of President John F Kennedy is one of the most historic—and horrific— days of the 20th century, and its impact is still being felt today.
It’s hard to believe it has been 50 years this week since the tragic events unfolded in Dallas, Texas.
JFK as a Senator and Presidential Candidate When John F Kennedy was running for President, he was a United States Senator from Massachusetts.
These publications give insight to the man during this period of transition from active Senator to President-elect.
Classic Speeches, 1830-1993 contains the text of some of the most famous speeches by United States Senators, including a young Senator John F Kennedy.
Intelligence Briefings of Presidential Candidates, 1952-2004 and the Audiobook-MP3 edition are new publications that tell the story of how the CIA and the United States Intelligence Community begin to brief Presidential candidates and Presidents-elect, including JFK and Lyndon Johnson, on vital intelligence issues even before they take office.
Senator Kennedy proposed “a peace corps of talented men and women” who would dedicate themselves to the progress and peace of developing countries.
Encouraged by more than 25,000 letters responding to his call, newly elected President Kennedy took immediate action to make the campaign promise a reality and established the Peace Corps on March 1, 1961, with his brother-in-law, R Sargent Shriver, as its leader.
The lasting legacy of the Peace Corps’ and its ongoing inspiration to America’s younger generations is clearly shown in these two books.
Tales of Peace Corps Service is a collection of autobiographical reminiscences by 28 former Peace Corps volunteers, while Crossing Cultures With the Peace Corps: Peace Corps Letters From the Field is a collection of actual letters from Peace Corps volunteers serving in various nations.
Cold War Warrior President Kennedy was confronted with some dramatic foreign policy issues from his first days in office, not least of which was how to avoid nuclear war with the Soviet Union over their missiles in Cuba.
More than a mere historical text, The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, Vol., 1961-1964 provides a fascinating inside look at the Joint Chiefs’ participation and their point-of-view in dealing with the following foreign crises from the U.S.S.R. arms race, Berlin Wall construction, Cuba, to Laos, expansion of NATO, support for Israel, and more – while working with new thinking in the Kennedy and Johnson presidential administrations.
Resolving the Missile Gap With Technology from the CIA which contains analysis and hundreds of recently declassified intelligence documents about the Soviet missile build-up and perceived United States missile gap.
The Importance of Clandestine Reporting which studies the reaction by the Soviets to the West’s formation of NATO including West Germany by establishing a military bloc of Communist nations with the Warsaw Treaty of May 1955.
This study continues CIA’s efforts to provide a detailed record of the intelligence derived from clandestine human and technical sources from that period.
The Berlin Wall became a symbol of Cold War hostilities between the United States and the Soviets.
Building of the Berlin Wall is a new multimedia book with DVD that covers the period of 1945 to the end of 1961, during the Kennedy administration with a vast collection of recently declassified CIA documents, videos, and photographs that show Berlin’s journey from a battered post war region occupied by the Allies to a city literally divided – with its western half becoming an island of freedom surrounded by a sea of Communist repression.
This statement turned to real policy and eventually manned missions to the moon.
JFK’s lasting legacy to the United States space program is incalculable.
Historical Perspectives; NASA 50 Anniversary Proceedings, a wide array of scholars turn a critical eye toward the achievements of NASA’s first 50 years, probing an institution widely seen as the premier agency for exploration in the world, carrying on a long tradition of exploration by the United States and the human species in general.
Civil Rights and the Brothers Kennedy After the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in Brown Board of Education in 1954 that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional, desegregation was a slow process in many Southern school districts and universities.
She said that President Kennedy was fond of the music to the popular 1960-63 smash Broadway musical, Camelot, the lyrics of which were penned by Kennedy’s Harvard classmate, Alan Jay Lerner.
Jackie Kennedy’s historic role as First Lady is outlined in the beautifully done First Ladies of the United States of America book by the White House Historical Association which profiles the many courageous First Ladies, from Martha Washington to Jacqueline Kennedy, up to Hillary Rodham Clinton and Laura Bush.
The end of Camelot came with President Kennedy’s assassination by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Afterwards, President Lyndon Johnson created a commission, chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren to investigate the events that led to the assassination and any possible conspiracies.
It became known unofficially as the Warren Commission Report or the Warren Report, named for Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren who chaired the commission.
White House Before it was released to the public on September 27, 1964, special security measures were set up at GPO to prevent any unauthorized disclosure of the manuscript.
Today it is still fascinating to re-live the events surrounding the events in Dallas in 1963 from eye witnesses.
In addition to witness testimony, the Report contains numerous photos, maps, diagrams, and illustrations.
John F Kennedy, Jr. salutes his father’s coffin at President Kennedy’s funeral, with his widow First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, daughter Caroline, and brothers Edward Kennedy and Robert Kennedy.
These Official publications are part of the legacy of President John F Kennedy and help us remember his 1,000 days of an American Camelot.
GPO provides copies of these publications to Federal Depository libraries worldwide.
