He suggested that the combination of the existence of such weapons and human fallibility could result in the destruction of all nations and almost did when the United States and the Soviet Union confronted each other over Soviet missiles on Cuban soil in October of 1962.
Many fear that nuclear Armageddon could occur, even if leaders and people do not choose it, as long as nations possess these powerful weapons.
The story involves the long history of the Cuban peoples’ pursuit of national self-determination, traditional United States hegemony over the island, and the dangerous and militarized relationship between the United States and the former Soviet Union, known as the Cold War.
The United States Invades Cuba Before Fidel Castro’s 26th of July Movement seized power in Cuba in January 1959, the United States had long dominated the island nation 90 miles from its shores.
In the 1950s, the country was ruled by dictator Fulgencio Batista, a close ally of the United States, who, through repression and corruption, generated large-scale opposition in the countryside and the cities.
The island nation had been under the yoke of the Spanish from the dawn of the 16th century until 1898 and economically dominated in the 19th century by British investors.
As a result of the Spanish-American War of 1898, Cubans achieved their formal independence.
The United States Congress passed the Platt Amendment in 1901, which declared that the United States government could unilaterally intervene in Cuban affairs when instability occurred.
Subsequently, United States troops and diplomats frequently intervened in the island’s affairs.
In the 1950s, in opposition to the U.S.-supported Cuban dictator Batista, Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, workers, peasants, and students carried out a revolution ousting the dictator from power.
When the Castro-led revolutionaries assumed office in 1959, they began to develop a series of policies to alleviate the worst features of Cuban poverty.
The revolutionary government invested in housing, schools, and public works.
Salaries were raised, electrical rates were cut, and rents were reduced by half.
On a visit to the United States in April of 1959, Castro, who had proposed a large-scale assistance program for the Western Hemisphere, was ignored by President Eisenhower.
Returning from a hostile visit to Washington, Castro announced a redistributive program of agrarian reform that generated opposition from conservative Cuban and American landowners.
The agrarian reforms involved land transfers to the Cuban people, with compensations that the United States rejected.
Threatened with a reduction of purchases of Cuban sugar long in place, Cuba nationalized the industry.
In February of 1960, Cuba signed trade agreements with the Soviet Union.
The Soviets agreed to exchange sugar no longer purchased by the United States for oil.
When the U.S.-owned oil refineries refused to refine the Soviet oil, the Cuban government nationalized them.
Over the next several months, the Cuban government nationalized U.S.-owned corporations and banks on the island.
Therefore, between the spring of 1960 and January of 1961, U.S–Cuban economic ties weakened as the island nation established formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, the Cold War communist adversary of the United States.
Shortly before Eisenhower left office, the break was made symbolically complete with the United States termination of formal diplomatic relations with Cuba.
As U.S–Cuban economic and diplomatic tensions were escalating, President Eisenhower, in March of 1960, made a decision that contributed to escalating tensions and a growing presence of the Soviet Union on the island.
He ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to create a Cuban exile force that would invade the island and depose Fidel Castro from power, even though the State Department knew at that time that Castro was enormously popular.
The Bay of Pigs invasion, April 17 to 19, 1961, was launched by 1,400 Cuban exiles.
He saw a need to respond to communism, whether in Cuba or South Vietnam.
In the face of the perceived communist danger to the Western Hemisphere, he reserved the right to intervene as needed.
The lesson he drew from the Bay of Pigs was the need for escalated confrontation with Cuba, not caution.
Therefore let us express our special friendship to the people of Cuba and the Dominican Republic—and the hope they will soon rejoin the society of free men, uniting with us in our common effort.
Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable.
The Kennedy administration initiated a policy of foreign assistance in Latin America to complement the United States’ historic use of military force in the region.
The president’s economic program was announced in the aftermath of long-standing complaints from Latin American dictators and some elected leaders that the United States had supported European recovery, the celebrated Marshall Plan of the 1940s, but ignored the Western Hemisphere.
Most important, the Kennedy Administration and anticommunist friends in the hemisphere became increasingly concerned about the enthusiasm the Cuban revolution was generating in the region.
The United States pressured members of the Organization of American States to expel Cuba.
The CIA began campaigns to assassinate the Cuban leader, and President Kennedy initiated the complete economic blockade that existed until 2015.
In addition, Castro warned that the United States was continuing to plan for another invasion.
The Soviet Union began providing more economic and military support to the Cubans, including antiaircraft missiles and jet aircraft.
U.S–Soviet tensions also began to escalate in June of 1961 after an acrimonious summit meeting between Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy in Vienna.
Each declared his continuing commitment to his allies in the divided Germany.
During the summer, Soviet troop mobilizations in East Germany were matched by a Kennedy mobilization of the air force and the activation of 150,000 National Guard reservists.
With thousands of East Germans fleeing from East to West Berlin, the Soviet and East German militaries constructed the infamous Berlin Wall in August.
Heated rhetoric from both Cold War adversaries escalated until October, when Chairman Khrushchev announced the Soviets were postponing any further treaty making with the German Democratic Republic.
This signaled a de-escalation of the crisis, but it was to resume in 1962 over Cuba.
On October 14, 1962, United States spy planes sighted the construction of Soviet surface-to-air missile installations and the presence of Soviet medium-range bombers on Cuban soil.
For months, Republican leaders had been attacking the president for allowing the Soviet Union to arm Cuba.
Kennedy had warned the Soviets in September not to install “offensive” military capabilities in Cuba.
But the October photos indicated that the Soviets had also begun to build ground-to-ground missile installations on the island, which Kennedy defined as “offensive” and a threat to national security.
After securing the photographs, Kennedy assembled a special team of advisers on October 16, known as EXCOMM, to discuss various responses the United States might make.
Social psychologist Irving Janis claimed that the president had learned the lessons of the failed decision-making process leading up to the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Janis called the propensity of groups to make decisions without detailed reflection on various alternative responses and their impacts groupthink.
Janis said that the president wanted EXCOMM to deliberate on all possible responses to the Soviet missiles on Cuban soil and the consequences that would be faced after each policy choice.
As Janis reports, EXCOMM began with 10 options, then addressed two of these at length.
Graham Allison notes that although the president asked for a full discussion of various options, he did preclude a reliance on diplomacy to solve the problem.
The UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson suggested taking the issue to the United Nations, but the president dismissed this approach at the outset.
Both options had a high probability of escalating to nuclear war if the Soviet Union refused to back down.
The president, supported by some EXCOMM members who prioritized concern about the danger of escalation to nuclear war, believed that the naval blockade would give the Soviet leadership and diplomacy more time to succeed.
President Kennedy told the American people in a televised speech on October 22 of his decision to launch the naval blockade.
High drama, much of it televised, followed the initiation of the naval blockade of Soviet ships heading across the Atlantic to Cuba.
Graham Allison reported that Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara encountered resistance from naval officers when he sought to oversee the implementation of the blockade.
Soviet ships sailing across the Atlantic stopped when they confronted the United States blockade on October 24.
On October 27, an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba.
As the drama unfolded, some televised, the leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, sent two notes to the president offering a way out of the conflict.
Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba, and the United States would promise not to invade Cuba to overthrow the Castro government.
In addition, the president indicated privately, through diplomatic channels, that obsolete United States missiles in Turkey would be disassembled over time.
Most scholars argue that the missile crisis constituted Kennedy’s finest hour as statesman and diplomat.
They agree with the administration view that the missiles constituted a threat to United States security, despite Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s claim in EXCOMM meetings that the missiles did not change the strategic balance between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Given the importance of the missiles, many social scientists have written that the Kennedy team carefully considered a multitude of policy responses before initiating the naval blockade as a first step.
EXCOMM did not ignore competing analyses, as had been done in the decision process prior to the Bay of Pigs.
The blockade policy that was adopted, experts believe, constituted a rational application of force that it was hoped would lead to de-escalation of tensions.
Janis regarded the EXCOMM decision-making process as counter to the groupthink that had characterized the faulty decision making that led to the Bay of Pigs invasion one year earlier.
The policy was rational, even though observers agreed that the United States and the Soviet Union had gone to the brink of nuclear war.
Even the president estimated that there was a 50% probability of full-scale nuclear war.
In the end, the Soviets withdrew their missiles in exchange for the informal promise by the Kennedy administration to dismantle the obsolete United States missiles in Turkey.
Analysts said the Soviet Union suffered a propaganda defeat for putting the missiles on Cuban soil in the first place and then withdrawing them after United States threats.
Khrushchev was criticized by the Chinese government, and within a year, he was ousted from leadership in the Soviet Union.
In the light of this United States “victory,” Kennedy has been defined as courageous and rational.
Graham Allison, in his definitive study of the crisis, Essence of Decision, offers competing explanations of the decisions made by both the United States and the Soviet Union, which suggest a more sober-minded conclusion about rational decision making during nuclear crises.
Although some explanations of state behavior rest on assessments of what leaders seek to achieve and the rational decision-making processes they use to achieve their goals, the rational actor model, Allison suggested that organizational dynamics and politics make rational means–ends decisions less than feasible.
Using the missile crisis as his case, he traced key decisions made by both powers, finding instances in which bureaucracies behaved using standard operating procedures, rather than rational practices tailored to achieve defined goals.
In the United States case, the CIA, the air force, the State Department, and EXCOMM all acted in the ways they were programmed to, not as instruments of decisions to rationally pursue predetermined goals.
Organizational processes in large institutions always interfere with the rational pursuit of policy making and implementation.
Finally, for Allison, bureaucratic politics—that is, the link between decision making and political variables, such as the image of the president, electoral opposition, and upcoming elections—always reduce the capacity for rational decision making.
For example, President Kennedy was calculating the effects of the missiles on the chances for his party to regain control of Congress in 1962.
A second “defeat” over Cuba would have heightened the opposition’s criticisms of his foreign policy.
In personal terms, Kennedy was driven by the need to establish a public image as courageous and powerful in confronting the Soviets.
Khrushchev had spoken harshly to him at a summit meeting in Vienna in 1961, and Castro had been victorious at the Bay of Pigs.
The president’s own “credibility” had been damaged, and a show of force in October 1962 was necessary for his career.
Planting missiles on Cuban soil would lead to a perceived, if not actual, change in the balance of military power between the two superpowers.
In addition, in the Soviet Union, similar organizational processes and internal politics were found to impede the rationality of their decision to place the missiles on Cuban soil and how that policy was carried out.
The Allison lens suggests that leaders of nations, even powerful ones with technologically sophisticated armaments, can only barely control the information they receive, the decisions they make, and the operationalization of policies.
From this point of view, former secretary of defense McNamara had good reason to conclude that the world was lucky to have survived the gravest nuclear crisis the world has ever seen.
Subsequent to the crisis, other commentators, such as Stephen Krasner, criticized the theoretical insights of Irving Janis and Graham Allison.
Others, such as former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger, Theodore Sorenson, and the president’s brother, Robert Kennedy, emphasize the skill with which the president orchestrated informal diplomacy with the Soviets, managed interaction with EXCOMM, and engaged the public in the crisis.
Stone, suggest the president was willing to risk nuclear war to achieve a narrow, largely symbolic victory over the Soviet Union.
In the end, Stone claimed, it was Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the adversary, the Soviet Union, who was left to decide whether the world would embark on a new World War.
From Stone’s point of view, it was bad policy to let the adversary decide the outcome of the crisis.
Former secretary of defense Robert McNamara reported that the Kennedy administration did not believe that nuclear weapons were already on the island.
Also, President Fidel Castro indicated that if such an attack on Cuba had occurred, he would have supported a military response.
McNamara said that if the United States had embarked on a strategic air strike, contrary to EXCOMM expectations, nuclear war would have ensued.
And McNamara pointed out, We must learn as much as we can about nuclear danger in October 1962—about the factors that led to it, about the reasons we escaped the ultimate consequences in the events; about what might have happened but thankfully did not, and about whether, or how, the lessons learned from the missile crisis might assist those of us who are interested in reducing the risk of nuclear catastrophe in the 21st century.
