Habermas’s theory of communicative action observes how communication is strategically distorted into an extreme version of what we call the inverted speech situation.
Bateson’s ecology of communication shows how metacommunicative messages can affect the relations between nations, generating potentially catastrophic relational dynamics but also opportunities for constructive change.
While the world contemplated a future without any future, both nations desperately tried to find some way to resolve the conflict through negotiations rather than violence.
Hindering this process was the communicative structure of nuclear deterrence, which had by this point become an established method of avoiding nuclear conflict through paradoxical communication.
In this communication environment the actors could not engage in rational discourse oriented to mutual understanding but could only negotiate on a metacommunicative level, through strategic, indirect, and contradictory exchanges, to negate the conflict and stabilize their relationship.
Craig in general and can be seen in everyday interactions from dating to business deals.
Bateson theorized that communication goes on simultaneously at several levels of abstraction.
Habermas’s normative foundation is a principle of communicative rationality that requires mutual consensus seeking in a free and open process of reasoned discourse, while Bateson’s normative foundation is a principle of ecological wisdom that requires ongoing adaptation of conscious purpose within complex interactive systems in which paradoxical contradictions across levels of abstraction can generate creative change as well as pathological dysfunction.
The two theories bring to light pathological tendencies in the doctrine of nuclear deterrence.
Habermas’s theory of communicative action observes how communication is strategically distorted against mutual understanding into an extreme version of what we call the inverted speech situation.
The inverted speech situation allows communicators to maneuver their opponents into inaction.
Our use of Bateson reveals a weakness in Habermas’s theory of communicative action.
By overemphasizing the role of the linguistic level of communication, Habermas has underestimated the importance of metacommunicative processes, which, in Bateson’s ecology of communication, are foundational in the stabilization and change of social order.
The Batesonian interpretation of the deterrence situation demonstrates that communication on the meta level can function to stabilize relations between hostile nations, thereby to keep the reciprocal schismogenesis of the arms race from spiraling out of control.
This analysis also applies a cybernetic explanation that points out the limiting constraints upon the communicative environment.
This hostility was maintained through the power inherent in nuclear arms.
This study relies upon several primary and secondary sources for a timeline of events, with an emphasis upon Chang and Kornbluh’s timeline.
The phrase nuclear deterrence refers to policy discussions that occurred regarding the international relations between hostile nuclear powers.
It is these policy decisions for which Dauber believes we need an analytical framework to better understand.
Deterrence was never a settled doctrine but rather a subject of intense debate regarding the material potential of nuclear weapons within a wartime environment.
The doctrine of nuclear deterrence emerged because nuclear weapons redefined the consequences of warfare; they possessed unique material qualities that changed the nature of war and shaped international relations.
There are two primary schools of thought concerning nuclear engagement.
Craig defense from a nuclear attack difficult and almost impossible by conventional means.
This philosophy creates a paradox in the communication between nuclear nations.
The second level of paradox confounds the other party with conflicting secondary meta messages such that communicative understanding not only cannot be achieved but is strategically avoided to maintain a state of ambiguity in which the other party cannot strategically act.
The paradoxes of nuclear deterrence both function to create inaction from the other party.
In the first paradox the consequences of acting outweigh the consequences of inaction.
Through intentional ambiguity, the available information suggests the real possibility that the other party is willing and able to act against their best intentions and engage in a war with catastrophic outcomes for all parties.
Those actions were the Soviet shipment of nuclear arms to Cuba and the naval quarantine of Cuba by the United States.
Each party continually reinforced to the other that it was not in their collective interest to act, but staying true to the second paradox, they left the possibility of their action open.
In the framework of Habermas’s theory of communicative action, this communicative dynamic constituted what we call an inverted speech situation.
Habermas distinguishes communicative action, which seeks a freely formed consensus, from strategic action, in which communication is used by individual agents to pursue their instrumental goals.
Under challenge the actors are required to provide good reasons to justify their claims.
The paradoxical structure of nuclear deterrence constitutes a communicative relationship that radically inverts this ideal speech situation.
In order for deterrence to work, both parties must be equally constrained by the other’s power, an unstable and disabling form of power neutralization that inverts Habermas’s ideal in which power neutrality enables each party to question what is going on and engage the other in discourse.
In contrast, this communicative relationship relies upon the metacommunicative paradox within deterrence to freeze communication and action.
The strategic avoidance of mutual understanding becomes an implicit norm of the deterrence relationship.
In the case of deterrence it became recognized that action could only be deterred if both parties’ military systems were unable to produce consequences upon the other without self-destructive effects.
If a party found that the other was too weak for retaliation, then it would behoove them to act.
On the other hand, if a party found that the other was much more powerful, it would be better to strike first because a strike was inevitable.
The idea of deterrence provides the option of either possible destruction in the case of inaction, or assured destruction in the case of action.
The agency of each party has been given over to the other, such that each can only act in response to the other’s action, giving up their right to pursue a rational discourse with ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no’’ responses.
Additionally, the discourse itself relies on each participant observing the other (and presenting the self) as an irrational being who is willing to follow through with their threat despite the catastrophic consequences, otherwise the entire threat falls through.
Fundamentally at the heart of this discourse is not a norm of reaching mutual understanding through rationally redeemable validity claims, but rather an implicit norm, dictated by the logic of deterrence, that validity claims must not be redeemable in discourse in order to maintain the inverted speech situation on which deterrence, and ultimately human survival, depends.
This event demonstrates how the inverted speech situation emerges in a time of nuclear crisis, and how it confuses the situation rather than offering a resolution.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev made frequent references to the other party not understanding them, and both parties kept redefining the meaning of specific items.
Confusion occurred over many communications and actions, all of which almost brought the world to war.
The semantics of these weapons were a linguistic choice in reference to future use, but the terms of the debate were in dispute the entire time.
Then there was the exchange between Cuban President Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union regarding the imminence of a United States invasion.
Khrushchev understood Castro’s letter as a plea to launch a first strike against the United States.
Castro later claimed this interpretation to be the result of a ‘‘bad translation’’ that was also fueled by deterrence hostilities.
Craig Habermas and Bateson intentionally unclear during these communications including the interpretation of the blockade and its legitimacy, and the shooting down over Cuba of a United States U-2 spy plane.
Each party repeatedly displayed the confusion engendered by ambiguous messages sent from the other party.
Habermas believes this creates a situation in which the validity claims have to be addressed, not necessarily redeemed but addressed nonetheless.
However, in a deterrence situation, those claims not only fail to be addressed but are strategically ignored in order to come to an agreement.
Turning Habermas on his head, an inverted speech situation concludes with both parties strategically avoiding understanding in order to avoid war—ironically an outcome that reasoned discourse could only have endorsed, had reasoned discourse been possible.
Truth Neither side in a deterrence relationship can be certain of the other’s true nuclear capability.
This is the reason that the ideology of deterrence leads to an arms race.
Since a nation cannot trust their opponent’s figures, they must estimate and build up according to what they deem probable.
This lack of trust in itself creates a policy of ‘‘strategic superiority’’ to maintain an assured destruction capability in the realm of uncertainty.
If it were possible to engage in open discourse to ascertain the true balance of strategic forces, then an arms race would not occur.
Some of these contradictory meanings occurred in the form of actions that sent a different message than the official statements.
Both sides officially claimed to be acting defensively while each took steps that could lead to aggression.
The US declared publicly that they were only acting in defense of the United States and allied countries , while the entire time preparing for an invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro.
Craig Sincerity Under deterrence it becomes necessary for both sides to believe that either would strike first in spite of the fact that they both claim that they will not.
Once the ideology of deterrence is operative, both sides question the sincerity of the other’s assurances regarding the conditions under which they would engage in a first strike.
If both sides were convinced that the other would not engage in a nuclear war without the other engaging in a first strike, then both would be left open to conventional warfare, thus negating the power inherent in nuclear weapons through deterrence.
As we have seen, each side prepared for aggressive action while publicly claiming to be acting only in defense, but the sincerity of these claims could not be redeemed discursively.
Normative rightness Normative rightness is in question under deterrence because the ideology of deterrence requires each side to be willing to annihilate the other and be annihilated in turn.
Both parties recognize and address the possibility of self destruction, but continue to threaten or engage in actions that would promote such a result in order to prevent such a result.
In an ideal speech situation, the parties would attempt to resolve this moral contradiction in discourse, but in the inverted speech situation of deterrence the claim must remain contested by both sides.
While this was recognized, both sides also believed that nuclear war was an unthinkable thing for their opponents to provoke, so they both frequently stated that they were willing to go to war if the other didn’t cease (Chang & Kornbluh, 1998), and that the other side would be the one responsible and they would just be acting based on that response.
During the discussions in President Kennedy’s EXCOM the possibility of escalating into nuclear engagement over Cuba was discussed as a possible outcome of the crisis.
Castro’s communication to the Soviet Union regarding an imminent United States invasion led Khrushchev to believe that Castro was requesting a first strike against America.
This occurred while the communications between the Soviet Union and United States all contained the warning that the world would end in nuclear war if the other side didn’t back down, but neither side was able to act against the escalation of war.
Habermas relies on a model of linguistically mediated communication that fails to grasp the complexity of the mostly unconscious metacommunicative codes that, according to Bateson , function to establish relationships between communicators.
Habermas struggles with how to theorize this dual structure of language in his normative model of communication.
So while Habermas does attempt to account for the metacommunicative structures in speech, he does so by privileging linguistic speech acts, excluding those metacommunicative codes whose function operates outside of these linguistic codes.
These explanations do not allow for a normative communicative process in which paradoxes are used to communicate complex multileveled messages.
Bateson starts from the assumption that language itself ‘‘is first and foremost a system of gestures . . . and words were invented later.
Bateson does not want to discard words from language, because they do provide useful tools enabling complex ideas to be exchanged.
He makes the argument that human relationships are and must be, to avoid certain pathologies, negotiated through nonverbal, metacommunicative codes, rather than linguistic codes.
Although Bateson thus associates consciousness with purposive action, he does not reduce reason to instrumental rationality or eschew critical self-reflection.
The hope for rational discourse that for Habermas is implied by human communication, for Bateson can only be realized in a process that, for good and necessary reasons, rarely conforms to a logician’s ideal.
Bateson, no less than Habermas, is highly critical of a narrow instrumental rationality and sees it as an ecologically dangerous tendency of human mind.
Bateson’s system theory operates from the understanding that when either the individual or the environment overpower the other’s influence upon a situation, pathologies develop that threaten the individual.
This distortion neglects the relationship-building element within communication that should be fundamental to achieve any type of coordinated action.
Taking communication as an ecology of words, environment, and metacommunication creates a new method of understanding and evaluating interactions that is not possible with the theory of communicative action.
Within the irrational framework of the inverted speech situation of nuclear deterrence, somehow the world has managed to establish relatively stabilized patterns of communication between nuclear powers.
The inverted speech situation is a construction of this environment whereby communicative paradox is used to move people into inaction.
While the inverted speech situation violates Habermas’s norm of communicative rationality, we show how this process of paradoxical communication can be understood differently using Bateson’s concept of metacommunication.
Norms concerning nuclear weapons have been created using metarelational communication that functions even with paradoxes present within the situation.
These seemingly illogical messages communicate patterns of interaction that can be unpacked and understood through Bateson’s ecology of communication.
Bateson offers a view of paradox in which it is a basic structure of human communication that functions to establish and maintain relationships, although too often in pathological ways.
To account for relational paradoxes we need to recognize that the structure of human communication comprises both a primary message and a framing, metacommunicative message that together can generate contradictory meanings.
The pairing of two contrary messages in a locutionary act cannot be resolved by determining the ‘‘true’’ illocutionary act and discarding the false.
As when the oft-cited but never named schoolboy dipped the pigtails of the girl into the inkwell, the relational meaning cannot simply come from the illocutionary act of either ‘‘I like you and want your attention’’ or ‘‘I hate you and want you to go away,’’ but paradoxically includes both.
The first context analyzed will be the large scale environment of the deterrence relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, which constituted a Batesonian double bind.
The first message was a private message from Khrushchev to Kennedy; the second was the official radio announcement that publicly announced the terms of the first message.
The difference between the two messages was the inclusion of a demand in the public radio address that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey.
The private message only asked the United States to remove the blockade from Cuba and offer assurances that the United States would not invade.
While the terms were changed, the second message claimed to be the same as the first and was presented through official public channels that metacomunicatively gave it the weight of official policy, so it officially superseded the previous communication.
It was difficult for the United States to abide by the second communication because of the international environment.
It would have required several days just to figure out if Turkey and the United Nations would allow the missiles to be withdrawn (Chang & Kornbluh, 1998), and the United States ambassador to Turkey had already stated that the idea was anathema.
This caused much debate about whether it was even possible to respond to the terms contained in the second transmission, and what was the official coding of the two transmissions.
The EXCOM finally decided to recode the messages making the first communication the official transmission and Kennedy sent a message to Khrushchev that made a direct reference to the first communication and ignored the second.
This recoding of messages occurred in spite of the fact that the public communication was coded as official, while the private message was coded as less official.
Later Khrushchev responded that he would accept the terms set by Kennedy’s response, thus implicitly accepting Kennedy’s metacommunicative recoding, and the crisis ended.
This action demonstrates what Bateson would call a transcontextual reaction present in the negotiations between the two nations.
Two messages were sent, both coded as official doctrine, but due to scope of delivery and temporal placement, the second was coded as ‘‘more official’’ than the first.
This official coding was placed into question by the EXCOM and they decided that they had the power to reinterpret the metacommunicative codes.
Craig Habermas and Bateson established by the relations between the Soviet Union and United States.
The double bind is a paradoxical situation in which a person receives two contradictory relational instructions from someone in the same message, and is unable to avoid consequences no matter what action they take in response to those instructions.
The set of instructions is paradoxical through a conflict between the linguistic and metacommunicative codes.
Our analysis of nuclear deterrence discourse shows how both parties transmit conflicting metacommunicative messages from which both parties understand there is no correct response.
Whatever either party chooses to do, they can still be punished with a first strike.
In this relationship, no message is ‘‘just this and nothing more,’’ and each message forces the parties to evaluate the metacommunicative coding before forming a response.
The act of recoding the official Soviet messages by Kennedy reflects the fact that they were operating within a double bind.
This is reinforced when the Soviet Union accepted the new code, even when it conflicted with the officially released public transmission.
That scenario was established through the constant ‘‘no-win’’ situation caused by deterrence.
This use of transcontextual gifts by both nations was not a ploy or a fluke, but rather a reaction that makes sense in the context of the double bind.
Threat ritual Bateson describes a threat as a statement with a denotative message that refers to a possible future yet that future depends upon the other party’s response to the threat.
Threats create a paradoxical communicative situation in that they not only refer to something that doesn’t exist but also imply a willingness to engage in a possible future while the sincerity of this statement is in question.
The ritual metacommunicatively states ‘‘don’t’’ in the denotated message of a proposal of a possible future containing violence; the rest of the message states that the violence is contingent upon the future actions of the other actors.
Under nuclear deterrence, nations engage in metacommunicative threat rituals to secure themselves from attack.
One party suggests that they are willing to go to war, a proposal that would critically endanger both parties, and it is expected that the other party would not complete the interaction and go to war.
The initial metacommunicative message from both nations isn’t a message of war, but rather a message of ‘‘don’t’’ conveyed upon the world stage with metacommunicative codes driving the primary meaning.
This is the primary strategy of deterrence, and in order to be successful it relies upon an expected response to the message.
When applied to nuclear arms this communicative strategy can become retrogressive and evolve into the policy of brinkmanship practiced by both Eisenhower’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, and by Khrushchev.
The first possible event would be the placement of missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union.
While initially it appears to be an interaction that would qualify, two elements make this an ambiguous starting point.
The first is the fact that the Soviet Union was placing those missiles in secret.
Attempting to hide their actions could be interpreted as meaning that they did not intend to use this action to engage in a threat ritual.
Craig Habermas and Bateson missiles, in which case this could be seen as a part of the threat ritual.
Scholars have also noted that even though Khrushchev was probably badly advised, he certainly knew that this deployment would be interpreted as hostile.
This event was carried out publicly on the international stage as a clear ‘‘don’t’’ message regarding the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
It took the form of an already established threat ritual that was apparent in the EXCOM when it was discussed how to effectively carry out this threat, and what appropriate actions needed to take place prior to the blockade.
Whatever the original intent, each event was referenced by the other party as the starting point for the hostile interactions.
The United States made clear that they felt the placement of nuclear weapons on Cuba was a clear threat that they would not allow.
The Soviet Union claimed that the blockade was the primary instigator of hostilities and they were just responding to that provocative act.
Even with an ambiguous starting point, both parties recognized that this interaction was framed in the ritual of a threat and referenced possible future events to the other party, claiming that those events would occur unless the other party backed down.
These codes took the form of schismogenetic relations, or a self-referencing behavior pattern, that were established between the nations.
Bateson classified these response patterns as either symmetrical or complimentary, either of which when left unchecked can run away in an exponential pattern and lead to the breakdown of the whole system.
One country increases their arsenal, the other responds by increasing their arsenal, the first responds by increasing still more, and so on.
Complementary systems work when one party responds with a complimentary reaction, for example hostility is met with submission, which causes more hostility, which is met with greater submission, etc.
Schismogenesis takes the ‘‘self’’ out of the steering properties of the environment and causes the self to respond to the system rather than steer it.
A separation between a person and their communicative environment can create pathological actions because of the environment applying corrective measures or destroying the ecology to which the self is directly tied.
Without steering available through the self, the system can run to destruction unless corrective measures are applied.
This was a symmetrical schismogenetic relationship whereby each party matched the other’s hostility in relation to weapon stockpiles.
A second process of symmetrical schismogenesis was the relationship of threat.
As shown above, each party saw the other as the threat instigator, and the threats became entwined to the point that increasing hostility was unmanageable.
In the Cuban missile crisis, both parties claimed to be acting in response to the other when exchanging threats.
It was this third process, enabled by transcontextual gifts arising from the double bind relationship that corrected the escalation of hostilities inherent in the first two processes, led to a resolution of the crisis, and contributed to the formation of a more stable relationship.
Conclusion Our construction of the inverted speech situation demonstrates how paradoxes present within actually occurring communication can be understood using the theory of communicative action.
This construction has the benefit of showing how paradox operates against actors reaching a rationally motivated consensus.
This created a pathological situation in which survival of the species was threatened by the imperative of strategic advantage.
What it does not demonstrate is how the United States and Soviet Union were able to navigate these paradoxes and end hostilities around Cuba.
This is not necessarily a failure of Habermas’s theory of communicative action, but it does demonstrate the limits of this normative model.
This limitation of Habermas’s theory indicates the need for further analysis.
From a historical perspective, perhaps some past event not covered in this analysis would prove key to the entire situation.
From a political science perspective, perhaps a game theoretic analysis would show that the strategic players behaved according to a rational assessment of the situation.
From a psychological perspective, perhaps the ultimate desire for survival overcame all other objectives and a diplomatic solution was manufactured after the fact.
We, however, propose to investigate the possibility that the solution lies within the paradoxical communicative environment itself.
From the viewpoint of this analysis, which holds that normative communication theories should be tested by using them to address actually occurring communication problems , the solution should present itself by applying a different normative theory that will account for the stabilization of relationships through strategic action.
Of importance to this study, Bateson’s communication theory provides a normative model for evaluating pathologies in the communication environment that threaten the survival of the human species.
It shows how paradoxical patterns of interaction can operate to create relatively stable relationships in spite of strategically avoiding Habermas’s standard of communicative rationality.
It is an alternative normative theory because it explains why certain ‘‘Habermasian nonrational properties’’ of human communication are not only practically unavoidable but functionally necessary in the formation of human relationships.
The application of this normative theory to the problem of nuclear deterrence demonstrates the strength and weakness of the theory.
Even actions undertaken in a paradoxical environment like nuclear deterrence can only be justified under challenge by arguing that they are reasonable under the circumstances, and those arguments can be debated.
Thus, we are left with a problem for normative communication theory to address.
The beginning of a solution may be to recognize that Habemas’s lifeworld-system distinction is relative, not absolute; there is no lifeworld entirely outside of systems because all relationships are ecologically embedded interactional systems.
This application demonstrates that a fundamental element of communication, that of metacommunication, is inadequately conceptualized as merely a distortion of the communicative process.
Metacommunication is a fundamental process that frames communicative action, forms relationships, and generates social order.
While Habermas is renowned for close readings of complex theorists, without his ambiguous highly conditional qualifying statement ‘‘sufficiently,’’ this claim could easily demonstrate a surface reading of Bateson’s work with the double bind, and a lack of familiarity with Bateson’s other works.
We believe that taking into consideration Bateson’s work with paradox, he does sufficiently demonstrate a marked difference between the three types of paradox observed.
Communicative action or the mode of communication for society as a whole.
Hearings before the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate Ninetieth Congress, Second Session.
