For conspiracy theories surrounding the assassination of John's brother Robert, see Robert F Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories.
Connally, and Texas Governor John Connally minutes before the assassination The assassination of John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald by nightclub owner Jack Ruby spawned numerous conspiracy theories.
These theories allege the involvement of the CIA, the Mafia, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, the KGB, or some combination of these entities.
The original FBI investigation and Warren Commission report, as well as an alleged ""benign CIA cover-up"", have led to the claim that the federal government deliberately covered up crucial information in the aftermath of the assassination.
In 1979, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Kennedy was probably assassinated in a conspiracy and that Oswald did not act alone.
The HSCA concluded a second gunman also fired at Kennedy, based on acoustic evidence that was later discredited. .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}Contents 1 Background 1.
Views of those close to Kennedy 2 Circumstantial evidence of a cover-up 2.
Alleged inconsistencies 3 Allegations of witness tampering, intimidation, and foul play 3.
Witness deaths 4 Allegations of evidence suppression, tampering, and fabrication 4.
Role of Oswald 5.10 Alternative gunmen 5.11 Three tramps 6 Allegations of other conspirators 6.
Assassination of John F Kennedy Handbill circulated on November 21, 1963, one day before the assassination.
President John F Kennedy was assassinated by gunfire while traveling in a motorcade in an open-top limousine in Dallas, Texas on Friday, November 22, 1963.
Immediately after President Kennedy was shot, many people suspected that the assassination was part of a larger plot, and broadcasters speculated that Dallas right-wingers were involved.
Among conspiracy theorists, author Mark Lane has been described as firing ""the first literary shot"" with his article, ""Defense Brief for Oswald"", in the National Guardian's December 19, 1963 issue.
Thomas Buchanan's book Who Killed Kennedy?, published in May 1964, has been credited as the first book to allege a conspiracy.In 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had acted alone and that no credible evidence supported the contention that he was involved in a conspiracy to assassinate the president.
The Commission also indicated that Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, FBI director J Edgar Hoover, CIA director John A McCone, and Secret Service Chief James J Rowley each individually reached the same conclusion on the basis of information available to them.
During the trial of Clay Shaw in 1969, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison challenged the single-bullet theory, claiming that the Zapruder film indicated that the fatal shot to Kennedy's head was fired from the ""grassy knoll"", a small hill that featured prominently in later conspiracy theories.In 1979, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations agreed with the Warren Commission that Oswald did, in fact, assassinate Kennedy, but concluded that the commission's report and the original FBI investigation were seriously flawed.
The HSCA concluded that at least four shots were fired, with a ""high probability"" that two gunmen fired at the President, and that a conspiracy was probable.
Exercising a provision of the 1992 act that allows for a President to extend the deadline, President Trump set a new deadline of October 26, 2021 for the remaining documents to be released.
In October 2021, President Biden further extended the deadline to December 15, 2022, citing delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The number of books written about the assassination of Kennedy has been estimated to be between 1,000 and 2,000.
Author David Krajicek describes Kennedy assassination enthusiasts as people belonging to ""conspiracy theorists"" on one side and ""debunkers"" on the other.
Public opinion polls have consistently shown that most Americans believe there was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy.
These same polls also show no agreement on who else may have been involved in the shooting.
A 2003 Gallup Poll reported that 75% of Americans do not believe that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone.
That same year, an ABC News poll found that 70% of respondents suspected that the assassination involved more than one person.
In 2009, 76% of people polled for CBS News said they believed the President had been killed as the result of a conspiracy.
A 2013 Gallup Poll found that 61% of Americans, the lowest figure in nearly 50 years, believed other people besides Oswald were involved.
Views of those close to Kennedy Kennedy's nephew, Robert F Kennedy Jr., believes his uncle was killed in a conspiracy, and endorsed the book JFK and the Unspeakable.
He has also said that his father, Robert F Kennedy, who publicly supported the Warren Commission, privately called it a ""shoddy piece of craftsmanship"", and was ""fairly convinced"" that others besides Oswald were involved in his brother's assassination.
Circumstantial evidence of a cover-up Background After Oswald's death, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover wrote a memo detailing that the Dallas Police would not have had enough evidence against Oswald without the FBI's information.
Top government and intelligence officials were also finding that, according to CIA intercepts, someone had impersonated Oswald in phone calls and visits made to the Soviet and Cuban embassies in Mexico City several weeks before the assassination.
Over the next 40 years this became one of the CIA's most closely guarded secrets on the Oswald case.
A CIA career agency officer, Anne Goodpasture, admitted in sworn testimony that she had disseminated the tapes of these phone calls herself.
The Central Intelligence Agency advised that on October 1st, 1963, an extremely sensitive source had reported that an individual identifying himself as Lee Oswald contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages.
These special agents are of the opinion that the referred-to individual was not Lee Harvey Oswald.
We have up here the tape and the photograph of the man at the Soviet Embassy, using Oswald's name.
Johnson relayed his concern to both Chief Justice Earl Warren and Senator Richard Russell, telling them that they could ""serve America"" by joining the commission Johnson had established to investigate the assassination, which would later become known unofficially as the Warren Commission.
In turn, Katzenbach wrote a memorandum to Lyndon Johnson aide Bill Moyers that said, among other things, that the results of the FBI's investigation should be made public.
Katzenbach also suggested that a commission be formed, composed of people with ""impeccable integrity"", to conduct a complete investigation of the assassination.
Four days after Katzenbach's memo, Johnson formed the Warren Commission with Earl Warren as chairman and Senator Richard Russell as a member.
Allegations of witness tampering, intimidation, and foul play Alleged witness intimidation Richard Buyer wrote that many witnesses whose statements pointed to a conspiracy were either ignored or intimidated by the Warren Commission.
The Last Dissenting Witness, a 1992 biography of Jean Hill, Bill Sloan wrote that Warren Commission assistant counsel Arlen Specter attempted to humiliate, discredit, and intimidate Hill into changing her story.
Breaking the Silence, quotes several assassination eyewitnesses as saying that Warren Commission interviewers repeatedly cut short or stifled any comments casting doubt on the conclusion that Oswald had acted alone.
In his book Crossfire, Jim Marrs gives accounts of several people who said they were intimidated by either FBI agents or anonymous individuals into altering or suppressing what they knew regarding the assassination.
Reynolds later testified to the Warren Commission that, in February 1964, someone attempted to kidnap his 10-year-old daughter.
Jim Koethe , one of two reporters who went to Ruby's apartment the night after Ruby shot Oswald.
Bill Hunter , the other of the two reporters who went to Ruby's apartment the night after Ruby shot Oswald.
Killed by a policeman with a gunshot at a police station; the gunshot was deemed accidental.
William Whaley , the taxi driver who took Oswald from the scene of the assassination.
Died in a car crash, alongside the driver of the car which crashed into his cab.
Howard also went to Ruby's apartment with Koethe and Hunter the night after Ruby shot Oswald.
Lee Bowers , a witness who was in a railway interlocking tower that overlooked Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
Killam later moved to Florida, and died there; he received a phone call at 4 am, after which he went to a building in downtown Pensacola and ""jumped or fell"" out of a first floor window, and bled to death from cuts to his throat, amid pieces of broken glass.
Died of a gunshot to the head in a bar; no one else was killed in the bar shooting.
Jones Jr. implied it was a case of mistaken identity and that Domingo Benavides was the intended victim.
Nancy Jane Mooney, aka Betty McDonald , a stripper at Jack Ruby's club.
Mooney was arrested for fighting with her roommate and reportedly hanged herself in her Dallas jail cell.
Tippit and reported this to the FBI, was shot in the head in January 1964.
The Ramparts article also referenced witnesses who said that Ruby and Oswald knew each other and that Ruby had ""gangland"" connections.
In 1973, similar claims about suspicious deaths of witnesses were brought to national attention by the theatrically released movie Executive Action.
Jim Garrison, the Senate Intelligence Committee, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
An In-Depth Investigation into the Mysterious Deaths of Witnesses to the JFK Assassination that examines the deaths of 50 people linked to the assassination and claims most of them were murdered as part of a cover-up.Vincent Bugliosi devoted two pages of his book Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F Kennedy to journalist Dorothy Kilgallen.
Kilgallen was publicly skeptical of the official version of the assassination of President Kennedy and Jack Ruby’s shooting of Lee Oswald.
During 1964 and 1965, she wrote several newspaper articles on the subject and many relevant short items in her daily column.
Whether Kilgallen and Ruby had a second conversation in a private room in the Dallas County, Texas courthouse several days later has been disputed.
Two months later, on November 8, 1965, Kilgallen was found dead in her Manhattan townhouse.
Her death was determined to have been caused by a combination of alcohol and barbiturates.
He added that the presence of Kilgallen’s husband and son in their five-story townhouse throughout the night when she died proves she could not have been murdered.
Bugliosi said an intruder would have awakened her husband or her eleven-year-old son and then the husband would have called the police.According to author Jerome Kroth, Mafia figures Sam Giancana, John Roselli, Carlos Prio, Jimmy Hoffa, Charles Nicoletti, Leo Moceri, Richard Cain, Salvatore Granello, and Dave Yaras were likely murdered to prevent them from revealing their knowledge.
According to author Matthew Smith, others with some tie to the case who have died suspicious deaths include Lee Bowers, Gary Underhill, William Sullivan, David Ferrie, Clay Shaw, George de Mohrenschildt, four showgirls who worked for Jack Ruby, and Ruby himself.The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated another alleged mysterious death – that of Rose Cheramie , whose real name was Melba Christine Mercades.
The Committee reported that Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge traveled to Eunice, Louisiana, on November 20, 1963 – two days before the assassination – to pick up Cheramie, who had sustained minor injuries when she was hit by a car.
Cheramie was admitted and treated at the state hospital in Jackson, Louisiana for alcoholism and heroin addiction.
Concerning the Tippit shooting, the Warren Commission named 12 witnesses to the shooting and its aftermath.
One of these witnesses, Warren Reynolds, was shot in the head 2 months after the Tippit shooting, but survived.
Author Gerald Posner said that Marrs's list was taken from the group of about 10,000 people connected even in the most tenuous way to the assassination, including people identified in the official investigations, as well as the research of conspiracy theorists.
Allegations of evidence suppression, tampering, and fabrication Many of those who believe in a JFK assassination conspiracy also believe that evidence against Oswald was either planted, forged, or tampered with.
Josiah Thompson stated that the Commission ignored the testimony of seven eyewitnesses who said they saw smoke in the vicinity of the grassy knoll at the time of the assassination, as well as an eighth witness who said he smelled gunpowder.
Jim Marrs wrote that the Commission did not seek the testimony of eyewitnesses on the triple underpass whose statements pointed to a shooter on the grassy knoll.
Author Jim Marrs and documentary producer Nigel Turner both presented the account of Gordon Arnold who said that his film of the motorcade was taken by two policemen shortly after the assassination.
Another witness, identified as Beverly Oliver, came forward in 1970 and said she was the ""Babushka Lady"" who is seen, in the Zapruder film, filming the motorcade.
According to Oliver, the men told her that they wanted to take her film, have it developed, and then return it to her within ten days.
Withheld documents Richard Buyer and others have complained that many documents pertaining to the assassination have been withheld over the years, including documents from investigations made by the Warren Commission, the House Select Committee on Assassinations, and the Church Committee.
Tax return information, which identified employers and sources of income, has not yet been released.The existence of several secret documents related to the assassination, as well as the long period of secrecy, suggests to some the possibility of a cover-up.
In response to a Freedom of Information Act request filed by journalist Jefferson Morley, the CIA stated in 2010 that it had over 1,100 documents in relation to the assassination, about 2,000 pages in total, that have not been released due to national security-related concerns.
Photographs Oswald, carrying a rifle in his backyard Among the evidence against Oswald are photographs of him holding a Carcano rifle in his back yard, the weapon identified by the Warren Commission as the assassination weapon.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that the Oswald photos are genuine and Oswald's wife Marina said that she took them.
In 2009, the journal Perception published the findings of Hany Farid, a professor in the Department of Computer Science at Dartmouth College who used 3D modeling software to analyze one of the photographs.
He demonstrated that a single light source could create seemingly incongruent shadows and concluded that the photograph revealed no evidence of tampering.
According to Groden, a photograph of a cadaver's head was inserted over another depicting a large exit wound in the back of the president's head.
Zavada concluded that there was no detectable evidence of manipulation or image alteration on the film's original version.Former senior official at the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center, Dino Brugioni, said that he and his team examined the 8mm Zapruder film of the John F Kennedy assassination the evening of Saturday 23 November 1963 and into the morning of Sunday 24 November 1963.
Brugioni recalls seeing a ""white cloud"" of brain matter, three or four feet above Kennedy's head, and says that this ""spray"" lasted for more than one frame of the film.
The version of the Zapruder film available to the public depicts the fatal head shot on only one frame of the film, frame 313.
Kennedy's body In his 1981 book Best Evidence, author David Lifton presented the thesis that President Kennedy's dead body had been altered between the Dallas hospital and the autopsy site at Bethesda for the purposes of creating erroneous conclusions about the number and direction of the shots.
Fabrication of evidence Murder weapon The Warren Commission found that the shots that killed Kennedy and wounded Connally were fired from an Italian 6.5mm Manlicher Carcano rifle owned by Oswald.
Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig claimed that he saw ""7.65 Mauser"" stamped on the barrel of the weapon.
Dallas District Attorney Henry Wade told the press that the weapon found in the book depository was a 7.65 Mauser, and the media reported this.
In Matrix for Assassination, author Richard Gilbride suggested that both weapons were involved in the assassination and that Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz and Lieutenant J Carl Day both might have been conspirators.Addressing ""speculation and rumors"", the Warren Commission identified Weitzman as ""the original source of the speculation that the rifle was a Mauser"" and stated that ""police laboratory technicians subsequently arrived and correctly identified the weapon as a 6.
Bullets and cartridges The Warren Commission determined that three bullets were fired at the presidential motorcade.
One of the three bullets missed the vehicle entirely; another bullet hit President Kennedy and passed through his body before striking Governor Connally; and the third bullet was the fatal head shot to the President.
Some claim that the bullet that passed through President Kennedy's body and hit Governor Connally – dubbed by critics of the Commission as the ""magic bullet"" – was missing too little mass to account for the total weight of bullet fragments later found by the doctors who operated on Connally at Parkland Hospital.
Robert Shaw, as well as two of Kennedy's autopsy surgeons, Commander James Humes and Lt.
However, in his book Six Seconds in Dallas, author Josiah Thompson took issue with this claim.
Thompson added up the weight of the bullet fragments listed in the doctor reports and concluded that their total weight ""could"" have been less than the mass missing from the bullet.With Connally's death in 1993, forensic pathologist Dr.
Cyril Wecht and the Assassination Archives and Research Center petitioned Attorney General Janet Reno to recover the remaining bullet fragments from Connally's body, contending that the fragments would disprove the Warren Commission's single-bullet, single-gunman conclusion.
They point to evidence that brings into question the number of shots fired, the origin of the shots, and Oswald's ability to accurately fire three shots in such a short amount of time from such a rifle.
In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that there were four shots, one coming from the grassy knoll.The Warren Commission, and later the House Select Committee on Assassinations, concluded that one of the shots hit President Kennedy in ""the back of his neck"", exited his throat, and struck Governor Connally in the back, exited the Governor's chest, shattered his right wrist, and implanted itself in his left thigh.
Mary Moorman said in a TV interview immediately after the assassination that there were either three or four shots close together, that shots were still being fired after the fatal shot, and that she was in the line of fire.
In 1967, Josiah Thompson concluded from a close study of the Zapruder film and other forensic evidence, corroborated by the eyewitnesses, that four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza, with one wounding Connally and three hitting Kennedy.On the day of the assassination, Nellie Connally was seated in the presidential car next to her husband, Texas Governor John Connally.
Our Final Hours, she said she believed that her husband was wounded by a bullet separate from the two that hit Kennedy.
When interviewed by the Warren Commission in 1964, he reported that he saw two men behind the grassy knoll's stockyard fence before the shooting took place.
The men did not appear to be acting together or doing anything suspicious.
After the shooting, Bowers said that one of the men remained behind the fence and lost track of the second man whose clothing blended into the foliage.
When interviewed by Mark Lane and Emile de Antonio in 1966 for their documentary film Rush to Judgment, Bowers noted that he saw something that attracted his attention, either a flash of light or smoke from the knoll, allowing him to believe ""something out of the ordinary"" had occurred there.
Bowers told Lane that he heard three shots, the last two in quick succession.
The Newmans said that they thought the fatal shot came from ""the garden"" behind them.
He viewed the presidential motorcade from the Terminal Annex Building's roof.
In 1993, George Whitaker, a manager at the Ford Motor Company's Rouge Plant in Detroit, told attorney and criminal justice professor Doug Weldon that after reporting to work on November 25, 1963, he discovered the presidential limousine in the Rouge Plant's B building with its windshield removed.
Whitaker said that the limousine's removed windshield had a through-and-through bullet hole from the front.
He said that he was directed by one of Ford's vice presidents to use the windshield as a template to fabricate a new windshield for installation in the limousine.
Film and photographic evidence Film and photographic evidence of the assassination have led viewers to different conclusions regarding the origin of the shots.
When the fatal shot struck, the President's head and upper torso moved rapidly backwards – indicating, to many observers, a shot from the right front.
Paul Chambers believes that the fatal head shot is consistent with a high velocity rifle rather than the medium-velocity Mannlicher–Carcano.Close inspection of the Zapruder film shows Kennedy's head pivoting downward immediately before it moves rapidly backwards.
Anthony Marsh suggests that this downward motion was caused by driver William Greer's deceleration of the car.
However, the acoustical analysis that the HSCA presented as evidence for two gunmen has since been discredited.
The HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came from police officer McLain.
However, McLain stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza when the assassination occurred.
They concluded that the recording was made after the President had already been shot and that the recording did not indicate any additional gunshots.
Thomas challenged the 2005 Science & Justice article and restated his conclusion that there actually were two gunmen.
Some critics skeptical of the official ""single bullet theory"" have stated that the bullet's trajectory, which hit Kennedy above the right shoulder blade and passed through his neck , would have had to change course to pass through Connally's rib cage and fracture his wrist.
Kennedy's death certificate, which was signed by his personal physician George Burkley, locates the bullet at ""about the level of the third thoracic vertebra"" – which some claim was not high enough to exit his throat.
The autopsy descriptive sheet displays a diagram of the President's body with the same low placement at the third thoracic vertebra.There is a conflicting testimony regarding the autopsy performed on Kennedy's body, particularly during the examination on his brain and whether or not the photos submitted as evidence are the same as those taken during the examination.
A bone fragment found in Dealey Plaza by William Harper the day following the assassination was reported by the HSCA's Forensic Pathology Panel to have been from Kennedy's skull, a part of his parietal bone.
Some critics of the lone gunman theory, including James Douglass, David Lifton, and David Mantick, contend that the bone fragment that Harper found is not parietal bone, but is actually a piece of Kennedy's occipital bone ejected from an exit wound in the back of his head.
They allege this finding is evidence of a cover-up, as it proves that the skull radiographs taken during the autopsy, which do not show significant bone loss in the occipital area, are not authentic.
Oswald's marksmanship The Warren Commission examined the capabilities of the Carcano rifle and ammunition, as well as Oswald's military training and post-military experience, and determined that Oswald had the ability to fire three shots within a time span of 4. to 5. seconds.
According to their report, an army specialist using Oswald's rifle was able to duplicate the feat and even improved on the time.
The report also states that the Army Infantry Weapons Evaluation Branch test fired Oswald's rifle 47 times and found that it was ""quite accurate"", comparing it to the accuracy of an M14 rifle.
Also contained in the Commission report is testimony by Marine Corps Major Eugene Anderson confirming that Oswald's military records show that he qualified as ""sharpshooter"" in 1956.
Despite Oswald's confirmed marksmanship in the USMC, conspiracy theorists like Walt Brown and authors such as Richard H Popkin contend that Oswald was a notoriously poor shot, that his rifle was inaccurate, and that no reconstruction of the event has ever been able to duplicate his ability to fire three shots within the time frame given by the Warren Commission.
The Commission came to this conclusion after examining Oswald's Marxist and pro-Communist background, including his defection to Russia, the New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee he had organized, and the various public and private statements made by him espousing Marxism.
Some conspiracy theorists have argued that Oswald's pro-Communist behavior was in fact a carefully planned ruse and part of an effort by United States intelligence agencies to infiltrate left-wing groups and conduct counterintelligence operations in communist countries.
Dallas Police Department Chief Jesse Curry expressed doubts that Oswald killed President Kennedy.
When asked to account for himself at the time of the assassination, Oswald claimed that he “went outside to watch P Parade” , and was “out with in front”, and that he was at the “front entrance to the first floor” when he encountered a policeman.
Several FBI employees had made statements indicating that Oswald was indeed a paid informant, but the Commission was nonetheless unable to verify the veracity of those claims.
FBI agent James Hosty reported that his office's interactions with Oswald were limited to dealing with his complaints about being harassed by the Bureau for being a communist sympathizer.
A former roommate of Oswald, James Botelho, who would later become a California judge, stated in an interview with Mark Lane that he believed Oswald was involved in an intelligence assignment in Russia, although Botelho did not mention this suspicion in his testimony to the Warren Commission years earlier.
Richard Sprague, interim staff director and chief counsel to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, stated that if he ""had to do it over again"", he would have investigated the Kennedy assassination by probing Oswald's ties to the Central Intelligence Agency.
In 1978, former CIA paymaster and accountant James Wilcott testified before the HSCA, stating that Lee Harvey Oswald was a ""known agent"" of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Wilcott and his wife, Elsie later repeated those claims in an article in the San Francisco Chronicle.Despite its official policy of neither confirming nor denying the status of agents, both the CIA itself and many officers working in the region at the time have ""unofficially"" dismissed the plausibility of any possible ties of Oswald to the agency.
Robert Blakey, staff director and chief counsel for the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, supported that assessment in his conclusions as well.
Three tramps The three tramps Vincent Bugliosi provides a ""partial list of assassins ... whom one or more conspiracy theorists have actually named and identified as having fired a weapon at Kennedy"" in his book Reclaiming History.
Since the mid-1960s, various allegations have been made about the identities of the men and their involvement in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy.
E Howard Hunt § JFK conspiracy allegations The theory that former CIA agent and Watergate burglar E Howard Hunt was a participant in the assassination of Kennedy garnered much publicity from 1978 to 2000.
In 1981, Hunt won a libel judgment against Liberty Lobby's paper The Spotlight, which in 1978 printed an allegation by Victor Marchetti stating that Hunt was in Dallas on the day of the assassination and suggesting Hunt's involvement in a conspiracy; the libel award was thrown out on appeal and the newspaper was successfully defended by Mark Lane in a second trial.
After Hunt's death in 2007, an audio-taped ""deathbed confession"" in which Hunt claimed first-hand knowledge of a conspiracy, as a co-conspirator, was released by his son Saint John Hunt.
In the confession, Hunt claimed to have been a ""bench warmer"" in Dallas during the events, and he named several high-level CIA operatives as those who likely carried out the logistics of the assassination.
Hunt named Vice President Lyndon Johnson as the most likely figure behind the main impetus of the conspiracy.
Tippit has been named in some conspiracy theories as a renegade CIA operative sent to silence Oswald and as the ""badge man"" assassin on the grassy knoll.
According to some Warren Commission critics, Oswald was set up to be killed by Tippit, and Tippit was killed by Oswald in self-defense.
Other critics doubt that Tippit was killed by Oswald and assert he was shot by other conspirators.
Some critics have alleged that Tippit was associated with organized crime or right-wing politics.
Bernard Weissman Advertisement in the November 22, 1963, Dallas Morning News, placed by Bernard Weissman and three others According to the Warren Commission, the publication of a full-page, paid advertisement critical of Kennedy in the November 22, 1963, Dallas Morning News, which was signed by ""The American Fact-Finding Committee"" and noted Bernard Weissman as its chairman, was investigated to determine whether any members of the group claiming responsibility for it were connected to Oswald or to the assassination.
The Commission stated that ""The American Fact-Finding Committee"" was a fictitious sponsoring organization and that there was no evidence linking the four men responsible for the genesis of the ad with either Oswald or Ruby, or to a conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy.Related to the advertisement, Mark Lane testified during the Warren Commission's hearings that an informant whom he refused to name told him that Weismann had met with Tippit and Ruby eight days before the assassination at Ruby's Carousel Club.
According to Lane, a ""prominent Dallas figure"" who frequented Ruby's Carousel Club told Waldo, and later Lane, that he observed the meeting of the three men at the club.
Despite not having revealed to the Warren Commission that Waldo was his original source of the alleged meeting, Lane disputed their findings and complained that they failed to ask Waldo about it.
According to Hugh Aynesworth, the source of the allegation whose identity Lane promised not to reveal was Carroll Jarnagin, a Dallas attorney who had also claimed to have overheard a meeting between Oswald and Ruby.
Some critics doubt that Tippit was killed by Oswald and assert he was shot by other conspirators.
They allege discrepancies in witness testimony and physical evidence that they think call into question the Commission's conclusions regarding the murder of Tippit.
Others say that multiple men were directly involved in Tippit's killing.
Conspiracy researcher Kenn Thomas has alleged that the Warren Commission omitted testimony and evidence that two men shot Tippit and that one left the scene in a car.William Alexander – the Dallas assistant district attorney who recommended that Oswald be charged with the Kennedy and Tippit murders – later became skeptical of the Warren Commission's version of the Tippit murder.
According to Brian McKenna's review of Henry Hurt's book, Reasonable Doubt, Hurt reported that ""Tippit may have been killed because he impregnated the wife of another man"" and that Dallas police officers lied and altered evidence to set up Oswald to save Tippit's reputation.In the documentary JFK to 9/11, Francis Conolly claims that Tippit was shot because his looks resembled Kennedy's.
Conolly speculatates that the assassination plot did not go as planned, and that the conspirators needed a second body.
He further theorizes that Tippit's body and JFK's body were switched on Air Force Two.
Allegations about witness testimony and physical evidence The Warren Commission identified Helen Markham and Domingo Benavides as two witnesses who actually saw the shooting of Officer Tippit.
Domingo Benavides initially said that he did not think he could identify Tippit's assailant and was never asked to view a police lineup, even though he was the person closest to the killing.
Benavides later testified that the killer resembled pictures he had seen of Oswald.
However, critics have questioned these lineups as they consisted of people who looked very different from Oswald.Witnesses who did not appear before the Commission identified an assailant who was not Oswald.
Acquilla Clemons said she saw two men near Tippit's car just before the shooting.
Frank Wright said he emerged from his home and observed the scene seconds after the shooting.
He described a man standing by Tippit's body who had on a long coat and said the man ran to a parked car and drove away.Critics have questioned whether the cartridge cases recovered from the scene were the same as those that were subsequently entered into evidence.
Poe told the FBI that he marked the shells with his own initials, ""J.M.P."" to identify them.
Sergeant Gerald Hill later testified to the Warren Commission that it was he who had ordered police officer Poe to mark the shells.
However, Poe's initials were not found on the shells produced by the FBI six months later.
The identification of the cases at the crime scene raises more questions.
However, Oswald was reportedly arrested carrying a non-automatic .38 Special revolver.
In an unpublished manuscript titled When They Kill a President, Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig stated that when he heard the news that Tippit had been shot, he noted that the time was 1:06 pm.
However, in a later statement to the press, Craig seemed confused about the time of the shooting.Warren Burroughs, who ran the concession stand at the Texas Theater where Oswald was arrested, said that Oswald came into the theater between 1:00 and 1:07 pm; he also claimed he sold Oswald popcorn at 1:15 pm – the ""official"" time of Officer Tippit's murder.
A theatre patron, Jack Davis, also corroborated Burroughs's time, claiming he observed Oswald in the theatre prior to 1:20 pm.
Unidentified witnesses Following the assassination of President Kennedy the ""umbrella man"" can be seen sitting on the sidewalk next to the ""dark complected man"" on the right side of the photograph.
Some conspiracy theories surrounding the Kennedy assassination have focused on witnesses to the assassination who have not been identified, or who have not identified themselves, despite the media attention that the Kennedy assassination has received.
Umbrella man The so-called ""umbrella man"" was one of the closest bystanders to the president when he was first struck by a bullet.
The ""umbrella man"" has become the subject of conspiracy theories after footage of the assassination showed him holding an open umbrella as the Kennedy motorcade passed, despite the fact that it was not raining at the time.
One conspiracy theory, proposed by assassination researcher Robert Cutler, suggests that a dart with a paralyzing agent could have been fired from the umbrella, disabling Kennedy and making him a ""sitting duck"" for an assassination.
Testifying before the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, Witt stated he brought the umbrella to heckle Kennedy and protest the appeasement policies of the president's father, Joseph Kennedy.
Dark complected man An unidentified individual who is referred to by some conspiracy theorists as the ""dark complected man"" can be seen in several photographs, taken seconds after the assassination, sitting on the sidewalk next to the ""umbrella man"" on the north side of Elm Street.
Louie Steven Witt, who identified himself as the ""umbrella man"", said he was unable to identify the other individual, whose dark complexion has led some conspiracy theorists to speculate Cuban government involvement, or Cuban exile involvement, in the assassination of Kennedy.
Badge Man Some conspiracy theorists believe that ""badge man"" could have fired the fatal shot that killed President Kennedy.
The ""badge man"" figure – so called as he appears to be wearing a uniform similar to that worn by a policeman, with a badge prominent – helped fuel conspiracy theories linking Dallas Police officers, or someone impersonating a police officer, to the assassination.
Black dog man ""Black Dog Man"" Another ""figure"" is the so-called ""black dog man"" figure who can be seen at the corner of a retaining wall in the Willis and Betzner photo of the assassination.
In an interview, Marilyn Sitzman told Josiah Thompson that she saw a young black couple who were eating lunch and drinking Cokes on a bench behind the retaining wall and, therefore, it is possible that the ""black dog man"" figure is actually the black woman and her child.
The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that a head of an individual could be seen but that this individual was situated in front of, rather than behind the bushes.
Bill Miller argues that this individual is actually the eyewitness Emmett Hudson.
Edgar Hoover,Earl Warren, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Secret Service, the John Birch Society, and far-right wealthy Texans.
Some other alleged foreign conspirators includes, the KGB and Nikita Khrushchev,Aristotle Onassis, the government of South Vietnam, and international drug lords, including a French heroin syndicate.
Trial of Clay Shaw and David Ferrie Soon after the assassination of President Kennedy, Oswald's activities in New Orleans, Louisiana, during the spring and summer of 1963, came under scrutiny.
Three days after the assassination, on November 25, 1963, New Orleans attorney Dean Andrews told the FBI that he received a telephone call from a man named Clay Bertrand, on the day of the assassination, asking him to defend Oswald.
Andrews would later repeat this claim in testimony to the Warren Commission.
David Ferrie with Lee Harvey Oswald in the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol in 1955 Also, in late November 1963, an employee of New Orleans private investigator Guy Banister named Jack Martin began making accusations that fellow Banister employee David Ferrie was involved in the JFK assassination.
He said that Ferrie had outlined plans to kill Kennedy and that Ferrie might have taught Oswald how to use a rifle with a telescopic sight.
Martin claimed that Ferrie had known Oswald from their days in the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol, and that he had seen a photograph, at Ferrie's home, of Oswald in a Civil Air Patrol group.
Ferrie denied any association with Oswald.It was later discovered that Ferrie had attended Civil Air Patrol meetings in New Orleans in the 1950s that were also attended by a teenage Lee Harvey Oswald.
In 1993, the PBS television program Frontline obtained a photograph taken in 1955 showing Oswald and Ferrie at a Civil Air Patrol cookout with other C.A.P. cadets.
Whether Oswald's and Ferrie's association in the Civil Air Patrol in 1955 is relevant to their later possible association in 1963 is a subject of debate.According to several witnesses, in 1963, both Ferrie and Banister were working for lawyer G Wray Gill on behalf of Gill's client, New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello, in an attempt to block Marcello's deportation to Guatemala.
On the afternoon of November 22, 1963 – the day John F Kennedy was assassinated and the day Marcello was acquitted in his deportation case – New Orleans private investigator Guy Banister and his employee, Jack Martin, were drinking together at a local bar.
As the sole member of the New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, Oswald ordered 1,000 leaflets with the heading, ""Hands Off Cuba"" from a local printer.
On August 16, 1963, Oswald passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans.One of Oswald's leaflets had the address ""544 Camp Street"" hand-stamped on it, apparently by Oswald himself.
The address was in the ""Newman Building"", which from October 1961 to February 1962 housed the Cuban Revolutionary Council, a militant anti-Castro group.
Banister's office was involved in anti-Castro and private investigative activities in the New Orleans area.
In the late 1970s, the House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated the possible relationship of Oswald to Banister's office.
While the committee was unable to interview Guy Banister , the committee did interview his brother Ross Banister.
Ross ""told the committee that his brother had mentioned seeing Oswald hand out Fair Play for Cuba literature on one occasion.
Guy Banister's secretary, Delphine Roberts, would later tell author Anthony Summers that she saw Oswald at Banister's office, and that he filled out one of Banister's ""agent"" application forms.
In 1966, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison began an investigation into the assassination of President Kennedy.
Garrison's investigation led him to conclude that a group of right-wing extremists, including David Ferrie and Guy Banister, were involved with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy.
Garrison further believed that Shaw, Banister, and Ferrie conspired to set up Oswald as a patsy in the JFK assassination.
On March 1, 1967, Garrison arrested and charged Shaw with conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy.
On January 29, 1969, Clay Shaw was brought to trial on these charges, and the jury found him not guilty.
In 2003, Judyth Baker – whose employment records show that she worked at the Reily Coffee Company in New Orleans at the same time Oswald did – appeared in an episode of the television documentary series, The Men Who Killed Kennedy.
Mary Sherman on a clandestine CIA project to develop a biological weapon that could be used to assassinate Fidel Castro.
According to Baker, she and Oswald were hired by Reily in the spring of 1963 as a ""cover"" for the operation.
Baker further claimed that she and Oswald began an affair, and that later Oswald told her about Merida, Mexico – a city where he suggested they might begin their lives over again.
Others on both sides of the research community have widely dismissed her claims.
He stated that CIA agent David Atlee Phillips, using the pseudonym ""Maurice Bishop"", was involved with Oswald prior to the Kennedy assassination in connection with anti-Castro Cuban groups.In 1995, former United States Army Intelligence officer and National Security Agency executive assistant John M Newman published evidence that both the CIA and FBI deliberately tampered with their files on Lee Harvey Oswald both before and after the assassination.
Furthermore, he found that both agencies withheld information that might have alerted authorities in Dallas that Oswald posed a potential threat to the President.
Subsequently, Newman expressed the belief that CIA chief of counter-intelligence James Angleton was probably the key figure in the assassination.
In 1977, the FBI released 40,000 files pertaining to the assassination of Kennedy, including an April 3, 1967, memorandum from Deputy Director Cartha DeLoach to Associate Director Clyde Tolson that was written less than a month after President Johnson learned from J Edgar Hoover about CIA plots to kill Fidel Castro.
Shadow government conspiracy One conspiracy theory suggests that a secret or shadow government including wealthy industrialists and right-wing politicians ordered the assassination of Kennedy.Peter Dale Scott has indicated that Kennedy's death allowed for policy reversals desired by the secret government to escalate the United States' military involvement in Vietnam.
Military-industrial complex In the farewell speech given by United States President Dwight D Eisenhower before he left office on January 17, 1961, warned the nation about the power of the military establishment and the arms industry.
According to author James W Douglass, Kennedy was assassinated because he was turning away from the Cold War and seeking a negotiated peace with the Soviet Union.
Fletcher Prouty, Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Kennedy, and the person who inspired the character ""Mr X"" in Stone's film, wrote that Kennedy's assassination was actually a coup d'état.
Secret Service conspiracy The House Select Committee on Assassinations reported that it investigated ""alleged Secret Service complicity in the assassination"" and concluded that the Secret Service was not involved.
No actions were taken by the agent in the right front seat of the presidential limousine Roy Kellerman to cover the President with his body, although it would have been consistent with Secret Service procedure for him to have done so.
The primary function of the agent was to remain at all times in close proximity to the President in the event of such emergencies.
Some argue that the lack of Secret Service protection occurred because Kennedy himself had asked that the Secret Service make itself discreet during the Dallas visit.
However, Vince Palamara, who interviewed several Secret Service agents assigned to the Kennedy detail, disputes this.
With the 1959 Cuban Revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power, many Cubans left Cuba to live in the United States.
Their hopes were dashed with the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961, and many blamed President Kennedy for the failure.The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that some militant Cuban exiles might have participated in Kennedy's murder.
These exiles worked closely with CIA operatives in violent activities against Castro's Cuba.
President Kennedy's popularity among the Cuban exiles had plunged deeply by 1963.
Their bitterness is illustrated in a tape recording of a meeting of anti-Castro Cubans and right-wing Americans in the Dallas suburb of Farmer's Branch on October 1, 1963.
Author Joan Didion explored the Miami anti-Castro Cuban theory in her 1987 book Miami.
She discussed Marita Lorenz's testimony regarding Guillermo Novo, a Cuban exile who, in 1964, was involved in shooting a bazooka at the headquarters of the United Nations building from the East River during a speech by Che Guevara.
Allegedly, Novo was affiliated with Lee Harvey Oswald, and Frank Sturgis.
Lorenz claimed that she, Oswald, and seven anti-Castro Cubans transported weapons from Miami to Dallas in two cars just prior to the assassination.
These claims, though put forth to the House Assassinations Committee by Lorenz, have never been substantiated.
Organized crime conspiracy In 1964, the Warren Commission found no evidence linking Ruby's killing of Oswald with any broader conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
Author Gerald Posner similarly ignores Ruby's ties to Joseph Civello, the organized crime boss in Dallas.
In fact, Campisi and Ruby were close friends; they had dinner together at Campisi's restaurant, the Egyptian Lounge, on the night before the assassination.
After Ruby was jailed for killing Oswald, Campisi regularly visited him.
Government documents have revealed that some members of the Mafia worked with the Central Intelligence Agency on assassination attempts against Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
In summer 1960, the CIA recruited ex-FBI agent Robert Maheu to approach the West Coast representative of the Chicago mob, Johnny Roselli.
When Maheu contacted Roselli, Maheu hid the fact that he was sent by the CIA, instead portraying himself as an advocate for international corporations.
He offered to pay $150,000 to have Castro killed, but Roselli declined any pay.
Many Cuban exiles and Mafia bosses disliked President Kennedy, blaming him for the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
They also disliked his brother, then United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who had conducted an unprecedented legal assault on organized crime.
This was especially provocative because several Mafia ""families"" had allegedly worked with JFK's father, Joseph Kennedy, to get JFK elected.
Carlos Marcello allegedly threatened to assassinate the President to short-circuit his younger brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who was leading the administration's anti-Mafia crusade.
Information released in 2006 by the FBI has led some to conclude that Carlos Marcello confessed to his cellmate in Texas, Jack Van Lanningham, an FBI informant, using a transistor radio that was bugged by the FBI, to having organized Kennedy's assassination, and that the FBI covered up this information that it had in its possession.In his book, Contract on America, David Scheim provided evidence that Mafia leaders Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, Jr., and Jimmy Hoffa ordered the assassination of President Kennedy.
In his book Peace, War, and Politics, Anderson claimed that Mafia member Johnny Roselli gave him extensive details of the plot.
Anderson said that although he was never able to independently confirm Roselli's entire story, many of Roselli's details checked out.
Anderson said that Oswald may have played a role in the assassination, but that more than one gunman was involved.
Johnny Roselli, as previously noted, had worked with the CIA on assassination attempts against Castro.
The History Channel program The Men Who Killed Kennedy presented additional claims of organized crime involvement.
He said that he was offered the assassination contract on President Kennedy, but that he did not accept it.
David said that since the other two shooters were still alive, it would break a code of conduct for him to identify them.
When asked what the shooters were wearing, David noted their modus operandi was to dress in costumes such as official uniforms.
Much of Christian David's testimony was confirmed by former Corsican member Michelle Nicole, who was part of the DEA witness protection program.The book Ultimate Sacrifice, by Lamar Waldron and Thom Hartmann, attempted to synthesize these theories with new evidence.
The authors argued that government officials felt obliged to help the assassins cover up the truth because the assassination conspiracy had direct ties to American government plots to assassinate Castro.
Outraged at Robert Kennedy's attack on organized crime, mob leaders had President Kennedy killed to remove Robert from power.
A government investigation of the plot was thwarted, the authors allege, because it would have revealed embarrassing evidence of American government involvement with organized crime in plots to kill Castro.
A 2003 Gallup poll indicated that nearly 20% of Americans suspected Lyndon B Johnson of being involved in the assassination of Kennedy.
Critics of the Warren Commission have accused Johnson of plotting the assassination because he ""disliked"" the Kennedys and feared that he would be dropped from the Democratic ticket for the 1964 election.According to journalist Max Holland, the first published allegation that Johnson perpetrated the assassination of Kennedy appeared in Penn Jones, Jr.'s book Forgive My Grief, self-published in May 1966.
In the book, Jones provided excerpts of a letter purported to have been authored by Jack Ruby charging LBJ with the murder of the President.
With his 1968 book, The Dark Side of Lyndon Baines Johnson, Joachim Joesten is credited by Bugliosi as being the first conspiracy author to accuse Johnson of having a role in the assassination.
In 1968, Kennedy's personal secretary Evelyn Lincoln wrote in her book, ""Kennedy and Johnson"" that President Kennedy had told her that Lyndon B Johnson would be replaced as Vice President of the United States.
As Mr Kennedy sat in the rocker in my office, his head resting on its back he placed his left leg across his right knee.
In a slow pensive voice he said to me, 'You know if I am re-elected in sixty-four, I am going to spend more and more time toward making government service an honorable career.
Lincoln went on to write ""I was fascinated by this conversation and wrote it down verbatim in my diary.
In 2003, researcher Barr McClellan published the book Blood, Money & Power.
McClellan claims that Johnson, motivated by the fear of being dropped from the Kennedy ticket in 1964 and the need to cover up various scandals, masterminded Kennedy's assassination with the help of his friend, Austin attorney Edward A Clark.
The book suggests that a smudged partial fingerprint from the sniper's nest likely belonged to Johnson's associate Malcolm ""Mac"" Wallace, and that Mac Wallace was, therefore, on the sixth floor of the Depository at the time of the shooting.
McClellan states that the assassination of Kennedy allowed the oil depletion allowance to be kept at 27. percent.
According to McClellan, this resulted in a saving of over $100 million to the American oil industry.
McClellan's book subsequently became the subject of an episode of Nigel Turner's ongoing documentary television series, The Men Who Killed Kennedy.
The episode, ""The Guilty Men"", drew angry condemnation from the Johnson family, Johnson's former aides, and former Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter following its airing on The History Channel.
The History Channel assembled a committee of historians who concluded the accusations in the documentary were without merit, and The History Channel apologized to the Johnson family and agreed not to air the series in the future.Madeleine Brown, who alleged she was the mistress of Johnson, also implicated him in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy.
Brown claimed that by its fruition in 1963, the conspiracy involved dozens of persons, including the leadership of the FBI and the Mafia, as well as prominent politicians and journalists.
In the documentary The Men Who Killed Kennedy, Madeleine Brown and May Newman both placed FBI Director J Edgar Hoover at a social gathering at Murchison's mansion the night before the assassination.
In addition, Brown said that on New Year's Eve 1963, she met Johnson at the Driskill Hotel in Austin, Texas, and that he confirmed the conspiracy to kill Kennedy, insisting that ""the fat cats of Texas and intelligence"" had been responsible.
Brown reiterated her allegations against Johnson in the 2006 documentary Evidence of Revision.
In the same documentary, several other Johnson associates also voiced their suspicions of Johnson.
Conspiracy of Silence, along with conspiracy theorists Jens Hansen and J Gary Shaw.
Crenshaw was a third-year surgical resident on the trauma team at Parkland Hospital that attended to President Kennedy.
While attending to Oswald, Crenshaw said that he answered a telephone call from Lyndon Johnson.
Shortly afterwards, an audio-taped ""deathbed confession"" in which Hunt claimed first-hand knowledge of a conspiracy, as a co-conspirator, was released by his sons; the authenticity of the confession was also met with some skepticism.In 1984, convicted swindler Billie Sol Estes made statements to a Grand Jury in Texas indicating that he had ""inside knowledge"" that implicated Johnson in the death of Kennedy and others.Historian Michael L Kurtz wrote that there is no evidence suggesting that Johnson ordered the assassination of Kennedy.
According to Kurtz, Johnson believed Fidel Castro was responsible for the assassination and that Johnson covered up the truth because he feared the possibility that retaliatory measures against Cuba might escalate to nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
In 2012, biographer Robert Caro published his fourth volume on Johnson's career, The Passage of Power, which chronicles Johnson's communications and actions as Vice President, and describes the events leading up to the assassination.
Caro wrote that ""nothing that I have found in my research"" points to involvement by Johnson.Political consultant and convicted felon Roger Stone believes that Johnson orchestrated Kennedy's assassination.
He also claims that Rafael Cruz, father of Texas Senator and Republican presidential candidate for the 2016 elections Ted Cruz, is tied to Lee Harvey Oswald.
Bush conspiracy On November 29, 1963, exactly one week after the assassination, an employee of the FBI wrote in a memo that ""Mr George Bush of the Central Intelligence Agency"" was given a briefing on the reaction to the assassination by Cuban exiles living in Miami.
Bush, who was appointed head of the CIA by president Gerald Ford in 1976, 13 years after the assassination.
During Bush's presidential campaign in 1988, the memo resurfaced, prompting the CIA to claim that the memo was referring to an employee named George Williams Bush.
Bush biographer Kitty Kelley alleges that Bush was unable to remember his whereabouts on the day of Kennedy's assassination, despite the fact that this information is known.
The day of the assassination, Bush flew to Tyler, Texas, to make an appearance ahead of his upcoming campaign for the United States Senate in 1964, and spoke to the FBI about a local who had threatened Kennedy.
The previous day, Bush had been in Dallas to speak at an oil industry meeting.
Those who believe that Bush may have been involved in the assassination have presented photographic evidence of a man resembling Bush in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
However, Morley argues this evidence is weak, as no comparative measurements of the two men's facial features has been made.
Bush was already an announced Senate candidate for several months by the time of the assassination and thus had received much press attention.
No eyewitnesses have publicly recalled seeing Bush at the scene, though his opponent, incumbent Senator Ralph Yarborough, passed by in the presidential motorcade.In September 1976, George de Mohrenschildt, a Dallas petroleum geologist and a friend of both Bush and Lee Harvey Oswald, wrote a letter to Bush, then director of the CIA, asking for his assistance.
Mohrenschildt was being pressured by House Select Committee on Assassinations investigators to testify on the assassination, causing him to write the letter in distress.
Bush responded to Mohrenschildt's letter, but said he would be unable to help.
Morley argues that the letter's existence, and Bush's response, does not demonstrate guilt for either man, but merely that Bush was uninterested in questioning the CIA's account of the assassination.
Cuban government conspiracy In its report, the Warren Commission stated that it had investigated ""dozens of allegations of a conspiratorial contact between Oswald and agents of the Cuban Government"" and had found no evidence of Cuban involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy.
However, some conspiracy theorists continue to allege that Fidel Castro ordered the assassination of Kennedy in retaliation for the CIA's previous attempts to assassinate him.In the early 1960s, Clare Boothe Luce, wife of Time-Life publisher Henry Luce, was one of a number of prominent Americans who sponsored anti-Castro groups.
This support included funding exiles in commando speedboat raids against Cuba.
In 1975, Clare Luce said that on the night of the assassination, she received a call from a member of a commando group she had sponsored.
According to Luce, the caller's name was ""something like"" Julio Fernandez and he claimed he was calling her from New Orleans.According to Luce, Fernandez told her that Oswald had approached his group with an offer to help assassinate Castro.
Fernandez further claimed that he and his associates eventually found out that Oswald was a communist and supporter of Castro.
He said that with this new-found knowledge, his group kept a close watch on Oswald until Oswald suddenly came into money and went to Mexico City and then Dallas.
Both committees investigated the incident, but were unable to uncover any evidence to corroborate the allegations.In May 1967, CIA Director Richard Helms told President Lyndon Johnson that the CIA had tried to assassinate Castro.
Helms also said that the plots against Castro continued into the Kennedy Administration and that Attorney General Robert Kennedy had known about both the plots and the Mafia's involvement.On separate occasions, Johnson told two prominent television newsmen that he believed that JFK's assassination had been organized by Castro as retaliation for the CIA's efforts to kill Castro.
There were people in the American government who thought Kennedy was a traitor because he didn't invade Cuba when he had the chance, when they were asking him.
Soviet government conspiracy The Warren Commission reported that they found no evidence that the Soviet Union was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy.
Ion Mihai Pacepa, said that he had a conversation with Nicolae Ceauşescu who told him about ""ten international leaders the Kremlin killed or tried to kill"", including Kennedy.
Lee Harvey Oswald, the Soviet KGB, and the Kennedy Assassination, in 2007.
Similar views on the JFK assassination were expressed by Robert Holmes, former First Secretary at the British Embassy in Moscow, in his 2012 book Spy Like No Other.
Decoy hearse and wound alteration David Lifton presented a scenario in which conspirators on Air Force One removed Kennedy's body from its original bronze casket and placed it in a shipping casket, while en route from Dallas to Washington.
Once the presidential plane arrived at Andrews Air Force Base, the shipping casket with the President's body in it was surreptitiously taken by helicopter from the side of the plane that was out of the television camera's view.
Richard Lipsey on January 18, 1978, by committee staff members Donald Purdy and Mark Flanagan.
Richard Lipsey said that he and General Wehle had met President Kennedy's body at Andrews Air Force Base.
Lipsey ""... placed in a hearse to be transported to Bethesda Naval Hospital.
With Lipsey's mention of a ""decoy hearse"" at Bethesda, Lifton theorized that the casket removed by Lipsey from Air Force One – from the side of the plane exposed to television – was probably also a decoy and was likely empty.Laboratory technologist Paul O'Connor was one of the major witnesses supporting another part of David Lifton's theory that somewhere between Parkland and Bethesda the President's body was made to appear as if it had been shot only from the rear.
O'Connor said that President Kennedy's body arrived at Bethesda inside a body bag in ""a cheap, shipping-type of casket"", which differed from the description of the ornamental bronze casket and sheet that the body had been wrapped in at Parkland Hospital.
O'Connor said that the brain had already been removed by the time it got to Bethesda, and that there were ""just little pieces"" of brain matter left inside the skull.Researcher David R Wrone dismissed the theory that Kennedy's body was surreptitiously removed from the presidential plane, stating that as is done with all cargo on airplanes for safety precautions, the coffin and lid were held by steel wrapping cables to prevent shifting during takeoff and landing and in case of air disturbances in flight.
Federal Reserve conspiracy Jim Marrs, in his book Crossfire, presented the theory that Kennedy was trying to rein in the power of the Federal Reserve, and that forces opposed to such action might have played at least some part in the assassination.
According to Marrs, the issuance of Executive Order 11110 was an effort by Kennedy to transfer power from the Federal Reserve to the United States Department of the Treasury by replacing Federal Reserve Notes with silver certificates.
Critics of the theory note that Kennedy called for and signed legislation phasing out Silver Certificates in favor of Federal Reserve Notes, thereby enhancing the power of the Federal Reserve; and that Executive Order 11110 was a technicality that only delegated existing presidential powers to the Secretary of the Treasury for administrative convenience during a period of transition.
Israeli government conspiracy Immediately following Kennedy's death, speculation that he was assassinated by a ""Zionist conspiracy"" was prevalent in much of the Muslim world.
The Missing Link in the JFK Assassination Controversy, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion orchestrated the assassination after learning that Kennedy planned to keep Israel from obtaining nuclear weapons.
The theory also alleges involvement of Meyer Lansky and the Anti-Defamation League.
In a speech before the United Nations General Assembly in 2009, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi also alleged that Kennedy was killed for wanting to investigate Dimona.
Other published theories Secret Service Agent George Hickey holding his AR-15 rifle Reasonable Doubt by Henry Hurt, who writes about his Warren Commission doubts.
Behold a Pale Horse by William Cooper alleges that Kennedy was shot by the presidential limousine's driver, Secret Service agent William Greer.
In the Zapruder film, Greer can be seen turning to his right and looking backwards just before speeding away from Dealey Plaza.
This theory has come under severe criticism from others in the research community.ISBN 0-929385-22-5.
Former Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden's The Echo from Dealey Plaza and Kevin James Shay's Death of the Rising Sun detail plots that occurred shortly before Kennedy's trip to Dallas in 1963, in Chicago and Florida.
Within the Secret Service during those chaotic months, ""rumors were flying"" about Cuban dissidents and right-wing southerners who were stalking Kennedy for a chance to kill him, Bolden wrote.
The security threat in Chicago in early November 1963 involved former Marine Thomas Arthur Vallee, who was arrested after police found an M-1 rifle, handgun, and 3,000 rounds of ammunition in his vehicle.
A high-powered rifle was confiscated from another suspected conspirator in Chicago shortly before Kennedy's trip there was canceled, Bolden said.
The Role of J Edgar Hoover in the Assassination of President Kennedy, implicates the FBI Director.
North documents that Hoover was aware of threats against Kennedy by organized crime before 1963, and suggests that he failed to take proper action to prevent the assassination.
North also charges Hoover with failure to work adequately to uncover the truth behind Kennedy's murder, ISBN 0-88184-877-8.
The Shot That Killed JFK by Bonar Menninger alleges that while Oswald did attempt to assassinate JFK and did succeed in wounding him, the fatal shot was accidentally fired by Secret Service agent George Hickey, who was riding in the Secret Service follow-up car directly behind the presidential limousine.
George Hickey sued Menninger in April 1995 for what he had written in Mortal Error.
According to this theory, suggested by the editor of an organic gardening magazine, Oswald killed JFK due to mental impairment stemming from an addiction to refined sugar, as evidenced by his need for his favorite beverage immediately after the assassination.
Passport to Assassination by Oleg M Nechiporenko, the Soviet consular official who met with Oswald in Mexico City in 1963.
He was afforded the unique opportunity to interview Oswald about his goals including his genuine desire for a Cuban visa.
An American Mystery concludes that Oswald was guilty, but holds that the evidence may point to a second gunman on the grassy knoll, who, purely by coincidence, was attempting to kill JFK at the same time as Oswald.
The Kennedy Mutiny by Will Fritz , claims that the assassination plot was orchestrated by General Edwin Walker, and that he framed Oswald for the crime.
The Second Plot by Matthew Smith explores the strange case of Roscoe White.
In 1990, Roscoe's son Ricky made public a claim that his father, who had been a Dallas police officer in 1963, was involved in killing the president.
David Wrone's The Zapruder Film concludes that the shot that killed JFK and JFK's throat and back wounds were caused by in-and-through shots originating from the grassy knoll.
Roosevelt was riding in an open car with Mayor Anton Cermak of Chicago.
In Dallas, JFK was the real target, and Connally was a secondary target.
The military, CIA, NASA, anti-Castro factions, Hoover's FBI and others.
He concludes that the person that allowed all of these groups to form a ""coalescence of interests"" was Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
Dinkin was arrested nine days before Kennedy was killed, placed in psychiatric care , and released shortly thereafter.
Described by the Associated Press as ""one of the strangest theories"", Hugh McDonald's Appointment in Dallas stated that the Soviet government contracted with a rogue CIA agent named ""Saul"" to have Kennedy killed.
McDonald said he worked for the CIA ""on assignment for $100 a day"" and met ""Saul"" at the Agency's headquarters after the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
According to McDonald, his CIA mentor told him that ""Saul"" was the world's best assassin.
McDonald stated that after the assassination, he recognized the man's photo in the Warren Commission report and eventually tracked him to a London hotel in 1972.
The pseudonymous author claimed to be a lawyer with investigative skills working in the South.
Despite the work's obscurity, the claim of government awareness and negligence regarding a plot to kill Kennedy has since become a key framework surrounding discussion about the Kennedy assassination.
In a November 20, 1966, interview with The Atlanta Constitution, Russell said that he harbored a ""lingering dissatisfaction"" with the Commission's work and that he disagreed with the single bullet theory.
I remember the back of his head seemed like his hairline was sort of – looked like his hairline sort of went square instead of tapered off, and he looked like he needed a haircut for about 2 weeks, but his hair didn't taper off, it kind of went down and squared off and made his head look flat in back.
Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations United States House of Representatives.
Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives.
HSCA Report, Volume 3, Investigation of the Assassination of President John F Kennedy.
Hearings before the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives.
In the 'Journal American' it filled several pages over three days and was accompanied by revealing commentary by Miss Kilgallen who has reported on the assassination inquiry with a most unusual zeal.
And, she might have added, fascinating for what was not asked of Ruby by the Chief Justice.
Dorothy Kilgallen, Abuse of Power, and the Most Compelling JFK Assassination in History.
Appendix to Hearings before the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives.
One witness felt he was too distant from the gunman to make a positive identification.
Warren Commission Hearings, CE 1968, Location of Eyewitnesses to the Movements of Lee Harvey Oswald in the Vicinity of the Tippit Killing.
On Solving History's Greatest Murder Mystery, The Assassination of John F Kennedy.
September 3, 2006. ^ a b Appendix to Hearings before the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives.
Social Constructivism and the Forensic Evidence in the Kennedy Assassination.
ISBN 1944205012 ^ Rumors that Oswald was an undercover agent, J Lee Rankin, General Council for the Warren Commission – via Mary Ferrell Foundation.
Archived from the original on August 12, 2001 – via jfk.ci.dallas.tx.us.
When They Kill a President, 1971, ASIN B00072DT18 ^ Roger Craig, Mcadams.posc.mu.edu.
The committee believes, on the basis of the evidence available to it, that President John F Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.
The Secret Service and the JFK Murder, , ISBN 0-9656582-4-4 ^ Bolden, Abraham.
A Mafioso's Story, , ISBN 0-312-20388-8 ^ Investigative Reports, cable TV program, interview by Bill Curtis, September 1991.
John and Robert Kennedy, the Plan for a Coup in Cuba, and the Murder of JFK , by Lamar Waldron, with Thom Hartmann; Carroll & Graf.
The Love Story of Madeleine Brown and President Lyndon Baines Johnson, Conservatory Press.
The Straight Scoop on Freemasons, the Illuminati, Skull & Bones, Black Helicopters, the New World Order, and Many, Many More.
