Jeffrey Goldberg, a national correspondent for The Atlantic, blogged on the magazine's Web site Tuesday that he was on vacation last month when the head of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington which Cuba maintains there instead of an embassy called to say Castro had read his article about Israel and Iran and wanted him to come to Cuba.
Goldberg asked Julia Sweig, a CubaUnited States policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, to accompany him, and they spent portions of three days talking with Castro.
The 84-year-old ex-president wore full military fatigues and an olive-green cap while addressing university students last week and had previously appeared in public in a military shirt.
Goldberg saw Castro in a red shirt, sweat pants, and black New Balance sneakers.
He said Castro, who has been a fierce critic of Israel, ""repeatedly returned to his excoriation of antiSemitism,"" chiding Ahmadinejad for denying the Holocaust.
Mr Goldberg asked Julia Sweig, a CubaUnited States policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, to accompany him, and the pair spent portions of three days talking with Mr Castro.
Sweig met with Mr Castro and attended the dolphin show at Havana's aquarium, but the Atlantic blog was the first to reveal details of what they discussed.
Mr Goldberg said their first meeting lasted five hours and featured appearances by Mr Castro's wife, Dalia; his son Antonio; and several bodyguards, two of whom held Mr Castro's elbow to steady him when he moved.
But Mr Goldberg saw Mr Castro in a red shirt, sweat pants and black New Balance sneakers.
He said Mr Castro, who himself has been a fierce critic of Israel, ""repeatedly returned to his excoriation of anti-Semitism,"" chiding Mr Ahmadinejad for denying the Holocaust.
I knew of a bird that was a called a 'Jew,' and so for me, the Jews were those birds,"" Mr Goldberg quoted Mr Castro as telling him.
According to Mr Goldberg, Mr Castro said, ""I don't think anyone has been slandered more than the Jews.
After undergoing emergency intestinal surgery in July 2006, giving up Cuba's presidency and dropping out of sight for four years, Mr Castro has begun making near-daily public appearances to warn of a nuclear war pitting the United States and Israel against Iran and also featuring a Washington-led attack on North Korea.
Bumped to Saturday night because of the presidential debates on Thursday, this two-hour program has the misfortune of playing against the World Series.
Jennings said writer/producer Sherry Jones has compiled information obtained from Soviet and Cuban officials as well as recently declassified documents and tapes.
But it turns out that, for the most part, our leaders were in the dark.
This month marks the 30th anniversary of the historic Cold War confrontation from which Kennedy emerged a hero for forcing Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to back down over Soviet missiles based in Cuba.
The ABC special also shows that the threat of nuclear war lasted much longer than the 13 days in October that history records.
MIMI WHITEFIELD Herald Staff Writer Section: FRONT 1033 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link At 7:31m. on Oct., 1962, Maj.
Richard S Heyser's U2F reconnaissance jet entered Cuban territory to search for evidence of Soviet missiles.
Approaching from the south to avoid detection, Heyser roared over the Isle of Pines at an altitude of nearly 14 miles, then followed a prescribed course over the western province of Pinar del Rio.
A highresolution camera loaded with two rolls of film, each nine inches wide and more than 5,000-feet long, whirred all the while.
He spent just 12 minutes over Cuba, then headed for Orlando where another plane waited to ferry the film to Washington.
Recent release of classified documents and talks between the surviving key players have revealed that the world was closer to nuclear war in 1962 than it has ever been.
It began late the night of Oct. in the California desert when he took off from Edwards Air Force Base.
As he approached the Isle of Pines, which Cubans now call the Isle of Youth, he turned on the camera and continued over Davaniguas, Los Palacios, San Cristobal, San Diego de los Banos and Los Pozos.
Unknown to Heyser, the camera was turning up the first photographic evidence of offensive mediumrange ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Somehow, in the intervening 39 days, the Soviets had managed to turn a vacant field into completed missile sites.
Although the Pentagon blamed bad weather for the lapse in flights, Brugioni said military bumbling and intransigence was the real reason the missiles weren't discovered earlier.
The film arrived under guard at NPIC, housed in a dreary building in northwest Washington, the morning of Oct. and analysts set to work, said Brugioni, whose exhaustively researched account of the missile crisis, Eyeball to Eyeball, was published last year.
There had been U-2 overflights of Cuba since 1960, Brugioni said in an interview from his Virginia home, so the analysts were familiar with the island's topography, the palms and pine trees, the tobacco-drying barns, the sugar-cane fields, the mountains.
It was the first clear indication that there were offensive nuclear weapons on Cuban soil.
The analysts worked through the night, as CIA and military officials were informed of the find.
The analysts had discovered two missile launching sites and a related military encampment.
As the crisis progressed, new reconnaissance missions would reveal 33 missiles.
The photo analysts also spotted six launchers for nucleartipped Luna rockets, which the United States called Frogs, Brugioni said.
Lunas with a range of only 25 miles are considered tactical weapons that could be used to repel an invading force.
There was always the presumption that there were nuclear warheads for the missiles on the island, but it was unclear how many.
At a ground-breaking conference in Havana on the missile crisis last January, Gen.
It had always been assumed that no Soviet nuclear weapon of any sort could be fired without the authorization of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Gribkov's revelation changes the whole understanding of the missile crisis, and suggests that nuclear war would have been inevitable if Kennedy had given in to persistent pressure, especially from the U.S. military, to invade Cuba during the height of the crisis.
Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara said earlier this year that if United States forces had been under attack with tactical nuclear warheads ""no one should believe . . . the United States would have refrained from responding with nuclear warheads.
Brugioni said he doubts Gribkov's assertion because of previous Khrushchev statements and the delicacy of the situation.
But he agrees that if United States troops had been fired upon by tactical weapons, there would have been a nuclear war.
The Strategic Air Command, he said, had 7,000 megatons -equivalent to seven billion tons of TNT -of destructive power at its disposal in 1962.
Florida, where United States troops gathered at air bases, ports and even South Broward's Gulfstream Park to prepare for a possible invasion of Cuba, would surely have been a Soviet target, too, he said.
In the days after the missile crisis, Cuba felt alone, betrayed by the Soviets who agreed to a U.S. demand to withdraw the missiles without consulting Castro, unsure of where it stood and still fearful the United States might attack.
It is isolated from trends toward free-market economic reforms and democracy that are sweeping the former Soviet bloc.
And there no longer is a Soviet pro tector to buffer it from the United States.
Castro must have felt more than a touch of deja vu last fall when former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of a training brigade whose existence dates to the the 1962 crisis from Cuba.
Again Castro wasn't consulted, and again it was what the United States wanted.
The Cold War has thawed, and the Berlin Wall has been knocked down and sold in pieces as souvenirs.
Castro, however, remains the Abominable Snowman in the furthest recesses of the Cold War icebox.
United States officials admit the island is scarely a threat to United States security, but Cuba still is considered the most hostile of enemies.
There are no formal diplomatic relations, and President Bush recently signed legislation to make the trade embargo against Cuba even more stringent at a time when the island economy already is in crisis.
Thirty years ago concerned about Cuba's place in the socialist world and fearful the United States would try a repeat of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion Castro allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island.
Blight, the main organizer of a series of historic 1987-92 conferences on the missile crisis, also is apprehensive about how the Castro government might react if it sees no way out of its current economic and political problems.
As Cuba's economy falters, Castro repeatedly has sounded the missile crisis themes of resistance and survival at all costs.
This is the lesson that inspires us in the face of new challenges and which will live on in the immortal memory of our people,'' said Castro in one of his first speeches linking the missile crisis to the island's economic crisis.
And it wastes few opportunities to remind its people of its hostile neighbor to the north.
While a lot is hype, Castro still says ``under special circumstances'' a United States invasion is possible.
Brigades have been organized all over the island to carve out tunnels along the coast purportedly for use during an attack.
Castro always has found the ``yanqui'' threat useful in times of crisis when national unity is imperative.
And a reconstruction of the surface-to-air missile that shot down the plane now stands in a sugar cane field, seemingly in the middle of nowhere.
During a visit to Banes, near that old SAM site, Blight told the town fathers that they still seemed to be reacting as if the events in question had happened only yesterday.
Castro still is counting on that memory 30 years later as he struggles to hold the island together.
But the part that got my attention comes at the end, when Castro expresses his fear that an Iranian/Israeli/US showdown could get out of control.
I mentioned to Castro the letter he wrote to Khruschev, the Soviet premier, at the height of the crisis, in which he recommended that the Soviets consider launching a nuclear strike against the United States if the Americans attack Cuba.
But whenever he started revealing such a changed outlook, it is a significant complement to the views of the Kennedy Administration officials who were in charge at the time, many of whom looked back in relief and horror at how close the world had come to an uncontrolled nuclear exchange.
The full dispatch from Havana is very much worth reading, as presumably will be the second online installment; and the upcoming print magazine account; and Jeff Goldberg's promised omnibus reply to supporters and critics of his original article contending that Israel is planning to bomb Iran.
For the first time, Soviet officials publicly explained why their country instigated the Cuban missile crisis and then why the Soviets agreed 13 days later to a United States demand that the missiles be sent back to the Soviet Union.
Students of the crisis have long been mystified by why the Soviets risked a nuclear showdown for the sake of missiles in Cuba -a showdown that brought the world to the nuclear precipice.
In an extraordinary American-style news conference, two Soviets gave fresh answers to some old questions.
In the latest example of the Soviet Union's new policy of greater openness, they admitted that misjudgments and accidents on the Soviet side contributed to the crisis.
McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and presidential speech writer Theodore Sorensen.
Sergei Mikoyan, whose father was a top adviser to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev during the crisis, said he only begun to believe this week that the United States was not planning an invasion of Cuba in 1962.
Khrushchev wanted the missiles installed to protect Fidel Castro's revolution, Mikoyan said.
The Americans sitting at the conference table with him were astonished.
The other Soviet at the table said that Khrushchev had another motivation -he saw the missiles as a step toward nuclear parity with the United States, which had overwhelming superiority in that area.
Fedor Burlatsky, then Khrushchev's speech writer, remembered his boss saying to him, ""The Americans surround us with many bases, especially bases in Turkey near our border.
Burlatsky, who spoke English fluently, if not perfectly, said Khrushchev also underestimated his adversary, President Kennedy.
The Soviets believed they could quickly install the missiles before America noticed.
But the Soviets have had their share of bureaucratic bungling, Burlatsky acknowledged, and the missile sites were not camouflaged.
As a result, American U-2 spy planes got incontrovertible evidence of the missiles before the Soviets finished building them.
A week after the photographic evidence was in hand, on Oct., 1962, Kennedy announced a naval blockade of Cuba, taking the Soviets off guard.
Five days after the blockade was announced, the crisis took on greater gravity when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air-missile.
The downing of the U-2, which brought the two countries to the brink of nuclear destruction, was an accident, Mikoyan said.
Mikoyan said there were doubts about whether it was a Soviet or a Cuban who was responsible.
There was no command to do so from the supreme commanders,"" said Mikoyan, now editor of a magazine on Latin America in Moscow.
Mikoyan dismissed the suggestion of a story by investigative reporter Seymour Hersh published last weekend that Soviets and Cubans engaged in armed combat at one of the missile bases at the time of the crisis.
The Castro government uses the Spanish word for worm, gusano, to describe Cuban exiles.
Khrushchev accepted Kennedy's ultimatum 12 hours after it was given because he had no choice, Burlatsky said.
Khrushchev believed that if he rejected it, the United States would attack the island.
If he accepted it, Khrushchev could claim a victory in a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
Bundy, the former national security adviser, said the United States has lived up to that promise, which never was formalized.
But he added that the United States retained the right to invade if Cuba threatened hemispheric security -a threat Bundy would not define.
The ''top secret'' four-page memorandum also reflected concern that President Kennedy's administration was prepared to go it alone in waging a nuclear response to any Soviet move against Berlin.
The memo, released last month by the National Archives, summarized a meeting on Nov., 1962, involving Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, Foreign Secretary Lord Home and Maj.
The British discussion came just two days before the United States ended its blockade of Cuba.
The crisis moved toward resolution on Oct., when Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev announced that the missiles would be removed.
Strong, who had good contacts within the Kennedy administration, had been in the United States from Oct. to Oct., the memo said.
Strong thought that the American government were prepared for their action in Cuba to escalate into the nuclear,'' the memo said.
It stated Macmillan planned to raise the issue with Kennedy during their next meeting.
There was no indication whether Macmillan did subsequently raise the issue with Kennedy.
Britain, the United States and the Command of Nuclear Forces'' , questioned whether Strong was a reliable source on the reported United States plan of a bomber strike against Soviet sites.
The assertion ''was curious because the Americans had a significant number of missiles themselves,'' and there is no mention of first strike with missiles, Scott said.
The following day, President Khrushchev agreed to United States demands for the removal of the missiles.
Cuban missile crisis deepens The Cuban crisis worsened yesterday with the announcement from the White House that the development of Soviet ballistic missile sites on the island was continuing at a rapid pace, and apparently with the objective of achieving a full operational capacity as soon as possible.
The statement was restricted to details of this development but spokesmen recalled President Kennedy's statement on Monday that further United States action would be justified should the preparations continue.
The determination of the President to eliminate this Soviet threat to the Western hemisphere has obviously hardened.
A military force, with sufficient ships and aircraft, is now poised in Florida for any action that the President may order.
There are strong indications that the order for some kind of intervention will be given during the weekend.
There is no evidence to date that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these sites.
The British, French and West German ambassadors attended a briefing at the State Department yesterday given by the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs and the Assistant Secretary of Defence for Internal Security.
The new urgency that was obvious at the White House and State Department clearly showed that a decision had been reached, or at any rate was about to be reached.
President Kennedy's objective has gone beyond maintaining the blockade and insisting that the bases be removed.
Instead, it is now the urgent necessity to prevent the bases from becoming fully operational.
State Department officials said the United States did not propose to stand by idly while the bases were prepared for firing.
There was no hope of persuading the Soviet Union to remove them and it was difficult to see how the United States could avoid intervening.
Fred KaplanBoston Globe Section: NEWS 1101 Words Page: A14 OpenURL Link In the last two days of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, all of President Kennedy's top advisers -including his brother, Robert -favored launching an air strike against missile sites in Cuba or invading the island, according to documents to be made public this week.
Only the president, the documents show, favored resolving the crisis in the way it eventually was ended -through a diplomatic trade, a promise to remove United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
The documents, which the John F Kennedy Library in Dorchester plans to release Wednesday, are transcripts of the sessions held by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council on Saturday, Oct., 1962, the day before Nikita S Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, announced that he would remove the missiles from Cuba.
According to those who have seen them, the transcripts debunk a number of myths that have been built around the missile crisis during the past 25 years.
Most critical is the myth that Kennedy ""won"" the faceoff by being tough and uncompromising.
A second myth is that Kennedy and his advisers managed the crisis through consensus.
In fact, Kennedy solved it by acting on a judgment that went against the consensus.
The transcripts show that had Kennedy accepted the judgment of his advisers, there might have been war between the United States and the Soviet Union.
On Oct., Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter proposing to trade the United States missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba and to swap a United States pledge not to invade Cuba and a Soviet pledge not to invade Turkey.
All of Kennedy's top advisers at three Executive Committee, or ExComm, meetings held that day, argued against the idea even though they knew that the alternative was either an invasion of Cuba or an air strike against the missile sites.
ExComm meeting, Paul Nitze, an assistant secretary of defense (he is now President Reagan's chief arms-control adviser), first spoke up against the idea, saying that the Soviets' next step would be to demand that the United States remove all nuclear weapons from Western Europe.
McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser, and Roswell Gilpatric, the deputy secretary of defense, said that no such deal should be discussed until after the Soviet missiles had been pulled out.
George Ball, the undersecretary of state, speaking for his entire department, said the idea would upset the Turks so much that it should not even be raised with them.
Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother and the attorney general, said the administration must make it clear that the Turkish and Cuban missiles were entirely different issues.
Robert S McNamara, the defense secretary, pointed out that the missiles belonged to Turkey and that only the nuclear warheads were under United States control.
His differences are captured in official ""summary records"" of the ExComm meeting, which the Kennedy Library released in sanitized form.
Some of the records were released five years ago, some just this month.
If the missiles in Cuba added 50 percent to Soviet nuclear capability, then to trade these missiles for those in Turkey would be of great military value.
The summary records indicate that at a 2:30m. meeting at the State Department, held without President Kennedy, his brother, Robert, ""urged that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday,"" the 29th or 30th.
At a 4m. meeting back in the White House, according to the summary record and, some say, according to the soon-to-be-released transcript, President Kennedy once again raised the merits of a missile trade.
Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reported that all of the chiefs favored invading Cuba on Monday the 29th.
In other words, according to the summary records -and, evidently, the transcripts -McNamara and the other advisers were willing to attack Cuba, knowing that this risked U.S.-Soviet war in Europe, rather than agree to remove from Turkey missiles that the administration was planning to get rid of anyway.
Up to this point, Johnson had remained virtually silent throughout the deliberations.
Ball's informal solution was finally what the Kennedy administration did to mollify Turkish bitterness over withdrawal of the missiles.
ExComm meeting on Oct. show that Kennedy was not entirely averse to the use of force.
Earlier in the day, an American U-2 spy plane had been shot down over Cuba.
Kennedy said that if United States reconnaissance planes were fired on again the next day, he would order an air strike against the surface-to-air missile site responsible for the action.
In other words, if the crisis had continued for another full day, a war might have been triggered.
United States District Court Judge Robert Ward temporarily blocked the sale until a hearing scheduled for next week.
Protesters gather to tout their special interests After reciting a pledge against vandalism, violence and even running or swearing, hundreds of protesters marched peacefully to the Capitol on Monday to oppose United States funding for the Colombian military.
Four days of demonstrations in the nation's capital wrapped up later Monday evening with dueling proPalestinian and pro-Israeli picketing outside the annual convention of a powerful Jewish lobbying group.
Protesters gathered before dawn Monday near the Washington Monument to object to United States aid to the Colombian military in its anti-guerrilla war and to a United States Army school that trains Latin American soldiers, some of whom have gone on to commit human rights abuses.
Agency checking pedals on Taurus and Sable cars Federal safety officials are investigating whether the brake and gas pedals on the Ford Taurus and Mercury Sable are too close, causing some drivers to hit the accelerator accidentally when trying to slow down.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's investigation involves 402,651 cars from the 2000 and 2001 model years.
NHTSA opened the inquiry in March and included it in a monthly report of investigations released Monday.
Living organ donations outpace those from dead Organ donations from the living reached a record high last year, outnumbering donors who are dead for the first time.
With waiting lists growing, more than 6,400 people gave away a kidney or a piece of their liver.
For more than a decade, the numbers of organs donated by the living have been growing more quickly than those given after death as desperate patients have turned increasingly to families or friends.
In 2001, living donors increased by 13. percent, on top of a 16. percent increase a year earlier, the government said Monday.
California Police chief resigns, won't sue for 2nd term LOS ANGELES Police Chief Bernard Parks resigned Monday, saying he will step down sometime next week and won't sue the city over the decision not to give him a second five-year term.
Parks, whose term ends in August, said he didn't want ""the citizens of this great city to incur any economic loss"" as part of a lawsuit.
Parks' departure follows an ugly rift with Mayor James Hahn, who was sharply criticized by members of the black community for refusing to support another term for the chief, who is black.
Hahn relied heavily on African-American support in last year's mayoral election.
Hahn has said he wants a police chief more willing to implement police reforms and community policing programs.
City and police union officials have criticized Parks for his inflexibility on those issues and on police discipline.
After that climactic Saturday, President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty that outlawed atmospheric testing.
They also installed the red phone hot line that allowed them to communicate more effectively.
The incident began on the morning of Oct.,1962, as Maultsby a U-2 spy plane pilot and one of the top five fighter pilots in the world at one time took off from Eielson Air Force Base in Alaska.
He was on a mission for the Atomic Energy Commission to check the atmosphere over the North Pole for signs of Soviet nuclear testing.
But on his return, Maultsby made a navigational error and ended up over the Chukotka Peninsula, in northeastern Russia.
Ordinarily the mistake would have been unremarkable, but it was amplified by the events of the preceding days.
The United States and Russia had squared off after the United States demanded Russia pull its nuclear weapons out of Cuba and Russia adamantly refused.
Soviet officials picked up Maultsby's blip on their radar and could have taken it as a sign of attack.
But they did not respond because Maultsby and a team of F-102s that came to his aid and guided him out quickly left, Schaller explained.
That same day, the United States had discovered Soviet ballistic missile sites in Cuba were armed, and a U-2 was shot down over Cuba.
In a 1992 television interview, Maultsby said he didn't realize he had entered Soviet airspace.
The MiGs only followed the American planes to the border, and the crisis fizzled to a close later that week as Khrushchev backed down and made plans to dismantle the Cuban missile sites.
But he had barely flown a dozen of those missions when he was shot down over Korea in 1952.
Battling electrical problems in his F-80 as well as enemy fire, Maultsby ejected as his plane was speeding downward.
He began running toward the cover of a nearby hill, but a dozen Chinese soldiers quickly surrounded him and took him prisoner.
He spent the next 22 months in a prisoner-of-war camp before he was freed.
Maultsby went on to serve in the Nellis Air Force Base Fighter Weapons Team, where officials considered him one of the top five fighter weapons gunners in the world.
He then flew with the Thunderbirds, the Air Force demonstration team, from 1958 to 1960.
Maultsby eventually became inspector general for combat readiness, supervising NATO forces from 1974 to 1977.
Maultsby received 18 decorations for valor and service over his more than 30 years of duty, including the Purple Heart, the Silver Star, the Legion of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross with three oak leaf clusters and the Air Medal with 19 oak leaf clusters.
He is survived by his wife of 49 years, Jeanne; sons Chuck II and Kevin of Tucson and Shawn of Colorado Springs, Colo.; and grandsons Chuck and Stevie, of Tucson.
Co pyrig ht 19 9 8 The Ariz o na Daily Star Cit at ion L Anne Newell, 'Col.
The founder and editor of George magazine is there as a journalist, a spokeswoman said.
The Cuban missile crisis came to a head Oct., 1962, when President Kennedy established an air and sea quarantine to prevent Russian nuclear missiles from being delivered to Cuba.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ultimately agreed to dismantle the missile sites.
Barbara Mandrell, who is giving up music to pursue acting, made her last stage performance with a concert at the Grand Ole Opry House in Nashville, Tenn.
Mandrell, 48, sang Sleeping Single in a Double Bed and played the saxophone, guitar and steel guitar Thursday night.
Quinn, Medicine Woman, Touched by an Angel and Baywatch, and has a recurring role on Sunset Beach.
Dowager Queen Ingrid of Denmark underwent surgery to repair a broken hip.
The 87-year-old Ingrid, mother of Queen Margrethe II, fell Thursday in her private quarters.
Ingrid stepped out of the limelight when her husband, King Frederik IX, died in 1972.
A panther that bit a trainer last week on the set of The New Swiss Family Robinson can say goodbye to Hollywood after biting a double for Stacy Keach.
The double, Terry Moore, was treated for two bites on his leg and a cut on his hand.
Moore, 44, has worked with Baer since the 2-year-old cat was 3 months old.
His journalistic career included many years with the Associated Press and ABC News.
In 1962, when Mr Scali was a diplomatic reporter for ABC News, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba and warned that if any were fired at the United States, the United States would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana.
Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Over lunch, Fomin outlined a proposal for the Soviets to dismantle the Cuban missile bases provided the American government pledged not to invade Cuba.
The two nations were able to settle the crisis diplomatically with Mr Scali's continued assistance.
ABC planned to disclose the account after Kennedy's assassination, but the Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the story first.
Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, disclosed in a conference in Havana last week that the Soviets had given authority to the local commander in Cuba to fire these missiles in the event President Kennedy ordered an invasion.
Robert S McNamara, Kennedy's defense secretary and a participant at the meeting, told his colleagues that Gribkov's disclosure had changed his assessment about how dangerous the missile crisis actually was, Brenner said.
McNamara told the gathering, Brenner said, that there was no question that Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba -and perhaps the Soviet Union as well -if United States forces had been fired on by nuclear weapons.
McNamara and other participants were en route home on Monday and were unavailable for comment.
It flopped on the West End stage but now, six years later, Lloyd Webber has taken a step towards unravelling the truth behind the man who was convicted as a pimp but went to his death protesting that he was a patriot who had served his country.
The impresario has released a cache of documents from the scandal, including a previously unseen letter that Ward sent to Harold Wilson, the future Labour prime minister, claiming that he was an intermediary during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, trying to de-escalate the nuclear stand-off.
The handwritten letter was sent on November 1, four days after John F Kennedy, the American president, and Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, had pulled back from the brink of war.
Wilson passed the letter on to Harold Macmillan, the Conservative prime minister.
Kennedy went on television on October 22 to say he would stop Soviet ships carrying weapons reaching Cuba and demanded that the missiles were removed.
On October 26, Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, urged Khrushchev to launch a nuclear strike against America.
Ward wrote to Wilson on headed notepaper with the address of his consulting rooms, a few minutes' walk from his mews house where John Profumo, secretary of state for war, had conducted his liaison with the 19-yearold Christine Keeler.
But they are tainted as a historical record because the police had his home and office under 24-hour watch and he was desperate to clear his name.
Wilson referred to Ward's letter in a 20-minute meeting with Macmillan held on May 27, 1963.
Ward wrote to Wilson one more time, as he awaited bail from Brixton prison on June 13, 1963.
He gave further details of the peace mission, claiming that when Loganov, the Russian chargé d'affaires, met Home, ""he was greeted by a tirade of recrimination that took up six pages of shorthand notes.
Jonathan Haslam, a historian and expert on the Soviet Union, said Ward ""had a charismatic effect on the people around him.
Britain's ""missed opportunity"" ""As I understand it you see the dangers in this feeling of having forced a Russian retreat.
It is possibly incidental that the status of this country could have enormously risen and that we could have had the credit that now goes to Washington or in fewer minds to Moscow.
Undeterred, Ward offers to help mediate between the superpowers over Berlin ""It is possible that I may be able to persuade the Russian embassy, when the heat comes on over Berlin, that we are still capable of balancing action — it will, in my opinion, be sorely needed and can be exercised only by this country.
Ward's motives ""I am not a member of any political party or other organisation.
I must ask you not to make public any of this — it is far too serious for political capital.
First Class set in 1962, with President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev squaring off in a nightmare game of nuclear chicken the truth about what really happened off the southern tip of Florida is revealed.
The dramatic action sheds a whole new light on those dread-filled days that November, when the world looked like it would be covered in mushroom clouds and for that, director Matthew Vaughn and his team should be thanked.
Of course, history books will have to be rewritten, but, hey, that's life.
This was also the time, it should be noted, when James Bond was combing nearby Caribbean waters for Dr.
First Class has some fun trying to explain how Professor X, Magneto, and all those mopey mutants came to be.
Charles Xavier (James McAvoy) is graduating from Oxford, a budding, brainy geneticist who picks up babes by complimenting them on their ""groovy"" genomes.
Erik Lehnsherr is a concentration camp survivor determined to track down the Nazi sicko who exploited his magnetic mind powers.
Kevin Bacon, an evil gleam in his eye and a Berlitz class worth of German in his mouth, plays Sebastian Shaw, the sinister Teuton.
Sending millions of Jews to their death only whetted this guy's appetite for destruction.
And there's Raven , the blue-skinned beauty who becomes Mystique; and Hank , the science whiz who becomes Beast; and Cassidy , whose sonic scream gives him the moniker Banshee, and January Jones, all vintage va-va-va-voom as a telepath.
Oliver Platt and Rose Byrne show up (the latter in lingerie, to blend in with a bevy of lap-dancing call girls) as CIA agents trying to figure out what's up with these weirdos and to help with the exposition.
For a time, Vaughn who seemed considerably less encumbered with his previous superhero outing, Kick-Ass keeps things afloat.
McAvoy and Fassbender are serious actors, and seem to be having a serious good time inhabiting these extraordinary Marvel Comics creations.
With James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Jennifer Lawrence, January Jones, Kevin Bacon, Oliver Platt, and Rose Byrne.
