After World War II the Cold War began and caused tension throughout the world.
The Berlin Airlift June 1948 – May 1949 After WWII, Germany and its capital Berlin, were divided into four parts controlled by Great Britain, the United States, France, and the Soviet Union.
To gain total control of Berlin, the Soviet Union set up a blockade to the part it did not control, West Berlin.
The U.S., Great Britain, and France sent over 2 million tons of food and fuel by planes for the next year.
The Berlin Wall 1961 To prevent people from leaving East Germany, the government constructed a concrete wall with barbed wire on top in 1961.
Berlin Wall • Following World War II, Germany was divided, creating Soviet East Germany and West Germany.
Berlin, located inside of East Germany, was also divided into East and West zones.
The Berlin Wall 1961 Joseph McCarthy • A United States senator from the state of Wisconsin.
April 1949 Ten western European countries along with the United States and Canada formed an alliance to resist the threat of Communism.
They signed the North Atlantic Treaty and agreed to come to each other’s defense to prevent communist attacks.
It takes action to support the values of democracy, individual liberty, rule of law, and peaceful resolution of conflicts.
The Korean War 1950-1953 Korean War • At the end of WWII Korea was divided into North Korea and South Korea.
In 1950 Kim Il Sung, the leader of North Korea, sent his powerful army into South Korea.
The United Nations responded quickly offering help from several countries to South Korea.
Korean War June 25, 1950 – July 27, 1953 After WWII, Korea was divided.
In 1950, North Korea invaded South Korea to try to unify Korea as a Communist country.
South Korea fought back with the help of the United Nations The dividing line between the two countries changed positions during the war, but eventually ended up back at the 38th parallel when the war ended.
The Soviet Union wanted to compete with the United States in building long range missiles.
President J.F.K. set up a blockade of Cuba and told the Soviet Union to remove the missiles.
After 13 tense days, the Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles and the United States agreed not to invade Cuba.
Vietnamese communists known as Vietcong tried to take over the South Vietnamese government.
President Nixon withdrew troops in 1973 and South Vietnam fell in 1975 to North Vietnam.
