Leader: another campaign promise in gaining congressional approval four days later Sam Mike for a United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
Following Kennedy's announcement of an ""Alliance for Progress"" with the 16, 1961); John W. countries of Latin America, Congress in May 1961, and August 1962, McCormack approved $1. billion in aid to Latin America, which it was hoped would result in political and social reforms guaranteeing greater stability and progress in these countries.
On March 16, 1961, the Senate approved the convention providing for United States membership in the Organization for Economic Development.
Early that fall legislation was enacted consolidating earlier laws on educational and cultural exchange programs.
Congress also sought to direct United States foreign policy through passage of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1962, which prohibited aid to Communist countries, and those countries providing assistance to Cuba.
Shifting its emphasis to the Nation's domestic needs, Congress drafted four laws, during Kennedy's first two years in office, to cover special vocational programs which would be coordinated by the same State vocational agencies already having responsibility for existing Federal-State programs.
The Area Redevelopment Act of May 1961 authorized special job training for workers in economically depressed areas.
The Manpower Development and Training Act of March 1962 sought to retrain workers with obsolete skills.
The Public Welfare Amendments of July 1962 provided special community training for people dependent upon public assistance.
The Trade Expansion Act of October 1962 made special training available for workers who had lost their jobs because of foreign competition.
President Kennedy's signature on the Area Redevelopment Act of May 1, Senate Majority Leader 1961, established a multimillion dollar program to assist in the financing of Mike Mansfield industrial and rural redevelopment.
With the Public Works Acceleration Act of September 1962, Congress provided $900 million for immediate acceleration of job-creating Federal and local public works projects in areas of high unemployment.
Other actions on Capitol Hill during the 87th Congress raised the minimum wage from $1.00 to $1.25 an hour, broadened social security benefits, provided supplemental funds for Federal and Federal-aid highways, established the Communications Satellite Corporation, and authorized a $100 million loan to the United Nations.
In addition, the Twenty-fourth amendment, outlawing the use of poll taxes as a means of preventing citizens from voting in Federal elections, was sent to the States for ratification late in August 1962.
This new amendment went into effect on January 23, 1964, with the ratification by South Dakota.
The Kennedy Administration justified growing U.S. involvement in Vietnam as necessary to halt the worldwide spread of communism.
Under the “domino principle,” the prevention of the spread of communism in Vietnam, Laos, and every other country in Southeast Asia was vital to United States security.
In Laos, the proUnited States faction lost ground to the pro2 Soviet faction and on May 2, 1961 a cease-fire was declared, with the U.S. agreeing to support a collation government led by Souvanna Phouma.
In South Vietnam, there was growing dissatisfaction with the government of Ngo Dinh Diem.
During 1961 the Viet Cong sharply increased guerrilla, subversive, and political warfare, and continued to control major portions of the population in the countryside.
The gains of the Viet Cong insurgency were not yet perceived as serious enough to threaten the immediate collapse of the Diem government, but the U.S. officials began to feel that eventually the Diem government would collapse.
On December 11, 1961 two United States helicopter companies arrived in Vietnam, providing direct United States military support to South Vietnam for the first time.
In 1962 the government of South Vietnam, with United States assistance, launched the Speaker of the House strategic hamlet, with the intention of fortifying a network of rural villages to John W McCormack oust the Viet Cong and prevent re-infiltration.
On April 15, 1961, eight U.S.-made planes, piloted by Cuban rebels, bombed three Cuban airbases.
Two days later, a force of 1,400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba.
In less than three days the invasion was crushed and all survivors were captured.
On April 24, President Kennedy issued a statement accepting full responsibility for the invasion.
Kennedy later accepted the resignations of CIA director Allen Dulles and his chief deputy Richard M Bissell, Jr., who had directed the operation.
Sam Rayburn Addresses the House Following His Sometime in mid-1962 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to install Swearing-In as Speaker of the 1st Session of the intermediate-range nuclear missiles, launching equipment and Il28-bombers 87th Congress in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States The plan would have nearly doubled Soviet nuclear striking capability against targets in the U.S., although the U.S. would still have maintained at least a 2-1 superiority in nuclear power targeted against the Soviet Union.
In July and August military shipments and specialists poured into Cuba.
Ball publicly disclosed the full extent of the Soviet military build-up in Cuba known at that time.
On October 15, United States intelligence analysts conformed that the Soviets were building a medium-range missile base in Cuba.
On October 22, President Kennedy addressed the nation, stating that the Soviet Union was preparing a series of offensive missile sites in Cuba with the purpose of providing nuclear strike capability against the United States and other Western hemisphere countries.
The President announced that he directed a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba.
On October 23, Khrushchev stated that captains of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba would be instructed not to obey the orders of United States naval vessels.
Two days later Khrushchev proposed that the Soviets withdraw weapons from Cuba on the condition that the U.S, withdraw the blockade and agree not to invade Cuba.
The next day a single Soviet ship resumed its passage towards Cuba and President Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s proposal.
Nonetheless, the U.S, expected that a military confrontation would occur.
ProQuest Congressional, CMP-1979FOA-0039 United States Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Committee on Armed Services.
ProQuest Congressional, CMP-1971-ASH-0003 Economic Trends and Conditions 1961 opened in the midst of a recession, with hopes that economic recovery would ensue.
Nearly 7% of the labor force was unemployed and almost onefifth of manufacturing capacity lay idle.
A persistent deficit in international payments had weakened confidence in the dollar.
Government response in 1961 and 1962 included measures intended to improve the structure and functioning of the economy, including new programs to redevelop chronically depressed areas, retrain the unemployed, increase social security benefits for the aged and the unemployed, boost business capital spending, and raise wages of underpaid workers.
The unemployment rate stood at 6.1% and confidence in the dollar had been restored.
During 1962 the unemployment rate continued to drop and stood at 5.6% by the end of the year.
Kennedy, John F Economic Report of the President, January 1962, House, Jan., 1962, 87th Congress, 2nd Session.
ProQuest Congressional, 12497 H.doc.8 Johnson, Lyndon B Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress, January 1963, House, Jan., 1963, 88th Congress, 1st Session.
Provided that no citizen would be denied the right to vote by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
Established the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a consultative body, consisting of the United States, Canada, and 18 European nations.
Constitution of the United States of America, Analysis and Interpretation.
Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Eighty-Seventh Congress, First Session, 1961, Vol.
Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 1962, Vol.
ProQuest Congressional Johnston, Felton M Orbital flight of John H Glenn, Jr.
Address of the President of the United States delivered before a joint session of the Senate and the House of Representatives relative to urgent national needs.
ProQuest Congressional, CR-1962-0904 Subcommittee to Investigate Administration of Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws.
Authorized the President to appoint an Area Redevelopment Administrator, to serve under the Secretary of Commerce, with authority to borrow $300 million from the Treasury for a revolving 9 fund to finance industrial and rural redevelopment loans and public facility loans.
Also appropriated monies for technical assistance, vocational retraining, and subsistence payments to trainees.
Raised the minimum wage in stages from $1 an hour to $1.25 an hour, and extended full wage and hour coverage-also in stages-to about 3,624,000 previously exempt workers, twothirds of them in the retail and service trades.
Authorized an additional $900 million a year for the National Interstate Highway program.
Authorized $2 billion in new funds for urban renewal, $55 million for urban planning, and special grants and loan funds for development of mass transit facilities and ""open spaces"" in cities.
Expanded community facilities loans aimed at financing basic sewage, gas and water service in small communities, authorized about 100,000 new public housing units, and boosted funds for construction of farm housing and housing for the elderly.
Also initiated three new experimental programs providing Federal loan insurance against losses on long-term commercial loans made for construction and rehabilitation of moderate income housing.
Broadened the President's authority to finance the costs of sending Americans abroad and bringing foreigners to the United States for a wide variety of educational, scientific, and cultural purposes.
Also created a new non-immigration alien category of ""exchange visitors"" with special visas and amended tax law to the benefit of exchanges.
Granted ""permanent legislative authority"" to the Peace Corps, established by executive authority in March 1961 to enlist young Americans as technological instructors and helpers in the less developed countries, providing skilled manpower for international development projects.
Established an independent United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to conduct research, prepare policy recommendations, conduct disarmament negotiations, and plan for 10 establishment of inspection and control systems.
Provided for a 15-member General Advisory Committee and authorized an appropriation of $10 million to the agency.
Authorized a new Federal program to train workers to help alleviate unemployment and to provide skilled personnel in certain industries.
Under this program the Secretary of Labor and the States were responsible for helping to determine manpower needs, selecting candidates for training, and placing trained persons.
Broadened welfare aid to those people considered to be the most needy, while undertaking a campaign to reduce the need for aid through programs of rehabilitation, training, and self-care for the needy.
Increased Federal reimbursements to the States for rehabilitative services to public assistance clients from 50 to 75 percent of the total cost.
Authorized appointment by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare of a 12-member Advisory Council on Public Welfare.
Authorized appropriations totaling $4,572,000,000 including $600 million for the Alliance for Progress in each of the fiscal years 1963-1966, but stipulated that no funds, except $100 million in fiscal 1963, could be used for other than dollar-payable loans.
Authorized an appropriation of $900 million for immediate acceleration of job-creating Federal and local public works projects in areas with long-term high unemployment.
Further provided that the United States should use every efforts to promote a pattern of United Nations financing (including a vigorous program for collection of delinquencies on annual assessments on a current basis) that will avoid any future large-scale defects.
Also instructed the Department of State to submit to Congress not later than January 31, 1963, a report on the steps taken by the United Nations General Assembly on long-term financing.
Amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to sharply strengthen Federal safety controls on drugs, authorized the standardization of drug names, and clarified and strengthened existing inspection authority.
Authorized the President to reduce duties by 50 percent between July 1, 1962 and June 30, 1967; to remove duties on entire categories of goods when the United States and members of the European Economic Community together accounted for 80 percent or more of the total free world trade; to cut or remove tariffs on agricultural products not meeting the 80 percent rule if necessary to maintain or expand United States farm exports; and eliminate tariffs on products currently dutiable at a rate of 5 percent or less.
Authorized $1,118,550,000 for Federal and Federal-aid highways in fiscal 1964 and $1,165,000,000 for fiscal 1965.
In addition authorized supplemental funds for fiscal 1963 of $10 million for forest roads and $6 million for public lands highways; authorized for fiscal 1964 only, $850,000 to complete construction of Nicaragua's Rama Road, $32 million to complete construction of the Inter-American Highway, and $800,000 for an Alaska highway study.
Authorized the President to name of Group of incorporators to establish the Communications Satellite Corporation , a private commercial communication system and to arrange for an initial stock offering.
Provided for the subsequent choice of 15 directors-three by the present, and six year to be elected annually by public stock holders and by communication carriers.
Gave the President broad responsibility for aiding the corporation in the rapid development of a Satellite System and for supervising its international activities; directed the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to provide satellite launching and others technical services on a reimbursable basis; and gave the FCC wide powers to regulate the corporation and the carriers in the interests of maximum competition, efficiency and economy.
