In response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, and the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to agree to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter future invasions.
An agreement was reached during a secret meeting between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in July 1962 and construction of a number of missile launch facilities started later that summer.
The 1962 midterm elections were under way in the United States and the White House had denied charges that it was ignoring dangerous Soviet missiles 90 miles from Florida.
These missile preparations were confirmed when an Air Force U-2 spy plane produced clear photographic evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missile facilities.
The United States established a military blockade to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba.
After a long period of tense negotiations, an agreement was reached between United States President John F Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a United States public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba again without direct provocation.
Secretly, the United States also agreed that it would dismantle all U.S.-built Jupiter MRBMs, which, unknown to the public, had been deployed in Turkey and Italy against the Soviet Union.
When all offensive missiles and Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba, the blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962.
The negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear, and direct communication line between Washington and Moscow.
A series of agreements sharply reduced U.S.–Soviet tensions during the following years.
Contents 1 Earlier actions by the United States 2 Balance of power 3 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba 4 Missiles reported 4.
October 23, "" United States Imposes Arms Blockade on Cuba on Finding Offensive Missile Sites; Kennedy Ready for Soviet Showdown"" 9.
October 25, ""Some Soviet Ships Said to Veer From Cuba; Khrushchev Suggests a Summit Meeting; Thant Bids United States and Russia Desist 2 Weeks"" 9.
October 26, ""Kennedy Agrees to Talks on Thant Plan, Khrushchev Accepts It; Blockade Goes On"" 9.
October 27, "" United States Finds Cuba Speeding Build-Up of Bases, Warns of Further Action; United Nations Talks Open"" 9.
October 28, "" United States Gets Soviet Offer to End Cuba Bases, Rejects Bid to Link It to Those in Turkey"" 9.
October 29, "" United States and Soviet Reach Accord on Cuba; Kennedy Accepts Khrushchev Pledge to Remove Missiles Under United Nations Watch"" 10 Memories in the media 10.
Media representations 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 14.
Such an involvement would also directly defy the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy which, while limiting the United States' involvement in European colonies and European affairs, held that the Western Hemisphere was in the United States sphere of influence.
The United States had been publicly embarrassed by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961, which had been launched under President John F Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles.
United States covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the similarly unsuccessful Operation Mongoose.
In addition, Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weakness was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly to the building of the Berlin Wall.
In January 1962, United States Army General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban government in a top-secret report , addressed to President Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose.
Balance of power When Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets leading.
In fact, the United States led the Soviets by a wide margin that would only increase.
Khrushchev increased the perception of a missile gap when he loudly boasted to the world that the USSR was building missiles ""like sausages"" whose numbers and capabilities actually were nowhere close to his assertions.
The United States had a considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads at the time and in the technology required for their accurate delivery.
Operation Anadyr In May 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of countering the United States' growing lead in developing and deploying strategic missiles by placing Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite the misgivings of the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, Alexandr Ivanovich Alexeyev who argued that Castro would not accept the deployment of these missiles.
Khrushchev faced a strategic situation where the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike"" capability that put the Soviet Union at a huge disadvantage.
The poor accuracy and reliability of these missiles raised serious doubts about their effectiveness.
A newer, more reliable generation of ICBMs would only become operational after 1965.
These missiles could hit American allies and most of Alaska from Soviet territory but not the contiguous 48 states of the United States.
A second reason Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba was because Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin—the American/British/French-controlled democratic enclave within Communist East Germany—into the Soviet orbit.
For this reason, among others, Khrushchev made West Berlin the central battlefield of the Cold War.
If the United States tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin.
Since Berlin was strategically more important than Cuba, the trade would be a win for Khrushchev.
Khrushchev was also reacting in part to the nuclear threat of obsolescent Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles which the United States had installed in Turkey during April 1962.
The Cuban leadership had a strong expectation that the United States would invade Cuba again and they enthusiastically approved the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
However, according to another source, Fidel Castro objected to the missiles deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be an irritant to the United States and help the interests of the entire socialist camp.
Further, the deployment would include short-range tactical weapons that would provide a ""nuclear umbrella"" for attacks upon the island.
Like Castro, Khrushchev felt that a United States invasion of Cuba was imminent, and that to lose Cuba would do great harm to the communist cause, especially in Latin America.
He said he wanted to confront the Americans ""with more than words ... the logical answer was missiles."":29 The Soviets maintained their tight secrecy, writing their plans longhand, which were approved by Rodion Malinovsky on July 4 and Khrushchev on July 7.
All of the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were carried out in the utmost secrecy, with only a very few told the exact nature of the mission.
Even the troops detailed for the mission were given misdirection, told they were headed for a cold region and outfitted with ski boots, fleece-lined parkas, and other winter equipment.
Anadyr was also the name of a river flowing into the Bering Sea, the name of the capital of Chukotsky District, and a bomber base in the far eastern region.
All these were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences.
Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July.
Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, chief of the Soviet Rocket Forces, led a survey team that visited Cuba.
He told Khrushchev that the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by palm trees.
The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September the United States Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230, which expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment.
On the same day, the United States announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIGLEX-62, which Cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation and proof that the United States planned to invade Cuba.
The Soviet leadership believed, based on their perception of Kennedy's lack of confidence during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, that he would avoid confrontation and accept the missiles as a fait accompli.:1 On September 11, the Soviet Union publicly warned that a United States attack on Cuba or on Soviet ships carrying supplies to the island would mean war.
On September 7, Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin assured United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the USSR was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba.
On September 11, the Telegrafnoe Agentstvo Sovetskogo Soyuza announced that the Soviet Union had no need or intention to introduce offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba.
On October 17, Soviet embassy official Georgy Bolshakov brought President Kennedy a personal message from Khrushchev reassuring him that ""under no circumstances would surface-to-surface missiles be sent to Cuba."":494 As early as August 1962, the United States suspected the Soviets of building missile facilities in Cuba.
During that month, its intelligence services gathered information about sightings by ground observers of Russian-built MiG-21 fighters and Il-28 light bombers.
On August 10, he wrote a memo to President Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba.
With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the Crisis became enmeshed in American politics.
On August 31, Senator Kenneth Keating , who received his information from Cuban exiles in Florida, warned on the Senate floor that the Soviet Union may be constructing a missile base in Cuba.
He charged the Kennedy Administration was covering up a major threat to the United States Air Force General Curtis LeMay presented a pre-invasion bombing plan to Kennedy in September, while spy flights and minor military harassment from United States forces at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base were the subject of continual Cuban diplomatic complaints to the United States government.
It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fueled missile that could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon.
Missiles reported The missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to effectively target the majority of the continental United States The planned arsenal was forty launchers.
United States intelligence received countless reports, many of dubious quality or even laughable, and most of which could be dismissed as describing defensive missiles.
They described large trucks passing through towns at night carrying very long canvas-covered cylindrical objects that could not make turns through towns without backing up and maneuvering.
Aerial images find Soviet missiles The United States had been sending U-2 surveillance over Cuba since the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
In a meeting with members of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance on 10 September, United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy heavily restricted further U-2 flights over Cuban airspace.
During this period, no significant U-2 coverage was achieved over the interior of the island.
At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28 light bomber fuselages.
In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases, leading DIA to lobby for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island.
Although in the past the flights had been conducted by the CIA, due to pressure from the Defense Department, the authority was transferred to the Air Force.
President notified On October 15, the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center reviewed the U-2 photographs and identified objects that they interpreted as medium range ballistic missiles.
This identification was made, in part, on the strength of reporting provided by Oleg Penkovsky, a double agent in the GRU working for CIA and MI6.
Although he provided no direct reports of the Soviet missile deployments to Cuba, technical and doctrinal details of Soviet missile regiments provided by Penkovsky in the months and years prior to the Crisis helped NPIC analysts correctly identify the missiles on U-2 imagery.
That evening, the CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President.
Without informing the members of EXCOMM, President Kennedy tape recorded all of their proceedings, and Sheldon M Stern, head of the Kennedy library has transcribed some of them.
The United States had no plan in place because United States intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Offer Castro the choice of splitting with the Russians or being invaded.
This Game Tree models how the two actors would have considered their decisions.
Kennedy also believed that United States allies would think of the United States as ""trigger-happy cowboys"" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation.
President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting.
The EXCOMM then discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military.
The United States already had approximately 5,000 strategic warheads,:261 while the Soviet Union had only 300.
First, Kennedy had explicitly promised the American people less than a month before the crisis that ""if Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the United States ... the United States would act."":674–681 Second, United States credibility among their allies, and among the American people, would be damaged if they allowed the Soviet Union to appear to redress the strategic balance by placing missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office On October 18, President Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only.
Not wanting to expose what he already knew, and wanting to avoid panicking the American public, the President did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up.
On October 22, 1962 a second helicopter crashed into the Gulf, that also was from HSS-2 stationed on the Essex.
The details of the deaths of October 19, 1962 have never been provided to the families affected.
There are numerous rumors that exist from bad storms, Soviet interference with the flight, or a one way suicide recon mission.
However, Army units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanized and logistical assets, while the United States Navy could not supply sufficient amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armored contingent from the Army.
Quarantine A United States Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis.
According to international law a blockade is an act of war, but the Kennedy administration did not think that the USSR would be provoked to attack by a mere blockade.
Since it would take place in international waters, Kennedy obtained the approval of the OAS for military action under the hemispheric defense provisions of the Rio Treaty.
However, reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the 21st, the paramount concern being that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles.
Consequently, the United States could find itself bombing operational missiles were the blockade to fail to force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island.
In Moscow, Ambassador Kohler briefed Chairman Khrushchev on the pending blockade and Kennedy's speech to the nation.
Before the speech, United States delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, and French President Charles de Gaulle to brief them on the United States intelligence and their proposed response.
Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba Sorry, your browser either has JavaScript disabled or does not have any supported player.
You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser.
The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade, with the USS Leary as Newport News's destroyer escort.
On October 23, at 11:24 am EDT, a cable drafted by George Ball to the United States Ambassador in Turkey and NATO notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw what the United States knew to be nearly obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba.
Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade involving the U.S.'s missile presence in their country.
Two days later, on the morning of October 25, journalist Walter Lippmann proposed the same thing in his syndicated column.
In West Germany, newspapers supported the U.S.'s response, contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months.
Two days later, after a visit by a high-ranking CIA agent, they accepted the validity of the photographs.
Soviet broadcast At the time, the crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet news agency TASS broadcast a telegram from Khrushchev to President Kennedy, in which Khrushchev warned that the United States's ""outright piracy"" would lead to war.
However, this was followed at 9:24 pm by a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy which was received at 10:52 pm EDT, in which Khrushchev stated, ""if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA"" and that the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression"" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it.
United States alert level raised Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations, October 25, 1962.
For the only confirmed time in United States history, while B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields, and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice.
Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52s were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union so that the latter might observe that the United States was serious.Jack J Catton later estimated that about 80 percent of SAC's planes were ready for launch during the crisis; David A Burchinal recalled that, by contrast, the Russians were so thoroughly stood down, and we knew it.
Blockade challenged At 7:15 am EDT on October 25, the USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept the Bucharest but failed to do so.
Fairly certain the tanker did not contain any military material, they allowed it through the blockade.
Later that day, at 5:43 pm, the commander of the blockade effort ordered the USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr. to intercept and board the Lebanese freighter Marucla.
This took place the next day, and the Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked.
At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on.
This report was later verified by a CIA report that suggested there had been no slow-down at all.
During the day, the Soviets responded to the blockade by turning back 14 ships presumably carrying offensive weapons.
Crisis stalemated The next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba.
However, he was persuaded to give the matter time and continue with both military and diplomatic pressure.
The USSR had shown no indication that they would back down and had made several comments to the contrary.
The United States had no reason to believe otherwise and was in the early stages of preparing for an invasion, along with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union in case it responded militarily, which was assumed.
Secret negotiations At 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin , at Fomin's request.
Following the instructions of the Politburo of the CPSU, Fomin noted, ""War seems about to break out"" and asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends"" at the State Department to see if the United States would be interested in a diplomatic solution.
He suggested that the language of the deal would contain an assurance from the Soviet Union to remove the weapons under UN supervision and that Castro would publicly announce that he would not accept such weapons in the future, in exchange for a public statement by the United States that it would never invade Cuba.
The United States responded by asking the Brazilian government to pass a message to Castro that the United States would be ""unlikely to invade"" if the missiles were removed.
Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 26, 1962 On October 26 at 6:00 pm EDT, the State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by Khrushchev.
The long letter took several minutes to arrive, and it took translators additional time to translate and transcribe it.
I have no doubt they would lose such a war. —Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, October 1962 S-75 Dvina with V-750V 1D missile on a launcher.
Castro, on the other hand, was convinced that an invasion of Cuba was soon at hand, and on October 26, he sent a telegram to Khrushchev that appeared to call for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the U.S in case of attack.
Castro also ordered all anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba to fire on any United States aircraft, whereas in the past they had been ordered only to fire on groups of two or more.
At 6:00 am EDT on October 27, the CIA delivered a memo reporting that three of the four missile sites at San Cristobal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande appeared to be fully operational.
They also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under order not to initiate action unless attacked.
At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev.
Contrary to the letter of the night before, the message offered a new trade, that the missiles on Cuba would be removed in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey.
He also noted that they had not made the USSR aware of the blockade line and suggested relaying this information to them via U Thant at the United Nations.
He gave the message to one of his most trusted friends, Ettore Bernabei, the general manager of RAI-TV, to convey to Arthur M Schlesinger Jr.
Unknown to the Soviets, the United States regarded the Jupiter missiles as obsolescent and already supplanted by the Polaris nuclear ballistic submarine missiles.
At approximately 12:00 pm EDT, the aircraft was struck by a S-75 Dvina SAM missile launched from Cuba.
The stress in negotiations between the USSR and the United States intensified, and only later was it believed that the decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander acting on his own authority.
At 4:00 pm EDT, Kennedy recalled members of EXCOMM to the White House and ordered that a message immediately be sent to U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out.
During this meeting, General Maxwell Taylor delivered the news that the U-2 had been shot down.
Drafting the response Emissaries sent by both Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev agreed to meet at the Yenching Palace Chinese restaurant in the Cleveland Park neighborhood of Washington D.C. on the evening of October 27.
Kennedy suggested that they take Khrushchev's offer to trade away the missiles.
Unknown to most members of the EXCOMM, Robert Kennedy had been meeting with the Soviet Ambassador in Washington to discover whether these intentions were genuine.
The new plan called for the President to ignore the latest message and instead to return to Khrushchev's earlier one.
Kennedy was initially hesitant, feeling that Khrushchev would no longer accept the deal because a new one had been offered, but Llewellyn Thompson argued that he might accept it anyway.
White House Special Counsel and Adviser Ted Sorensen and Robert Kennedy left the meeting and returned 45 minutes later with a draft letter to this effect.
The group argued that the letter should be underscored with an oral message to Ambassador Dobrynin stating that if the missiles were not withdrawn, military action would be used to remove them.
Dean Rusk added one proviso, that no part of the language of the deal would mention Turkey, but there would be an understanding that the missiles would be removed ""voluntarily"" in the immediate aftermath.
He went on to claim that an invasion was only hours away, at which point Fomin stated that a response to the United States message was expected from Khrushchev shortly, and he urged Scali to tell the State Department that no treachery was intended.
Within the United States establishment, it was well understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put Khrushchev in a terrible position.
Robert Kennedy later recalled the mood, ""We had not abandoned all hope, but what hope there was now rested with Khrushchev's revising his course within the next few hours.
However, as Robert Kennedy noted, there was little expectation it would be accepted.
The decision to launch these required agreement from all three officers on board, but one of them, Vasili Arkhipov, objected and so the launch was narrowly averted.
On the same day a United States U-2 spy plane made an accidental, unauthorized ninety-minute overflight of the Soviet Union's far eastern coast.
On October 27, Khrushchev also received a letter from Castro – what is now known as the Armageddon Letter – interpreted as urging the use of nuclear force in the event of an attack on Cuba.
Crisis ends On October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in southern Italy and in Turkey, the latter on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba.
There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement, although Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was; nevertheless, when the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey.
At 9:00 am EST, on October 28, a new message from Khrushchev was broadcast on Radio Moscow.
Remove the 15 Jupiters in Turkey and Russia will remove the rockets from Cuba.
The Soviet premier had made the offer in a public statement for the world to hear.
Kennedy had deployed the Jupiters in March of the year, causing a stream of angry outbursts from the Soviet premier.
On November 2, 1962, President Kennedy addressed the United States via radio and television broadcasts regarding the dismantlement process of the Soviet R-12 missile bases located in the Caribbean region.
However, the Soviets changed their minds, fearing possible future Cuban militant steps, and on November 22, 1962, the Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan told Castro that those rockets with the nuclear warheads were being removed too.
In his negotiations with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Robert Kennedy informally proposed that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed ""within a short time after this crisis was over."":222 The last United States missiles were disassembled by April 24, 1963, and were flown out of Turkey soon after.
The practical effect of this Kennedy-Khrushchev Pact was that it effectively strengthened Castro's position in Cuba, guaranteeing that the United States would not invade Cuba.
It is possible that Khrushchev only placed the missiles in Cuba to get Kennedy to remove the missiles from Italy and Turkey and that the Soviets had no intention of resorting to nuclear war if they were out-gunned by the United States Because the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Southern Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time, Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened.
The perception was that Kennedy had won the contest between the superpowers and Khrushchev had been humiliated.
This is not the case as both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite the pressures of their governments.
Khrushchev held power for another two years.:102–105 Aftermath The nuclear-armed Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile.
The United States secretly agreed to withdraw these missiles from Italy and Turkey.
Khrushchev went to Kennedy thinking that the crisis was getting out of hand.
The Soviets were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started.
Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of the Politburo embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the United States and his ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place.
Cuba perceived the outcome as a betrayal by the Soviets, given that decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
This caused Cuban–Soviet relations to deteriorate for years to come.:278 On the other hand, Cuba continued to be protected from invasion.
The worldwide United States Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned to DEFCON 4 on November 20, 1962.
U-2 pilot Major Anderson's body was returned to the United States and he was buried with full military honors in South Carolina.
Seven crew died when a MATS Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23.
Post-crisis revelations Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., a historian and adviser to President Kennedy, told National Public Radio in an interview on October 16, 2002, that Castro did not want the missiles, but that Khrushchev had pressured Castro to accept them.
Castro was not completely happy with the idea but the Cuban National Directorate of the Revolution accepted them to protect Cuba against United States attack, and to aid its ally, the Soviet Union.:272 Schlesinger believed that when the missiles were withdrawn, Castro was angrier with Khrushchev than he was with Kennedy because Khrushchev had not consulted Castro before deciding to remove them.
Although Castro was infuriated by Khrushchev, he planned on striking the United States with remaining missiles should an invasion of the island occur.:311 In early 1992, it was confirmed that Soviet forces in Cuba had, by the time the crisis broke, received tactical nuclear warheads for their artillery rockets and Il-28 bombers.
Castro stated that he would have recommended their use if the United States invaded despite knowing Cuba would be destroyed.
An argument broke out among three officers on the B-59, including submarine captain Valentin Savitsky, political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov, and Deputy brigade commander Captain 2nd rank Vasili Arkhipov.
Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests.
Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
While in Havana, Mikoyan witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of Castro, who was convinced that Moscow had made the agreement with the United States at the expense of Cuba's defense.
During a tense, four-hour meeting, Mikoyan convinced Castro that despite Moscow's desire to help, it would be in breach of an unpublished Soviet law to transfer the missiles permanently into Cuban hands and provide them with an independent nuclear deterrent.
He alerted the citizens of the United States that the Soviet Union had broken its previous promises and was building missile delivery equipment in Cuba.
He told the citizens these missiles would have range up to 2,000 miles.
President Kennedy directly attacked the Soviet Union in his speech and blamed them for starting the current crisis.
Kennedy further stated that any missile fired into the western hemisphere would be seen as an attack against the United States.
The Soviet Union challenged the United States's blockade of any weapons being shipped to Cuba.
They asserted that Cuba could make any defensive arrangements they wanted.
They further warned President Kennedy that the United States naval quarantine could lead to thermonuclear war and that Moscow would prepare suitable measures to enhance its combat measures.
Moscow asked the United Nations Security Council to meet and discuss the violation of the United States Charter and the U.S.'s threat to peace with its blockade.
Moscow called United States Ambassador Foy D Kohler and gave him a 2,500 statement in response to President Kennedy's speech on the day prior.
It informed the United States that they would resist dismantling missiles in Cuba and issued a ""serious warning"" to the United States.
There was speculation that the Russians were trying to approach the blockade first with a ship carrying innocent cargo, but the United States administration refused to comment.
The diversion of Russian ships and Premier Khrushchev's call for a meeting suggested that Moscow was willing to negotiate.
Sources inside the Kennedy Administration hinted that the United States was prepared to consider negotiations with the Soviet Union if the United States retained freedom of action.
October 26, ""Kennedy Agrees to Talks on Thant Plan, Khrushchev Accepts It; Blockade Goes On"" It was reported that President Kennedy agreed to talks between the United States and U Thant acting Secretary General on arrangements that could be made for the Cuban crisis.
Premier Khrushchev also accepted Mr Thant's negotiation proposals where the United States would suspend its blockades of Cuba for three weeks if the Soviet Union stopped shipping missiles to Cuba.
At the United Nation's meeting both the United States and Soviet Union ambassadors relayed their acceptance of a meeting in the interests of peace.
While President Kennedy agreed to meet with Mr Thant, he did not mention to the United State's people the call for the temporary suspension of the United States blockade.
The Administration stated that this progress must be stopped immediately.
It was reported that U Thant had gotten Premier Khrushchev to agree to temporarily divert all Russian ships away from the United States blockade surrounding Cuba.
President Kennedy issued a statement to Mr Thant stating that the American ships would do everything they could to avoid all contact with Russian ships outside the blockade zone, but the United States would not leave until the missile sites were deconstructed.
October 28, "" United States Gets Soviet Offer to End Cuba Bases, Rejects Bid to Link It to Those in Turkey"" It was reported that President Kennedy revealed Premier Khrushchev had offered an acceptable solution for the Cuban crisis and that they would pull away.
In a letter to the Soviet Union, President Kennedy called for Premier Khrushchev to stand by an offer made in a private negotiations session that happened over night.
This offer would remove all the Soviet missiles from Cuba under the United Nations supervision.
It was also reported that President Kennedy ignored a proposal from Premier Khrushchev to eliminate all Soviet missile bases in Cuba if the United States removed all of its missile bases in Turkey.
In an effort to persuade Premier Khrushchev to work with his offer, President Kennedy offered to halt its blockade if the United Nations were to oversee the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Premier Khrushchev pledged to have the Soviet Union stop work on missile cites in Cuba and to remove them and ship them back to the Soviet Union while under inspection by United Nation representatives.
Memories in the media The American popular media, especially television, made heavy use of the events of the missile crisis and both fictional and documentary forms.
Sheldon Stern finds that a half century later there are still many ""misconceptions, half-truths, and outright lies"" that have shaped media versions of what happened in the White House during those harrowing two weeks.
According to William Cohn, television programs are typically the main source used by the American public to know about and interpret the past.
The Soviet media proved somewhat disorganized as it was unable to generate a coherent popular history.
One contradiction that pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasizes the horrors of nuclear war, versus the militancy of the need to prepare Soviets for war against American aggression.
Media representations Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's account of the crisis, released in 1969; It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries.
The music video for My Trigger by Miike Snow is based loosely on the crisis.
See also Cold War portal Cuba portal Soviet Union portal United States portal Bomber gap Cuba–Soviet Union relations Leninsky Komsomol class cargo ships Mutual assured destruction Norwegian rocket incident Nuclear disarmament Soviet Navy Notes ↑ McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26.
The Kennedys Thirteen Days RFK Bobby RFK Must Die The Kennedys Ethel Electoral 1964 United States Senate election 1968 Presidential campaign primaries Boiler Room Girls Family,family tree Ethel Skakel Kathleen Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy Robert F Kennedy Jr.
David Kennedy Courtney Kennedy Michael Kennedy Kerry Kennedy Chris Kennedy Max Kennedy Doug Kennedy Rory Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy III Joseph P Kennedy Sr.
Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License unless otherwise noted.
