Republicans nominated Nixon Former Vice President as well as communisthunter 2.
Democrats nominated Kennedy Kennedy asked Lyndon B Johnson, a Senator from Texas, to be his Vice President 3.
A televised debate is believed to have made the difference in the election, in which Kennedy “looked” better than Nixon 4.
Kennedy first ran for a seat in the House of Representatives He was reelected two times 3.
In 1952, Kennedy decided to run for the Senate B Kennedy’s Administration 1.
He also secured the passage of the Trade Expansion Act which cut tariff rates up to 50% 3.
Kennedy and Defense Secretary McNamara pushed a policy of flexible response—they wanted to have a variety of options ready to apply to any potential situation that arose This did not mean adding more nuclear weapons; it included special forces that could be used—so they had multiple responses to conflict 4.
Wanted to put a man on the moon ASAP He was the first president to ask Congress to approve money for the space program He asked for more than $22 billion for Project Apollo, which had the goal of landing an American man on the moon before the end of the decade 6.
Concerned with Cold War issues and wanted to continue the policy of containment 7.
Historically, Vietnam was first controlled by the Chinese, the French, and the Japanese France controlled Vietnam again in the post-WWII era France struggled to maintain influence over Vietnam ii.
The Geneva Conference declared a cease-fire and spilt Vietnam at the 17th parallel into North and South aa.
Because they wanted to prevent the spread of communism in Vietnam due to the Cold War and the domino theory B Vietnam 1.
Just before Eisenhower left office he broke diplomatic relations with Cuba The result of a failed attempt by the United States to overthrow Castro Eisenhower had advised Kennedy to advance the plans for an invasion of Cuba The plan was to invade Cuba through the Bay of Pigs 2.
The United States planned to land CIA trained and armed Cuban exiles in Cuba in an attempt to overthrow Castro’s government The United States and the Cuban exiles were counting on support from the local population to overthrown Castro Overall, the Bay of Pigs invasion was a disaster for which Kennedy took full responsibility D Kennedy vs.
Hopes of “thawing” the Cold War were dashed by Khrushchev’s threat that the Soviets would conclude a peace treaty with East Germany and thus cut off Western access to West Berlin E The Berlin Wall 1.
The East Germans constructed the Berlin Wall with help from the Soviets This was to prevent the emigration of East Germans to West Germany 2 This was not how the Soviets advertised their reason for constructing the wall— both a physical barrier and sign of the tension that existed ii.
A major Cold War confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union—closest we ever were to nuclear war 2.
Following the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Soviet Union increased its support of Castro’s regime In the summer of 1962, Khrushchev installed ballistic missiles in Cuba 3.
When United States reconnaissance flights revealed the secret construction of missile launching sites, President Kennedy publicly denounced the Soviet actions Kennedy imposed a naval blockade/quarantine on Cuba He declared that any missile launched from Cuba would warrant a full-scale retaliatory attack by the United States against the Soviet Union 4.
Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles and dismantle the missile sites Kennedy agreed to end the naval quarantine of Cuba (and…remove some missiles from Turkey) 6.
Led to the development of the “hotline” where the United States and Soviets could speak to each other if any future crises were to occur G Other Programs 1.
Remember… Brown Board, the Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 that segregation in public schools would no longer be permitted BUT… There were many schools, especially in southern states, that did not obey this decision There were also still racial segregation on buses, in restaurants, movie theaters, and other public places B Freedom Rides 1.
An interracial group of CORE members organized a Freedom Ride on buses traveling through the South The riders encountered opposition in Alabama as they were attacked and their bus was torched C Integrating Universities 1.
The NAACP and SNCC focused on Albany, Georgia to continue nonviolent resistance and the sit-in movement E Martin Luther King, Jr.
Birmingham, Alabama was also a focus of the Civil Rights Movement and was considered one of the most segregated cities King was arrested here and wrote the very famous “Letter from Birmingham Jail” 2.
All of this pushed Kennedy to press Congress for civil rights legislation to establish equality for blacks F March on Washington 1.
This brought Lyndon B Johnson, an entirely different man, into the White House B Johnson as President 1.
He had risen through the party ranks to become a polished professional negotiator by the time he was Kennedy’s Vice President 3.
Famous for using what was called the “Johnson Treatment,” in the Senate He literally got right in his opponents’ faces to discuss key issues 4.
As a former Senate Majority Leader Johnson was a skilled legislator and developed a good relationship with Congress C 1964 Presidential Election 1.
Johnson is easily elected D Johnson’s Domestic Programs—The Great Society 1.
Johnson declared a “war on poverty” The book The Other America brought up the issue of poverty (40 million Americans were in poverty) 2.
His domestic programs and policies became known as the Great Society Think of it as an attempt at a “New Deal” in the 1960s His programs focused on education, medical care for the elderly, immigration reforms, and civil rights 3.
The Higher Education Act and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 provided federal aid to schools Head Start was developed for young children The Child Nutrition Act added breakfast to school lunch programs 3.
In February 1964, Johnson moved another Kennedy plan through Congress: a $10 billion tax cut This helped to increase consumer spending and GNP soared 6.
Sought to continue what Kennedy had started although previously he had not supported the civil rights movement 2.
One of the first pieces of legislation that Johnson pushed through Congress was the Civil Rights Act of 1964 It banned racial discrimination in public accommodations in the United States (this included gas stations, restaurants, hotels, movie theaters, and airline terminals) Also outlawed discrimination based on color, nationality, religion, and gender (gave some power to the women’s movement) 3.
A New Direction in the Fight for Civil Rights A From Nonviolence to Violence 1.
More and more people began to disagree with integration and nonviolence Malcolm X was more forceful than King and felt it was time for African Americans to stand on their own feet and defend themselves against white domination He popularized the Nation of Islam (and the idea of black nationalism, separatism, and self-improvement) ii.
Blacks should do things for themselves rather than rely on the charity of white politicians bb.
By the mid 1960s, racial tensions had gone beyond sit-ins and Freedom Rides 2.
A combination of a lack of rights, poverty, and unemployment led to violence 3.
Earl Warren was chief justice of the Supreme Court from 1953-1969 Considered impactful as the John Marshall Court was Decision focused on protecting individual rights 2.
The was became “Americanized” in 1965 when United States ground troops arrived in Vietnam By June 1965 75,000 United States troops were in Vietnam 4.
The terrain made it difficult to find the Viet Cong and led the United States to fight a war of attrition in an effort to wear down the enemy by killing as many men as possible 5.
By 1966 there were approximately 400,000 United States soldiers in Vietnam and this number would reach 500,000 by 1968 6.
Nasty chemicals were used during the war such as napalm and Agent Orange 7.
The war mad LBJ extremely unpopular as the United States became more and more involved He decided not to run for reelection in 1968—that is how bad it was B Anti-war Movement 1.
Demonstrations, marches, and even some civil rights leaders spoke out against the war 3.
The war had gone on too long, cost too much money, and caused too many deaths 4.
Students for a Democratic Society protested heavily against the war They met in Port Huron, MI and wrote the Port Huron Statement 7 They believed in a participatory democracy, in which people take part in making decisions that affect their lives ii.
Those that practiced nonconformity were a part of the counterculture 2.
The most prevalent group were the hippies They focused on ways of achieving personal fulfillment and rejected traditional elements of life They got away from the conservativism and conformity that existed during the 1950s Wore flowered or unusual clothing Many used marijuana or LSD Heavily influenced by the writers of the Beat Generation of the 1950s Opposed the Vietnam War influenced by the music of the Beatles, Jefferson Airplane, Joan Baez, and Bob Dylan B Music 1.
Betty Friedan wrote The Feminine Mystique This brought equal pay for equal work to the forefront It also focused on the “problem that had no name” Women felt unfulfilled as housewives and their husbands did not understand this at all 2.
