Stalin suspicious that the West did not want the the Tehran, Yalta & Soviet Union to emerge strongly from the war.
Up until 1949, the USA thought it could development of the use it’s monopoly of nuclear weapons to deter Soviet attack.
Soviet Union argued it needed as ‘buffer zone’ protecting it from attack 10 1947 Cominform established satellite states in from the west.
USA more determined to 11 1949 Comecon established contain communism through military and economic assistance.
Stalin responded by setting up Cominform and Comecon enabling more 14 May 1949 Berlin Blockade Ends control of bloc.
Capitalist sides were soon united Berlin Crisis (blockade into Federal Republic of Germany.
Truman viewed this as a major victory, Stalin Key Words felt humiliated.
Also led to the creation of NATO 20 Communism The political belief that everyone should be equal, governed under a single political party, 31 Two consequences of 1) USA now committed to the defence of Western Europe and would not accept Soviet aggression. and share their wealth among the whole formation of NATO 2) Increased tension.
Developments in West Germany to make it part of NATO in 1955 and allow the nation to remilitarise were seen by Stalin as a direct threat.
Both alliances planned for military action 22 Satellite Russia had twice been invaded by Germany against the other, including the use of nuclear and conventional weapons.
Stalin 2) The Warsaw Pact gave the Soviet Union direct control over the armed forces of it’s wanted these countries to become satellite satellite states, thus strengthening it’s grip on Eastern Europe. states to protect Russia 33 Two consequences of 1) 200,000 Hungarians fled the country and became refugees.
The intercontinental ballistic missiles could hit almost all American cities and the launch sites could be operational by November.
Many people viewed Kennedy as a great statesman who had stood up well to communism.
Limited Test Ban Treaty signed in 1963 – USA and Russia agreed to stop testing weapons in the atmosphere 11 1964 Brezhnev becomes new leader of USSR Nuclear non-proliferation Treaty signed in 1968 Superpowers agreed to help stop the spread on nuclear weapons.
Soviet union forced Czech to produce goods for the Soviet economy, yet the Czech’s needed those raw materials.
Though Brezhnev supported Dubcek, he was fearful: Causes: 1) Berlin Crisis • Other Czech parties began to propose even more radical changes.
Alexander Dubcek, a communist, proposed reforms to Russian leader Brezhnev.
Freedom of press also to be granted 17 Berlin Ultimatum Khrushchev demanded that the USA leave West • Democratic elections and a multi-party state Berlin.
He increased United States defense by $3. billion the next Dubcek and other reformers were arrested and forced to reverse the reforms they had made.
Construction of Berlin Khrushchev closed the boarder between East and West Berlin in August with high wall, with nobody allowed in or out.
Brezhnev’s doctrine stated that the Soviet Union had the right to invade any communist country Initial Stand-off: The United States lined it’s side with tanks, so the soviets responded. who’s actions appeared to threaten the entire Eastern Bloc.
Following the events in Czechoslovakia, this was to be the 18 One wrong move and there was a serious possibility of armed conflict. new normal for Russia.
Berliners were separated from their loved ones set himself on fire in protest.
Ease of tensions: The building of the wall essentially settled the dispute over actions.
However, America was at war with Vietnam at this point, and therefore did not intervene in the crisis.
Romania had refused to send troops to help the invasion and Albania did the same, 1963 and said the wall was a reminder of the failures of communism.0,00 leaving the Warsaw Pact in 1968.
Following 1968, Romania and Yugoslavia moved closer to China, and distanced came to here him speak. themselves from Russia.
New president Nixon visited China in 1971 – Brezhnev did not want a close relationship to develop between China and the USA so he 1 1969 SALT talks begin – Détente invited Nixon to Moscow in 1972.
The Russian economy was weak and they wanted to reduce arms spending 2 July 1971 SALT I signed 26 Détente The period of peace between the superpowers in the 1970s, characterized by meetings between the leaders and agreements.
Anti-Missile systems only allowed at 2 sites BUT no limits put on strategic bombers.
Russia accepted the existence of West Germany as an 6 1980 Carter Doctrine independent nation, calls were made for greater cooperation, particularly in science, each side had to respect universal human rights like freedom of speech, religion etc.
Olympics 28 5 Causes of Soviet 1) Afghanistan neighbored the oil fields of the middle east.
He announced the United States defense Reagan policies program would cost 1 trillion dollars.
This would give the United States a huge advantage in the arms race 14 Dec 1988 Gorbachev announces the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine 31 Causes of New Gorbachev was leader of Soviet Union from 1985.
He was aware of the issues facing Russia and new the country would need to change or see its Thinking empire collapse.
He led a series of reforms aimed at modernizing the Soviet Union and Russian economy.
Geneva Accords committed the countries to speeding up arms talks, banishing chemical weapons and being more 17 Nov 1989 Berlin Wall falls Thinking’ active in human rights issues 3) Reykjavik Leaders committed to reducing their nuclear arsenals.
Gorbachev agreed to this deal because he had become Russia simply could Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria not keep up with America in defense spending.
Instead, the realization that the Soviet Union would 19 Dec 1989 Malta Summit not interfere in their politics prompted radical political change.
Hungary opened its border with Austria, creating a gap collapse of Soviet in the Iron Curtain and people began migrating to the capitalist West.
By 1990, the Baltic 21 Jul 1991 Warsaw Pact dissolved Union States had declared their independence from Russia 2) Developments in East Germany Demonstrations occurred in 1989 and there were calls for changes to government.
On 4 th November, 1 22 Jul 1991 START Treaty Ratified by United States million people protested to demand free elections.
As a result, collapse of Soviet military co-operation between states ended in 1990 and Warsaw Pact was dissolved in 1991.
