ACTIVITY As you read, use the chart below to list the different proxy wars fought by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 superpowers also affected “hot” wars, or those that actually involved fighting.
World War II had destroyed European supremacy among the nations of the world.
As the Cold War conflict between them grew stronger, European nations were divided into two armed camps.
They were forced to depend upon one or the other of these two major powers.
The rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union brought the world to the brink, or the very edge, of nuclear war.
These two nations seemed to hold the survival of the world in their hands.
Instead, the United States and the Soviet Union fought a series of proxy wars.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union were armed with powerful nuclear arsenals.
However, both nations were willing to support opposing sides in local wars in other countries.
The two nations considered this support as part of the ongoing struggle between their two worldviews.
The United States began with NATO in Europe and continued to build alliances in other parts of the world.
The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was formed to stop Communist aggression in the East.
The Central Treaty Organization included Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Great Britain, and the United States.
The Soviet Union and the United States sent military support to prevent the other side from expanding its influence.
Also, the Cold War proxy conflict on the small island of Cuba almost turned into a major nuclear war.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 2.
United States President Harry S Truman saw this as yet another example of Communist aggression and expansion.
He gained the approval of the United Nations and sent United States troops to repel, or force back, the North Korean invaders.
As a result, in the mid-1950s the administration of President Dwight D Eisenhower adopted a policy of massive retaliation, or fighting back in a big way.
President Eisenhower explained as the reason for this that the freedom at risk in Asia was as important as the freedom people had in the West.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 PROGRESS CHECK 3.
The Cold War confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union reached frightening levels during John F Kennedy’s time as president.
In 1959 a left­wing revolutionary named Fidel Castro overthrew the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
United States viewed this Soviet-supported regime so close to the mainland as a security threat.
If this happened, the conditions might lead to a nuclear war between the two superpowers.
One hundred and fourteen people died, and the rest were captured by Castro’s troops.
Then, in 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The missiles were a clear response to the placement of United States nuclear weapons in Turkey.
Khrushchev commented that the United States was worried about Soviet missiles that were 90 miles across the sea from the United States when United States missiles were basically on the Soviet border.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 Cuba.
In fact, 30 years later in 1992 a high-ranking Soviet officer revealed just how close it had come to war.
Short-range rockets armed with nuclear devices would have been used against United States troops if the United States had invaded Cuba.
At the time, people realized that the world could have been destroyed in a few days by a nuclear war.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 Both sides agreed to hold elections in two years.
If the Communists succeeded in South Vietnam, all the other countries in Asia that were freeing themselves from colonial domination would fall like dominoes to communism.
American forces had the advantage of massive superiority in equipment and firepower.
Americans, especially college students of draft age, soon responded with an antiwar movement.
The growing destruction caused by the conflict was repeatedly televised.
Former vice president Richard M Nixon ran on the pledge, or promise, to stop the war and bring the American people together.
The Paris Peace Accords allowed the United States to withdraw its forces.
Within two years after American withdrawal, Communist armies from the North forcibly reunited Vietnam.
The North Vietnamese Communists gained control of Vietnam, but the domino theory proved wrong.
This clear disagreement put an end to the Western idea of a single form of communism directed by Moscow.
By the end of the Vietnam War, a new era in American-Soviet relations began to emerge.
Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 Answer Key 1.
All three were formed by the United States to stop or prevent Soviet and Communist expansion and aggression.
Eisenhower started a policy of massive retaliation against the Soviet Union and formed United States military alliances with other countries.
Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States agreed not to invade Cuba.
The United States and the Soviet Union took opposing sides in the Vietnamese conflict.
