The Initial Crisis Cuba, during early 1962, requested nuclear weapons from Khrushchev, and got ones able to hit the East Coast of much of the Americas.
It openly acknowledged this fact, getting rage from America and its allies.
America threatened to use nuclear weapons on Cuba, Venezuela and even innocent Mexico.
The USA soon posts nuclear weapons in Chile, Argentina and Puerto Rico in a hurry.
Decision to launch a Nuclear War The missile crisis was getting unbearable for both sides, and Kennedy in particular was urged to trigger a limited nuclear war in Latin America.
Kennedy clearly had considered this idea before, for he had once evacuated some Texans before.
Meanwhile in the Soviet Union many party members, all patriotic, wanted to destroy the USA once and for all.
After an 80-day standoff, on 17th Sept 1962, President Kennedy ordered an evacuation in the South and prepared a battle plan for a nuclear advance into Latin America.
He identified Cuba, Venezuela and to one extent, Mexico as major targets.
On the 23rd, after the South people were evacuated and East Coast evacuations were half-finished, the First Nuclear War started.
The Nuclear War Santa Clara was the first target struck by American troops in Floridan bases.
Soon, a number of Cuban cities and bases were hit and quickly afterwards, missiles were launched towards Venezuela and Mexico.
The Americans, however, considered their missiles too precious to waste on military bases, and Cuba and Venezuela launched their own missiles.
A total of over 30 million died in the first two waves of attacks across the Americas.
Chavez and Castro had been killed before Soviet silos could alert them.
It ordered a large deployment into Eastern Europe, North Korea, and China.
Iran was told to be anti-American and hit Middle Eastern and North African targets.
On the 27th, hundreds of missiles were launched at Western Europe, Thailand, Turkey and Australia.
Iran used all of its missiles, at Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh, Cairo, Jerusalem, Istanbul, Baghdad, Calcutta, Mumbai and so on, in the initial attack.
It also sends a large batch of 35 missiles to the United States West Coast, which are mostly intercepted, although one hits San Francisco.
Over 50 million die in the Soviet attacks, and more will in the counterattack next hour.
Khrushchev hides in a bunker, but the chaos in Moscow makes him feel ashamed and he commits suicide.
Generals and party officials take control and direct an immediate attack on the East Coast.
Washington, DC is hit out of a sudden and Kennedy, too, dies of the powerful impact of five nuclear missiles, in his bunker.
With the war's death toll at about 130. million dead, including many leaders, the world starts to descend into chaos.
NATO Counterstrike and Soviet Second Strike NATO prepared a counterattack drawn up by the surviving world leaders.
Together on 4th October 1962, many remaining nuclear, biological and chemical weapons were launched soon, to the remains of the USSR and its allies.
Biological weapons strike surviving Japan, South Korea, North Korea and China.
The deaths are considerably less than some doomsday scenarios, but the ""last strike"" that comes will be deadly.
Biological weapons, chemical weapons, untreated diseases, fallout and climatic changes kill about 300,000 instantly.
Many countries in the world are destroyed, and the world descends into chaos.
Categories Categories Nuclear Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted.
