Construction of several missile sites began in the late summer, but United States intelligence discovered evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including Soviet IL–28 bombers, during routine surveillance flights, and on September 4, 1962, President Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba.
Some advisers—including all the Joint Chiefs of Staff—argued for an air strike to destroy the missiles, followed by a United States invasion of Cuba; others favored stern warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The letter was the first in a series of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin throughout the remainder of the crisis.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff announced a military readiness status of DEFCON 3 as United States naval forces began implementation of the quarantine and plans accelerated for a military strike on Cuba.
On October 24, Khrushchev responded to Kennedy’s message with a statement that the United States “blockade” was an “act of aggression” and that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be ordered to proceed.
Nevertheless, during October 24 and 25, some ships turned back from the quarantine line; others were stopped by United States naval forces, but they contained no offensive weapons and so were allowed to proceed.
Meanwhile, United States reconnaissance flights over Cuba indicated the Soviet missile sites were nearing operational readiness.
While White House staff scrambled to assess the validity of this “back channel” offer, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message the evening of October 26, which meant it was sent in the middle of the night Moscow time.
Kennedy and his advisors prepared for an attack on Cuba within days as they searched for any remaining diplomatic resolution.
It was determined that Kennedy would ignore the second Khrushchev message and respond to the first one.
First, despite the flurry of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin—perhaps because of it—Kennedy and Khrushchev, and their advisers, struggled throughout the crisis to clearly understand each others’ true intentions, while the world hung on the brink of possible nuclear war.
Second, having approached the brink of nuclear conflict, both superpowers began to reconsider the nuclear arms race and took the first steps in agreeing to a nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Kennedy Library) After the failed United States attempt to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba with the Bay of Pigs invasion, and while the Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose, in July 1962 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt.
Construction of several missile sites began in the late summer, but U.S. intelligence discovered evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including Soviet IL–28 bombers, during routine surveillance flights, and on September 4, 1962, President Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba.
Despite the warning, on October 14 a United States U–2 aircraft took several pictures clearly showing sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles (MRBMs and IRBMs) under construction in Cuba.
