The wonderful, wonderful SovietHistory Wiki All pages were written by intlnews, otherwise known as “Leftist Critic.
Please spend some time reading this FAQ so this subreddit does not overfill with questions that can be easily answered.
If your question is not answered in the FAQ, please use the search feature.
If you still have not found an answer, then feel free to post your question.
The idea of this wiki is based off one written by marxism-feminism , a mod on CommunismlOl's subreddit Also, please do not forget to check out the sidebar and other resources as needed.
This subreddit covers the early years of the Soviet government from 1917-1922 when it was under attack by fourteen countries in an imperialist assault known as commonly as the Russian Civil War.
Some people could call this period the years of the Bolshevik government since the Soviet Union did not formally come into existence until December 1922.
However, for the sense of consistency, this period can be called the first Soviet government.
Links or posts do not have to be from radical sources, but can be from bourgeois sources, whether they are media outlets or scholars, if deemed necessary.
An example would be a set of pictures from a magazine, like Wired, let's say, but would be acceptable as it is still a part of Soviet history.
Any posts from the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism on the Marxist Internet Archive will be deleted immediately.
It is still in development, but LeftistCritic, a good comrade, had begun compiling a history of the Soviet Union, starting in 1917 with the Bolshevik government.
Also, this comrade had begun an online journal, called Soviet History , the first issue of which, reprinting a section of the Great Soviet Encylcopedia on United States history is mentioned in another page of this wiki.
Specifically here we are referring to the Great October Socialist Revolution or the October Revolution in 1917, not the bourgeois February Revolution the same year.
While the Soviet Union was only officially in existence from 1922 to 1991, since the history of the Soviet state reaches back to 1917, it is worth acknowledging that as well.
Vladimir Lenin He was head of government from 1917-1918 of the Russian Republic, head of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic from 1918 to 1924, and of the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1924.
He was also Chairman of the Council of Ministers from May 1941 until March 1953.
After Lenin died in 1924, Stalin took more of a leading role in Soviet affairs.
He served in that position from October 1964 until November 1982, along with serving as the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from May 1960 to July 1964 and June 1977 to November 1982.
He was also Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from June 1983 until February 1984, along with being head of the KGB from May 1967 until May 1982.
He would serve in that position from February 1984 until March 1985, along with serving as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from April 1984 until March 1985.
He also was the first President of the Soviet Union from March 1990 until December 1991, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet from May 1989 until March 1990, and Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from October 1988 to May 1989.
Since today is a holiday, 100th anniversary of the Red Army, Russian army brought a big deal of tanks, trucks etc to Invangorod... for display for the local people.
Many came from Narva town which is in Estonia (and in European Union) just by crossing a bridge across the river which divides two countries.
Deep into West-Siberian taiga there is a small village of Russian old believers.
To get to their place you would need a helicopter lift or you can try going by the river which is a very trick way and you would need an experienced guide who knows the way.
Most of them are the Russian old believers living by very strict religious rules.
The first state company, Dobrolyt, was founded, renamed in 1932 to Aeroflot.
The library has many books on the questions that interest you"" , 1920s.
How the Old Intelligentsia Was Drawn into the Building of Socialism , 1975.
From the 1917 Russian Revolution to the Revolution of Our Times , 2017.
Stalin’s important report to the 17th congress in 1934 • Multiple authors, “Buryat-Mongolia”, a collection of speeches from representatives of this little known Soviet Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union, affirming their strong determination to oppose any possible invasion of their region by Japan , 1936.
To the West!” , 1942 • Anna Louise Strong, The Soviets Expected It , 1942.
An Eye-Witness Account by Soviet Correspondents and Red Army Commanders , 1943, over seventy pages.
The reception was attended by several hundred representatives of various Jewish organizations.
Emphasizing that he based his estimate of those saved on facts gathered by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Mr Rosenberg quoted the organization’s journal as reporting that “of some 1,750,000 Jews who succeeded in escaping the Axis since the outbreak of hostilities, about 1,600,000 were evacuated by the Soviet Government from Eastern Poland and subsequently occupied Soviet territory and transported far into the Russian interior and beyond the Urals.
She has given life, asylum, bread, and shelter to a vast Jewish population.
To make them known to every Jew in this country is a task of supreme importance for the Jewish Council for Russian War Relief.
But even so, Palestine cannot alone solve the problem of the Jews of Europe.
As for the rest of the world, when thirty-two nations were convened at Evian by that great humanitarian, Franklin D Roosevelt, to give help to refugees, only that generous little nation, the Dominican Republic, offered asylum for a substantial number.
Nevertheless we still look to the Western Hemisphere, many of whose lands are underpopulated.
There is a land where anti-Semitism is a crime against the State, where human beings are actually given an equal chance in life, whatever the color of their hair or skin, the shape of their noses, the slant of their eyes.
A New Civilisation ” , quoted here when they say that Stalin wasn't a dictator • Soviet sniper Roza Shanina , 1944.
Soviet forces were the first to approach a major Nazi camp, reaching Majdanek near Lublin, Poland, in July 1944.
Surprised by the rapid Soviet advance, the Germans attempted to hide the evidence of mass murder by demolishing the camp.
Camp staff set fire to the large crematorium used to burn bodies of murdered prisoners, but in the hasty evacuation the gas chambers were left standing.
Soviet soldiers found over six thousand emaciated prisoners alive when they entered the camp.
In the following months, the Soviets liberated additional camps in the Baltic states and in Poland.
Shortly before Germany's surrender, Soviet forces liberated the Stutthof, Sachsenhausen, and Ravensbrueck concentration camps.
A commentary on its publication, “Nazi-Soviet Relations.39-1941"" , 1948.
What would Europe look like if the Soviets hadn’t defeated Hitler? , 2015.
Conspiracy, infiltration of the state apparatus, and “Aesopian language” 8.
The dialectic of the revolution and the genesis of abstract universalism 15.
From a new drive for “Soviet democracy” to “Saint Bartholomew's night” 17.
Semipalatinsk Test Site , 29 August 1949, • Ralph Parker, Moscow Correspondent , 1949.
Manton, The Soviet Union Today • Unpublished Speech by Stalin at the Plenum of the Central Committee of the CPSU , 1952 • Josef Stalin, Final Speech , October 1952.
Origins of the Cold War (not a Soviet work, but related) • Solomon M Schwartz, Labor In The Soviet Union • USSR, ""Soviet Economic Development since 1917"" , 1953.
A Textbook issued by the Economics Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R , 1954.
The resolution that remained the official Soviet assessment of Stalin until the Gorbachev period.
An English Translation , 1965 • Maurice Dobb, Soviet Economic Development since 1917 , 1966.
Gaponenko, and others, Outline History of the Soviet Working Class , 1978. • texts • Muhammad Ali at the Red Square.
The Struggle for the Leninist Strategy and Tactics in National Liberation Movements , 1979.
Many women hold high executive posts in public life, especially in cultural and health activities.
In the laws regulating domestic life the woman's rights are in every respect the same as those of the man.
The wife's property is her own, and marriage settlements which affect her property rights are invalid.
A wife does not have to follow her husband to another place of residence.
Collective farm shock workers : Stalin and women: this conjunction usually evokes salacious details of Stalin’s somewhat active life as a young man, leaving a number of offspring across Russia.
Far less known is the way he came to see, later in hfe, the importance of socialism for women.
On many occasions, he addressed women’s congresses, let alone framing the Constitution of the USSR to address explicitly equality of the sexes.
Women in the U.S.S.R. are accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life.
The possibility of exercising these rights is ensured to women by granting them an equal right with men to work, payment for work, rest and leisure, social insurance and education, and by state protection of the interests of mother and child, prematernity and maternity leave with full pay, and the provision of a wide network of maternity homes, nurseries and kindergartens.
They often struggled to live up to ideals expressed and often acted hypocritically, as Alexandra Kollontai points out, but you can’t fault the ideals.
Needless to say, the USSR is usually written out of the history of feminism as with so many other matters.
As the constitution was in its final stages of being formulated, Stalin addressed a gathering of collective farm women shock workers.
Comrades, what we have seen here today is a slice of the new life we call the collective life, the socialist life.
We have heard the simple accounts of simple toiling people, how they strove and overcame difficulties in order to achieve success in socialist competition.
We have heard the speeches not of ordinary women, but, I would say, of women who are heroines of labour, because only heroines of labour could have achieved the successes they have achieved.
Here am I, already 56 years of age, I have seen many things in my time, I have seen many labouring men and women.
The story goes that after the first collectivisation wave, in 1933 Pasha organised an all-female tractor brigade in the Donetsk region.
It exceeded its quota by 129%, producing more than any other team in their region.
Invited to the Kremlin, elected to the supreme soviet of the USSR, organiser of even more women’s tractor teams, winner of the Stalin Prize in 1946 ... still, she preferred to drive tractors.
As this article puts it, she became a symbol what might now be called Soviet feminism except that by now such feminism was almost half a century old.
There is even some rare footage of Pasha at the Kremlin, with Stalin and the others.
And a lifetime working with tractor fuels and oils destroyed her body’s ability to clear the toxins, so she died at 46.
A lesser kn own aspect of the Russian Revolution is the flourishing of... nudism.
After the revolution, the famous actress, Ida Rubenstein, played naked on stage.
A movement called ‘Down with shame’ would walk the streets in Soviet cities, catch trams, go about their daily lives wearing nothing but a red sash over their shoulders.
A White Army newspaper joked in 1919 that the price of suits must have skyrocketed, since so many people were going around naked.
At international nudist conferences in the 1920s, the Soviet delegates far outnumbered those from other countries.
Over the summers, rivers, beaches and lakes witnessed millions of old people, children, families, singles in the prime of their life gathered to play games, picnic or enjoy the sun all naked.
It appears that during his long exile before the Revolution, Lenin visited a nudist beach in Austria and was favourably impressed.
It was not so much the naked bodies everywhere, but the emphasis on healthy living.
Given that Lenin was as many noted a muscular man with a love of outdoor activities, nudism was a natural extension of that passion.
Soon enough both he and Krupskaya were regularly tossing their clothes in a corner and diving into the nearest river, lake or sea completely starkers.
I’m not sure whether they also hiked and rode their bicycles naked , but in this light one of Lenin’s favoured phrases, ‘tearing off the fig-leaf, takes on a whole new meaning.
Of course, one can enjoy the breeze much more when naked, even while chatting away with all and sundry.
It mattered not where they were, for they would swim naked in Longjumeau or in Pornic on the French coast, or in Stjernsund in Sweden, or in swimming pools in Munich, or in Poronino or in the Vistula River in Krakow.
Nor were they alone, for other Bolsheviks were also given to stripping down whenever possible, among them Anatoly Lunacharsky, Nikolai Bukharin, Alexander Bogdanov.
As one of those early communist nudists observed, ‘In nudity class distinctions disappear.
Nudism was a particularly strong feature of the USSR, as also in East Germany.
Lenin was, of course, a nudist, along with Krupskaya and many of the Bolsheviks.
All conveniently air-brushed out in a way that would make even Stalin jealous.
Alexandra Kollontai: revolutionary, Bolshevik, People’s Commissar for Social Welfare, founder of the ‘Women’s Department’ in 1919, champion of the Soviet policies of radical gender equality , tireless campaigner for women and world’s first female ambassador to Norway in 1923.
The Soviet “Emancipation” of Muslim Women in Pan-Islamic Perspective , 2012 article by bourgeois scholar.
The following paper will demonstrate Alexandra Kollontai""s involvement in European socialist and feminist movements and how she contributed to the transnational feminism.
Kollontai for a long time was not seen by historians as a feminist and was little known among historians of feminism in American historiography.
Now her feministic approach to social problems is well-established and she is considered one of the greatest Marxist Russian feminists.
However, historical approach to Kollontai's feminism still rooted in Russian and Soviet narration, Kollontai is still placed by historians into the context of Russian history.
This paper aims to reveal Kollontai's impact in transnational feminism.
The paper claims that Kollontai's ideas on gender, sexuality, and women's rights were universal and not as strongly politicized as the scholars of Kollontai's heritage and Russian feminism considered before.
Such transnational dimension of Kollontai's feminism will help in better understanding the history of Euro feminism and will give an opportunity to understand Soviet history in a broader context.
Alexandra Kollontai was born in 1872 to a wealthy aristocratic family of Domontovich in St Petersburg, Russia.
She was raised by English governesses in early childhood, and later educated by tutors from France and Germany; thus by the time she was ten Alexandra spoke five languages.
After Kollontai received her higher education in Switzerland, she traveled through Europe, where she participated in different socialists” gatherings.
Before the Revolution of 1917 Kollontai lived in Europe and there she became a prolific writer on the questions of sexuality, women's political rights, changes in the nature of relations between sexes, and women's roles in the family.
Alexandra Kollontai is usually mentioned along with Vladimir Lenin's wife Nadezhda Krupskaya as one of the founders of Zhenotdel (Women's Rights and Education division of the Soviet government) or as a Soviet ambassador in Norway.
However, she is still known among the general public in Russia Kollontai is known as an author of the glass of water theory.
For many years Kollontai was little known among Soviet and Russian historians of feminism because of her own intention to be in a shadow of more famous revolutionary politicians l ik e Lenin and his wife Krupskaya; l ik ewise because of the Soviet historiography which tended to depict Kollontai mostly as a Soviet diplomat and communist, never emphasizing her role in the international feminist movement.
Soviet historians only spoke of her as a Soviet diplomat and intentionally underestimated her as a feminist and writer.
In this way in Russian historiography Kollontai""s works on fe minism are little known, as well as practically unknown for the general audience.
Independent voices of feminism were not heard in the USSR until the 1980s.
Clements also speaks about the reasons why the question of women""s rights was downtrodden in Imperial Russia, such as poverty of peasants and lack of free time for working women.
Clements notes that for upperclass women society allowed some independence, and Kollontai was a prime example of an upper-class woman who educated herself in politics and philosophy.
Kollontai herself was quite skeptical about the notion of feminism, since she districted herself from “bourgeois feminists,” who, according to Kollontai, identified themselves as the enemies of men.
Kollontai believed that only through socialist revolution could working women and men obtain freedom.
Moreover, Kollontai had never used such feminist terms as “sexism” or “male chauvinism” typical for Western feminists and gender studies scholars in the 1960s and 1970s.
However, Kollontai did not share Lenin”s rejection of a sexual question as a topic for Marxist writers.
She was not scared to openly criticize individualism, ignorance, and egoism in the relationships between men and women.
The three sources used for the research of the transnational dimension in Kollontai's works were written by Alexandra Kollontai between 1913 until 1926.
First, her autobiography , where she depicted her childhood, the cultural and social environment she was raised in, and her later acquaintance with European socialists.
Second, Kollontai's pre-Revolutionary essay “The New Woman” will be analyzed in order to track her feminist ideas that were not only applicable for the Russian reality, but for other countries as well.
In addition Kollontai's article “Make Way for the Winged Eros” will be analyzed in order to show how even her Sovietfocused texts were applied to other contexts.
Kollonta's attitude toward women's rights, her involvement in the Western feministic movement, and her own transnational feministic dimension will be demonstrated through textual analysis of her autobiographical work.
From the very first chapter the reader can see how deeply Kollontai was preoccupied with the questions concerning women""s liberation movement.
In the beginning of the autobiography Kollontai only touched upon some facts of her childhood and early life.
More important for Kollontai's narration was to connect the facts from her personal biography with understanding the freedom and how a notion of women""s freedom developed.
Through the facts of Kollontai""s life and especially in the way she described quiet ordinary events, like getting married at the age of nineteen, it can be seen how early in life Kollontai was struggling for her personal freedom and how her views of marriage were contemporary and more along the lines of the end of nineteenth-century Western feminism, not yet shaped by socialist ideas and a Marxist environment.
Although the autobiography itself was written during 1926 when Kollontai already was involved in the Soviet foreign policy, Kollontai's description of her life decisions were not mixed with Marxism or communistic ideology, and it can be well seen how they were driven by feministic ideals, and not by socialist philosophy.
Kollontai refers to her decision to get married as a “struggle” which is concordant with the ideology of Western suffragists.
Kollontai touched upon one of the central points in the ideology of Western feminism marriage and how women's roles in it were changing.
She described how her marriage to Vladimir Kollontai, an engineer student, was more or less happy for the first three years.
Here Kollontai used a word “cage” to explain her growing desire to participate in Russian political events, socialistic circles of Russian intellectuals, and to fight for women""s rights and social justice in Imperial Russia.
Starting from 1893 until 1896 were the years when Kollontai""s life drastically changed.
She became an “enthusiastic follower of Darwin,” and in this way materialistic conception of history became her field of interests.
At the time she started sympathizing with the revolutionary movement in Russia, which became more and more popular among working class people, as well as aristocrats by the end of the nineteenth century.
Kollontai""s early life and pre-revolutionary activities were finished by 1908, when she was arrested and immigrated to Germany as a political refugee.
She briefly touched upon her life with Vladimir Kollontai, her separation from him, and nurturing her son.
However, she characterized in detail her political activism, for example, opening the first Working Women""s club in 1907 in St.
The way Alexandra Kollontai wrote about her early life highlighted her passion for politics and her fight for women""s rights.
Her autobiography focused Kollontai's early devotion to the universal ideals of social justice, moreover it revealed Kollontai""s attitude to the problem of women's emancipation and the way she solved it in her personal life.
Alexandra Kollontai's revolutionary activity and desire to fight for social justice and working women's rights was influenced by German Marxist feminists Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg.
Her European life and political experience shaped Kollontai's international feministic approach.
While living in Germany, France, Austria, Great Britain, Sweden, and Norway Kollontai was partially excluded from Russian political activity.
She recalled to her earlier interest in women""s rights, however while living in Europe and actively participating in feminist organizations and their political activities her focus shifted from social justice in general to the question of justice for women in any country.
From 1908 until 1917 she organized women""s strikes around Europe, as well as prolifically demonstrated herself as a writer different essays and pamphlets along with her bigger works were published in German, English, and French and only then translated into Russian after the Revolution.
She visited the USA for five months in 1915 for a series of lectures about international socialists, which she delivered in German, French, and Russian.
Not only the international travels themselves, but the fact that Kollontai had put them in her relatively short autobiography speaks in favor of the international focus of her writings.
Kollontai's international approach to studying and answering so-called “women""s question” is demonstrated by her comparative studies of legislative systems of different European countries.
She mentioned that she “studied this question” of maternity welfare in England, France, and Scandinavian countries.
From closer reading of her autobiography, it seems like almost all of her writing and political activity before her return to Russia in 1917 was connected to the question of women's rights and their comprehensive representation in European laws.
The rhetoric of Kollontai""s biography was influenced by her dedication to fight for women""s rights around Europe.
Socialism, Marxism, communism, her Russian roots and her past involvement in the revolutionary movement in Russia seemed to have waned, or at least just been overlapped, by her involvement in the European feminist movement.
The significance of Kollontai's Autobiography of A Sexually Emancipated Communist Woman for understanding an international dimension of her feminism can hardly be overestimated.
This work has always been crucial for the historians of Russian revolutionaries and biographers of Kollontai as a source of the information on Kollontai""s life, especially her life in exile in Europe.
Nevertheless, in American historiography research which touched upon this work was lacking close textual analysis and did not take Kollontai""s internationalism into consideration.
Kollontai""s autobiography is a valuable source for the historians of Western feminism, since it demonstrates how Kollontai's involvement in the European movement for women""s rights grew into her international feministic ideology later.
It is important to trace not only internationalism of Kollontai's feministic ideas, but also their transnational dimension, or in other words how such ideas were universal and could generally be applied to any woman in the world, regardless of her nationality.
In order to do so, Kollontai""s work “The New Woman” will be analyzed further.
The New Woman Kollontai's 1913 essay “The New Woman” was her earlier manifesto of transnational feminism. 1913 was the year of her most active work among European women.
The essay was initially written while Kollontai lived in Germany and travelled a lot to France at the same time.
It was first published in German where she was living in exile, so the intended audience was German and French people both men and women.
Later it was translated in Russian and was very much appreciated by Russian intellectuals, because it had plenty examples which came from Russian literature; however, “The New Woman” remains one of Kollontai""s most famous works among Western scholars of women and gender studies.
It was little researched by Russian scholars, who only looked at Kollontai as the Soviet politician and ambassador.
In her statement Kollontai did not mention nationality or political views of a woman who can be called “the new woman”; moreover, she referred to the “general human interests” which is more transnational than European or Russian, applied to any human being per se.
Kollontai""s argument is that the new woman exists regardless of nationality or politics of the country she lives in reveals her transnational feministic approach to the question of women's rights and social justice.
The single woman is the one who “strengthens through the exercise of her will;"" she is “demanding,” she “seeks for and enjoins esteem for her personality,” demanding “respect for her “ego;” what makes her modern is that she can “forgive much to which the woman of the past would have found very difficult to reconcile herself,” for example lack of attention from her husband.
Kollontai's attempt to define the new woman is a brilliant example of the transnational feministic ideas in her writings.
She did not write anything about the new woman""s nationality, her place in the social hierarchy, her wealth, education level, or political views, if there were any.
The notion of independence here in “The New Woman” essay helps to complete the picture Kollontai had drawn.
The word independence itself has universal meaning, so the fact that Kollontai used it only clarifies her transnationalism.
In addition Kollontai put her transnational feministic ideology in a contemporary framework.
Only at the very end of her essay did Kollontai add a social dimension to her research on the new women, saying that nowadays women participate in industrial life and it is not viewed as a deviation.
She did not argue that modern women of working class is a standalone group of the new women, and she did not refer to any country where working women live in particular.
The words “working women” in her essay did not reflect upon her socialistic background and revolutionary ideology, but speak in of her perception of modern women in general, who in order to become independent personally have to work and gain financial independence.
Kollontai demonstrated herself being not only internationalist, but more a transnational feminist.
She made an attempt to be an independent writer on the different aspects of women and gender studies at the time when women and gender studies did not exist as a standalone scholarly area and when a notion of “transnational feminism” was not used by historians and writers at all.
To fully understand the transnational dimension of Kollontai""s writings it is important to look at her essay written in 1923 “Make Way for The Winged Eros,” which initially was intended for the Soviet people men and women, but appeared to be implicitly influenced by Kollontai""s transnational feministic ideology.
A vivid example of such work was “Make Way for the Winged Eros,” where Kollontai spoke about the differences between “wingless eros” and “winged eros:” where the first one is physical sex and the second one is sex rich with emotions.
This work is important for understanding Kollontai's transnational dimension.
Even though she included a general timeframe, she did not put any geographical, social, economical, or cultural frames for these events.
Even when she writes about Soviet people""s sexual relationships, her mindset geared toward universal values.
The sentence, mentioned above, if taken out of context of Kollontai""s writing, could be applied to any European country at the first part of the twentieth century where women became emancipated.
Kollontai""s “Make Way for The Winged Eros” was the work focused on Soviet culture and was initially intended for the Soviet audience.
However it was written in a way that the work appeared to have two layers of understanding a Soviet, demonstrable and more obvious layer, and a hidden international one.
Kollontai wrote about a “new morality” without specifically referring to the country where that “new morality” developed.
Although her three principals of the “new morality” were proclaimed to be made for the proletarian class in the USSR, they can be seen as being generally applied to people who were not only in the USSR and not only communists.
Conclusion This paper has established how the literary heritage of Alexandra Kollontai can be applied to a broader cultural context; the examples from her works indicate her transnational feministic ideas.
Being a political activist, Marxist, socialist, and prolific writer, Kollontai""s ideas on the question of equality of men and women, and of social justice were transnational in their nature.
This paper has shown both international and transnational aspects of her writings which have not been acknowledged enough in the historical and feminist literature.
In addition the paper has demonstrated how Kollontai""s works need to be researched more assiduously by scholars of feminism, and also that more historical research needs to be done in order to highlight her activity in fighting for women""s equality in Europe before 1917.
The transnational dimension of Kollontai”s works requires to revise the history of Western and transnational feminism, and it provides a new perspective on the Russian and Soviet history of the twentieth century.
It is especially important for historians of the USSR and scholars oftransnational feminism to look at Kollontaf's socialistic feminism and her dedication to Marxist philosophy as a sign of the universality of her ideas about gender, sexuality, and women""s rights.
Of course, the real achievements of the Bolsheviks are usually written out of any history of feminism, since as we all know, it is really a Western phenomenon.
The catch is that the likes of Kollontai, Zetkin and others did l ik e to be known as feminists, since they saw it a distinctly bourgeois phenomenon.
There has not been in the history of mankind a single great movement of the oppressed in which women toilers have not participated.
Women toilers, the most oppressed of all the oppressed, have never kept away from the high road of the emancipation movement, and never could have done so.
As is known, the movement for the emancipation of the slaves brought to the front hundreds of thousands of great women martyrs and heroines.
In the ranks of the fighters for the emancipation of the serfs there were tens of thousands of women toilers.
It is not surprising that the revolutionary working-class movement, the mightiest of all the emancipation movements of the oppressed masses, has rallied millions of women toilers to its banner.
International Women’s Day is a token of the invincibility of the working-class movement for emancipation and a harbinger of its great future.
If the working class pursues a correct policy, they can and must become a real working-class army, operating against the bourgeoisie.
To forge from this reserve of women toilers an army of working women and peasant women, operating side by side with the great army of the proletariat—such is the second and decisive task of the working class.
International Women’s Day must become a means of transforming the working women and peasant women from a reserve of the working class into an active army of the emancipation movement of the proletariat.
In an address to the first all-union congress of collective-farm shock brigaders , Stalin deals with the processes of admitting individual peasants into collective farms.
Some such farms were a little wary of accepting individual peasants who may not have been so keen on collectivisation.
Two years ago I received a letter from a peasant woman, a widow, living in the Volga region.
She complained that the collective farm refused to accept her as a member, and she asked for my support.
I received a reply from the collective farm stating that they could not accept her because she had insulted a collective-farm meeting.
It turns out that she is now working in the collective farm, not in the last, but in the front ranks.
A couple weeks ago, I saw a really interesting clip on Twitter that showed students in the Soviet Union learning to program using pen and paper.
My mom has often told stories about how she learned to program the same way, and I shared the tweet.
Marie Hicks, a tech historian, reached out and asked if my mom would want to write about her experiences, and she did.
In 1976, after eight years in the Soviet education system, I graduated the equivalent of middle school.
Or, I could go for the equivalent of a blend of an associate and bachelor’s degree, with an emphasis on vocational skills.
I went with the second option, mainly because it was common knowledge in the Soviet Union at the time that there was a restrictive quota for Jews applying to the five-year college program, which almost certainly meant that I, as a Jew, wouldn’t get in.
My best friend at the time proposed that we take the entrance exams to attend Nizhniy Novgorod Industrial and Economic College.
Since I got good grades in math and geometry, this looked like I’d be able to get in.
It also didn’t hurt that my aunt, a very good seamstress and dressmaker, sewed several dresses specifically for the school’s chief accountant, who was involved in enrollment decisions.
What’s interesting is that from the almost sixty students accepted into the program that year, all of them were female.
Later, after I started working the Soviet Union, and even in the United States in the early 1990s, I understood that this was a trend.
I’d say that 70% of the programmers I encountered in the IT industry were female.
We started what would be considered our major concentration courses during the second year.
But programming was the main course, and we spent the most hours on it.
In fact, this method was so important that students who forgot their pencils were sent to the main office to ask for one.
It was extremely embarrassing, and we learned quickly not to forget them.
We would learn from simplest commands to loop organization, function and sub-function programming, multi-dimensional array processing, and more.
After mastering the basics, we would take exams, which were logical computing tasks to code in this specific language.
The programming language was AP, which was one of the few computer languages with Russian keywords.
You had to type your program in entering device which basically was a typewriter connected to a huge computer.
The programs looked like step-by-step instructions, and if you made even one mistake you had to start all over again.
To code a solution for a linear algebraic equation usually would take 10 12 steps.
Our teacher used to go for one week of “practice work and curriculum development,” to a serious IT shop with more advanced machines every once in a while.
At that time, the heavy computing power was in the ES Series, produced by Soviet bloc countries.
She would bring back tons of papers with printed code and debugging comments for us to learn in classroom.
After two and half years of rigorous study using pencil and paper, we had six months of practice.
Most of the time it was one of several scientific research institutes existed in Nizhny Novgorod.
Most of the girls from my class took computer operator jobs, but I did not want to settle.
I wrote a lot about my first college because now looking back I realize that this is where I really learned to code and developed my programming skills.
After this course I could read technical documentation in English without issues.
My final university degree was equivalent to a United States master’s in Computer Science.
In total I worked for about seven years in the USSR as computer programmer, from 1982 to 1989.
I started out writing programs on special blanks for punch card machines using a Russian version of Assembler.
To maximize performance, we would leave stacks of our punch cards for nightly processing.
Initially, there were not enough terminals and “machine time” was evenly divided between all of the programmers during the day.
Then, the terminals started to appear in the same room where programmers were.
I did not know then, but I picked profession where things are constantly moving.
The most I’ve ever worked with the same software was for about three years.
I had to quit my job two years before to avoid any issues with the Soviet government.
Every programmer I knew had to sign a special form commanding them to keep state secrets.
To refresh my skills and to become more marketable, I had to take programming course for six months.
The main differences between USA and the USSR was the level at which computers were incorporated in every day life.
Some of the reasons were planed organization of economy, politicized approach to science.
Cybernetics was considered “capitalist” discovery and was in exile in 1950s.
In the United States, computers were already widely in use, and even in consumer settings.
In Russia as I was starting my professional life, it was considered more of a female occupation.
These choices included majors l ik e construction engineering and mechanical engineering.
Average salary for software developer in Moscow is around $2IK annually, versus $10K average salary for Russia as a whole.
Although I constantly have to learn new things, I’ve never had to worry about being employed.
Indeed, “Stalin hated gays” is something I’ve seen posted online numerous times by trots and anarchists.
In any event, such an accusation is by, its very nature, decontextualized and misleading.
What needs to be stated is that Soviet legal and medical opinion on this question was no different than what was generally accepted in the world at large, namely, that homosexuality was a psycho-sexual disorder, a form of mental illness.
Additionally, there were arguments made that attempted to tie homosexuality to fascism especially considering that many of Hitler’s Brownshirts were homosexual.
The science of human sexuality was in its infancy for all of Stalin’s life.
In fact, it was only in 1975 that the American Psychological Association itself ceased to classify homosexuality as a mental disorder.
To expect that Stalin, and Soviet Russia in the 1930s, would foresee the advances in medical and psychological science that would occur forty years in the future is either naive or malicious.
It should be noted, by comparison, that the GDR had a much more open and positive policy with respect to homosexuality.
This can be explained by the fact that studies in sexology were more advanced in Germany than in any place else in the world.
But this too has to be seen in historical context, as part not only of the deepening of scientific knowledge, but the spread of such knowledge throughout the society in general.
By 1987, GDR law stated that “homosexuality, just l ik e heterosexuality, represents a variant of sexual behavior.
Today, there is not a single communist worthy of the name who does not whole-heartedly support gay rights.
Soviet legislation does not recognize so-called crimes against morality.
Once again, the important thing here is the level of scientific understanding and the extent to which that knowledge has been spread throughout society at large.
Germany had the longest history of psychological and medical research on human sexuality.
Many German Communists were not only supportive of gay rights, but were pioneers of sexual liberation.
Markus Wolf would later become the head of foreign intelligence for the GDR; the man the CIA would call “the man without a face” because they didn’t possess a photograph of him.
Furthermore, “Lenin decriminalized homosexuality” is a much beloved trotskyite trope that they love to throw at Marxist-Leninists.
Nevertheless, once the old criminal code had been repealed after the October Revolution, the antihomosexual article also ceased to be valid.
The absence of formal statutes against anal intercourse or lesbianism did not stop the prosecution of homosexual behavior as a form of disorderly conduct.
After the 1922 Penal Code was published there were in that same year at least two known trials for homosexual practices.
The official stance of Soviet medicine and law in the 1920s, as reflected by Sereisky’s encyclopedia article, was that homosexuality was a disease that was difficult, perhaps even impossible, to cure.
The Tsarist criminal code was declared null and void, the anti-homosexual statutes along with all the others.
The 1922 and 1926 Soviet criminal codes did not mention homosexuality, but anti-homosexual laws remained on the books in the Islamic republics and Georgia.
But, the intent and extent of the law was far different from what anti-Stalin and ‘left anti-communist” propaganda would have one believe.
Fleeing from hunger, they moved to the capital of the USSR from the village near Odessa.
When he was 7 years old, his father and mother sent Vasily to grandparents.
They couldn’t even think their son to get into the German occupation as much as three and a half years.
But another soldier gunner ordered the boy to return the unearned gift.
The father and mother after the rear work with chemicals have become disabled, and ruined.
For example, together with his friends climbed into food trucks and stole products.
After leaving the walls of the school with a gold medal, Vasily could not decide whom to become.
On the other hand, he wanted to get a prestigious education, becoming, for example, a journalist.
The love to the scene was instilled by a famous Soviet director Sergei Stein.
In his amateur drama studio Lanovoi mastered the basics of the profession.
In company with him were not less promising future actors Valery Nosik, the star of the Moscow Satire Theater Vera Vasilyeva and prima operetta Tatiana Shmyga.
Vasily Lanovoi entered the Shchukin Theater School Lanovoi without questions asked.
The production was awarded the Grand Prix at the All-Union competition of amateur, and Vasily, as a key figure, handsome, received five hundred rubles as prize money.
Lanovoi played Red Guard Ivan Varavva so enthusiastically that in 1971 he was recognized as the best actor of Soviet cinema.
By the way, all the tricks in the frame Lanovoi carried himself catching up with a freight train with flowers in his hands, ran across the rooftops of wagons, and rode a horse.
And once he acted as a hero outside the frame saved Alina Pokrovskaya, when her horse suddenly rushed to the precipice.
Aristocrat of Soviet cinema Vasily Lanovoi was appreciated by both the audience and critics, and also officials.
That he lives in one room with sick parents and two sisters, very simple man, almost rustic.
For roles, both visibly lost weight, from what have become even more attractive.
For a while, the actors, and most viewers were hoping love awaken in them.
The second wife of Vasily Lanovoi became Tamara Zyablova TV stage director and actress, who was 5 years older.
The film crew found a ship, bought fabric, sewed the sails and sailed from Sevastopol to Koktebel.
After the double loss the actor became indifferent to everything, except work.
This family happiness and the joy of fatherhood to Vasily gave his third wife actress Irina Kupchenko.
To the great relief of their parents, both sons were indifferent to the profession of actors.
Sergey has left this world suddenly 9 October 2013 at the age of 37 years.
The memory of his son continues in his daughter and granddaughter of Vasily Lanovoi and Irina Kupchenko Anna.
In the era of perestroika Lanovoi virtually disappeared from the screens.
In his native Shchukin School has gone from the lecturer to the head of the Department of scenic speech.
In the late nineties in the creative biography of the actor once again came a streak of light.
In the past, Aristocrat of Soviet cinema Vasily Lanovoi didn’t often play the cynical fans of vile intrigues.
Stalin on the dialectic of a totalising proletarian culture : Fredric Jameson used to argue for what may be called a dialectic of totalisation.
In some cases, a universal master narrative actually fosters a diversity of voices, which in some way gain the possibility to speak.
Jameson was countering the postmodern ban on master narratives, but I am interested in another dimension of this dialectic, which relates to Stalin.
Until now what has happened has been that the socialist revolution has not diminished but rather increased the number of languages; for, by stirring up the lowest sections of humanity and pushing them on to the political arena, it awakens to new life a number of hitherto unknown or little-known nationalities.
He goes on to weaken his insight a little, suggesting some mutual benefit between proletarian culture and local cultures.
But he tries to get across the point that the process is dialectical, with each side, or, rather, many sides engaging in the process.
More to the point, some forms of the universal, in this case the proletarian universal, actually enable diversity rather than stifling it.
Of course, if you no longer buy into the universal in question and opt for another, such as when an enemy appears on the doorstep, then you fall outside the process.
We are perhaps most used to the Cultural Revolution in relation to China the extraordinary decade of revolutionary upheaval that is still to be fully assessed for its drawbacks and benefits.
However, the term ‘cultural revolution’ actually goes back to Lenin and Stalin, where it has a distinct meaning.
Therefore, the cultural development of the working class and of the masses of the working peasantry, not only the development of literacy, although literacy is the basis of all culture, but primarily the cultivation of the ability to take part in the administration of the country, is the chief lever for improving the state and every other apparatus.
Often this involved creating literate cultures where none existed before.
Scripts were created, grammars written, people taught for the first time to read and write their own language, literature written, and a new intellectual and political leadership fostered.
The affirmative action program also included strict punishments for racist statements and acts for scattered minorities which included the Jews.
All of this was predicated on the core socialist idea that the party and then the government should foster rather than repress different languages and cultures.
Indeed, the ‘national question’ was in many ways structured and determined by the issue of language.
For Babel, linguistic unity is desired and multiplicity a seeming curse; for Pentecost unity is the source of unexpected diversity.
Soon enough, the human effort to build a city with a tower into the heavens makes God realise the immense potential of human power.
The account of Pentecost in Acts 2 may seem to provide a long-range resolution of this confusion of tongues.
Here, the multiplicity of tongues, ‘as of fire’, appearing on the heads of the apostles, enables a united understanding of the new gospel of Christ.
Multiplicity is therefore a way of understanding the same message, which may be spoken in many tongues.
One cluster of such policies may be described as Babelian, or rather pre-Babelian.
The desire is for one language, which existed before the divinely instigated confusion of tongues and scattering of peoples.
Such a desire is predicated on the assumption that multiple languages are signs of the Fall, with Genesis 11 understood as yet another Fall story, or at least another facet of the story of the Fall that begins in Genesis 3.
Far better is a universal language that would overcome the strife and discord of many tongues.
Walter Benjamin’s search for the perfect, Adamic language that does not seek to communicate; the proponents of Esperanto; tsarist policy makers afraid of native languages and their connections with separatism; the Nazi refusal to acknowledge minority languages in Germany and Austria such as the Sorbians and Slovene Carinthians; and indeed ‘assimilation’ policies around the globe even today, in which immigrants are supposed to meld into the national culture through language.
Socialists are clearly Pentecostalists, in in favour of multiplicity and diversity.
What is needed is to cover the country with an extensive network of schools functioning in the native languages, and to supply them with staffs of teachers who know the native languages.
What is needed is widely to develop the press, the theatre, the cinema and other cultural institutions functioning in the native languages.
Cultural revolution is therefore the Pentecost of languages and peoples.
As for how many languages Stalin knew, that is still a matter of debate.
The secrets of the hammer and sickle , 2014: The hammer and sickle on the coat of arms of the USSR is one of the most recognized symbols of Soviet power.
Freemasonry, Hinduism, and ancient Aryan and Slavic mythology are all found in the two crossed implements on the Soviet emblem.
The hammer and sickle that decorated the coat of arms of the USSR is probably the most recognizable symbol both of Soviet power and of the ideology of the state it represented, as well as the entire history of the country.
The hammer was chosen for its traditional association with workers in European countries.
Together with an agricultural tool, it was supposed to illustrate Lenin’s famous slogan about the unity of the proletariat and peasants.
In April 1918 the final version of the emblem was approved a design by the Moscow artist Yevgeny Kamzolkin.
In summer 1918 the Fifth Session of Soviets officially adopted the symbol.
It is interesting to note that Kamzolkin was not even a communist and, furthermore, he was a deeply religious man from a wealthy family.
The artist was a member of the mystical artistic Society of Leonardo da Vinci for more than 10 years and perfectly understood the meaning of the symbols.
First of all, the hammer and sickle are associated with the Masonic symbol of the hammer and chisel.
In European religious symbology, the hammer is associated with aggressive male force, physical as well as deadly.
In China and India it is the symbol of the destructive triumph of the forces of evil.
It is now difficult to say what meanings Kamzolkin insinuated into his drawing.
The fact is that it sounds like “with a throne” [put together and inversed, the words for hammer and sickle create the word prestolom, meaning literally “with a throne”] this is how Muscovites hinted at the dictatorial methods of the Bolsheviks.
In Christianity, the sheaves and the harvest are equated with the human souls that the Harvester,e. the Lord, will gather after the end of the world.
It is interesting to note that during the Middle Ages death was depicted not with a scythe but specifically with a sickle.
The pagan pantheons of various Indo-European and Slavic peoples feature a goddess called Mara or Morana, who traditionally held a sickle in her left hand.
In Hinduism the goddess of death Kali, sister of Shiva, holds a sickle in her left hand.
Curiously, the eagle on the coat of arms of revolutionary Austria also holds a sickle in its left claw and the sickle is l ik ewise placed on that side on the Soviet crest.
One of the largest steelmaking and metallurgical factories in Moscow, which had belonged to the French merchant Jules Goujon prior to the revolution, was renamed the Hammer and Sickle plant.
There even used to be a special golden medal called the Hammer and Sickle, which was developed by Stalin’s personal architect and designer, Miron Merzhanov.
Lenin and Stalin were myths, invincible supermen in whose honor songs and poems were composed, films made, and gifts sent from all over the world.
Many of these items are now on show for the very first time at an exhibition called “The Myth of the Beloved Leader”, which recently opened at the State Historical Museum on Red Square.
The exhibition has gathered exhibits that have been lying in warehouses for more than 20 years, and many of them had never been exhibited in Russia before.
They were shown in Sweden, in Germany, in other countries, but not in Russia.
Works that did not meet these were rejected at the highest level,” says Lyubov Lushina, historian and one of the creators of the exhibition.
The actual appearance of Stalin small in stature, with traces of smallpox on his face did not inspire due reverence.
The real biographies of the leaders were not as heroic as they would have like them to be.
Stalin’s picture of a girl feeding a lamb with a bottle of milk, which he cut out of his favorite magazine Ogonyok... these did not fit the carefully cultivated image of heroism.
People were to treat these leaders as icons, avatars of a new religion that the Soviet authorities had invented.
The Bolsheviks fought fiercely against the Orthodox faith, seeing in it a competitor.
However, the “holy place is never empty” as icons and the cross had been outlawed, they had to come up with something new with Soviet symbols.
The five-pointed red star became the new “cross”, while the new “icons” were Lenin and Stalin.
A closed book meant sacrament, while an open one meant the path of truth.
In this there is a striking similarity to the representation of saints on icons.
And among the gifts presented to Stalin there is even a triptych , featuring the six “ages” of the leader.
It was probably for this reason that it was forbidden to show the wooden bust of Lenin depicting him laughing, which can also be seen at the exhibition.
Lenin was sent gifts from all over the world, from Japan (a wooden bust of Lenin with prominent cheekbones and narrow eyes in which he is indistinguishable from a Japanese man), from Madagascar , and from Clare Sheridan, the niece of Winston Churchill, who made a bust of the Soviet leader herself.
There is also the Chukchi legend of the hero Lenin, carved on a walrus tusk, as well as portraits of him made of thousands of grains, of bird feathers, foal wool, poplar fluff, wire, amber, sugar and beads.
A prisoner, serving time for forgery, created a portrait composed of texts of Lenin’s quotes.
Or maybe there was another reason he might have been released earlier for such an ideological act.
Stalin received so many gifts that in 1949, on the 70th anniversary of his birth, they were exhibited in three museums.
There were gorgeous silkscreens sent by Mao (Stalin hung them in the hall of his summer cottage), a leather briefcase made from an entire Brazilian crocodile, and a collection of vintage pipes.
Stalin himself did not attend the exhibition of his presents the real Stalin could hardly make an advantageous impression against the background of the fictional Stalin, whose portraits hung on all the walls.
Once, attending an exhibition dedicated to the 15th anniversary of the Red Army, Stalin stopped in front of a picture in which he was depicted inspecting a cavalry parade in 1919.
Though there are few of us, we have fervent hearts, and our minds crave knowledge,” write some young communists.
Trade declined by 50%, heavy industry came to a virtual standstill, unemployment went as high as 33% and so on.
Obviously, for such accounts the USSR was not part of the ‘world’ and ‘globe’ at the time.
The first and second five-year plans had an extraordinary effect, industrialising a ‘backward’ economy in a way that makes every other industrial revolution pale by comparison.
Agriculture was mechanised and collectivised, and output, employment, and standard of living grew by staggering proportions.
While many at the time prophesied the imminent economic collapse of the Soviet Union ‘mediaeval fossils to whom facts mean nothing’ others were willing to give honour where honour was due.
Russia is forging ahead while all too many of our factories and shipyards lie idle and approximately 3,000,000 of our people despairingly seek work.
Jokes have been made about the five-year plan, and its failure has been predicted.
All of which leads me to ponder whether there was not a connection between that Depression and the huge and disruptive processes underway in the Soviet Union.
Such a massive shift in a place l ik e the USSR was bound to have an effect globally.
As I work through the material concerning the industrialisation and collectivisation drives of the 1930s , it is becoming clearer that it this period and its enormous upheavals were crucial for Stalin’s rethinking of Marxist theories of human nature.
During those intense periods of extraordinary reconstruction literally unleashing the forces of production in a way not seen before there were many who were wildly enthusiastic about the process.
This was the time of the ‘foi furieuse’, of Stakhanovism, of mass enthusiasm and emulation.
But there were also many losers, since it was a profoundly disruptive time.
This is when what I would like to call a ‘materialist doctrine of evil’ really comes into its own.
People look for the class enemy outside the collective farms; they look for persons with ferocious visages, with enormous teeth and thick necks, and with sawn-off shotguns in their hands.
The present-day kulaks and kulak agents, the present-day anti-Soviet elements in the countryside are in the main “quiet,” “smooth-spoken,” almost “saintly” people.
There is no need to look for them far from the collective farms; they are inside the collective farms, occupying posts as storekeepers, managers, accountants, secretaries, etc.
It is inherently anti-communist, as it ends up praising perestroika and condemning Stalin, but still has good information nonetheless.
In 1934 the Soviet Government established the Jewish Autonomous Region, popularly known as Birobidzhan, in a sparsely populated area some five thousand miles east of Moscow.
Designated as the national homeland of Soviet Jewry, Birobidzhan was part of the Kremlin's effort to create an alternative to Palestine.
Drawing on photograph collections never seen outside Birobidzhan, this exhibit explores both the Kremlin's efforts to create a socialist Jewish homeland and reasons for the failure of the Birobidzhan experiment.
The story of the Soviet Zion sheds light on a host of important historical and comtemporary issues regarding Jewish identity, community, and culture.
In a remote region Via panel 2 In a remote region in the Russian Far East, there is a Jewish enclave that has existed for over sixty years.
This is the story of the region's pioneers, a group with little experience in agricultural development but with a great dream of building a socialist Jewish ho me land... [map of Jewish Autonomous Region in 1934, then says:] The territory highlighted here was designated the Jewish Autonomous Region in 1934.
Birobidzhan, formerly Tikhonka, is the capital city of the Jewish Autonomous Region.
Joseph Stalin, 1913 Living out a meager existence Via panel 4 Most Jews living in Tsarist Russia eked out a meager existence, and were required to reside within the empire's western and southwestern provinces, an area known as the Pale of Settlement.
After the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power, most of the 2. mi llion Jews living in Russia resided in small towns and cities within the Pale of Settlement, and made their livings from petty trade, small-scale handicraft production, and unskilled labor.
Jews were hard hit by the collapse of the economy due to the combined impact of world war, revolution, civil war, and pogroms between 1914 and 1921.
Propaganda poster Via Panel 5 This Soviet propaganda poster asserts that the kheder, the one-room Jewish primary school, produces a slavish attitude and leads to shopkeeping, the prayerhouse, and enmity among peoples.
In contrast, the Soviet school prepares healthy people, capable of building the socialist order in which agricultural labor, factory work, and brotherhood among peoples are primary objectives.
Communist officials in 1920s Via Panel 6 In the 1920s Communist officials hoped to refashion the occupational profile of Jews by transforming them into farmers.
The government wanted this experiment in social engineering to weaken popular anti-Semitism and to promote the integration of Jews into the emerging socialist society.
The Kremlin promoted Jewish agricultral colonization in Crimea, Ukraine, and Belarus.
By 1930, 46,560 Jewish families, or approximately 231,000 people, lived in such colonies throughout the Soviet Union.
Mikhail Kalnin, president of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, addressing a 1926 conference on Jewish agricultural settlement A region designed Via Panel 8 The region known as Birobidzhan was designed as the official territory for Jewish land colonization.
The mostly marshy territory, approximately twice the size of New Jersey, had been annexed by Russia in 1858.
Some 27,000 Russians, Cossacks, Koreans, and Ukrainians were already living in the region when Jewish settlement began.
Came as peasants Via Panel 9 A Jewish family works outside their home in the late 1920s or early 1930s.
Their underground home, known as a zemlianka, was a mud hut with sod and thatch built over a hole in the ground.
In the early days of settlement, Jewish migrants frequently slept out-of-doors until tents arrived and barracks were erected, Jews from Minsk interested in moving to Birobidzhan apply at a KOMZET (Committee for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land) office, circa 1928.
KOMZET was the government organization in charge of recruiting and supervising the agriculture settlement of Jews.
Jewish settlers arrive at the train station in Tikhonka, a small village along the route of the Trans-Siberian Railway.
Chief point of disembarkation for people moving to the region, Tikhonka grew rapidly after 1928 and was renamed Birobidzhan several years later.
Birobidzhan and Palestine Via Panel 10 Published in both Yiddish and Russian , Birobidzhan and Palestine by I Sudarskii underscored the Soviet Government's conviction that the newly selected territory in the Soviet Far East was a viable alternative to Palestine.
The Kremlin hoped to score propaganda points in the international arena by establishing the first Jewish homeland in the modern era.
OZET Via Panel 11 OZET commissioned posters to advertise its lotteries to raise funds for Jewish agricultural settlement throughout the Soviet Union, though primary emphasis was placed on the J.A.R. by 1930.
The posters were designed by Mikhail Dlugach , a well-known and respected member of the Soviet artistic community.
Harsh realities Via Panel 13 The harsh realities of life in Birobidzhan in the early years of colonization contrasted starkly with the promises and public pronouncements of the government, which did not provide the settlers with decent housing, food, medical care, and working conditions.
In many instances, Jewish agricultural colonists found they were given land unsuitable for cultivation because it had not been surveyed and drained.
In other cases, the fledgling collective and state farms lacked basic necessities such as potable water, barns, livestock, tools, and equipment.
People unbearably suffered from mosquitoes...but we knew, the future is ahead.
Autonomous status Via Panel 14 The Kremlin granted autonomous administrative status to the Birobidzhan region in 1934, when it was designated the Jewish Autonomous Region.
The decision signaled the government's official recognition of the area as the national territory of Soviet Jewry.
Supporters of the Soviet Union hailed the formation of the J.A.R. as a sign of the freedom and rights enjoyed by Jews under communism.
Publicity campaign Via Panel 15 The Kremlin spearheaded a publicity campaign designed not only to publicize the Birobidzhan experiment, but also to raise funds and to encourage migration to the region.
OZET (Society for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land) dubbed an airplane the ""Birobidzhanets"" and had it traverse Belarus and Ukraine as part of a publicity stunt to raise funds.
During its two-week trip in 1933, the ""Birobidzhanets"" covered some five thousand kilometers, distributing pamphlets and other propaganda.
Grew by leaps and bounds Via Panel 16 The Jewish autonomous region grew by leaps and bounds during the 1930s.
By 1939 nearly 109,000 people lived in the region, though only 18,000 of them were Jews.
The city of Birobidzhan boasted 30,000 residents by the end of the decade.
Banner Via Panel 17 This banner was a gift from the workers of Kharkiv to the Jewish Autonomous Region in 1935 on the first anniversary of the region's existence as an autonomous region.
Building socialism Via Panel 18 From the late 1920s until the mid-1930s, over a thousand foreign Jews moved to the Jewish Autonomous Region.
Starting in 1935, all foreigners wishing to settle in the Jewish Autonomous Region had to pay $200 to KOMZET (Committee for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land), which covered all expenses while they traveled in the Soviet Union.
Many of these Jews had family roots in Russia and were disenchanted with life in Europe and the Americas.
Like many Zionist pioneers in Palestine, the foreign Jews who settled in the Jewish Autonomous Region were attracted by the mystique of tilling the land, engaging in physical labor, and building socialism.
The Birobidzhan Project Via Panel 19 The Birobidzhan Project was well known among world Jewry.
Supporters of the Jewish Autonomous Region organized committees to publicize awareness of the region and to raise funds.
However, the collection never found its way to the Jewish Autonomous Region, and the fate of these works of art is unknown.
Two years later, a group of Jewish artists from Chicago celebrated the Jewish Autonomous Region by issuing this portfolio of 14 lithographs.
A story Via Panel 21 In 1931 Morris and Rose Becker moved from California to the ICOR Commune in Birobidzhan.
Morris and Rose fervently believed in socialism and Zionism and pinned their hopes on the Soviet Zion.
After several years of living in the commune, the Beckers became disillusioned with the Birobidzhan experiment.
Within a year, Morris died of pneumonia while preparing to bring the children back to America.
Their children, Mitchell and Elizabeth, remained in the Soviet Union after their parents' deaths.
Yiddish used Via Panel 22 Yiddish was used by the Soviet's government to foster the region's specifically Jewish nature.
The region established Yiddish schools, newspapers, and cultural institutions.
The regional government also printed street signs, railway station signs, and postmarks in both Yiddish and Russian.
In 1935 the government decreed that all government documents, including public notices, announcements, posters, and advertisements had to appear in both Yiddish and Russian.
Yiddish introduced Via Panel 23 Yiddish was intended to serve as the bedrock of a non-religious, Soviet Jewish culture and community.
The Kremlin believed that the use of Yiddish as the national secular language of the Jews would make the Jewish Autonomous Region the new center of Soviet Jewish life.
The Kaganovich Jewish Theater was named after prominent party leader Lazar Kaganovich, who was Jewish.
The theater was established in 1934, when members of the Moscow State Jewish Theater arrived in the J.A.R. along with musicians, technical personnel, and costumes.
Initial promise Via Panel 25 Despite the initial promise to find agricultural work for Jewish settlers, most Jews who migrated to the Jewish Autonomous Region shied away from farm labor and gravitated to jobs with which they had prior experience such as employment in retail and service sectors.
By 1939 less than one quarter of the Jews living in the region engaged in agricultural pursuits.
Atheism a major component Via Panel 26 Atheism was a major component of the Kremlin's official policy.
In an effort to combat religious practices among Jews, the leadership of the Jewish Autonomous Region held a series of lectures designed to undercut the appeal of Jewish Religion.
This notice from the 1930s was posted throughout the region and listed a series of lectures and other events that were held in factories and workers' clubs at Passover time.
The lectures covered such topics as the incompatibility of socialism and religion.
The purges Via Panel 27 The bloodletting of the purges unleashed by Stalin and the secret police between 1936 and 1938 directly affected the inhabitants of the Jewish Autonomous Region.
No reliable estimates exist regarding the number of Jewish Autonomous Region residents who fell victim to the purges.
In all probability, thousands of people were arrested, sent to the burgeoning labor camp system, or executed.
The political leadership of the region was particularly hard hit by arrests and executions.
Khavkin survived his interrogation by the secret police and managed to emerge alive from the gulag after Stalin's death in 1953.
Khavkin's wife was also imprisoned after being accused of trying to poison the prominent party leader Lazar Kaganovich with homemade gefilte fish during his 1936 visit to the Jewish Autonomous Region.
Supposed failure Via Panel 28 With the onset of the purges, the Kre ml in gutted all projects that promoted Yiddish and Jewish culture in the Jewish Autonomous Region.
But responsibility for the failure of the Birobidzhan experiment does not belong solely to the Kre ml in.
Young Soviet Jews were assimilating at a rapid pace, and Yiddish and the Jewish Autonomous Region did not figure prominently in the minds of those seeking to get ahead.
Finally, the effort to create a new Jewish identity devoid of religious heritage and traditions proved to be a difficult task.
By the end of the 1930s, the settlement of Jews in the region came to a standstill.
Most non-Soviet observers concluded that the experiment in building a Soviet Zion had failed.
Breathing new life Via Panel 29 Ironically, the trauma of the Second World War breathed life again into the Jewish Autonomous Region, as it did into Soviet Jewish society in general.
In 1945 the government once again revived the idea of Jewish migration to the region in order to address the problems confronting Soviet Jews in the wake of the war.
Between 1946 and 1948, perhaps as many as 10,000 Jews moved to the Jewish Autonomous Region.
Estimates indicate that as many as 30,000 Jews were living in the region by the end of 1948.
American Birobidzhan Committee Via Panel 30 The American Birobidzhan Committee was a Communist front organization formed in the 1930s.
After the Second World War, it actively promoted the cause of the Jewish Autonomous Region by raising money and sending food and clothing.
The support of prominent public figures, such as Albert Einstein who served as honorary president, lent AMBIJAN credibility and a high profile.
The figure of 25,000 Jewish settlers to the Jewish Autonomous Region since the end of the war was an exaggeration.
Concentrated postwar effort Via Panel 31 The concentrated effort to populate the Jewish Autonomous Region with Jews occurred as the Kre ml in relaxed its grip on Soviet society and permitted a resurgence of Jewish cultural life.
Despite this revival, artists and writers were confined by the ideological straightjacket constraining them since the 1930s.
Supposed ""murderous effort 1 Shows the inherently anti-communist nature of this project.
Via Panel 32 In 1948 Stalin launched a murderous campaign to destroy all Jewish intellectual and cultural activity in the Soviet Union.
He and others feared the perceived political disloyalty of Soviet Jewry after the establishment of the State of Israel, and were motivated by unrestrained antiSemitism.
In the Jewish Autonomous Region itself, prominent Jewish officials and cultural figures were arrested and imprisoned.
In perhaps the most serious attack, some 30,000 books from the Judaica collection of the public library were burned.
The anti-Jewish assault in Stalin's last years delivered a mortal blow to the Birobidzhan experiment.
Via Panel 33 Whatever promise the Jewish autonomous region held in the minds of both foreign and Soviet Jews had evaporated by the time of Stalin's death in 1953.
The post-Stalin era did not bring any substantial changes to the Jewish Autonomous Region, and Jewish life remained sterile.
Nonetheless, the continued existence of the Jewish Autonomous Region served the Kremlin's purposes, presumably as proof of the regime's commitment to allow Jews national and cultural rights.
Perestroika enters Via Panel 34 The advent of perestroika and glasnost' in the mid-1980s encouraged local officials and Jewish activists to revive Jewish life in the Jewish Autonomous Region.
During the first half of the 1990s, Yiddish was again offered as a subject in several schools, including the Birobidzhan Teachers' College.
Sunday schools were opened and public celebrations of Jewish holidays became commonplace.
Of the current population of over 200,000 in the Jewish Autonomous Region, no more than a few thousand are Jewish.
In addition, hundreds are leaving the region every year for Israel and other places.
Like many Jews elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, most Jews in the Jewish Autonomous Region feel isolated from their Jewish heritage.
Still, there is no sign that the official designation of the Jewish Autonomous Region will be taken away.
Nor is there any indication that the Jewish community of the Jewish Autonomous Region, no matter how small, will lose interest in recovering its Jewish heritage.
More than seventy years of communist rule did not extinguish all forms of Jewish identity.
Yet the state of affairs in Birobidzhan today strongly suggests that the future of Jewish life in that region is bleak.
The hopes and aspirations that so many of the original Jewish settlers placed in the Birobidzhan experiment remain unfulfilled.
There are also pages for the timeline , multimedia , page for comments Articles about this • Wikimedia photographs about • Birobidzhan Jewish autonomous region documentary in 2009 aired on RT • Official portal of the Jewish Autonomous Region public authorities • History of formation and development of the Jewish Autonomous Region • Birobidzhan film excerpt, created in 1934 in the eastern USSR • D Bergelson, The Jewish Autonomous Region , 1939.
Birobidzhan: An Experiment to Create a Soviet Jewish Homeland • Birobidzhan: The Soviet Jewish Homeland • James von Geldern, Birobidzhan • Profiles: Birobidzhan Jewish Community • Far East Jewish Community Chairman Passes Away • Far Eastern Research Center for Jewish Culture and Yiddish • Governor Voices Support for Growing Far East Jewish Community • Birobidzhan New Rabbi, New Synagogue , also see Birobidzhan Back to the Synagogue in the Washington Post.
A Yiddishland in the Far East • Emigration to Israel empties 'homeland' for Jews contrived in the Stalinist era (CNN article, anti-Communist) • Library of Congress collections • 'Sad And Absurd': The U.S.S.R.'s Disastrous Effort To Create A Jewish Homeland , NPR article, anti-communist • Who Will ‘Swallow Up’ the Jewish Autonomous Oblast Khabarovsk Region or China? , anti-Russia publication.
The Sad and Absurd Story of Birobidzhan, Russia's Jewish Autonomous Region , anti-communist book.
I did not intend to because the previous speakers have said all that had to be said — and have said it well and to the point.
You shock brigaders of the collective farms evidently have no doubt that the collective farms are on the right path.
There are still not a few among the peasants, even among the collective farmers, who have doubts as to whether the collective-farm path is the right one.
Indeed, for hundreds of years people have lived in the old way, have followed the old path, have bent their backs to the kulaks and landlords, to the usurers and speculators.
It cannot be said that that old, capitalist path was approved by the peasants.
But that old path was a beaten path, the customary path, and no one had actually proved that it was possible to live in a different way, in a better way.
It is time to abandon the old path, it is time to begin living in a new way, in the collective-farm way; it is time to begin living not as everyone lives in bourgeois countries, but in a new way, cooperatively.
At all events, the new path is not the customary path, it is not a beaten path, not yet a fully explored path.
These are the doubts that are now troubling one section of the labouring peasantry.
Hence, the question I have just put cannot be described as an idle one.
Some comrades think that the transition to the new path, to the collective-farm path, started in our country three years ago.
Of course, the development of collective farms on a mass scale started in our country three years ago.
The transition, as we know, was marked by the routing of the kulaks and by a movement among the vast masses of the poor and middle peasantry to join the collective farms.
But in order to start this mass transition to the collective farms, certain preliminary conditions had to be available, without which, generally speaking, the mass collective-farm movement would have been inconceivable.
Secondly, it was necessary to drive out the landlords and the capitalists, to take the factories and the land away from them and declare these the property of the people.
Thirdly, it was necessary to curb the kulaks and to take machines and tractors away from them.
Fourthly, it was necessary to declare that the machines and tractors could be used only by the poor and middle peasants united in collective farms.
Finally, it was necessary to industrialize the country, to set up a new tractor industry, to build new factories for the manufacture of agricultural machinery, in order to supply tractors and machines in abundance to the collective-farm peasantry.
Without these preliminary conditions there could have been no question of the mass transition to the collective-farm path that started three years ago.
Hence, in order to adopt the collective-farm path it was necessary first of all to accomplish the October Revolution, to overthrow the capitalists and landlords, to take the land and factories away from them and to set up a new industry.
It was with the October Revolution that the transition to the new path, to the collective-farm path, started.
This transition developed with fresh force only three years ago because it was not until then that the economic results of the October Revolution made themselves fully felt, it was not until then that success was achieved in pushing forward the industrialization of the country.
But those revolutions differ from the October Revolution in that all of them were one-sided revolutions.
One form of exploitation of the working people was replaced by another form of exploitation, but exploitation itself remained.
One set of exploiters and oppressors was replaced by another set of exploiters and oppressors, but exploiters and oppressors, as such, remained.
Only the October Revolution set itself the aim of abolishing all exploitation and of eliminating all exploiters and oppressors.
The revolution of the slaves eliminated the slave-owners and abolished the form of exploitation of the toilers as slaves.
But in their place it set up the serf-owners and the form of exploitation of the toilers as serfs.
Under the slave system the ""law"" permitted the slave-owner to kill his slaves.
Under serfdom the ""law"" permitted the serf-owner ""only"" to sell his serfs.
The revolution of the peasant-serfs eliminated the serfowners and abolished the form of exploitation through serfdom.
But in their place it set up the capitalists and landlords, the capitalist and landlord form of exploitation of the toilers.
Under the capitalist system the ""law"" permits ""only"" of the toilers being doomed to unemployment and destitution, to ruin and death from starvation.
It was only our Soviet revolution, only our October Revolution that dealt with the question, not of substituting one set of exploiters for another, not of substituting one form of exploitation for another, but of eradicating all exploitation, of eradicating all exploiters, all the rich and oppressors, old and new.
That is why the October Revolution was a preliminary condition and a necessary prerequisite for the peasants' transition to the new, collective-farm path.
They acted rightly, because the October Revolution helped ehem to shake off the yoke of the landlords and capitalists, the usurers and kulaks, the merchants and speculators.
It is all very well to drive out the oppressors, to drive out the landlords and capitalists, to curb the kulaks and speculators.
In order to become entirely free from the old fetters it is not enough merely to rout the exploiters; it is necessary also to build a new life — to build a life that will enable the labouring peasants to improve their material conditions and culture and make continuous progress from day to day and year to year.
In order to achieve this, a new system must be set up in the countryside, the collective-farm system.
Under the old system the peasants worked singly, following the ancient methods of their forefathers and using antiquated implements of labour; they worked for the landlords and capitalists, the kulaks and speculators; they worked and lived half-starved while they enriched others.
Under the new, collective-farm system the peasants work in common, cooperatively, with the help of modern implements — tractors and agricultural machinery; they work for themselves and their collective farms; they live without capitalists and landlords, without kulaks and speculators; they work with the object of raising their standard of welfare and culture from day to day.
Over there, under the old system, the government is a bourgeois government, and it supports the rich against the labouring peasantry.
Here, under the new, collective-farm system, the government is a workers' and peasants' government, and it supports the workers and peasants against all the rich of whatever kind.
There are people who think that some sort of third path could be followed.
This unknown third path is most eagerly clutched at by some wavering comrades who are not yet convinced that the collective-farm path is the right one.
They want us to return to the old system, to return to individual farming, but without capitalists and landlords.
Moreover, they ""only"" want us to permit the existence of the kulaks and other small capitalists as a legitimate phenomenon of our economic system.
Actually, this is not a third path, but the second path — the path to capitalism.
It means restoring kulak bondage, restoring the exploitation of the peasantry by the kulaks and giving the kulaks power.
The restoration of the kulaks is bound to lead to the creation of a kulak power and to the liquidation of the Soviet power — hence, it is bound to lead to the formation of a bourgeois government.
And the formation of a bourgeois government is bound to lead in its turn to the restoration of the landlords and capitalists, to the restoration of capitalism.
The so-called third path is actually the second path, the path leading back to capitalism.
Ask the peasants whether they want to restore kulak bondage, to return to capitalism, to destroy the Soviet power and restore power to the landlords and capitalists.
Just ask them, and you will find out which path the majority of the labouring peasants regard as the only right path.
The labouring peasants did right to reject the capitalist path and take the path of collective-farm development.
It is said that the collective-farm path is the right path, but a difficult one.
But the point is that the main difficulties are over, and those difficulties which now confront you are not worth talking about seriously.
Your speakers here have praised the workers of Leningrad, Moscow, Kharkov, and the Donbas.
They said that these workers have achievements to their credit and that you, collective farmers, have far fewer achievements.
I could relate to you some facts from the life of the workers in 1918, when for whole weeks not a piece of bread, let alone meat or other food, was distributed to the workers.
The best times were considered to be the days on which we were able to distribute to the workers in Leningrad and Mos-cow one-eighth of a pound of black bread each, and even that was half bran.
And that lasted not merely a month or six months, but for two whole years.
But the workers bore it and did not lose heart; for they knew that better times would come and that they would achieve decisive successes.
Just compare your difficulties and privations with the difficulties and privations which the workers have endured, and you will see that they are not even worth talking about seriously.
What is needed, in the first place, is that the collective farms should have land fully secured to them and suitable for cultivation.
It is well known that the best lands have been transferred to the collective farms and have been durably secured to them.
Hence, the collective farmers can cultivate and improve their land as they please without any fear that it will be taken from them and given to somebody else.
What is needed, secondly, is that the collective farmers should have at their disposal tractors and machines.
Everyone knows that our tractor works and agricultural machinery works produce primarily and mainly for the collective farms, supplying them with all modern implements.
What is needed, finally, is that the government should support the collective-farm peasants to the utmost both with men and money, and that it should prevent the last remnants of the hostile classes from disrupting the collective farms.
Name another country where the government supports, not the capitalists and landlords, not the kulaks and other rich, but the labouring peasants.
There is not, nor has there ever been, another country l ik e this in the world.
Only here, in the Land of Soviets, does a government exist which stands solidly for the workers and collective-farm peasants, for all the working people of town and country, against all the rich and the exploiters.
Hence, you have all that is needed to extend collective-farm development and to free yourself entirely from the old fetters.
Of you only one thing is demanded — and that is to work conscientiously; to distribute collectivefarm incomes accord ing to the amount of work done; to take care of collective farm property, to take care of the tractors and machines; to see to it that the horses are well looked after; to fulfil the as signments of your workers' and peasants' state; to consolidate the collective farms and to expel from the collective farms the kulaks and kulak agents who have wormed their way into them.
You will surely agree with me that to overcome these difficulties,e., to work conscientiously and to take good care of collective-farm property, is not so very difficult.
The more so that you are now working, not for the rich and not for exploiters, but for yourselves, for your own collective farms.
As you see, the collective-farm path, the path of socialism, is the only right path for the labouring peasants.
Our Immediate Task — To Make All the Collective Farmers Prosperous Second question.
One of our achievements is that we have helped the vast masses of the poor peasants to join the collective farms.
One of our achievements is that by joining the collective farms, where they have at their disposal the best land and the finest instruments of production, the vast masses of the poor peasants have risen to the level of middle peasants.
One of our achievements is that the vast masses of the poor peasants, who formerly lived in semi-starvation, have now, in the collective farms, become middle peasants, have attained material security.
One of our achievements is that we have put a stop to the differentiation of the peasants into poor peasants and kulaks; that we have routed the kulaks and have helped the poor peasants to become masters of their own labour in the collective farms, to become middle peasants.
The poor peasants were becoming poorer, were sinking into ruin and falling into bondage to the kulaks.
The middle peasants were trying to climb up to the kulaks, but they were continually tumbling down and swelling the ranks of the poor peasants, to the amusement of the kulaks.
It is not difficult to see that the only ones to profit by this scramble were the kulaks, and perhaps, here and there, some of the well-to-do peasants.
Hence, at the lowest estimate, 35 per cent of all the peasant households were poor-peasant households, compelled to bear the yoke of kulak bondage.
That is apart from the economically weaker strata of the middle peasants, comprising more than half of the middle peasantry, whose condition differed little from that of the poor peasants and who were directly dependent upon the kulaks.
By the expansion of collective-farm development we have succeeded in abolishing this scramble and injustice; we have smashed the yoke of kulak bondage, brought this vast mass of poor peasants into the collective farms, given them a secure existence there, and raised them to the level of middle peasants, able to make use of the collective-farm land, the privileges granted to collective farms, tractors and agricultural machinery.
It means that not less than 20 mi llion of the peasant population, not less than 20 million poor peasants have been rescued from destitution and ruin, have been rescued from kulak bondage, and have attained material security thanks to the collective farms.
It is an achievement such as has never been known in the world before, such as no other state in the world has yet made.
There you have the practical, tangible results of collective-farm development, the results of the fact that the peasants have taken the collective-farm path.
But this is only our first step, our first achievement on the path of collective-farm development.
It would be wrong to think that we must stop at this first step, at this first achievement.
In order to advance further and defini tively consolidate the collective farms we must take a second step, we must secure a new achievement.
It is to raise the collective farmers, both the former poor peasants and the former middle peasants, to a still higher level.
Thanks to the collective farms we have succeeded in raising the poor peasants to the level of the middle peasants.
We must now succeed in taking another step forward, and help all the collective farmers — both the former poor peasants and the former middle peasants — to rise to the level of prosperous peasants.
We need only make better use of the machines and tractors, we need only improve the cultivation of the land, to increase the quantity of our produce two-fold and three-fold.
And this will be quite sufficient to convert all our collective farmers into prosperous tillers of collective-farm fields.
In order to become prosperous a peasant had to wrong his neighbours; he had to exploit them; to sell to them dear and buy from them cheap; to hire some labourers and thoroughly exploit them; to accumulate some capital and then, having strengthened his position, to creep into the ranks of the kulaks.
This, indeed, explains why formerly, under individual farming, the prosperous peasants aroused suspicion and hatred among the poor and middle peasants.
For collective farmers to become prosperous it is not at all necessary now that they wrong or exploit their neighbours.
And besides, it is not easy to exploit anybody now; for private ownership of land and the renting of land no longer exist in our country, the machines and tractors belong to the state, and people who own capital are not in fashion in the collective farms.
Only one thing is now needed for the collective farmers to become prosperous, namely, to work in the collective farms conscientiously, to make proper use of the tractors and machines, to make proper use of the draught cattle, to cultivate the land properly and to take care of the collectivefarm property.
Against the exploiters, against those who do not work themselves, but compel others to work for them, and get rich at the expense of others.
Socialism demands, not loafing, but that all should work conscientiously; that they should work, not for others, not for the rich and the exploiters, but for themselves, for the community.
And if we work conscientiously, work for ourselves, for our collective farms, then we shall succeed in a matter of two or three years in raising all the collective farmers, both the former poor peasants and the former middle peasants, to the level of prosperous peasants, to the level of people enjoying an abundance of produce and leading a fully cultured life.
Miscellaneous remarks And now permit me to make a few miscellaneous remarks.
Yet we old Bolsheviks are not people of the least account in the world, comrades.
The question of women in the collective farms is a big question, comrades.
I know that many of you underestimate the women and even laugh at them.
Primarily, the point is that the collective-farm movement has advanced a number of remarkable and capable women to leading positions.
Look at this congress, at the delegates, and you will realize that women have long ago ceased to be backward and have come into the front ranks.
It is our duty to bring the women in the collective farms forward and to make use of this force.
Of course, not so long ago, the Soviet government had a slight misunderstanding with the women collective farmers.
But now this business about the cow has been settled, and the misunderstanding has been removed.
We have achieved a position where the majority of the collective-farm households already have a cow each.
Another year or two will pass and there will not be a single collective farmer without his own cow.
We Bolsheviks will see to it that every one of our collective farmers has a cow.
As for the women collective farmers themselves, they must remember the power and significance of the collective farms for women; they must remember that only in the collective farm do they have the opportunity of being on an equal footing with men.
Without collective farms — inequality; in collective farms — equal rights.
Let our comrades, the women collective farmers, remember this and let them cherish the collective-farm system as the apple of their eye.
A few words about the members of the Young Communist League, young men and women, in the collective farms.
Among the peasants there are not a few old people, borne down by the burden of the past, burdened with the habits and the recollections of the old life.
They are free from the burden of the past, and it is easiest for them to assimilate Lenin's behests.
And precisely because it is easiest for the youth to assimilate Lenin's behests it is their mission to give a helping hand to the laggards and waverers.
Hence, the task is to study and study again the principles of Leninism.
Individual peasants do exist, and we must not leave them out of our calculations; for they are our collective farmers of tomorrow.
I know that one section of the individual peasants has become utterly corrupt and has taken to speculating.
That, no doubt, explains why the collective farmers accept individual peasants into the collective farms with great circumspection, and sometimes do not accept them at all.
This, of course, is quite right, and there cannot be any objection to it.
But there is another, larger section of individual peasants, who have not taken to speculating and who earn their bread by honest labour.
These individual peasants, perhaps, would not be averse to joining the collective farms.
But they are hindered in this, on the one hand, by their hesitation as to whether the collective-farm path is the right path; and, on the other hand, by the bitter feelings now existing amongst the collective farmers against the individual peasants.
Of course, we must understand the feelings of the collective farmers and appreciate their situation.
During the past years they have suffered not a few insults and jeers at the hands of the individual peasants.
But insults and jeers must not be allowed to have decisive importance here.
He is a bad leader who cannot forget an offence, and who puts his own feelings above the interests of the collective-farm cause.
If you want to be leaders, you must be able to forget the insults to which you were subjected by certain individual peasants.
There you have another example, showing that leaders, if they want to be true leaders, must be able to forget an offence if the interests of the cause demand it.
I am not opposed to the exercise of circumspection in accepting people into the collective farms.
But I am against barring the path to the collective farms to all individual peasants without discrimination.
The collective farmers must not forget that not long ago they themselves were individual peasants.
Finally, a few words about the letter written by the collective farmers of Bezenchuk.
It shows that among our collective farmers there are not a few experienced and politically conscious organizers and agitators in the cause of collective farming, who are the pride of our country.
But this letter contains one incorrect passage with which we cannot possibly agree.
The point is that the Bezenchuk comrades describe their work in the collective farm as modest and all but insignificant work, whereas they describe the efforts of orators and leaders, who sometimes make speeches of inordinate length, as great and creative work.
The times have passed when leaders were regarded as the only makers of history, while the workers and peasants were not taken into account.
The destinies of nations and of states are now determined, not only by leaders, but primarily and mainly by the vast masses of the working people.
The workers and the peasants, who without fuss and noise are building factories and mills, constructing mines and railways, building collective farms and state farms, creating all the values of life, feeding and clothing the whole world — they are the real heroes and the creators of the new life.
It is not good when people overrate their strength and begin to be conceited about the services they have rendered.
But it is still worse when people begin to underrate their strength and fail to see that their ""modest"" and ""insignificant"" work is really great and creative work that decides the fate of history.
I would like the Bezenchuk comrades to approve this slight amendment of mine to their letter.
Fascist lies are accepted as the official truth, taught in Ukrainian schools and promoted by Ukrainian academics.
The facts The Holodomor, derived from “to kill by starvation,” refers to the phony genocide by famine in the Soviet Ukraine.
It’s a lie disseminated by Ukrainian nationalists and fascists, with no historical evidence.
It originated in the Ukrainian diaspora , a population led by veterans of Ukrainian Nazi forces.
While the famine of 1932-33 took a terrible toll, it was only one of a long series of catastrophes.
Russia and Ukraine had experienced famine every two to four years for a millennium — yes, for a thousand years, at least — and devastating famines every decade or so.
There were serious famines in 1920-1923, 1924-5, 1927-8, and again in 1932-33.
The Soviet leadership, Joseph Stalin included, did not understand the extent of these famines for some time.
They also sent tractors and “political departments” to organize agriculture.
About 10 percent of the population of Ukraine died from the 1932-33 famine, roughly the same percentage as in 1920-23.
The 90 percent who survived brought home the harvest and stopped the famine — with significant Soviet aid.
Thanks to the collectivization of agriculture, which took place mainly in 1930-31, farming was reorganized on a large-scale and increasingly mechanized basis.
Collectivization was the greatest humanitarian triumph of the 20th century.
It was caused by the devastation of World War II plus the worst drought in centuries, and affected all of Europe and much of Asia.
The Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army were trained by Germany’s Nazis.
They entered the USSR with Adolph Hitler’s troops and participated in mass murders of Jewish and Polish workers and communists.
Stepan Bandera led the more hard-core fascist wing of the OUN and eventually consolidated control over Ukraine’s nationalist forces.
In 1941, the Banderist leadership declared an “independent” Ukraine state, which was in reality a satellite of Nazi Germany.
The Ukrainian Insurgent Army was formed in part from the 14th Waffen-SS Division (storm troopers), an all-Western Ukrainian Nazi SS division.
Lies and damned lies In short, both of Ukraine’s foundational historical myths — or, more accurately, lies — have a Nazi origin.
Russian-speaking workers in eastern Ukraine are affected by these lies as well.
Now the open fascists are becoming prominent in the new Ukrainian government in Kiev.
This isn’t surprising, since fascist lies have been officially propagated and taught in Ukraine for the past 15 to 20 years.
The question of grain exports Like the pre-revolutionary Czarist regimes, the Soviet government exported grain.
While the USSR was exporting it was also allocating much more grain to seed and famine relief.
The government accumulated some three million tons in reserves during this period and then allocated two million tons from that to famine relief.
However, there was simply not enough food to feed the whole population, even if all exports had been stopped instead of just drastically curtailed, as they were.
The Soviet government used these procurements to feed 40 million people in the cities and industrial sites who were also starving, further evidence that the harvest was small.
About 10 percent of the population of Ukraine died from the famine or associated diseases.
But 90 percent survived, the vast majority of whom were peasants, army men of peasant background or workers of peasant origin.
The surviving peasants had to work very hard, under conditions of insufficient food, to sow and bring in the 1933 harvest.
The Soviet government’s large-scale relief campaign which, together with their own hard work under the most difficult conditions, enabled the peasants to produce a large harvest in 1933.
The so-called “Holodomor” or “deliberate” and “man-made” famine interpretation is not simply mistaken on some important points.
Its proponents misrepresent history by omitting evidence that would undermine their interpretation.
Far less known is the way he came to see, later in life, the importance of socialism for women.
His speeches at earlier women’s congresses may have been somewhat patronising, but here the issue of socialism and women gains clear expression.
The campaign, of course, remains the butt of much anticommunist ranting, with assertions that it ’caused’ the famines of the 1930s, that it curtailed the natural incentive of private property and farming, indeed that it was nothing more than a return to medieval patterns of indentured labour, if not outright slavery.
To begin with, the furious process of industrialisation in the 1920s had to do so in a new way.
So the whole industrialisation process had to rely on internal, or socialist accumulation.
The government decided to set higher prices for manufactured goods, as a type of super-tax that would flow back into industry.
Meanwhile, prices on agricultural goods were set lower, even if there were occasional shortages.
Obviously, this went directly counter to the supposed ‘iron law’ of supply and demand.
Obviously, it led to not a little speculation by the kulaks, or wealthy farmers, among others.
Most importantly, it produced the first layer of economic contradiction.
The second layer was between the rate of industrial change and the rate of agricultural change.
The furious pace of industrialisation left agriculture far behind, so that an ever larger gulf opened up between them.
The ‘super-tax’, or ‘scissors’ approach would not hold out forever in such a situation, so something had to be done in relation to agriculture.
Stalin toyed with the idea that the small farmers should be fostered, since their approach had been tested over centuries.
But in the end, he and the government opted for the very Left approach of collectivisation as a way of dealing with the growing contradiction between industry and agriculture.
As some have suggested, and as the editors of Stalin’s Works also point out, the collectivisation drive was the most difficult task since the conquest of power.
In short, it really was an other revolution, a massive undertaking never quite seen before, achieved in a breathtakingly short period of time and not without a few unexpected side-effects.
In this context, Stalin reflects on such revolutionary changes in a letter to Gorky from 1930.
It cannot be the case that now, when we are breaking the old relations in life and building new ones, when the customary roads and paths are being tom up and new, uncustomary ones laid, when whole sections of the population who used to live in plenty are being thrown out of their rut and are falling out of the ranks, making way for millions of people who were formerly oppressed and downtrodden—it cannot be the case that the youth should represent a homogeneous mass of people who sympathise with us, that there should be no differentiation and division among them.
Naturally, in such a “racking turmoil,” we are bound to have people who are weary, overwrought, worn-out, despairing, dropping out of the ranks and, lastly, deserting to the camp of the enemy.
It means people will be paid according to the labour they have provided.
It means different pay scales in terms of skills, type of labour, and contribution to the overall good of the socialist project.
It also means that one should take responsibility for one’s labour and stay in the same job for a while.
Yet, communism is like socialism in that it does not fall into the trap of individualist equalitarianism in relation to labour.
Obviously, the abilities differ, as do the needs depending on one stage in life, whether one has children or not, whether one is sick or healthy.
A slightly different image of the man who is charged with callously slaughtering millions, drooling while doing so.
A little later, in an address to graduates from the Red Army training centre, he tells this famous story to illustrate his point.
You, Mr Wells, evidently start out with the assumption that all men are good.
I cannot yet appreciate what has been done in your country; I only arrived yesterday.
But I have already seen the happy faces of healthy men and women and I know that something very considerable is being done here.
It would be a good thing to invent a five-year plan for the reconstruction of the human brain which obviously lacks many things needed for a perfect social order.
It may be called the vision of the future commune, based on the massive collectivisation drive of the late 1920s and 1930s.
In between the lines, we may catch a glimpse of the idea that communism is a state of becoming rather than being, although he does tend to the latter.
The future commune will arise on the basis of a more developed technique and of a more developed artel, on the basis of an abundance of products.
Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931-1933 • Mark B Tauger.
Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931-1933 The 1932 Harvest and the Famine of 1933 • Mark B Tauger.
I have now read carefully Terry Martin’s The Affirmative Action Empire.
It has its shortcomings, especially in the theoretical area, thereby missing some of the complexities and dialectical tensions at work.
What Martin does not do is use this to develop a Marxist theory of the state based on actual practice, but then he is not so interested in Marxist theory.
The interviewers did not ask direct questions concerning ethnic conflict.
Instead, they asked respondents to list the ‘distinguishing characteristics’ of Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, Georgians, Armenians, Kalmyks and Tatars.
To the astonishment of the interviewers, many of the respondents replied that there were no ethnic differences whatsoever.
The interviewers pressed their case, but the respondents determined that there were two very different issues at stake.
Second, the respondents inferred an interest by the interviewers in popular prejudice in the Soviet Union.
Even more, many of the respondents connected the absence of popular prejudice and conflict to state policy.
In response to the question concerning ‘distinguishing characteristics’, a dozen respondents asserted that the absence of open national prejudice was due to the very severe punishments for racial-hate speech.
You cannot tell somebody that he is a Ukrainian and brag that you are a Russian or you would be arrested.
It is strictly forbidden by law to offend any member of any nationality, regardless of whether he is a Russian, Ukrainian, White Russian, or anything else.
If you cussed out a member of a minority group, there was serious trouble.
If you call a Jew a ‘zhid’, he can go to the police and you will get a prison sentence.
A primary school teacher told a personal story of how she had used a Russian proverb, ‘An untimely guest is worse than a Tatar’, and almost lost her job.
Bear in mind that these positions were also voiced in the context of immediate memories of Nazi racial theory and practice.
And that they arose from the same period as the extensive purges of the 1930s part of my investigation of the practical contributions to a materialist doctrine of evil, if not a thorough revision of Marxist theories of human nature.
Indeed, they indicate precisely the opposite, as I will show in a moment.
So those who wish to make the accusation have to rely on hearsay secondand third-hand snippets from passing conversations, whether from an estranged daughter or from those within and without the USSR who were not favourably disposed to Stalin.
And once such a position is ‘established’, it is then possible to read some of his actions and written comments in such a light.
For instance, the ‘anti-cosmopolitan’ campaign of the late 1940s becomes a coded ‘anti-Semitic’ campaign.
However, the only way such an assumption can work is that many doctors in the Soviet Union were Jewish; therefore the attack on doctors was anti-Semitic.
Equally, even more doctors were Russian, but for some strange reason, the plot is not described as anti-Russian.
Unfortunately for Stalin’s accusers, even the hearsay indicates that Stalin was opposed to the deep-rooted anti-Semitism of Russian culture.
During the anti-cosmopolitan campaign of 194849 which was actually anti-capitalist in the wake of the Second World War it became the practice in some journal articles to include, where possible, the original family names in brackets after the Russian name.
If one assumes, even subconsciously, that Hitler and Stalin were of the same ilk, then it follows that Stalin too must be an anti-Semite.
Apart from the sheer oxymoron of an anti-fascist fascist, this assertion seems very much l ik e the speculative thought bubble that becomes ‘true’ through a thousand repetitions.
I prefer to follow a rather conventional approach, instead of relying on hearsay, gossip and speculation.
That approach is to pay attention to his written statements and actions.
Already in ‘Marxism and the National Question’ , in which Stalin deals extensively with the Jews and the Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland, and Russia), he points out that dispersed minorities such as the Jews would be given the full range of protections, in terms of language, education, culture and freedom of conscience, within a socialist state.
This would become his standard position, reiterated time and again and contrasted with the tsarist autocracy’s fostering of pogroms.
It was also reflected in extensive programs among Jews, including the fostering not without problems and failures of Yiddish, Jewish institutions and the significant presence of Jews at all levels of government.
And in 1931, in response to a question from the Jewish News Agency in the United States, he describes anti-Semitism as an ‘an extreme form of racial chauvinism’ that is a convenient tool used by exploiters to divert workers from the struggle with capitalism.
This was no empty boast, as those who accuse Stalin of anti-semitism seem to assume.
It may be surprising to some, but one of the key tasks of the NKVD was to counteract waves of residual anti-Semitism.
Yes, one of the jobs of the infamous secret police of the USSR was to root out anti-Semitism.
Further, the ‘affirmative action’ program of the Soviet Union, enacted in Stalin’s capacity as Commissar for Nationality Affairs , was explicitly a program in which territories of identifiable ethnic minorities were established, with their own languages and forms of education, the fostering of literature and cultural expression, and local forms of governance.
As for dispersed minorities, even within such regions, they were provided with a stiff framework of protections, including strong penalties for any form of racial denigration and abuse.
They too in a program of indigenization should be able to use their own languages, operate their own schools, law-courts and soviets, and have freedom of conscience in matters relating to religion.
Indeed, by the mid-1930s the Jews too were identified as a ‘nation’ with territory, having the Jewish Autonomous district in Birobidzhan.
It eventually failed, but it was the first move towards Jewish territory in the modern era.
Judaism too was subject anti-religious campaigns, which had the result not so much of divorcing Jews from their religious ‘roots’ but of producing a profound transformation in Jewish institutions and culture, so much so that one can speak of a ‘sovietisation’ of Jewish culture that produced Jews who were not religious but proud of contributions to Soviet society.
Equality of rights of citizens of the U.S.S.R., irrespective of their nationality or race, in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life, is an indefeasible law.
Any direct or indirect restriction of the rights of, or, conversely, any establishment of direct or indirect privileges for, citizens on account of their race or nationality, as well as any advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness or hatred and contempt, is punishable by law.
In order to ensure to citizens freedom of conscience, the church in the U.S.S.R. is separated from the state, and the school from the church.
Freedom of religious worship and freedom of anti-religious propaganda is recognized for all citizens.
Incidentally, article 124, which Stalin included in the face of stiff opposition, eventually led to the rapprochement between Stalin and the church during and after the Second World War.
The church petitioned for churches to be re-opened, religious personnel to be admitted to jobs, and religious candidates ran in the 1937 legislative elections.
Citizens of the USSR are equal before the law, without distinction of origin, social or property status, race or nationality, sex, education, language, attitude to religion, type and nature of occupation, domicile, or other status.
The equal rights of citizens of the USSR are guaranteed in all fields of economic, political, social, and cultural life.
Exercise of these rights is ensured by according women equal access with men to education and vocational and professional training, equal opportunities in employment, remuneration, and promotion, and in social and political, and cultural activity, and by special labour and health protection measures for women; by providing conditions enabling mothers to work; by legal protection, and material and moral support for mothers and children, including paid leaves and other benefits for expectant mothers and mothers, and gradual reduction of working time for mothers with small children.
Citizens of the USSR of different races and nationalities have equal rights.
Any direct or indirect limitation of the rights of citizens or establishment of direct or indirect privileges on grounds of race or nationality, and any advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness, hostility, or contempt, are punishable by law.
Needless to say, constitutions express certain ideals that are not are always practised in reality, but in its initial articulation it was the first affirmative action constitution in the world.
In his report to the seventeenth congress of the CPSU, Stalin once again comments on fascism, in the context of Hitler’s recent seizure of power in Germany.
Still others think that war should be organised by a “superior race,” say, the German “race,” against an “inferior race,” primarily against the Slavs; that only such a war can provide a way out of the situation, for it is the mission of the “superior race” to render the “inferior race” fruit ful and to rule over it.
Let us assume that this queer theory, which is as far removed from science as the sky from the earth, let us assume that this queer theory is put into practice.
It is well known that ancient Rome looked upon the ancestors of the present-day Germans and French in the same way as the representatives of the “superior race” now look upon the Slav races.
It is well known that ancient Rome treated them as an “inferior race,” as “barbarians,” destined to live in eternal subordination to the “superior race,” to “great Rome”, and, between ourselves be it said, ancient Rome had some grounds for this, which cannot be said of the representatives of the “superior race” of today.
The upshot was that the non-Romans,e., all the “barbarians,” united against the common enemy and brought Rome down with a crash.
A federation assumes disparate groups that then slowly merge together to form a state, like the United States or Switzerland.
The catch with the situation in the Soviet Union was that such disparate groups did not exist, except for a brief time after the ‘civil’ war that followed the October Revolution.
There are many still who l ik e to apply the term ‘empire’ or ‘colonial power’ to the USSR, since these are kn own frameworks.
Thus, it sought to impose its imperial will on subject peoples much like the tsarist autocracy that it overthrew, if not seek world domination; or it exploited the ‘border lands’ for the sake of raw material and was therefore a colonial power.
The Soviet government was extraordinarily careful to avoid repheating the patterns of the tsarist empire, which involved suppressing the many nationalities that made up the Soviet Union.
For them, particularly the Belorussians, Latvians and Georgians, nationalism was a positive movement and was seen as one with the socialist project.
A nation-state is impossible to think now without Benedict Anderson’s ‘imagined community’ argument.
However, the problem with that term is that the nations in question were not predicated on ethnicity and they included both minority and majority nations.
In light of this situation, the Soviet Union itself was not a nationality, not a nation, and not a nation-state.
For Terry Martin, this was the ‘imagined community’ of the Soviet Union.
But I would l ik e to go one step further and suggest that the Soviet Union was not a nation-state but a multi-national socialist state.
In this way it provides one model as to how a socialist state formation might develop.
The fact that this model deeply influenced China in the 1950s also suggests that China has also developed into a multi-national state, albeit with its own inflections since then.
The Socialist North, Revolutionary Perspectives in the South, and Unification , 1970.
Nkomo was imprisoned and official Black opposition banned in 1962 by the white colonialist government.
China, for their part, was active in aiding liberation in the country, seeing as a way to counter “Soviet hegemonism” and “Sovietism” with their support as part of their anti-superpower and anti-Soviet agenda.
The Soviets still backed the moderate Nkomo over Mugabe, who was more radical and Marxist.
This was partially due to Mugabe’s call to run his own organization while Nkomo was willing to rely on aid from the Cubans and Soviets.
The Soviets also felt this aid was important since they saw China’s aid in this struggle as “hostile” even if that meant supporting someone less radical.
It is also worth pointing out that that despite Cuba’s support for Zapu broadly, they did help the military wing of Zanu, which also received military training in Mozambique.
Even as the Soviets began to “warm up” to Mugabe, who visited the Soviet Union in 1978, they remained loyal to Nkomo.
Nkomo having thousands of men armed with armored vehicles and MiG fighters in Zambia, disregarding the advice of his socialist advisers by continuing the war.
Mugabe tried to create a socially democratic state, rather than a socialist one, helping the Chinese gain markets for their companies.
As Lance Selfa puts it, Kennedy brought the world the closest it has been to “global holocaust,” and holding the world hostage for over two weeks after which Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union agreed to remove nuclear missiles from Cuba.
US planners were afraid that the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, of which the pro-independence group FRELITIN declared independence for the island, would become “Cuba in the Indian Ocean” so they supported and backed an invasion and occupation by the brutal anti-communist authoritarian government of Indonesia.
The Cuban assistance to the Angolans would have been almost impossible if the Soviets had not given much of the logistical support despite the fact that it was ultimately the Cuban forces that changed the tide.
Joseph Stalin strongly supported the creation of Israel in 1947 because he hoped the Jewish state would be a Soviet ally in the Middle East.
But when things didn’t work out between Moscow and Tel Aviv, the Soviet Union became hostile and turned into a staunch Arab ally.
In 1947, the situation in the Middle East was very tense, with bombs and violent clashes every week.
Great Britain, which had been administrating Palestine since 1920, wanted to terminate the mandate and let the ex-colony go free.
Still, it was clear that independence would lead to more bloodshed and war.
Arabs didn’t want a Jewish state in Palestine and threatened to “throw it into the sea,” if one was created.
But the Jews, who had just suffered the horrors of the Holocaust, were ready to fight to establish their homeland.
Still, they needed diplomatic and economic support, and one of their main allies in the Independence War of 1948-1949 would be unexpected.
Since Arab regimes were often pro-British, Stalin ** preferred to work with the Zionists.
Previously a Soviet ally in World War II and now a geopolitical rival, Great Britain was also hated by Jewish settlers.
In 1946, Zionist militants bombed Jerusalem’s King David Hotel, where the British administration was housed, killing 91 people.
Driving out the British was a goal shared by the Zionists and the USSR, though for different reasons.
After Great Britain’s mandate was terminated, the Palestinian issue passed to the United Nations, which had to find a solution.
While Great Britain didn’t support the idea of creating an independent Jewish state, the two main powers in the postwar order, the USSR and the U.S., opted for a two-state solution, which in turn was strongly opposed by Arab states.
This contravened the Arab viewpoint that the creation of Israel was unjust.
The USSR was the first country to officially recognize Israel, two days after it declared independence on May 14, 1948.
The U.S., which also supported the creation of Israel, officially banned weapon supplies to the Middle East.
Unlike the Americans, however, Moscow sent arms to the Zionists, though unofficially and through other countries, such as Czechoslovakia.
As Julius Kosharovsky, a Russian-born Israeli historian, said in his book on the Zionist movement in the USSR, bilateral relations deteriorated soon after Golda Meir, Israel’s envoy to Russia, raised the issue of the emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel.
The official Soviet position was that all Soviet Jews, like all Soviet people in general, were extremely happy and didn’t need any Promised Land.
Israeli politicians couldn’t accept this, and they soon turned to the United States as their main ally.
Also, starting in the early 1950s and until the Cold War’s end, the USSR supported the Arabs in their conflict with Israel.
Marx, Lenin and Trotsky's Anti-Zionist Positions on the Jewish Question It is clear here that the attempt at relegating Marxs, Lenins, and Trotsky's positions on the Jewish Question to ""relativism"" with regards to Jewish nationalism/Zionism is an attempt to throw mud in the water and create confusion.
In the ultimate communist stage NO RELIGIOUS or NATIONALIST affiliations exist to separate people.
The fundamental notions of Marxism and its science discuss the evolution of societies in historical materialist progression to shed the primitive biases of racism, chauvinistic nationalism, and religious separation.
As Samir Amin would say, the very concept of a nation state in Europe was the founding of a feudal Europe where racial and linguistic differences were encouraged to separate the peasants in order to facilitate their exploitation.
Keeping in mind that the Arab homeland necessitates as Mao Tso Tung said a pragmatic Marxism not a dogmatic application of the Western model.
Apart from the absurd declaration that anything post-Lenin is ""Stalinist,"" an idea promoted by Trotskyists, this goes into reasons why people could dislike, hate or despise Stalin (like those bourgeois individuals for example) , just for context.
None of these comrades, quoted below, despise Stalin, in fact they work to disprove myths about him, but their writings could give a clue into why people wouldn't l ik e Stalin.
During the ""Stalinist era"" the soviet economy had a far less market-based approach than during and after the Khrushchev era.
During and after Khrushchev's reign commodity production on a semi-capitalist basis became more and more prevalent.
Some Marxists see this as the basis for the USSR's stagnation and eventual collapse.
One of the big debate issues faced by the USSR was whether to adopt ""Socialism in One Country"" which was basically a response to the situation the USSR found themselves in after their revolution was successful but all the other ones around the world failed.
SIOC is often contrasted with Trotsky's conception of Permanent Revolution however they're not really opposites so much as theories addressing different things but that conflict in some ways.
The problem is balancing it while doing everything in your power to support a world revolution.
Another debate faced during this time was whether to extend the New Economic Policy...or to collectivize farms.
Under the NEP some peasants had private property (which was a demand of peasants in the revolution) and aspects of a market mechanisms were allowed.
This meant that the countryside had its own class struggle going on between wealthier land owners and middle/lower peasants — this led to problems with production among other issues.
A common criticism of Stalinism is that the way of implementing this was too harsh and reckless.
Another factor of ""Stalinism"" was the purges, in which many members of the party were imprisoned, exiled, or executed...there is a degree of truth to this in my opinion but I must say that it is often extremely exaggerated.
Volkogonov found that there was about 30k persons condemned to death by military tribunals during this purge.
Their files say that there was close to 800k people condemned to death from 1930-1953 with close to 700k of them being during the purge.
The discrepancy between these fugues is because the KGB numbers include common criminals.
An American working in the USSR, John Littlepage, wrote a book about how some of the CP officials would purposefully approve and alter designs that would not work because they wanted Stalin's 5 year plan to fail.
There was also the Kulaks who wanted their land and feudal like positions back that would burn fields and kill farm animals.
The context of these acts of continued insurgency and sabotage come on the hills of the breakdown in the direction the growth of the country.
This was a crazy repressive system that was needed because you where fighting a civil war.
Trotsky and his camp wanted to go ahead with the revolution and international communism and restore War Communism.
They wanted to push the peasants into collectivization...and full soviet control.
The ideal was to create an example of socialism and that workers in America, France, etc would rise up and come to the aid of Russia.
Bukharin was originally weary of the NEP because he felt that only full restoration of capitalism will build the material wealth needed for socialism to be able to come about.
Most people in the USSR believed that Bukharin was the real threat to Stalin and there is some evidence that he was conspiring to overthrow Stalin in a party coup.
The Stalin camp is the one that won out in party elections and in the use of violence.
In elections the Bukharin people united to elect him but many latter turned their back once the Trotsky camp was marginalized.
Trotsky lost the vote 700,000 to 1,000 but not all 700k are Stalin supporters.
Also discipline and the legal system was not always controlled by the center, nor was the center consistent on legal matters.
One week the center might be demanding denunciations, but the next week it might be demanding that political statements against Stalinism by dissatisfied workers be given a pass.
So Stalinism really wasn't the iron fist of one dictator and the extension of his whims or the wholesale massacre of opposition.
Not everything that was critical was defined as a counter-revolutionary crime, far from it.
I do think, however, that way too much was defined as a counter-revolutionary crime.
IMO the definition that Stalinism set for ""crimes against the people"" was much too broad and applied without regard to factuality in many individual cases.
This has allowed a myth to develop about how Stalin was a sort of devious, all-knowing totalitarian monster or demi-god, who's psychotic paranoia murdered millions of innocents.
Stalinism did have enormous problems and some injustices, but they should be judged systemically and with an eye to the facts.
Yezhov mostly served as the attack dog for the First Secretaries under Stalin, the same people who pushed for the Purges in the first place.
There is a tendency to demonize Yezhov, but I don't think he was some sort of a monster.
He was just a bureaucrat , who meticulously carried out orders he received from Stalin.
At some point Yezhov probably went a bit further than it was required from him, but he should share the blame for that with Stalin and all Politburo members.
Instead, they made him the main scapegoat and executed him and all other NKVD officers who were involved in purges in 1937-1939.
I think Yezhov and his men bear more responsibility for the excesses of the Purges than Stalin.
While I completely agree, I think we should look more than just Stalin and co., but at the whole construct of the USSR at that time, it became very bureaucratic, and rather than the withering away of the state, it became more powerful.
Now this is not due to one great man becoming corrupt, but due to the material conditions that surrounded the Soviet Union.
For it's state to wither away, would open itself up to the dangers of foreign invasion.
For it to strengthen would ultimately result in a degeneration and deformation of what it set out to be and result in capitalist restoration.
The Soviet Union was plagued by the west and the threat of war, it inherited famine, a country destroyed by war, and a lack of industrialization.
Had Trotsky come to power, or Lenin lived there would still have been that class struggle that ultimately led in the restoration of capitalism.
So the blame may lie with the individuals, but we cannot forget the conditions they faced, while at the same time not excusing their actions.
My analysis is that Stalin’s USSR was socialist if any state has ever been.
I consider state capitalism to be state ownership of the means of production, but where labor-power is still a commodity, a bourgeoisie extracts surplus power, and the laws of motion of capitalist production dominate the economic logic of the social formation.
With these criteria, I would say that Stalin’s Russia did not fit this definition.
Rather, it was a genuine Dictatorship of the Proletariat; it was a socialist state.
I think sometimes we conflate control of the means of production with day-to-day operation.
Just because managers exist, this doesn’t indicate capitalism or fundamental control by some sort of ruling class.
Stalin’s Russia saw rapid increase in living conditions, housing, literacy, healthcare, life expectancy, etc.
Structural unemployment was virtually non-existent, and as we know, a reserve army of the unemployed is crucial for capitalists.
In fact, Soviet Russia faced a perpetual labor shortage as they sought to industrialize.
The economy grew every year , indicating the absence of overproduction crises.
The commanding heights of the economy of the Soviet Union were collectively owned, and the economy was centrally planned.
There’s really no evidence for any sort of ruling class exploiting workers, it’s mainly propaganda.
Another ethnic group that suffered mass expulsion was the Russaki, or Russian-Germans.
The population transfer was triggered by Nazi Germany's violation of Molotov-Ribbentrop in 1941.
A decree from the Supreme Soviet Presidium precipitated the removal of 1. million RussianGermans; most were relocated in Siberia and parts of Central Asia.
Obviously the driving force behind Soviet actions in this case was the fear of a so-called ""fifth column"" in the country.
In 1943 and 1944 Karachays, a Turkic-speaking people of the North Caucasus region, were accused of collaborating with the occupying German army.
In November 1943, 68,938 persons were transferred to Kazakhstan and Kirghizia.
In his excellent biography of the Man of Steel, New Zealand-born historian Ian Grey writes that along with other Russian Muslims, the Karachai displayed pro-German sympathies, at least to some degree.
In the Karachai region the bulk of the Muslim Mountaineers accorded the Germans a more genuine welcome than in most other occupied areas.
On December 27, 1943, NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria commenced the deportation of Kalmyks, a Buddhist people living in southern Russia near the Volga river basin.
Around half deported to Siberia died before being allowed to return home in 1957.
The German army often made the cliched promise of independence to the ethnic groups it presided over.
Edvard Radzinsky writes in his 1996 Stalin that ""During their occupation of the Caucasus the Germans had promised independence to the Chechens, the Ingush, the Balkars, and the Kalmyks.
Members of these ethnic groups did sometimes collaborate with the Germans.
In 1943 there were about 450,000 Chechens and Ingush in the Chechen Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, an artificial merger of the two groups established in 1936.
In March of 1944, the deportation of 38,000 Balkars (Turkish people in the Northern Caucasus near Elbruz Mountain) began.
Sent to Central Asia, between 20% and 40% of the Balkars transferred died from 1944 to 1956.
The forced removal began only one month after the German army withdrew from the Crimean Peninsula.
Furr writes that in 1939 there were 218,000 Crimean Tartars and estimates that the proportional amount of military-aged men should be about 22,000, or 10% of the population.
Nevertheless, Uehling admits that there was a great deal of collaboration between Crimean Tartars and Nazi Forces.
As you can probably tell, in most cases the State had a good reason for its population transfers.
The ethnic groups often contained many elements tied to foreign enemies l ik e Germany and Japan.
But I do want to make it clear that the USSR was collectively punishing these groups.
As Furr says, it was not following the Enlightenment views of individual, as opposed to collective, punishment.
Again, WWII was going on in the background, so maybe some of us can excuse the excesses.
If you know your Soviet history, you should also know that many of the things Khruschev says in his ""Secret Speech"" are pure bullshit.
I don't reject the fact that there were mass deportations of certain ethnic groups, but contrary to Khruschev's supposition, these mass deportations were actually driven by military considerations.
After all, WWII was going on in the background, particularly in the rear of the Red Army.
Keep in mind that many bourgeois historians have done good work on the USSR, not every Sovietologist is Robert Conquest or Richard Pipes.
The first large-scale deportation of a specific ethnic group came in 1937, when about 175,000 Koreans living on the Chinese border were forcefully relocated to Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan because they were allegedly spying for the Japanese.
Furr responds by saying that if ""only the guilty"" were punished, the nation as a whole would split, and its survival would be threatened.
Young men were usually the demographic involved in conspiracies, and if only they were deported, you could probably make an educated guess what would happen to the group altogether.
So instead, tactics of mass deportation were used to keep the groups intact.
He sincerely believed that the Koreans in the Far East had spies for the Japanese in their midst.
One Soviet report dated December 25, 1934 describes two Chinese spies sent by the Japanese being detained on their side of the border.
On December 28, a Soviet border guard was shot at by four unknown men from the ""Manchu"" side.
Still, despite all of this, Kuromiya contends that it isn't clear whether any of the ethnic Chinese and Koreans deported were actually spies.
History suggests that Japan very well may have been extensively using espionage tactics, as they used them in both the Russo-Japanese War and the Siberian Civil War.
Knowledge of the prevalence of black ops near the border areas combined with Stalin's conversation with Fyushkov should lead honest people to the conclusion that the mass deportations were not based on racism or hatred for Japanese culture, but fear.
Stalin was ineffective at putting into effect the proletarian dictatorship that Russia needed, and he should not have tried just yet to industrialize a nation already engaged in war.
Then rather than conducting principled struggle over line they would call out the secret police.
This is an extremely complicated problem and I'm not really sure that anyone could have done a much better job, but the truth is that productivity was appallingly low for many decades, the use of violence became necessary in particularly dramatic situations l ik e famines, wars or natural disasters, the contradictions between private and social production were poorly understood, the many different solutions implemented didn't work very well, not enough incentives were given for people to truly improve things, and a long etc.
Eventually things started to work better (by the late 40s early 50s), and others learned a lot from all this experience , but every time I read about this I cannot help but think that somehow it should have been possible to handle things a bit better.
Stalin conflated to some extent the interests of the USSR with the interests of Socialism.
I think this led in some cases to the Comintern pushing in the wrong direction, or making everyone do things that might make sense for the USSR but not for other Communist parties.
Learning the reality about Stalin Varying Resources Ludu Martin's Another View of Stalin • Ludu Martin's Another View of Stalin, full book.
You may have all the firepower in the world, he pointed out, but it is the quality of ground troops that makes all the difference.
The USA loves firing missiles and dropping bombs more bombs were dropped in North Korea in the early 1950s than in the whole of the second world war.
One wonders how long the United States war machine can keep on failing.
And as a footnote -1 am afraid I was wrong about Trump on the international scene.
He is no different from the Bushes, Clinton and Obama, acting l ik e drunken cowboys, trying to provoke one country after another.
Recently published is a new book by the stakhanovite, Domenico Losurdo, called: Western Marxism: How It Was Born, How It Died and How It Can Rise Again.
Western Marxism was afflicted by a sort of myopia: it didn’t realize that the wind of the revolution was blowing from Russia to China and the Third World, joining with the national revolutions against Western imperialism.
Although at first the October revolution was viewed with hope, 20th century Communism contributed to the disintegration of the global colonial complex rather than creating a radically new social system.
An extraordinary result that Western Marxism failed adequately to understand or appreciate.
Losurdo puts these questions to the great authors of the 20th century Bloch, Lukacs, Adorno and Foucault and of today Agamben, Badiou and Zizek in a heated debate that combines historical reconstruction and philosophical enquiry.
This policy enabled arms, personnel and knowhow to support most of the anti-colonial struggles of the twentieth century as part of the global undermining of imperialist capitalism.
It would be quite absurd to mention in the same breath the philosophy of Marxism and the “ideology” of the Third Reich, to mention a man of the stature of Joseph Stalin in the same breath as such charlatans as Hitler, Goring, Hess, Goebbels, Himmler, Ribbentrop, Rosenberg, Streicher, etc.
In his fascinating piece, ‘The Foundations of Leninism’, Stalin decisively claims Lenin’s heritage against the arrogant quirkiness of Trotsky.
Russian revolutionary sweep is an antidote to inertia, routine, conservatism, mental stagnation and slavish submission to ancient traditions.
Russian revolutionary sweep is the life giving force which stimulates thought, impels things forward, breaks the past and opens up perspectives.
But Russian revolutionary sweep has every chance of degenerating in practice into empty “revolutionary” Manilovism if it is not combined with American efficiency in work.
American efficiency ... is an antidote to “revolutionary” Manilovism and fantastic scheme concocting.
American efficiency is that indomitable force which neither knows nor recognises obstacles; which with its businesslik e perseverance brushes aside all obstacles; which continues at a task once started until it is finished, even if it is a minor task; and without which serious constructive work is inconceivable.
But American efficiency has every chance of degenerating into narrow and unprincipled practicalism if it is not combined with Russian revolutionary sweep.
The first commandment: Don’t allow yourselves to be provoked by the counter-revolutionaries; arm yourselves with restraint and self-control; save your strength for the coming struggle; permit no premature actions.
Time's Man of the Year-twice • Stalin: Time's Man of the Year -twice, 2014: The first was in 1939, although the reason was ambivalent: ‘Whether Europe’s new era will end in nationalist chaos, good or bad internationalism, or what not, the era will be new—and the end of the old era will have been finally precipitated by a man whose domain lies mostly outside Europe.
This Joseph Stalin did by dramatically switching the power balance of Europe one August night.
The man whose name means steel in Russian, whose few words of English include the American expression ‘tough guy’ was the man of 1942.
Only Joseph Stalin fully knew how close Russia stood to defeat in 1942, and only Joseph Stalin fully knew how he brought Russia through.
Pipe tobacco at the time was cheap and rough and he had become rather fond of the flavour of the cigarettes when he was a young trainee priest and revolutionary.
The smokes were produced at the Moscow ‘Java’ factory, which was originally established by Samuel Gabai, from Kharkov, in the 19th century.
Gabai’s idea was to produce a tobacco l ik e no other, so he found a tobacco plant in Java, grew it in Herzegovina and then shipped it to Moscow.
The products initially became favoured by the elite nobility and fledgling bourgeoisie.
So Stalin, as the leader of the first worker’s state was in a quandary.
So he opted for the common man’s pipe, but since he couldn’t tear himself away from the flavour of the tobacco, he decided to use it to fill his pipe.
Eventually, the elite origins of the tobacco were forgotten and it became indelibly associated with the man himself.
Many others followed suit, among them the famous soviet composer, Mayakovsky.
Of course, with the propagation of the ‘black legend’ of Stalin, Herzegovina Flor sadly fell out of favour.
Now it is produced in small amounts, although it is still notable for its rich aroma and high tar content.
Molotov falls in love with Stalin • Molotov falls in love with Stalin, 2014.
Stalin tended to make long friendships, especially with those he could trust.
One of those was Molotov , or Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Skryabin, later to take up many senior posts including that of Foreign Minister.
In his memoirs, Molotov notes that the young Stalin was ‘handsome’ to women.
Thin, scruffy, energetic, and with the ability to charm with poetry and song, few could resist Stalin’s charms.
Moments after Molotov arrived, Stalin emerged suddenly from behind a woodpile.
Stalin on peasant wisdom • How to be a communist and a Christian: Stalin on peasant wisdom A wonderful piece of advice from Comrade Stalin on the practical wisdom of peasants: To illustrate how tactlessly the peasants are approached sometimes, a few words must be said about anti-religious propaganda.
Occasionally, some comrades are inclined to regard the peasants as materialist philosophers and to think that it is enough to deliver a lecture on natural science to convince the peasant of the non-existence of God.
Stalin's orthodox Erfurtian position • Ship and compass: Stalin's orthodox Erfurtian position : Comrade Iosef was quite the orthodox socialist, it appears.
What is scientific socialism without the working-class movement? — A compass which, if left unused, will only grow rusty and then will have to be thrown overboard.
What is the working-class movement without socialism?—A ship without a compass which will reach the other shore in any case, but would reach it much sooner and with less danger if it had a compass.
Combine the two and you will get a splendid vessel, which will speed straight towards the other shore and reach its haven unharmed.
The fact that Russia, which was formerly regarded by the oppressed nationalities as a symbol of oppression, has now, after it has become socialist, been transformed into a symbol of emancipation, cannot be called an accident.
Nor is it an accident that the name of the leader of the October Revolution, Comrade Lenin, is now the most beloved name pronounced by the downtrodden, oppressed peasants and revolutionary intelligentsia of the colonial and unequal countries.
In the past, the oppressed and downtrodden slaves of the vast Roman Empire regarded Christianity as a rock of salvation.
On interpreting Marx • Spirit versus Letter: On interpreting Marx : One of the more fascinating aspects of reading carefully through Stalin’s writings is what may be called the scriptural dynamic of spirit and letter.
Stalin is clearly on the side of the spirit in interpreting the texts of Marx and Lenin.
Thus, Marx’s thought applies to emerging capitalism, while Lenin’s thought is Marxism in the age of imperialism.
The SocialDemocrats became flurried and replied that they couldn’t decide the question of a revolt without a special conference.
The sailors intimated that there was no time to lose, that everything was ready, and that if they did not get a straight answer from the Social-Democrats, and if the SocialDemocrats did not take over the direction of the revolt, the whole thing might collapse.
The sailors and soldiers went away pending instructions, and the Social-Democrats called a conference to discuss the matter.
They took the first volume of Capital, they took the second volume of Capital, and then they took the third volume of Capital, looking for some instruction about the Crimea, about Sevastopol, about a revolt in the Crimea.
But they could not find a single, literally not a single instruction in all three volumes of Capital either about Sevastopol, or about the Crimea, or about a sailors’ and soldiers’ revolt.
They turned over the pages of other works of Marx and Engels, looking for instructions—but not a single instruction could they find.
Well, the SocialDemocrats had to confess that under the circumstances they were unable to give the sailors and soldiers any instructions.
This article argues that the key to Stalin’s early theoretical work on the national question may be read as an attack on culturism the propensity to identify an intangible ‘culture’ (often with religious factors) as the basis for collective identity.
Although his criticism is directed at a number of social democratic organisations at the turn of the twentieth century, it also has pertinence for today due to the persistence of culturist assumptions.
The first is to define ‘nation’ in order to sideline the culturist position, although his own definition is not without its problems.
The unexpected result is that the unity provided by a focus on the workers and peasants produces both new levels of cultural diversity and enables a stronger approach to ensuring such diversity.
The approach undertaken in this article pays careful attention to Stalin’s theoretical and philosophical arguments as they appear in his written texts.
Stalin's strong state versus withering away of the state • Stalin's strong state versus withering away of the state Over the last few years, I have become convinced by Losurdo’s argument that a socialist state must be a strong state.
Losurdo shows how Marx and Engels actually recognised the need for the state to continue, observing that the whole idea of its withering was a petty-bourgeois, anarchist aberration.
As for Stalin, he argued that it may be very well in the context of global socialism, but until then a strong socialist state is needed to deal with its many enemies.
From Theology to the Philosophy of Socialism in Power • Stalin: From Theology to the Philosophy of Socialism in Power : I am happy to say that Springer Beijing will publish my book on Stalin later this year.
I didn’t realise this until today, but Springer has the largest presence in China of any international press by a long way, publishing works by Chinese authors or Chinese-based authors.
Some years ago, I managed to acquire a set of Stalin’s works, from none other than a second-hand bookshop in Kansas.
Yes, for it used to be many, many years ago a left-wing, if not Marxist centre in North America.
But I soon found that the ‘Works’ were incomplete, ending abruptly in January of 1934.
Eventually, I tracked down the remaining volumes, published by Red Star Press in London.
To add to my collection, I became aware in the process of a new edition of Stalin’s works, Trudy, which is in the process of publishing what may well be a full collected works by Stalin.
I set to reading Stalin, slowly and painstakingly, as I had done earlier with Marx, Engels, leading western European Marxists, and then Lenin.
For some reason, Stalin took me longer, even though he wrote a little less than the others.
My earlier hunch that Stalin may actually have something to offer the Marxist tradition was slowly being confirmed, but what that contribution might be took a lot more effort.
It required working through the texts many times, seeking to discern the key ideas in light of the frameworks that I was developing.
Few had actually worked in such a way, with many simply dismissing Stalin and thereby not even giving him the benefit of serious attention.
My starting point with a theological radar meant that I was even more alone.
More to the point, I began to realise that many of my assumed categories were being broken down, forcing me to begin thinking again, rethinking everything in the process.
This was, after all, socialism in power, however one may interpret the term.
I also realised that socialism in power continues to be chronically under-thought, with many ‘Western’ Marxists simply refusing to countenance the possibility that anything could be learnt from socialism in power which by 2017 offered a century of immense experiences, stunning achievements, abysmal failures, but above all, an immense resource for reflecting on socialism after the revolutionary seizure of power.
Precisely this reality attracts me so much, especially now with my immersion in Chinese socialism.
Stalin is one although not the only one of the theorists of socialism in power, whether people l ik e it or not.
As I point out at various moments in the book, it was written largely in the context of China, my second home.
Initially, I was not so enamoured with the place too large, too hectic, too much change all the time.
But after a few years, I realised why I l ik e the place so much, with all its flaws.
It is the centre of the strongest socialist state in world history, eclipsing now the Soviet Union.
In the middle of Tiananmen square, the gate of heaven no less, lies the body of Chairman Mao.
It is like a magnet to me and I am working to understand what it means.
In an unexpected conjunction, the topics that arose through carefully reading and reflecting on Stalin’s texts turned out to be topics that are very relevant for understanding Marxism in China.
The intersection initially seemed fortuitous, but it eventually became clear that the common ground is socialism in power.
More specifically, the creative influence of Stalin and the Soviet Union rose to a peak in the Yan’an period of the 1930s and into the 1940s.
After the failure of earlier revolutionary efforts, and the trials and triumphs of the Long March, the Chinese communists had an opportunity to study, reflect, discuss and write.
Apart from works by Marx and Engels, they had recourse to the developed positions coming from the Soviet Union.
Translations brought them the works of Lenin and Stalin, as well as a number of key Soviet philosophers from Stalin’s era.
It was this context that framed the significant materials delivered in lectures and written in Yan’an, although the Chinese communists also clearly developed their own positions in debate with Soviet thought.
Indeed, some of Mao’s most important theoretical works come from this time, continuing to influence the frameworks of Chinese Marxism today.
In my study of these works, it has become clear that many of the categories first broached by Stalin are taken and reworked in the writings of Mao and others.
Thus, Stalin so often excised from the history of Marxism, let alone Marxist philosophy is the crucial link from Marx, Engels and Lenin to Mao and modem China.
The book is predicated on the fact that Stalin was actually able to think.
It may be surprising, but he is not often credited with this ability, let alone the ability to think dialectically.
Many are those who have reiterated this curious dismissal, perhaps adding the hypothesis that Stalin was either deluded and out of touch with reality or cynically in touch with reality, spinning words to justify yet another deviation.
I must admit that I have come to agree with Kotkin and Van Ree on these points, overturning many of my preconceptions through patient and careful attention to Stalin’s works.
I have also come to the position that Stalin must be studied carefully as part of the Marxist tradition.
No matter what one’s assessment of Stalin may be, it is an act of intellectual laziness to deny him, for whatever reason, a place in the tradition.
Stalin’s library was overwhelmingly Marxist and he made extensive notes in the works of Marx, Engels and Lenin.
Even more, all of the key ideas developed by Lenin and Stalin can be found in earlier moments of the Marxist tradition.
After all, a political tradition like Marxism is constantly developing, revising positions and developing new ones in light of changing circumstances.
In recent discussion in China, I have become more aware of different ways the Marxist tradition can be interpreted.
You can take any core feature, such as the dictatorship of the proletariat, the withering away of the state, the distinction between socialism and communism, the nature of the socialist state, and many more.
For example, Marx uses the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ 11 times, where he means a coercive force of the state that crushes class opponents.
This is in tension with his treatments of the Paris commune, where he praises the diminishment of state power and its continuance only as apparatus.
Lenin develops the argument further, distinguishing between two phases, the dictatorship of the proletariat and then the state’s withering.
He pushes this into a distant future, but Stalin argues that it would take place only after global communism had been achieved and communism had become second nature which may take 1000 years or more.
And in Chinese Marxism, dictatorship of the proletariat becomes ‘democratic dictatorship’ in Mao’s hands and then ‘people’s democratic dictatorship’ with Deng Xiaoping, now as an inclusive category operating in terms of non-antagonistic contradictions.
Only in the late notes, ‘Critique of the Gotha Program’, does Marx distinguish an initial stage of communism and a further stage.
Lenin then distinguishes these as socialism and communism, with socialism still bearing many features, such as state, classes, law and so on.
Only with communism will the earlier prescriptions of Marxism begin to appear.
Stalin takes this further, pushing communism into a very distant future, while socialism has a strong multi-national state, tensions between forces and relations of production continue, people are rewarded according to work, equalisation has no place, and the state’s domestic responsibilities, affirmative action and fostering of anti-colonial struggles play huge roles.
A smaller number take this line, arguing that all of the ideas found in Stalin, Mao or Deng have precursors in the Marxist tradition.
Each stage of the tradition and each of its different branches constitutes a clarification of some idea or practice that was not so clear before.
Obviously, specific circumstances, cultural histories, political realities and so on produce new problems, which require new solutions.
As Lenin and Mao pointed out repeatedly, winning a revolution is relatively easy; infinitely more complex is the effort to construct socialism.
This is obviously connected with the fourth point, but plays a crucial role.
Throughout, I have been struck by the absence of any serious engagement with Stalin by the vast majority of the international Left.
All one need do, then, is perhaps quote a line or two, refer to the Red Terror and forget about Stalin despite the fact that a huge amount of research continues by those who are certainly not on the Left.
The present work assumes that Stalin was actually able to think, backed up by exceedingly careful interpretations of his writings and citations.
I must admit that I have come to agree with Kotkin on this point, overturning many of my preconceptions through patient and careful attention to Stalin’s works.
This is also one of the conclusions of van Ree’s important studies of Stalin’s political thought.
While I do not agree completely that Stalin developed a thoroughly tight-fitting and comprehensive doctrine to which he adhered, I do agree that Stalin gave much thought to the problems thrown up by the ever-changing situation and that he did so by immersing himself in the Marxist classics.
Significant here is van Ree’s consideration of the role of Stalin’s thought in popular conceptions, which I interpret as follows.
Stalin has variously been charged with vulgar Marxist, dogmatism, mystification, ignoring reality and the peddling of illusions.
These charges turn on whether Stalin was out of touch or in touch with reality.
If the former, then his dogmatism was one with his illusions, but this suggestion struggles to make any sense of the events as they unfolded in the Soviet Union, in all their stunning achievements, disruptions and failures.
It also fails to understand the remarkable consistency in Stalin’s thought and that of the other communists who worked with him.
If the latter, then he becomes a hypocrite, cynic or sophist, assuming a deliberate effort to conceal reality, as saying one thing in very Marxist terms but doing the opposite, or a cynical effort to secure ever more dictatorial power, or spinning words to justify yet another deviation.
The problem here is that Stalin clearly believed what he thought and acted upon such positions.
Ultimately, all of these charges carry with them the assumption that one has no need to consider his actual texts and the thoughts developed therein.
Indeed, I have come to the position that Stalin must be studied carefully as part of the Marxist tradition.
The various responses I have discussed ranging from dismissals of his intellectual ability to the charge of sophistry function as efforts to excise Stalin from this tradition.
To this should be added a narrative of betrayal, or even a Fall from the truth of Marxism.
I am interested here in the charge that Stalin himself betrayed Marxism.
This move is often made to distinguish him from Lenin, so that one may claim Lenin, dismiss Stalin, and then pick up another as the true heir of Lenin whether Trotsky, Mao, Ho Chi Minh, or Castro.
I find this a curious move indeed, for it erases a major figure in that tradition, who despite his missteps from time to time was crucial in fostering anti-colonial struggles and socialist revolutions elsewhere in the world, especially in China.
No matter what one’s assessment of Stalin may be, it is an act of intellectual laziness to deny him a place in the tradition.
So I follow van Ree in assuming that Stalin was very much part of the Marxist tradition.
He notes that Stalin’s library was overwhelmingly Marxist and he made extensive notes in the works of Marx, Engels and Lenin.
Instead, I am not comfortable with assumed orthodoxies, albeit with a twist.
As Losurdo pointed out to me last year, we are not the heretics or the revisionists, we are actually of the mainstream.
As with Mao, one needs to appreciate the significant achievements made and criticise the mistakes.
Like Mao, Stalin and the Bolsheviks made momentous breakthroughs and achievements, but they also made egregious mistakes of which they were only sometimes conscious.
Which is another way of saying that the Stalin book is both the end of 15 year project and it provides the seeds of a very new project in a Chinese situation.
It is called ‘Socialism in Power’ and seeks to analyse the theoretical implications of the realities of a communist party in power and its efforts to construct socialism.
Running through Stalin’s early debates with the Georgian Mensheviks are the matters of dialectics, class, politics and philosophy.
All of them turn, it seems to me, on the relationship between immanence and transcendence.
Stalin’s answer is that the question raises a false dichotomy, for it is both.
On this matter, he follows Kautsky and Lenin very closely, but gives the answer his own sharp formulation.
There exist two large classes, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, and between them a life-and-death struggle is going on.
The conditions of life of the bourgeoisie compel it to strengthen the capitalist system.
But the conditions of life of the proletariat compel it to undermine the capitahst system, to destroy it.
Socialist consciousness corresponds to the position of the proletariat.
Hence, the proletariat accepts this consciousness, assimilates it, and fights the capitalist system with redoubled vigour.
Needless to say, if there were no capitalism and no class struggle, there would be no socialist consciousness.
Kautsky says, and I repeat his idea, that the masses of proletarians, as long as they remain proletarians, have neither the time nor the opportunity to work out socialist consciousness.
The vehicles of science are the intellectuals, including, for example, Marx, Engels and others, who have both the time and opportunity to put themselves in the van of science and work out socialist consciousness.
Clearly, socialist consciousness is worked out by a few Social-Democratic intellectuals who possess the time and opportunity to do so.
It is here that Social-Democracy comes in and introduces socialist consciousnessinto the working-class movement.
I am more interested in the form of the argument, for it deploys one of his first efforts at what maybe called a dialectic of immanence and transcendence.
Socialist consciousness arises from within and without, not in some queer conjunction, but in a mode that is dialectical.
They repudiated all action from above, and this gave rise to a controversy between them and Engels.
The Bakuninists preached the very thing that the “minority” are saying today.
Engels ridicules this view and says that life has ruthlessly refuted this doctrine of the Bakuninists.
It turns out, therefore, that the principle of the “minority” — action only from “below” — is an anarchist principle, which does, indeed, fundamentally contradict Social-Democratic tactics.
The view of the “minority” that participation in a provisional government in any way would be fatal to the workers is an anarchist phrase, which Engels ridiculed in his day.
It also turns out that life will refute the views of the “minority” and will easily smash them as it did in the case of the Bakuninists.
Here already lie the seeds of the the later valorization of the revolution from above in the 1930s in terms of collectivization of industry and agriculture.
But even this would not have been possible without a massive impetus from below.
From Ernst Bloch to Stalin • The contemporaneity of non-contemporaneity: From Ernst Bloch to Stalin I have become quite intrigued by the way Ernst Bloch’s ‘non-contemporaneity’ of the present, or in shorthand the ‘contemporaneity of noncontemporaneity’, enables one to understand philosophically the reality of successful socialist revolutions.
These occurred of course in ‘backward’ countries outside ‘advanced’ capitalist ones Eastern Europe, Russia and Asia.
Bloch famously developed this philosophical category in Heritage of Our Times to explain the rise of fascism in Germany.
For Bloch, a mode of production such as capitalism always contains pre-capitalist traces, which exist at different levels and modalities simultaneously in the present.
They are like a ‘cultural ground water’, which lies closer to or further from the surface, depending on the place.
Here fascism finds room to arise, for it can construct such resistance in terms of its false myths and hopes, of the Blond Beast, of blood and soil.
But Bloch’s real insight is that such non-contemporaneity also creates the possibility for socialist revolution.
This is precisely why one would expect socialist revolutions to happen in culturally, economically and politically ‘backward’ places like Russia and China.
Here the meeting between the incomplete wealth of the past and the prevented future is more potent and revolutionary.
At the same time, the contemporaneity of non-contemporaneity also apphes after the revolution, if not in heightened form.
One of these is the extraordinary dialectical argument that only a proletarian revolution can complete the bourgeois revolution.
He means not merely that the October Revolution completed and transformed the February Revolution of 1917, but also that the bourgeois revolution was completed after October, precisely when the bourgeoisie was defeated.
Because we had the possibility of carrying the bourgeois revolution to completion.
Because we succeeded in overthrowing the power of the bourgeoisie and replacing it by the power of the proletariat, which alone is able to carry the bourgeois revolution to completion.
It scarcely needs proof that without these preliminary conditions, which determined the fate of the October Revolution, we could not have won the support of the peasantry as a whole for the task of completing the bourgeois revolution, either in October or after October.
Since I have recently read through Stalin’s works in some detail, let me offer an impression of his perspective on what was often a very personal conflict.
It was the beginning of what became a long political and, in many respects, personal struggle between the two.
By the late 1910s, the references to Trotsky begin to increase, but especially after Lenin’s death.
Or perhaps he is a ‘superman’ who stands above the Central Committee (Stalin 1924 -b, 14), taking offence at everyone.
All this is relatively light-hearted, but by the mid-1920s the struggle between them became more serious.
By the 1930s Stalin has dispensed with the humour at Trotsky’s expense.
Indeed, Trotskyism had become part of a fifth column, one with international bourgeois forces if not of fascism itself.
It is full of duphcity and double-dealing, engaging in nothing less than terrorism against the Soviet state.
A 'Western' Trope • Narratives of Betrayal: A 'Western' Trope : Lenin’s putative betrayal is more contested ground, with some seeing Lenin as a purveyor of distorted Marxism from the beginning, others that Lenin betrayed the revolution after October 1917, or that Stalin was responsible for the betrayal.
Let me take the example of Lenin’s betrayal of himself, for this is consistent with the role of Stalin in this case.
According to this story, Lenin held to some form of‘democratic’ position, envisaging the soviets as versions of the Paris commune.
The model may have been updated and reshaped a little in light of circumstances, but it held to ‘democratic participation’ by workers and peasants at local and national levels, open and free-wheeling debate within the communist party, and would form the basis of socialism after the revolution.
However, what happened very rapidly was an authoritarian move, hollowing out the soviets in the name of the dictatorship of the proletariat, if not replacing the proletarian dictatorship with the dictatorship of the party.
In short, Lenin moved from a ‘democratic’ commune model to an authoritarian approach.
The only difference is where one draws the line, whether within Lenin’s own thought and practice or between Lenin and Stalin.
Before a revolution, or perhaps for a while afterwards, the revolutionaries held to the ideal think of Lenin in particular, but also Mao.
It may have been force of circumstances, or a turn in the face of imminent failure, or simply a weakness of will.
And if Lenin or Mao did not do so themselves, then Stalin or Deng were responsible for overturning the socialist ideal and destroying it.
I have focused on European-derived, or ‘Western’ Marxism due to its preference for betrayal narratives and ideas of pristine origins.
Stalin and Religion • Saint Iosif: Stalin and Religion In a forthcoming work, I propose to investigate Stalin through an unexpected approach: his intimate relation with religion.
At the Spiritual Seminary Stalin is unique among world communist leaders in at least one respect: he studied theology for five years at the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary, the training college for priests in the Russian Orthodox Church.
One of the best students, he was known for his intellect and phenomenal memory.
And he was notably devout, attending all worship services and even leading the choir.
Yet, despite the importance of this theological study in forming Stalin’s mind and life, few if any take the time to analyse what Stalin studied and how he did so.
Thus, this chapter investigates closely Stalin’s studies, especially the theological content of his study with an eye on the themes that would emerge later in his thought.
In the earlier years, he studied both secular and theological subjects, such as Russian literature, secular history, mathematics, church singing and biblical studies.
Years later, Stalin annotated the religious works in his library, and memorised long passages from the Bible.
But I am particularly interested in the continuity (rather than the discontinuity) between his theological knowledge and the activism in which he increasingly engaged.
Stalin left the college just before the final examinations in 1899, of his own will.
Affirmative Action: Religions and the Church In the early years of the Second World War, Stalin made a historic compact with the Russian Orthodox Church.
In return for support of the war effort that eventually defeated Hitler, Stalin allowed the reopening of tens of thousands of churches and the re-establishment of the church’s leadership hierarchy.
It is not for nothing that from this period the religious iconography of Stalin began, fuelled by rumours of a ‘mysterious retreat’ in 1941.
Writing Like a Poet This chapter digs deeper into Stalin’s writing, beginning with his habitual pattern of biblical and religious allusions.
Above all, I am interested in his poetic style, especially in light of his early publications of widely-appreciated poetry.
His later texts reveal subtle variations in the balanced sentences, his rhetorical if not homiletical ability, his evocation of imagery, and the ability to tell a story most notably in the creation of the ‘political myth’ of the communist party and the victory of the October Revolution.
Modalities of Dialectics Multiple modulations of dialectics appear in Stalin’s works.
In this case, the resistance of the workers becomes the determining feature of the constantly changing tactics of the capitalists and the bourgeoisie initially on a national level but later in a world-historical form.
The two major developments in dialectics are in terms transcendence and immanence, and in a dialectic of crisis.
The former refers to the relations between workers and the communist party, between theory and action, and between the party and the multi-ethnic state.
The latter dialectics of crisis emerges in a complex pattern, particularly in light of the civil war, sustained international opposition, and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The key to this dialectic is that the closer’s one’s gaol becomes, the more ferocious become internal and external opponents.
The more grace is apparent, the more active do the forces of evil become.
Towards a Materialist Doctrine of Evil Crisis dialectics then leads to what I call a materialist doctrine of evil.
This doctrine, worked out more in practice than theory profoundly challenges the Enlightenment-inspired assumption of inherent human goodness so characteristic of many socialist movements.
It entails a recalibration of the crucial opposition of good and evil, now in terms of socialism and capitalism, of workers and bosses, and of international politics.
Above all, the Red Terror is the practical manifestation of this doctrine, in which good and evil are internal, with the one generating more of the other.
Veneration and Demonisation No other political leader has been and continues to be as venerated and as reviled as Stalin.
This is so in Russia, where he is reviled by some but revered by many others (even to the point of religious observances in his native Georgia), and internationally, where he functions either in terms of the reductio ad Hitlerum or as the architect of a stunning victory in WWII and in the construction of socialism.
This chapter argues that such polarisation has a religious dynamic as well as a political one, in Cold War and post-Cold War contexts.
I also focus on the dynamics of this polarisation by relating it to theological issues, Lenin’s veneration, the crucial role in extra-economic compulsion in the construction of socialism, the relation with Stalin’s dialectics of intensified crisis, and particularly the central role of Stalin in assessing the continued validity of socialism.
But Stalin has a strong position on democracy, socialist democracy that is.
The delegates ask sharp questions, relating to political parties, the press, religion, the party, world revolution and so on.
And Stalin asks some incisive questions, especially concerning the absence of a workers party in the United States.
In the U.S.S.R. the right to vote in the election of Soviets is enjoyed by the whole adult population from the age of eighteen, irrespective of sex or nationality—except for the bourgeois elements who exploit the labour of others and have been deprived of electoral rights.
In Western countries, people sometimes wax ironical over these conferences and assemblies and assert that the Russians in general like to talk a lot.
For us, however, these conferences and assemblies are of enormous importance, both as a means of testing the mood of the masses and as a means of exposing our mistakes and indicating the methods by which they can be rectified; for we make not a few mistakes and we do not conceal them, because we think that exposing mistakes and honestly correcting them is the best way to improve the administration of the country.
Stalin and Religion • Updated outline of Saint Iosif: Stalin and Religion As many may have been aware, I am working towards a book called Saint Iosif: Stalin and Religion.
Preparation entails a careful reading of his written works, from which I have posted from time to time.
To my knowledge, few actually read Stalin these days, and yet he is, for good or ill, possibly the most important communist of the twentieth century, precisely because he remains such a controversial figure.
My approach deploys both critical commentary, with careful attention to his intimate connection with religious thought, and it works with and develops a translation model for understanding the subtle connections between Marxism and religion.
Unlike the vast majority of studies on Stalin, I do not attempt to locate the tyrant in yet another way, now in terms of religious and philosophical thought.
Rather, I take seriously Stalin the thinker, seeking to understand instead of praise or condemn.
Such understanding extends to the very question of that polarisation, exploring the deeper reasons why he has been and continues to be venerated and demonized.
Setting the Scene: ‘The Priest’ and the Church This chapter functions as the background to understanding Stalin’s texts.
Stalin’s historic compact with the Russian Orthodox Church during the Second World War; and his theological study at the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary.
In return for support of the war effort that eventually defeated Hitler, tens of thousands of churches were re-opened and the leadership hierarchy was re-established.
At that time too, rumours began circulating of Stalin’s 1941 ‘mysterious retreat’, leading to a tradition of iconography that continues to this day.
Good work on the political realities has been done , pointing out that these developments were not due to a need for religious nationalism or to foreign policy pressures in relation to religion.
A brilliant student and notably devout, this deeply formative time had a lasting effect.
Years later, Stalin still memorised long passages from the Bible, annotated religious works in his library, and refused to include anti-religious works.
These factors provide insights into his literary style, preference for biblical citations, and materialist doctrine of evil.
Sentence Production and the Bible In light of the background material, this chapter delves deeply into Stalin’s writing.
It begins by focusing on form, specifically on the style of Stalin’s sentence production.
His style ranges from methodical analysis , through rhetorical if not homiletic subtlety, to poetic flights of imagery and the ability to tell a story most notably in the long process of creating the ‘political myth’ of the communist party and the victory of the October Revolution.
In order to account for this influence, I analyse his habitual patterns of biblical and religious allusions.
Religion and the National Question From the form of Stalin’s writing, I move to content and theory.
In this chapter, I focus on the intricate interweaving of the ‘national question’ and religion.
As the preeminent theorist of the national question, Stalin initially set out to counter the position of the Bund the General Jewish Labour Bund of Lithuania, Poland and Russia.
In order to counter divisive nationalism, the Bund sought a federated system that recognised the distinctive ethnic, cultural and religious nature of each group.
Over two decades , Stalin developed a delicate dialectical argument that was based on voluntary unity through autonomous diversity.
This entailed fostering languages, cultures, literature, education, religion and political leadership by local people.
Further, Stalin saw the crucial implications for anti-colonial struggles around the world.
Throughout these developments, the question of religion was never far away.
Practically, it appeared in the policies of allowing sharia law in Muslim-majority regions, as well as heavy penalties for anti-Semitism, especially in light of the many Jews in the Soviet administration.
At a deeper level, the national question embodied Stalin’s own way of working through to a position that resembled that of the Bund.
Modalities of Dialectics Dialectics may owe some debts to Hegel and Marx, but it also has a long pedigree in theology.
More importantly, Stalin develops the dialectic of transcendence and immanence, with distinct translations from the theological shape of this opposition.
This applies to the relations between theory and action, but especially to relations between the communist party, on one side, and workers and peasants on the other.
The party may appear to be transcendent, but when one perseveres long enough, it becomes immanent with workers and peasants.
Dialectic of Crisis The most significant and sustained form of the dialectic is one of crisis.
At its heart is the idea that the closer one’s gaol becomes, the more ferocious become internal and external opponents.
And the closer one becomes, the clearer becomes the division between either-or.
Indeed, this argument is Stalin’s unique contribution to the theory of revolution itself.
Important features of the doctrine include external and internal dimensions.
Externally, the reality was a situation of constant threat, by the sustained international blockade against the new Russia, which included support of the white armies, systematic sabotage and spying, and enfolded into the Cold War.
Veneration and Demonization No other political leader has been and continues to be as venerated and as reviled as Stalin.
This chapter moves from analysing Stalin’s thought to assess how he has been understood.
It argues that the polarisation over Stalin constantly translates categories between religion and politics, in Cold War and post-Cold War contexts.
This is so in Russia, where he is reviled by some but revered by many others (even to the point of religious observances in his native Georgia), and internationally, where he functions either in terms of the reductio ad Hitlerum or as the architect of a stunning victory in WWII and the builder of socialism.
In order to understand that polarisation, I analyse the ‘foi furieuse’ of the new utopian project, which includes the foreign fascination with the new socialist experiment , and its contrast in the many disappointments and eventual disillusionment with the project.
But my primary focus is how such polarisation illustrates the translatability of religious and political terms.
Veneration and demonization operate between both languages, with neither language claiming priority.
Indeed, the intersection between them creates the intensity of the polarisation.
The meaning of socialism in one country • The meaning of socialism in one country One of the tricks of developing new positions within a tradition is to assert your fidelity to the tradition while building a new argument out of the old.
In the struggle between Trotsky and Stalin, the tradition was named ‘Feninism’, and each of course claimed to be the faithful interpreter of that tradition.
On the matter of revolution, Trotsky argued that only a world-wide socialist revolution would secure socialism.
The reality was clearly otherwise, so Stalin argued again interpreting Fenin for the viability of socialism in one country.
No, it actually drew on the image of a Tight to the nations’ from Isaiah 49.
The pleasure increases with age: the discovery of unexpected ideas by means of disciplined and sustained reading.
In this case I refer to Joseph Stalin and the origins of the connection between Marxism, anti-colonialism and thereby post-colonialism.
Here I can spell out only the outlines of what will become a much longer argument.
As a preliminary note, we need to dispel the image popularised by the Trotskyites.
The sneering dismissal of a ‘mediocre provincial’ says more about Trotsky’s own vanity than it does about Stalin Even preliminary investigation reveals that Stalin was a very bright student, at both the church school he attended and the ‘Spiritual Seminary’ in Tiflis where he studied theology for six years.
At the seminary he also wrote poetry, which has entered the anthologies of great Georgian hterature.
Anyone who studies the poems is struck by the delicate balance and linguistic purity of the writing features that also show up in his later written work.
However, it was the experience of crude Russification in Georgia that influenced Stalin most deeply on the national question.
At the seminary, Georgian was forbidden even in everyday talk among the students.
All texts, literature, and instruction were in Russian with a national imperialist focus.
All this is easy enough when one is involved in an underground, revolutionary group.
As the new government began enacting its policy, he found that bourgeois-aristocratic governments began to claim autonomy.
So he stipulated that any claim to autonomy and self-determination had to come from a government established by workers and peasants in Ukraine, Lithuania, Estonia, Belarus and so on.
If one supports the emancipation of ethnic minorities within the USSR, then the same should apply to any colonised place on the globe.
This insight lay behind USSR’s policy, already from this time, of supporting anti-colonial struggles around the world.
I cannot go into the detail and complexity of these issues here, such as the relationship with the international solidarity of the working class, the way socialism and nationalism come together in a new way in such formulations, the realities of a massive war effort, and so on.
But I do need to ask how these insights have a bearing on post-colonialism.
As any self-respecting account of the origins of post-colonialism shows, what we now call ‘post-colonialism’ has a longer history in the anti-colonial articulations of Marxism and the struggles it fostered.
Yet, it was Stalin who developed most fully and in the context of the actual experience of constructing socialism the deeper logic of Marxist anti-colonialism.
The sensitivity to such issues may have arisen from his own intimate experiences in Georgia as a young man.
Trotsky never did anything without a careful look in the mirror of history.
Those of you who know me may recall an occasional comment, ‘Stalin’s day will come’, said half in jest.
To be sure, Stalin has not had a good time in the minds of those who write the history books.
Madman, butcher, paranoid dictator, responsible for countless deaths, proponent of the personality cult , the only realistic contender with Hitler for the most evil man of the twentieth century.
The right puts him forward as the logical outcome of communism; the left shies away, arguing he was an anomaly.
For the sake of the ‘civil’ war and the need to get the Soviet economy kicking, as well as come up with the bare modicum of grain needed to ward off the worst of the famines produced by the ‘civil’ war, Lenin relinquished his desire for collectivisation.
So, when the NEP was winding down in the late 20s, Stalin issued an order in 1927 that collectivisation was to restart.
Grain production was falling short by about 20 million tons, needed to feed Russia itself, largely due to old peasant methods of agriculture that were becoming increasingly inefficient.
However, the order was ignored and the shortages got worse, kulaks began stockpiling grain and pushing up the prices, so the next year Stalin announced collectivisation would be enforced.
In response, the peasants burned crops and barns and killed their animals.
Stalin followed Lenin’s path for a short while, allowing small-hold production to continue.
By the end of the year, 67% of farms were collectivised, but peasants continued to burn crops and stockpile.
Meanwhile, by 1939, 99% of Russian farms were collectivised, modernised and were using machinery.
Along with the massive reorganisation of industrial production, this put the USSR in a very strong position to resist Hitler’s attack in 1941.
But now Stalin outfoxed the left opposition, taking over their policy with gusto.
They were left with no room to move, and many Trots ended up getting behind Stalin on this one.
We can thank the man with the fried egg on his forehead, Gorbachev, for this one, since he opened the archives to foreign historians.
Since then, they have been rewriting the history of World War II, since the Soviets kept far better records than anyone.
Up until then, three factors had influenced the understanding of the war.
Second, western historians relied on what the German generals told them.
Good move that one, since we got fables about the Russian rabble, unarmed soldiers, machine-gun fodder and so on.
And they stressed Hitler’s mismanagement, the size of the Red Army, and that their supply-lines were too long.
Incidentally, the USA employed former Wehrmacht officers to provide them with information on the new Cold War enemy.
One of them, Franz Haider, was Hitler’s chief of the Army General Staff from 1938 to 1942 and was comp lie it in the effort to wipe out Jews, gypsies, gays and communists.
After the war, he was head of the project on the USSR in the United States Army’s Historical Division.
And for his wonderful contribution, John F Kennedy gave him the Meritorious Civilian Service.
While the Left has been focusing on politics and avoiding Stalin, the war historians have been providing a completely different picture of Stalin during the war.
David Glantz, Mark Harrison, Nikolai Litvin, Anthony Beavor, Catherine Merridale, Rodric Braithwaite, Omer Bartov, Wolfram Wette (who has showed that German officers in general and not merely the SS freely engaged in murder and genocide), Christopher Browning, Saul Friedlander, Richard Overy, Evan Mawdsley, Geoffrey Roberts and Norman Davies all have been using the wealth of material now available.
Here the Russians showed everyone how to beat a blitzkrieg with a meticulously planned, flexible and in-depth defence.
By comparison, the British, American, Australian, Canadian etc contribution on the western front was a sideshow.
However, Stalin didn’t start off well, trying to run the whole show himself, misjudging German attacks in 1941 and 1942, and launching ineffective counter-attacks.
Then he sat back, puffed through a few pipes full and had a good think.
For example, at the end of the war at the Yalta Conference (4-11 February, 1945), he had obtained information that the good Winston Churchill didn’t mind and tipple or three.
So Churchill was plied with grog, got plastered, and Stalin got a very good deal indeed.
Meanwhile, back in 1942, a well-organised, equipped, supplied and trained Red Army began winning battles, from Stalingrad onwards.
They waged increasingly sophisticated ‘deep operations’, namely, rapid, multiply-arms advances that pushed deep into the Wehrmacht’s rear, inflicting creative and utterly debastating defeats, much greater than any army in the war.
He fostered and was part of a dynamic, flexible and innovative team, discussing, debating and planning each move.
The usual story about the dreadful era under Stalin is that it was an economic disaster, that collectivisation led to massive famines and economic hardship.
I have addressed the recovery of Stalin as an innovative and dynamic war leader a little earlier a recovery brought about by war historians rather than political analysts or even Marxists, who shy away from the man with the moustache l ik e Australians from a visit of the English queen.
What’s interesting about this graph is not that it comes from a source not particulalry favourable to our man the Financial Times.
Those war historians have wondered why the USSR was able to recover so quickly after Hitler’s devastating invasion.
Perhaps an answer lies here, in the deep reorganisation of industry and agriculture known as collectivisation.
Volume 5, The Years of Hunger Soviet Agriculture 1931-1933 Mao's Evaluations of Stalin • Mao's Evaluations of Stalin The Single Spark web site is sponsoring a collective investigation and reappraisal of Stalin, and the Soviet Union in his times, from the point of view of Marxism-Feninism-Maoism.
As such, it seems appropriate to start by first reviewing the various evaluations and criticisms of Stalin that Mao himself made over the years.
We are not assuming that these comments are what our own final appraisal of Stalin should be exclusively based on.
The passage of time and the opening up of Soviet archives, and a large amount of additional critical commentary from a variety of perspectives has given us the resources on which to base a more objective evaluation than was possible in Mao’s day.
But Mao’s comments nevertheless form a good initial orientation for us as we begin our investigations.
The excerpts below do not include every single reference to Stalin by Mao, but they do include all of them we have located which could be deemed to explicitly or implicitly evaluate Stalin in some significant way.
Most of these comments, however, were not meant to be all-sided evaluations of Stalin, and all of them are the products of their times.
In most cases these comments below are excerpts from larger documents, but an attempt has been made to include enough of the context so that the remarks are clear.
The unattributed words in brackets are clarifying remarks that were inserted by the editors of the different editions of Mao’s writings.
The English source editions used are listed at the end of this document.
These editions sometimes contain only portions of a particular work and therefore it is necessary to consult more than one edition.
Moreover, some of Mao’s speeches are only known to us through notes that were prepared by listeners.
Although these notes are generally pretty carefully done, there are in some cases different versions of the notes which do show considerable differences between them.
As might be expected, there are also sometimes different translations of Mao’s writings into English which show some differences.
And, finally, some of Mao’s writings as officially published by the Chinese government—especially volume V of the Selected Works which was published after Mao’s death—have been expurgated or changed to reflect the political line of the CPC at the time they were published.
For all these reasons there are sometimes different “versions” available of particular works by Mao, as will be seen below.
In part II below we attempt a summary of Mao’s criticisms of Stalin by specific topic.
We should not regard their theories as dogma but as a guide to action.” —“On the New Stage” (Oct.-14, 1938), MRP6, 537.
The political side was not related directly to the world condition of the revolutionary movement but to the Soviet Union’s historic relations with Eastern Poland.
The Soviet-German Pact, on the other hand, was not political but a strategic-military necessity.
Stalin wanted it in order to block Chamberlain’s effort to build a coalition against Russia.
Mao claimed that Chamberlain had clearly indicated to Hitler that he had to make a choice between fighting Russia or fighting England.
If Hitler attacked Russia, Chamberlain was prepared to tolerate his occupation of Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia, and the Baltic states.
Stalin was then compelled to seek his own agreement with Hitler.” —Edgar Snow’s report of an interview with Mao, in “Interviews with Edgar Snow” (Sept.26), 1939), MRP7, 229.
Thus according to Snow, Mao fully supported Stalin’s decision to sign a non-aggression pact with Germany and to occupy eastern Poland.
It can be anticipated that this birthday will call forth warm and affectionate congratulations in the hearts of all those people in the world who are aware of this event and who know suffering.
To congratulate Stalin means to support him, to support his cause, to support the cause of the Soviet Union, to support the victory of socialism, to support the orientation he points out for humanity, and to support our own close friend.
Today in the world the great majority of humanity is suffering and only by following the orientation pointed out by Stalin, and with Stalin’s aid, can humanity be rescued from disaster.
But such friends can only be classed with Li Linfu of the Tang dynasty.
The Soviet Union alone has helped us with its great resources in men, materiel, and money.
The Chinese people’s love and respect for Stalin, and our friendship for the Soviet Union, are wholly sincere.
Provided only that they know who the man is who was born this day, provided that they know what manner of man he is, then all those who suffer oppression will congratulate him.
Only those who do not suffer oppression but, on the contrary, oppress other people, first of all, the imperialists.
On the one side is imperialism, which represents the front of the oppressors.
On the other side is socialism, which represents the front of resistance to oppression.
Some people imagine that the nationalrevolutionary front in the colonies and semicolonies occupies an intermediate position, but its enemy is imperialism, and hence it cannot do otherwise than call upon the friendship of socialism, and it cannot but belong to the revolutionary front of resistance to the oppressors.
China’s diehards imagine that they can play the harlot and, at the same time, set up arches in honor of their own virtue, fighting communism with one hand, and resisting Japan with the other.
They call themselves the middle-of-the-road faction, but they will never achieve their aims.
If they do not repent, they will certainly end by going over to the side of counterrevolution.
Both the revolutionary and the counterrevolutionary fronts must have someone to act as their leader, someone to serve as their commander.
Among the whole human race, this man, Stalin, has appeared, and this is a very great event.
He sees to it that everyone has food to eat, clothes to wear, a place to live, and books to read.
And in order to achieve this, he must lead a billion and more people to struggle against the oppressors and bring them to a final victory.
From the time that Marxism appeared on the scene, this old judgment was turned upside down, and this is a great contribution.
This principle was derived by the proletariat from its struggles, but Marx drew the conclusion.
In accordance with this principle, there was then resistance, there was struggle, and socialism was realized.
He developed this principle, developed Marxism-Leninism, and produced a very clear, concrete, and living doctrine for the oppressed people of the whole world.
This is the complete doctrine for establishing a revolutionary front, overthrowing imperialism, overthrowing capitalism, and establishing a socialist society.
Neither Marx, Engels, nor Lenin carried to completion the cause of the establishment of socialism, but Stalin did so.
Chamberlain’s mouth has been stopped, as have the mouths of those Chinese diehards.
Since the victory of Stalin’s cause, he has aided us with many airplanes, cannons, aviators, and military advisers in every theater of operations, as well as lending us money.
The imperialists all have honey dripping from their tongues and swords concealed in their hearts, and Chamberlain is a present-day Li Linfu.
Mao prefaced these passages with the following:] “The correct thesis that ‘the Chinese revolution is part of the world revolution’ was put forward as early as 1924-27 during the period of China’s First Great Revolution.
It is the best synthesis and summingup of the world communist movement of the past hundred years, a model of the integration of theory and practice, and so far the only comprehensive model in the whole world.
After receiving Stalin’s cable, an angry Mao remarked, ‘I simply don’t believe that the nation will perish if the people stand up and struggle .”’ —UP, 7.
Here, when the war with Japan ended, we invited the Chinese comrades to reach an agreement as to how a modus vivendi with Chiang Kai-shek might be found.
Mao then continues:] “History has developed in the direction pointed out by Stalin.
The October Revolution has opened up wide possibilities for the emancipation of the peoples of the world and opened up the realistic paths towards it; it has created a new front of revolutions against world imperialism, extending from the proletarians of the West, through the Russian revolution, to the oppressed peoples of the East.
First of all, the Soviets had simply erred in their estimate of the PLA and believed it could not defeat the Nationalists.
Marshal Nie Rong-zhen comments that Stalin, lacking confidence in the military power of the Chinese Communists, ‘was somewhat like the ancient man of Qi who was worried that the sky might fall anytime.
On the other hand, not long before sending that cable Stalin was apparently still trying to mediate an end to the civil war and keep China divided.
This weapon is not a machine-gun, but Marxism-Leninism.” —“On the People’s Democratic Dictatorship” , SW4, 412.
The Russians made the October Revolution and created the world’s first socialist state.
Under the leadership of Lenin and Stalin, the revolutionary energy of the great proletariat and laboring people of Russia, hitherto latent and unseen by foreigners, suddenly erupted l ik e a volcano, and the Chinese and all mankind began to see the Russians in a new light.
Then, and only then, did the Chinese enter an entirely new era in their thinking and their life.
They found Marxism-Leninism, the universally applicable truth, and the face of China began to change.
Before the October Revolution, the Chinese were not only ignorant of Lenin and Stalin, they did not even know of Marx and Engels.
If we dig into a subject for several months, for a year or two, for three or five years, we shall eventually master it.
At first some of the Soviet Communists also were not very good at handling economic matters and the imperialists awaited their failure too.
Over a period of almost thirty years, the Soviet people and the Soviet government have, on several occasions, assisted the Chinese people in their cause of liberation.
The Chinese people will never forget that in the midst of their ordeals they received such fraternal friendship of the Soviet people and the Soviet government.
He has further developed the revolutionary theory of Marxism-Leninism and has made extremely outstanding and extensive contributions to the cause of the world Communist movement.
In the arduous struggle to resist their oppressors, the Chinese people have become deeply appreciative of the importance of Comrade Stalin’s friendship.
We wish well-being, strength, and prosperity to our great friend, the Soviet Union under the leadership of Comrade Stalin.
We hail the great unprecedented solidarity of the working class in the world under the leadership of Comrade Stalin.
This is an inestimable loss, not only for the people of the Soviet Union, but for the Chinese people, for the entire camp of peace and democracy, and for peace-loving people through the world.
On behalf of the Chinese people, the Chinese government, and on my own behalf, I extend to you and to the people and government of the Soviet Union our deepest condolences.
Since the victory of the Chinese people’s revolution, Comrade Stalin and the people and government of the Soviet Union, under his leadership, have rendered generous and selfless assistance to the Chinese people’s cause of construction.
Such a great and profound friendship as that which Comrade Stalin had for the Chinese people will be forever remembered with gratitude by the Chinese people.
From March 7 to March 9, 1953, flags shall fly at half-mast throughout our country as a symbol of mourning; “2.
In this period of mourning, all factories, mines, enterprises, units of the armed forces, government organs, schools, and people’s organizations shall suspend all banquets and forms of entertainment.” —Central People’s Government’s Decree on Stalin’s Death , WMZ1, 328, in full.
His activities have led the Soviet people and the working people of all countries to turn around the whole world situation.
Moreover, the influence of this victory is daily spreading to every corner of the world.
This demonstrates that Comrade Stalin’s cause and his thought have gripped the broad masses of the people throughout the world and have already become an invincible force, a force that will guide those people who have already achieved victory in achieving still more fresh victories, one after another, and, at the same time, will guide all those people who are still groaning under the oppression of the evil old world of capitalism so that they can strike courageously at the enemies of the people.
The victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union was not only a victory for the people of the Soviet Union, but also a common victory for the people of the whole world.
First, this victory proved in the most real-life terms the infinite correctness of Marxism-Leninism and concretely educated working people through the world on how they should advance toward a good life.
Second, this victory ensured that during the Second World War humanity would have the strength to defeat the Fascist beast.
The achievement of victory in the anti-Fascist war would have been inconceivable without the victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union.
The fate of all humanity was bound up with the victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union and victory in the anti-Fascist war, and the glory for these victories should be attributed to our great Comrade Stalin.
Comrade Stalin creatively developed Lenin’s theory concerning the law of the uneven development of capitalism and the theory that it is possible for socialism to first achieve victory in one country; Comrade Stalin creatively contributed the theory of the general crisis of the capitalist system; he contributed the theory concerning the building of communism in the Soviet Union; he contributed the theory of the fundamental economic laws of present-day capitalism and of socialism; he contributed the theory of revolution in colonies and semi-colonies.
Comrade Stalin also creatively developed Lenin’s theory of party-building.
All these creative theories of Comrade Stalin’s further united the workers throughout the world, further united the oppressed classes and oppressed people throughout the world, thereby enabling the struggle of the world’s working class and all oppressed people for liberation and well-being and the victories in this struggle to reach unprecedented proportions.
We Chinese Communists, l ik e the Communists of all countries, search for our own road to victory in the great works of Comrade Stalin.
We rallied around him, constantly asked his advice, and constantly drew ideological strength from his works.
Comrade Stalin was full of warmth for the oppressed peoples of the East.
Everyone knows that Comrade Stalin warmly loved the Chinese people and regarded the might of the Chinese revolution as incalculable.
On the question of the Chinese revolution, he contributed his exalted wisdom.
The sorrow that this misfortune has brought us cannot be described in words.
The Chinese Communists and the Chinese people will further intensify the study of Stalin’s teachings and the study of Soviet science and technology in order to build our country.
This party has been our model in the past, is our model at present, and will still be our model in the future.
Now that the Soviet Union has become so powerful, the Chinese people’s revolution has achieved such great victories, construction in the various people’s democracies has achieved such great success, the movement of the peoples of various countries throughout the world against oppression and aggression has risen to such heights, and our front of friendship and solidarity is so consolidated, we can say with complete certainty that we are not afraid of any imperialist aggression.
Any imperialist aggression will be smashed by us, and all their despicable provocations will be to no avail.
The friendship between the peoples of the various people’s democracies, as well as with all the people who love peace, democracy, and justice in all the countries of the world is also built upon these great principles of internationalism and consequently is also unbreakable.
But we have since learned that as early as April 1956, Mao told Mikoyan the secret deals on Xinjiang and Manchuria were ‘two bitter pills’ that Stalin forced him to swallow, and the next year he complained to Gromyko that ‘only imperialists’ would think of imposing such a deal on China.
Indeed, in his contempt for the agreement, Mao came close to giving the game away in 1958, when he spoke of‘two “colonies” , the Northeast and Xinjiang, where the people of third countries were not permitted to settle down.’” —UP, 122.
The bad things about Stalin and the Third International can be transmitted to the district committee secretaries as well as to the xian committee secretaries.
These were not written into the article out of consideration for the situation as a whole.
An editorial footnote says that by “bad things” Mao is referring to the criticisms made of Stalin by Kh rushchev in his “secret” speech to the 20th Congress of the CPSU in February 1956.
The “article” referred to here is apparently “On the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” which appeared in the People’s Daily on April 5, 1956.
The many articles that we have seen criticizing Stalin’s errors either don’t mention this issue at all, or mention this issue only very infrequently.
It’s because on some questions his subjective did not correspond to objective reality.
Since some mistakes have occurred in the Soviet Union and those things have been much talked about, they have been exaggerated, and now there is the impression that mistakes of that kind are really terrible.
It is impossible for any nation not to commit any mistakes at all, and the Soviet Union was the first socialist country in the world, and has had such a long experience, it is impossible for it not to have made some mistakes.
Although we hear that some things have been around for twenty years already, they are nevertheless still temporary and partial and can be corrected.
The main current in the Soviet Union, its principal aspect, the majority [of its people], was correct.
Russia gave birth to Leninism, and after the October Revolution, it became the first socialist country.
It built socialism, defeated fascism, and became a great industrial state.
Of course, we should study the advanced experiences, and not the backward experiences.
We have always proposed the slogan of studying the advanced experience of the Soviet Union.
Some people say that no matter what, even the farts of the Russians smell good; that too is subjectivism.
There are some other questions, too, on which we disagree.” —Remarks about the Criticism of Stalin , WMZ2, 148, in full.
Gomulka and some people in Hungary have picked up this knife to kill the Soviet Union, opposing the so-called Stalinism.
The Communist parties of many European countries are also criticizing the Soviet Union; the leader is Togliatti.
The imperialists are also using this knife to kill people; Dulles, for one, picked it up and played around with it for some time.
Kh rushchev’s report at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU stated that it is possible to achieve political power through parliamentary means.
This is to say that other countries no longer need to emulate the October Revolution.
Lenin’s legs are gone, perhaps there’s still a head left, or perhaps one of Lenin’s two hands has been chopped off.
Relying on the masses and taking the mass line are things we learned from them.
This version of the speech, however, had many strong criticisms of Stalin removed from it.
The mass line, our political work, and the dictatorship of the proletariat have all been learned from the October Revolution.
At that time, Lenin had focused on the mobilization of the masses, and on organizing the worker-peasant-soldier soviet, and so on.
The problem lies with the latter phase of Stalin’s leadership after the October Revolution.
Although was still promoting socialism and communism, he nonetheless abandoned some of Lenin’s things, deviated from the orbit of Leninism, and became alienated from the masses, and so on.
Therefore, we did suffer some disadvantages when we emulated the things of the later stages of Stalin’s leadership and transplanted them for application in China in a doctrinaire way.
Today, the Soviet Union still has some advanced experiences that deserve to be emulated, but there are some other in which we simply cannot be l ik e the Soviet Union.
Lor example, the socialist transformation of the capitalist industries and commerce, the cooperativization of agriculture, and the Ten Major Relationships in economic construction; these are all ways of doing things in China.
Lrom now on, in our socialist economic construction, we should primarily start with China’s circumstances, and with the special characteristics of the circumstances and the times in which we are situated.
Therefore, we must still propose the slogan of learning from the Soviet Union; just that we cannot forcibly and crudely transplant and employ things blindly and in a doctrinaire fashion.
Similarly, we can also learn some of the things that are good in bourgeois countries; this is because every country must have its strengths and weaknesses, and we intend chiefly to learn other people’s strengths.
A concrete expression of this is negation of contradictions, and to date, has not yet thoroughly eliminated the influence of this viewpoint of Stalin’s.
Stalin spoke materialism and the dialectical method, but in reality he was subjectivist.
He placed the individual above everything else, negated the group, and negated the masses. the worship of the individual; in fact, to be more precise, personal dictatorships.
Stalin also spoke of the dialectical method, but in reality was metaphysical.
We should say that the most fundamental problem of dialectics is the unity of contradictory opposites.
It is because of his metaphysical that a one-sided viewpoint was produced, in which the internal connections in a thing are repudiated, and problems are looked at isolatedly and in a static way.
In this way, with regard to a person, we would not be at one time that he is all good, and then at another time that he is all bad, without a single good point.
It is because we have been able to proceed from the objective conditions in understanding and resolving all problems; in this way we are more comprehensive and we can avoid being absolutists.
But we Communists are materialists; we acknowledge that it is the masses who create everything and are the masters of history. there are no individual heroes; only when the masses are united can there be strength.
In fact, since Lenin died, the mass line has been forgotten in the Soviet Union. at the time of opposing Stalin, still did not properly acknowledge or emphasize the significance of the mass line.
Of course, more recently, attention has begun to be paid to this, but the understanding is still not deep.
At one time, the divergence between Lenin and the Third International and the Second International was mainly along the lines that the Marxists emphasized the class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat whereas the opportunists were unwilling to acknowledge them.
One excessively long paragraph in the report of this speech has been broken up into three paragraphs for readability purposes.
V “The fundamental policy and line during the period of Stalin’s administration were correct; methods employed against the enemy mustn’t be used against our own comrade.” —Comment on the Criticism of Stalin , WMZ2, 196.
Lollowing that, the imperialists cooked up two major anti-Communist storms, and in the international Communist movement also there were two big storms of debate.
Some of the parties in Europe and America felt the impact of these upheavals and suffered considerable damage, but the damage sustained and the degree to which the parties in the countries in the East were affected was relatively small.
I don’t think these people are practicing MarxismLeninism; they do not analyze problems, and they are also lacking in revolutionary ethics.
Marxism-Leninism also includes revolutionary ethics of the proletariat.
The Stalin problem involves the entire international Communist movement, and the parties in all countries have become involved.
Whenever a typhoon approaches, the ants will leave their holes before the rain comes.
When the typhoon of the CPSU’s Twentieth Congress approached, in China too, some ants left their holes.
Later, when the imperialists hit back with a few blows, and a few blows were delivered from within the international Communist movement itself, even Khrushchev had to change his tune, and they again swung back over to this side.
Compelled by the general trend, they had no choice but to swing back. a tuft of grass on a wall; when the wind blows it sways to one side and then the other.
To swing back was not their true intention; their true intention was to swing over to the other side.
In this way they exposed themselves; the ants left their holes, and even the turtles have come out.
When Gomulka said big democracy, they too said that ‘they wanted] big democracy.
Silence is not their true intention; their true intention is to make a lot of noise.
In China, too, a small number of ants wanted to leave their holes to engage in some activity.
The people who were most staunchly supportive of Stalin in the past are precisely the most vehemently opposed to Stalin now.
Some sway once or twice and then stop swaying; some will go on swaying forever.
Saplings, the stalks of rice, barley, corn, and the grass on the wall always sway when they see the wind coming; only the big tree will not sway.
There are typhoons every year, but there is not necessarily a political typhoon every year.
See previous item for the same passage from version I “My advice to the comrades here today is that if you understand materialism and dialectics, then you still need to supplement it by learning a bit about their opposites, idealism and metaphysics.
Those things on the opposing side, Kant’s and Hegel’s writings, Confucius, and Chiang Kai-shek’s books, ought to be read.
If you don’t understand idealism and metaphysics and have not undergone a struggle against these things of the opposing side, your materialism and dialectics would not be solid.
They read a few books written by Marx and proceed to talk about them accordingly; this is relatively monotonous.
They all studied energetically and learned all sorts of contemporary and historical things; moreover, they counseled others to do the same.
The three component parts of Marxism were produced through the process of studying the things in bourgeois , studying German classical philosophy, British classical economics, and French utopian socialism, and struggling against them.
For instance during his time German classical idealist philosophy was said to be a kind of reaction on the part of the German aristocracy to the French Revolution.
To draw a conclusion l ik e that is to totally negate German classical idealist philosophy.
He negated German military science, saying that the Germans had been defeated, their military science was impractical, and Clausewitz’s book needn’t be read any more.
The first that he talked about was the relationship between things, as if all things were related for no reason.
The relationship is actually between the two aspects of a contradiction.
Again, he only talked about the struggle between opposites, but not about the unity of opposites.
According to this unity of opposites—this basic law of dialectics—opposites struggle against each other, and at the same time they are united; they are mutually exclusive and also interrelated, and under certain conditions they transform themselves into each other.
This is to say that these phenomena which are in fundamental opposition to each other do not have identity in the Marxist , are mutually exclusive rather than interrelated, and cannot transform themselves into each other under certain conditions.
The thought of some people in the Soviet Union is just metaphysical and petrified l ik e that; they view things in either this way or that way and do not acknowledge the unity of opposites.
We uphold the viewpoint of the unity of opposites and adopt the policy of letting a hundred flowers bloom and letting a hundred schools contend.
At the same time that fragrant flowers are blooming, there will inevitably be poisonous weeds blooming too.
For instance, there are two opposing views regarding the CPSU’s knocking off Stalin in one blow at the ‘Twentieth Congress’; one supports and the other opposes it.
If opinions happen to coincide, after a month or two, new and differing opinions will again emerge.” —Ibid., 257.
It was only when he wrote Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR one year before his death that he hesitantly discussed the contradictions between the relations of production and the forces of production under the socialist system and said that if policies were incorrect or improperly regulated, problems would arise.
Even so, he still did not present contradictions under a socialist system between the relations and the forces of production and between the superstructure and the economic base as an issue of overall significance, he still did not recognize that these contradictions are the basic contradictions that propel socialist society forward.
We mustn’t think that the state is secure; it is secure and, at the same time, insecure.
Good deeds and good people emerge out of comparison with and struggle with evil deeds and evil people.
Fragrant flowers emerge from the comparison with and struggle with poisonous weeds.
Materialism emerges out of the comparison with and struggle with idealism.
Many people hate Chiang Kai-shek, but they don’t know what a bastard Chiang Kai-shek really is.
We should also publish the collected works of Sun Yat-sen and the collected works of Kang Youwei.
To prohibit people from coming into contact with ugliness, error and fallacies, idealism, and metaphysics is a very dangerous policy.
It would cause people’s thinking to deteriorate and ossify; it would make them one-sided and incapable of facing the world or meeting the challenge of a rival show.
We Communists know too little about the opposite side, so we are comparatively monotonous and can hardly produce any persuasive statements.
They all strenuously studied contemporary and historical matters and also instructed other people to study in a l ik e manner.
He rejected German philosophy (Kant and Feuerbach), and because Germany was defeated in war he also rejected German military teachings.
Stalin was in reality metaphysical , and he did not recognize the unity of opposites.
In the Dictionary of Philosophy they employed a metaphysical way of putting things. war does not turn into peace, nor does peace turn into war; the two things are separate and unrelated; they are not mutually transmutable; they only struggle , but there is no unity.
Lenin said that war was an extension of politics and a special means, and that peace was a result of war.
These people had a lot of metaphysics in their minds and became rigid in their thinking, thus they committed political mistakes.
When others disagreed occasionally, they were ostracized. counterrevolutionary, the only death by execution, and whoever disagreed with the Soviet Union was called anti-Soviet.
We wanted to sign a Sino-Soviet Treaty, but he didn’t want to sign; we wanted the Chinese-Changchun Railway back, but he didn’t want to give it up.
Therefore we must persuade cadres to go to the rural areas; if we want to industrialize, then we must engage in agriculture.
Stalin emphasized accumulation too much, which had a impact on industry.
In short, we must make the cooperatives expand reproduction so that we can be assured of even greater accumulation.
With philosophy there is always struggle; to discuss philosophy you have to struggle.
Some people, when they discuss philosophy, only talk about one side ; letting a hundred flowers bloom, they only talk about letting fragrant flowers bloom, and not about getting rid of poisonous weeds.
The Soviet Union does not acknowledge the existence of opposites , and forbids by law; as a matter of fact, many wrong things are hidden behind the front of socialism.
Lenin believed that merely talking about materialism could not solve problems.
One of the reasons why it has developed is because the Communist party has come into power.
So his criticism was not balanced and was very similar to a father scolding his son.
He didn’t air his opinions only after collecting large quantities of materials.
Some of the things he wrote were good, others he wrote as if he were sitting on a hillock and picking up stones to hit people.
Precisely for this reason he had both merits and demerits; his merits surpass his demerits.
He also has some dialectics, but not quite that much of dialectics.” — Conversations with Scientists and Writers on Contradiction among the People (Feb., 1957), WMZ2, 304.
After the October Revolution, during the period when Stalin was in charge, for a long time he confused these two types of contradictions.
Problems l ik e bad mouthing the government, talking about the government, being dissatisfied with the government, being dissatisfied with the Communist party, criticizing the government, criticizing the Communist party, are in origin problems among the people.
There is the enemy criticizing us, the enemy being dissatisfied with the Communist party; and there are the people criticizing us, the people being dissatisfied with us; and the two must be distinguished.
Stalin for so many years did not make such distinctions, or rarely did.
The so-called ‘leftists’ raise the banner of the ‘left’ but they are not really left, for they exaggerate the contradictions between ourselves and the enemy.
These people excessively emphasize antagonistic contradictions between the enemy and ourselves.
The policy previously employed was the one brought back from the Western Paradise.
That ‘Western Paradise’ was Stalin and was called ‘ruthless struggle and merciless blows.
In my opinion, there have been shortcomings, but if we compare ourselves with other countries, we have done relatively well.
On the one hand, he eliminated genuine counter-revolutionaries; this aspect was correct.
Historically, Marx and Engels said very little about this problem, and though Lenin referred to it, he only just referred to it.
He said that in a socialist society antagonisms died away, but contradictions continued to exist; in other words ... the bourgeoisie had been overthrown, but there continued to be contradictions among the people.
Lenin said there were still contradictions among the people, he didn’t have time to analyze this problem systematically.
It must be said that they can, but in Lenin’s day there was as yet no possibility of investigating this problem in detail.
In my view there have been shortcomings, but in comparison with other countries we have done relatively well.
We have drawn a lesson from this; it’s not that we’re especially clever.
Because the Soviet Union has been too left, we have learned something from that experience.
During the period of the southern base areas, when we were still rather ignorant, we suffered losses and every base area without exception used the same Soviet method.
Not a single person was to be killed and the bulk [of offenders] were not to be arrested.
Once in Beijing there were some improvements, though naturally there are still shortcomings, errors.
One side was the elimination of true counterrevolutionaries; that was the correct side.
The other side was the incorrect killing of numerous people, important people.
An alternate translation of some of this passage is given above. “ should affirm that contradictions in socialist society exist; these are basic kinds of contradictions, namely, contradictions between the relations of production and the forces of production, contradictions between the superstructure and the economic base.
Because at this time socialist society does not have exploiters, the system of ownership is that of the whole people or collective ; there are no private capitalists, no private landowners, no private factory owners enterprise owners.
Therefore Stalin, we say that Stalin was somewhat deficient in dialectics, but was without dialectics.
In the People’s Daily editorial we said he partially but seriously turned back on dialectical materialism.
Under his influence a book was written, called A Concise Dictionary of Philosophy, written by two men.
It under Stalin’s influence, in the context of discussing identity—he had a topic called identity on which he rambled on and on— refuted formal logical identity, failed completely to analyze clearly whether formal logical identity and dialectical identity are the same thing or not.
Then quoted Engels to say, Engels said there is no such identity, in reality everything exists in change, in objective reality there is no such identity.
Then he brought up some metaphysics; he says things in opposition, mutually repellent opposites, cannot be said to have identity.
For example, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, these two classes in a single society, they have no identity, have only mutual rejection, have only struggle.
After Stalin died, Soviet philosophers, the Soviet Union began to change on this question.
The so-called metaphysical outlook have no change, war is war, the bourgeoisie is the bourgeoisie, the proletariat is the proletariat.
The bourgeoisie becomes the proletariat; the oppressed proletariat transform into the proletariat which rules the nation.
War turns into peace, peace turns into war, life turns into death, death turns into life.
In the midst of identity, after quoting what Engels said (what Engels said had no metaphysics), he brought up a piece of metaphysics, these two things short of change cannot have unity, cannot be transformable, but Stalin in his book on economics said socialism has contradictions, between productive forces and productive relations, moreover if are not handled well, they can become antagonistic.
I say his dialectics are bashful dialectics, are coy dialectics, or could be called hesitant dialectics.
As we look at this question now, we should recognize socialism contains contradictions; the basic contradiction is the contradiction between relations of production and productive forces.
The ideologies of the superstructure should serve the economic base; should match the economic base.
If while you are living you receive no criticism, after you are dead, people will still criticize you.
After committing an error, one should always be criticized.” —Ibid., SSCM, 171.
To expose the cult of Stalin, to tear off the lid, to liberate people, this is a liberation movement; but his method of exposing is incorrect; hasn’t made a good analysis, clubbing to death with a single blow.
On the one hand, this provoked the worldwide currents of the latter half of last year; on the other hand, it later also provoked the Hungarian and Polish incidents.
But he had his incorrect side; although our published articles have not pointed at the Twentieth Congress, in fact talked about it.
About how the Stalin problem has not been handled appropriately; discussed our great-nation chauvinism....” —Ibid., SSCM, 178.
Of course, the Third International had merits as well, for instance, helping various countries to establish a party.
Later on, the dogmatists paid no attention to the special features of various countries blindly transplanted everything from Russia.
This dogmatism of his influenced China, making us fail in our revolution during a certain period.
If we were to do things as he bade us, we would not have been able to carry out the revolution in the later stage, and we wouldn’t be holding a meeting here.
Stalin had both sides; he also had dogmatism— transplant the Soviet Union in everything.
The things of the Soviet Union, both the mistakes and the achievements, are very worthy of being learned from.
The slogan that we propose now is to learn from the Soviet Union’s advanced experiences.
However, even though it was not proposed, some things l ik e that came over with the all the same, in the last seven years.
Nonetheless, in general, we can’t say that we weren’t selective at all... because we have been critical of dogmatism, and the source of dogmatism comes from Stalin.” —Ibid., 401.
He confused the two; he used the methods that are for dealing with the enemy to deal with the people, with contradictions among the people.
Kardelj was the Vice President of Yugoslavia. “ must clearly distinguish the two types of contradiction.
The first type, contradictions between ourselves and the enemy, should not be mixed up with the second type, contradictions among the people.
That there are contradictions in socialist society, that contradictions persist in socialist society, this is something Lenin once pointed out.
During the first years of Stalin’s leadership, the period following the death of Lenin, domestic life in the Soviet Union was still quite lively and not very different from ours today.
There, too, were different parties, different factions, and well-known personages such as Trotsky.
The first category, of contradictions between the enemy and ourselves, cannot be confused with the second category, of contradictions among the people.
In the beginning, Stalin—in the period immediately after Lenin’s death— a relative liveliness and activity in the domestic life in the Soviet Union.
They had all sorts of parties and factions, even some well-known people l ik e Trotsky.
Moreover, he played the role of a cheeky troublemaker and made trouble for us.
There were also quite some other people in the society who were allowed to say all sorts of things, including criticizing the government.
Furthermore, things became very dictatorial. would not allow for criticism.
He was afraid of people who wanted to criticize, of letting a hundred flowers bloom.
At the slightest hint of suspicion, he would say that it was a counterrevolutionary and would have people arrested or executed.
This is to confuse the two types of contradictions, to mistake the contradictions among the people for contradictions between the enemy and ourselves.
Your Comrade Xu Jiatun of Nanjing said many students came to submit petitions to him.
Their ranks, were very orderly. provincial governor, Peng Chong, also said that they were very well disciplined.
When they got to his place, as soon as they got in the door, they yelled ‘Down with bureaucratism’ and wanted certain problems resolved.
In regard to these problems, as I see it, if these were brought in front of Stalin, I think a few people would have been arrested, and a few heads would surely have rolled.
In fact there was not a single counterrevolutionary; were very good students.
Moreover, that problem ought to be resolved; there is indeed a bit of bureaucratism.
This is probably a different version of the same speech as in the previous item, which would mean that either the date there or the date here is wrong.
Apparently the “overseas Chinese students” Mao referred to here meant students who either returned from abroad, or else students from overseas Chinese families, who were studying in China.
Stalin, however, over a long period of time, in fact did not acknowledge that there would be contradictions in a socialist society.
In fact, what Stalin did was to confuse the contradictions among the people with the contradictions between the enemy and ourselves.
He considered everyone who said bad things and gossiped as an enemy, and therefore unjustly wronged many people.
In the book ‘Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR,’ written in 1952, Stalin himself said that in socialist society there would be contradictions between the relations of production and the forces of production.
Even so, Stalin said very little about the contradictions internal to socialist society, or the contradictions among the people.
It was not until the Chinese scolded and the British lent a hand that it was done.” —Interjections at a Meeting During the Qingdao Conference , WMZ2, 647.
Today there are contradictions, and in the future there will still be contradictions.
When the cooperatives have all been transformed into state farms that pay wages, there will still be contradictions.
The socialist system and the forces of production basically conform to each other, but there are still areas that do not conform completely; there are still shortcomings; to speak of perfect conformity is incorrect.
Once Stalin mentioned complete conformity, problems emerged....” —Speech at the Third Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee , WMZ2, 692.
The key lies in what Mao thought of the relations of production in the phase of socialist transition.
The position that Stalin took appeared to be that in the Soviet system during the socialist phase, the relations of production, as part of the ‘system’ of socialism are basically in conformity with the proletarianized forces of production.
This becomes a criterion by which the conclusion can be drawn that through the transformation of the system the socialist transition has already been basically achieved.
What remains to be done would be to focus on developing the forces of production, on the one hand, and to deal with those remnants of the superstructure that are yet partially inconsistent with the sovietized system, on the other.
In Mao’s view, this, joined with the ‘revisionist’ idea that the primary contradiction was the one between the backward forces of production and an already advanced social system, would give rise to what is labeled as the wei shengchanli lun (‘forces of production above all theory’), which focuses only on development and expansion of the forces of production, with little or no attention at all to continuing the struggle to transform the relations of production.
Mao himself believed that the stage of socialist transition is a stage of revolution, not just a stage of peaceful, material expansion and development.
In this phase, Mao believed, the struggle is to be concentrated on the transformation of the relations of production.
Moreover, Mao tended to see the relations of production as part of the economic base.
Thus he believed that, owing to the continued bourgeois influence in society during the stage of socialist revolution and transition, there was as yet an inconsistency (or contradiction) within the economic base itself that needed to be struggled over.
First of all, on the question of Stalin, we have contradictions with Khrushchev.
This is not a matter for their country alone; it is a matter that concerns all countries.
We hang Stalin’s portrait outside our Tiananmen; this is in accord with the wishes of the laboring people of the whole world, and it demonstrates our basic differences with Khrushchev.
Stalin’s achievements count for 70 per cent; his mistakes count for 30 per cent.
In any case, Stalin’s achievements are primary while his shortcomings and mistakes are secondary.
On this point we and Khrushchev hold differing opinions.” —Speech at the Conclusion of the Third Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee , version I, WMZ2, 707.
We used a very good method to attain our goal, and that is the method of consulting upholds the sense of principle and yet has flexibility; it is a unity of principle and flexibility.
Thus, an atmosphere of consultation has now been formed, whereas in the last stages of Stalin that was impossible.
It is not good to adopt a method of forcible imposition among the people, especially among comrades.
Mao was in the Soviet Union from Nov. to Nov., 1957; this excerpt is from one of several speeches he made while there.
His achievements are primary, and shortcomings and mistakes are secondary.
However, over a long period of time, he did develop metaphysics and damage dialectics.
The personality cult was metaphysics; no one was permitted to criticize him.
There were Lenin’s dialectics, Stalin there were many metaphysical viewpoints.
Some viewpoints were enacted, and when they reached a point of extreme, they were bound to move toward their opposite, and bring back dialectics again.
I am very happy that XXXXXX said, at the commemorative celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the October Revolution, that contradictions do exist in socialist society.
I am very glad that the philosophical circles in the Soviet Union have produced many articles that discuss the internal contradictions in socialist society.
Despite the identical title, this is a different speech from the one in the previous quotation.
Now, he said, we ‘must admit that our Soviet comrades’ style of work has changed a lot.’” —Nov.57.
Those who do not conform to the objective condition must be criticized.
Marxism-Leninism handles things according to the conditions, and furthermore, it pays attention to objective effect.
It was because the Third International was dissolved; otherwise could not achieve success.
It is only because Lenin refused to recognize the Second International that the October Revolution achieved success.
The Second International was revisionist, and the Third International was very good at the beginning, but it became dogmatist later.
Among the leaders of [the Third International,] Stalin and Bukharin were not very good.
That was a matter of the forces of production, not to a matter of the relationship among human beings.
Stalin thinks that is completely conducive to [the development of the forces of production]; there are problems with that.
In the future, a number of years from now, when the forces of production have been developed, there will be some contradictions between the system of collective ownership and the development of the production.
When we compare our system with India, India increased steel production by three million tons in its first five-year plan, and we increased ours by four mi llion tons.
Our relations of production are basically conducive to the development of the forces of production, but there are still some shortcomings.
Several decades from now, when the forces of production have developed, the law of value will become useless, and there will be no need for currency.” —“On the Question of the Primary Contradiction in the Transitional Period” , WMZ2, 812.
If we did so America would send troops to China and become directly involved in China’s Civil War and the South and North dynasties would reappear in China.
America did not send troops to China and there were no South and North dynasties.
If we really had followed his words surely there would be a situation of South and North dynasties.
To import Soviet codes and conventions inflexibly is to lack the creative spirit.
After the October Revolution, while Lenin was still alive, while the class struggle was very acute and Stalin had still not come to power, they too were full of life.
The origin of Ch’en Tu-hsiu-ism lay in foreign social democracy and our native bourgeoisie.
During this period, though there occurred the mistakes of Ch’en Tu-hsiuism, generally speaking there was no dogmatism.
At that time the Soviet Union had won victory over the Trotskyites, though on the theoretical plane they had only defeated the Deborin school.
The Chinese ‘left’ opportunists had nearly all been influenced while in the Soviet Union.
Of course, this is not to say that all those who went to Moscow were dogmatists.
Among the many who were in the Soviet Union at the time, some were dogmatists, others were not; some were in touch with reality, others had no contact with reality but saw only foreign conditions.
The Comintern at that time was Bukharin, Pikov and Zinoviev, while the head of the Eastern Bureau was Kuusinen and the head of the Far East Department was Mif.
These were the conditions which enabled dogmatism to develop, and some Chinese comrades were influenced by it too.
Ch’en Tu-hsiu was the head of the CPC from its founding in 1921 until the disaster of 1927 when Chiang Kai-shek turned on and murdered thousands of communists.
When heroes and warriors appear on the stage they are made to look quite unl ik e ordinary people.
The Chinese people had got so used to being slaves that they seemed to want to go on.
When Chinese artists painted pictures of me together with Stalin, they always made me a little bit shorter, thus blindly knuckling under to the moral pressure exerted by the Soviet Union at that time.
MarxismLeninism looks at everyone on equal terms, and all people should be treated as equals.” —Ibid., 99.
Others wished to submit to this pressure and do away with the cult of the individual.
One is correct, such as that of Marx, Engels, Lenin, and the correct side of Stalin.
A squad should revere its squad leader; it would be quite wrong not to.
Then there is the incorrect kind of cult of the individual in which there is no analysis, simply blind obedience.
The question at issue is not whether or not there should be a cult of the individual, but rather whether or not the individual concerned represents the truth.
It was completely necessary to remove the lid, to break down blind faith, to release the pressure, and to emancipate thought.
Then there were the two ‘colonies’, that is the North-East and Sinkiang , where people of any third country were not allowed to reside.
After the criticism of Stalin, the victims of blind faith had their eyes opened a bit.
In order that our comrades recognize that the old ancestor also had his faults, we should apply analysis to him, and not have blind faith in him.
We should accept everything good in Soviet experience, and reject what is bad.
Now we are a bit more skilful in this, and understand the Soviet Union a bit better, and understand ourselves. —Ibid., 101.
In the 1950 treaty Stalin insisted on the creation of joint-stock companies in Xinjiang to develop oil and metal production.
This continued the Soviet economic exploitation of the area that had already begun under the Nationalist regime.
The USSR also kept control, for a time, of two important military bases in Manchuria and de facto control of the Chinese Eastern Railway which was used to transport military supplies to those bases.
A secret protocol to the 1950 treaty prohibited the Chinese from allowing citizens of any third country to participate in trade or industry in Xinjiang or Manchuria. —Ed.
But our Seventh Congress advocated going all out to mobilize the masses and to build up all available revolutionary forces in order to establish a new China.
During the quarrel with Wang Ming from 1937 to August 1938, we put forward ten great policies, while Wang Ming produced sixty policies.
If we had followed Wang Ming’s, or in other words Stalin’s methods the Chinese revolution couldn’t have succeeded.
Unless you have a conquering spirit it is very dangerous to study MarxismLeninism.
Stalin could be said to have had this spirit, though it became tarnished.
The Leninist foundation of his writing on linguistics and economics was relatively correct—basically correct.
Imitation foreign devils did not permit us to carry out the revolution .” —Speech at the Conference in Hankou , quoted in UP, 298.
The term “imitation foreign devil” comes from a novel by the famous revolutionary writer Lu Xun [Lu Hsun] where one Chinese individual who refused to allow others to revolt was called that.
It’s very enlightening, although there are still some inadequacies, because of the limitations imposed by conditions in times.
They had little experience, so naturally their views are vague and inexplicit.
Don’t think the ancestors all fart fragrantly and fart no foul farts. talk about the future, there must inevitably be some vague spots.” —Talks at the Beidaihe Conference , SSCM, 441.
The first three chapters contain much that is worth paying attention to, much that is correct, although there are places where perhaps Stalin himself did not make things clear enough.
For example, in chapter 1 he says only a few things about objective laws and how to go about planning the economy, without unfolding his ideas; or, it may be that to his mind Soviet planning of the economy already reflected objective governing principles.
On the question of heavy industry, light industry, and agriculture, the Soviet Union did not lay enough emphasis on the latter two and had losses as a result.
In addition, they did not do a good job of combing the immediate and the long-term interests of the people.
He wanted nothing but technology, nothing but cadre; no politics, no masses.
And in industry they walk on one leg when they pay attention to heavy industry but not to light industry.
Furthermore, they did not point out the main aspects of the contradictions in the relationships among departments of heavy industry.
They exaggerated the importance of heavy industry, claiming that steel was the foundation, machinery the heart and soul.
Our position is that grain is the mainstay of agriculture, steel of industry, and that if steel and is taken as the mainstay, then once we have the raw material the machine industry will follow along.
To divide production into two major departments and to say that the means of production are not commodities—these points deserve study.
In Chinese agriculture there are still many means of production that should be commodities.
My view is that the last of the three appended letters is entirely wrong.
It expresses a deep uneasiness, a belief that the peasantry cannot be trusted to release agricultural machinery but would hang on to it.
On the one hand Stalin says that the means of production belong to state ownership.
For the two transitions Stalin failed to find the proper ways and means, a vexing matter for him.
Commodity exchange laws governing value play no regulating role in our production.
This role is played by planning, by the great leap forward under planning, by politics-in-command.
Stalin speaks only of the production relations, not of the superstructure, nor of the relationship between superstructure and economic base.
Chinese cadres participate in production; workers participate in management.
Sending cadres down to lower levels to be tempered, discarding old rules and regulations—all these pertain to the superstructure, to ideology.
He may speak of selfless labor, but in reality even an extra hour’s labor is begrudged.
If there were no communist movement it is hard to imagine making the transition to communism.
The concentrated manifestation of constructing socialism is making socialist, allembracing public ownership a reality.
Constructing socialism means turning commune collective ownership into public ownership.
Some comrades disapprove of drawing the line between these two types of ownership system, as if the communes were completely publicly owned.
One type is public ownership, as in the Anshan Iron and Steel Works, the other is commune-large collective ownership.
Stalin was speaking of culture when he proposed the three conditions, the physical development and education of the whole people.
Raising wages and lowering prices are particularly helpful here, but the political conditions are missing.” —Ibid., 133.
The rate of development of the Soviet economy is not high enough, although it is faster than the capitalists’ rate.
Relations between agriculture and industry, as well as between light and heavy industry, are not clearly explained.
The relationship between longand short-term interests has not seen any spectacular developments.
They believe that technology decides everything, that cadres decide everything, speaking only of ‘expert,’ never of‘red,’ only of the cadres, never of the masses.
For us steel is the mainstay, the primary contradiction in industry, while foodgrains are the mainstay in agriculture.
On commodity production and the law of value he has a number of views that we approve of ourselves, but there are problems as well.
Fimiting commodity production to the means of subsistence is really rather doubtful.
Essentially Stalin did not discover a way to make the transition from collective to public ownership.
Commodity production and exchange are forms we have kept, while in connection with the law of value we must speak of planning and at the same time politics-in-command.
They speak only of the production relations, not of the superstructure nor politics, nor the role of the people.
This document seems to be a different report of Mao’s speech “Concerning Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR” , which is excerpted above.
In this version there follows 33 specific comments on particular passages in Stalin’s pamphlet, most at least partly critical.
The opening comments above are a fairly good summation of all these specific comments.
This was because did not want uninterrupted revolution, but wanted to consolidate the socialist order.
The Russian peasants cannot be that selfish; it cannot be that they don’t want uninterrupted revolution.
Russia has built up a socialist order, but this type of order cannot be consolidated.
We disrupt a part of the socialist order; the supply system is what disrupts that order.” —Talks at the First Zhengzhou Conference , Talk of Nov.th, SSCM, 444.
Soviet socialism has collective ownership and ownership of the whole people.
Stalin’s transition to communism was hardly possible; there was no transition to the ownership by the whole people; he did not promote the elements of communism at all, split heavy and light industry, and openly advocated putting but small emphasis on the production of consumer goods.
Various differences became greater. “ have to reread Stalin’s Economic Problems of Socialism and look at the Collection of Articles on the Problem of Bourgeois Right.” —Ibid., SSCM, 448.
Those doing agriculture must be hell-bent on doing agriculture.” —Ibid., SSCM, 469.
I’m afraid at least a part can’t be abolished; Stalin, however, does not arbitrarily decide the question; he does not give a conclusion.” —Ibid., SSCM, 473.
Engels said one has to recognize objective law, master it, and apply it with full understanding.
I think Stalin’s recognition was not complete either; in application there was no flexibility, and as to application with full understanding, in that was even more deficient.
But , the Soviet Union has gone through twenty years and XXXX will have another twelve years; that is after thirty-two years they will eventually make the transition, and at that time collective ownership and ownership by the whole people will finally merge.
For us, the criterion for the completion of the building of socialism will be the unification of the systems of ownership.
We take the achievement of ownership by the whole people as the primary criterion.
By this criterion, the Soviet Union has not completed the building of socialism.
The two systems of ownership being referred to here are cooperatives and state ownership.
I think one has to leave this question of the abolition of classes in suspense, and that it’s best not to proclaim it hastily.
The bourgeoisie are permitted to enter the people’s communes, but they must still wear their bourgeois hats; fixed interest is not abolished.
In view of Stalin’s too early proclamation, one should not be hasty in proclaiming the abolition of classes, and I’m afraid one can only proclaim it when there is fundamentally no more harm in doing so.
But Stalin did not make clear the relationship between the means of livelihood produced by state-owned and those produced by collective farms.
Would you all please discuss this; it is in the third edition of Political Economy.
Thus one can repudiate only a part of Stalin’s things and should not throw them out altogether.
The reason being that he is scientific, to repudiate him altogether would not be good.
Such as in [his comments on] the third letter agricultural machinery should not be sold to the collective farms, in order to keep a hold of the peasants’ pigtails.
This looks at the matter as a grant by royal favor, forgetting that class struggles and mass mobilizations had been set in motion, a right deviationist point of view.
Our approach was to rely on the poor peasants, to unite with the majority of middle peasants (lower middle peasants) and seize the land from the landlord class.
While the party did play a leading role, it was against doing everything itself and thus substituting for the masses.
Indeed, its concrete practice was to ‘pay call on the poor to leam of their grievances,’ to identify activist elements, to strike roots and pull things together, to consolidate nuclei, to promote the voicing of grievances, and to organize the class ranks—all for the purpose of unfolding the class struggle.” —“Reading Notes on the Soviet Text Political Economy” , CSE, 44.
Mao is explaining here the difference in the approach to land reform in China as compared with how it was done in the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership.
Much of the rest of this document has similar implicit criticism of Stalin and his approach to collectivization.
If there are no priorities in producing the means of production in capitalist society there can be no expanded reproduction.
In Stalin’s time, due to special emphasis on priority development of heavy industry, agriculture was neglected in the plans.
In the time of Stalin there was excessive emphasis on collective interest; individual gain was neglected.
Now they have gone to the opposite extreme, overemphasizing material incentive, neglecting collective interest.” —Ibid., 94.
In many ways the Soviets continue to progress, but with respect to the production relations fundamentally they have ceased to progress.” —Ibid., 101.
The text here emphasizes peaceful competition between the two systems and building up ‘peacefully developing’ economic relations.
This turns the actually existing two world markets into two economic systems within a unified world market—a step back from Stalin’s view.
Criticism of Stalin “Stalin’s Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR, l ik e his other works, contains erroneous arguments.
The necessity for gradually making the transition to direct exchanges of production between industry and agriculture is fully formed.
He said that in the enterprises of the collective farms, although the means of production belong to the state, the goods produced are all the property of the separate collectives.
The reason is that the labor on the collectives is owned by the collectives, while the land that the state has given them for permanent use is in fact controlled by the collectives as if it were their own property.
Under such conditions ‘the collective farms are willing to release into circulation what they produce only in the commodity form, in expectation of obtaining the commodities they need in exchange.
As to the question of commodity exchange, for Stalin it was only a hypothesis.
This role is played by the law of planned proportional development and state planned economy.
Even though the text says that the means of production are commodities, nonetheless, in the first place, it must say that they are in the category of ownership by the whole people.
Purchase and sale of the means of production in no way changes ownership.
In the second place, the text ought to concede that the law of value functions differently in the sphere of production and in the process of circulation.
And it looks as if the model Stalin set at that time was not very enlightening.” —Ibid., 109.
But communists of any country and the proletarian philosophical circles of any country must create new theory, write new works, produce their own theoreticians to serve the political tasks facing them.” —Ibid., 115.
Interestingly enough, the 1967 version of this work of Mao’s, which was circulated in CPC party circles, had the words “and Stalin” deleted here.
At that time Stalin had nothing else to rely on except the masses, so he demanded all-out mobilization of the party and the masses.
Afterward, when they had realized some gains this way, they became less reliant on the masses.” —Ibid.,p.9.
These comrades in the Communist International simply did not understand, or we could say they utterly failed to understand, Chinese society, the Chinese nation or the Chinese revolution.
He said that it was improper for us to fight a civil war and it was necessary for us to cooperate with Chiang Kaishek.
Stalin wanted to prevent China from making a revolution, saying that we should not have a civil war and should cooperate with Chiang Kai-shek, otherwise the Chinese nation would perish.
After the victory of the revolution he next suspected China of being a Yugoslavia, and that I would become a second Tito.
Later, when I went to Moscow to sign the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance, we had to go through another struggle.
It was the time of the Resist America, Aid Korea campaign, from the winter of 1950.
He then came to believe that we were not Tito, not Yugoslavia.” —Speech at the Tenth Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee of the CPC , CMTTP, 191.
Mao speaking:] “Stalin felt that he had made mistakes in dealing with Chinese problems, and they were no small mistakes.” —Talk on Questions of Philosophy , CMTTP, 227.
In my view there is only one basic law and that is the law of contradiction.
Quality and quantity, positive and negative, external appearance and essence, content and form, necessity and freedom, possibility and reality, etc., are all cases of the unity of opposites.” —Speech at Hangchow, Dec., 1965, CMTTP, 240.
The first reason is that my health is not very good; the second was the lesson of the Soviet Union.
Malenkov was not mature enough, and before Stalin died he had not wielded power.
I wanted to establish their prestige before I died; I never imagined that things might move in the opposite direction.” —Talk at the Report Meeting, , CMTTP, 266.
Mao is implicitly criticizing Stalin here for not having better trained his successors, and is also admitting that he is having a tough job doing so as well.
Out of concern for state security and in view of the lessons of Stalin in the Soviet Union, we set up a first and second line , I have been in the second line, other comrades in the first line.
Now we can see that wasn’t so good; as a result our forces were dispersed.
When we entered the cities we could not centralize our efforts, and there were quite a few independent kingdoms.
Many things are left to other people so that other people’s prestige is built up, and when I go to see God there won’t be such a big upheaval in the State.
It seems that there are some things which the comrades in the first line have not managed too well.
So I am responsible, we cannot just blame them.” —Talk at the Central Work Conference, , CMTTP, 270.
For example he said that a genius only appears in the world once in a few centuries and in China once in a few millennia.
It depends on a party, the party which is the vanguard of the proletariat.
Given that Mao also said that Stalin did not use the mass line, it is not clear what basis he had for implying that Stalin was a genius. —Ed.
It should first be recognized that there are clearly some important changes of viewpoint over time, and even some outright inconsistencies if the changes of views over time are not allowed for.
Moreover, a few early statements by Mao sound almost religious in their devotion, such as that “Stalin is the savior of all the oppressed” and “Comrade Stalin is the leader of the world revolution.
Nevertheless, despite some changes in views over the years—mostly, it seems, in a considerably more critical direction—there is still a more or less unified general critical evaluation of Stalin that Mao presents in most of these collected comments.
He failed to recognize the centrality of the concept of contradiction in dialectics, and often failed to recognize the existence of important social and class contradictions.
Stalin did not use the mass line either in politics or in economic work.
Stalin failed to rely on the masses in suppressing counterrevolutionaries and enemy agents, instead relying almost entirely on the security agencies to do this.
Similarly, Stalin failed to rely on the masses to ward off the danger of a general capitalist restoration.
Even in economic work he tended in later years to rely more on cadres and technology than on the masses.
He was suspicious and mistrustful of those whose complete obedience and total agreement he questioned.
Nevertheless he did successfully lead the Soviet Union and the world in defeating Hitler.
At several key points, he even tried to prevent the Chinese Revolution from proceeding.
First, Stalin really did have some important positive aspects and really had led the Soviet Union to a number of important advances and victories.
Mao evidently felt that after such a long period of undiluted praise and glorification of Stalin and the Soviet Union while he was in charge, the sudden total denunciation of him and the exposure all at once of the many major problems, mistakes and even crimes during the Stalin period, would all lead to tremendous disorientation on the part of many communists and their supporters around the world.
Many western parties, as Mao later noted, lost huge numbers of members and much of their influence in the aftermath of Khrushchev’s not-really-so-secret total denunciation of Stalin.
Mao tended to emphasize praise and support for Stalin in his public statements, though he did openly acknowledge that Stalin had made some serious errors.
This may have been so that people would have time to reorient themselves about the Stalin era and not lose heart because of Khrushchev's revelations.
It was probably also due in part to the growing need to reaffirm Marxist principles and traditions in opposition to Khrushchev's ever-more-evident revisionism.
Graduating from words to deeds, the conflict was expanded from an ideological one between two political parties to a conflict between nation states as relations between the USSR and the PRC were severed and, in 1969, their troops clashed across their common border.
The CPC objected to the CPSU de-Stalinization campaign, arguing that the general line of the International Communist Movement had been correct during Stalin's tenure, that he was not just a Russian or Soviet leader, but a leader of world stature with a world-wide legacy which could not be swept aside by the CPSU leadership, and that overall, his successes outweighed his failings.
Whereas the CPSU recognized the power of the imperialist coalition arrayed against the socialist bloc and saw disastrous consequences for the world as a whole from nuclear war, the CPC tended to disparage the imperialists, a sentiment echoes in Mao's famous aphorism that ""Imperialists are paper tigers"", and instead spoke of turning world war into revolutionary war.
Deriving from its views on the dangers of nuclear war, the CPSU saw coexistence with the West as in the mutual interest of both systems.
The CPSU and its allied parties advocated using democratic and peaceful means to advance the struggles of the working class and toward winning state power wherever those means were available.
The CPC, on the other hand, disparaged such methods and proposed that the need for revolutionary war in order to seize power was a universal law of class struggle.
The conflict wound down after the death of Mao Zedong and the end of the Cultural Revolution in China.
Nonetheless, thanks in part to the Chinese flooding the world with pamphlets outlining their views, and mainly to the importance of the two countries and the issues they brought up, for a large portion of the latter half of the Twentieth Century whether one was ""Pekingese"" or ""Muscovite"" was pretty much the question for the world's non-Trotskyist Left.
In 1956, at the 20th Congress of the CPSU, Nikita Khrushchev delivered a report criticizing Stalin.
This report caused quite a stir internationally when it’s text was released.
As part of these exchanges, the CPC published “On the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” (April, 1956) and “More on the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” (December, 1956), seeking to refute several points made in Kh rushchev’s report.
The two principal such meetings were those held in Moscow in 1957 and 1960.
Though ostensibly to build the unity of the Communist Movement, they were dominated by the widening rift between the CPSU and the CPC, and at each both sides fought to have their views incorporated into the final documents.
Although China could count on the unqualified support of only the Albanian delegation, it reportedly managed to have some important amendments included in the documents issued from the conferences.
The documents of those meetings were among the last efforts made to compromise on several major issues between the two parties and themselves became reference points in the polemic that followed.
The Soviets attempted to bring the CPC to heel by suspending distribution of Chinese periodicals in the USSR, and in July of that year, all Soviet technical assistants -some 3,000 in allwere withdrawn from China.
In it, the CPC took the offensive and, reasserting that ""revisionism"" was the main danger within the socialist camp, spelled out its differences with the leadership of the CPSU and made a number of proposals.
The Chinese quickly translated it into several languages and published it, along with the texts of the CPSU letters of February 21 and March 30, 1963, and the CPC letter of March 9, 1963, as A Proposal Concerning the General Fine of the International Communist Movement.
Having made its point, the CPSU followed by proposing -e.g. in a letter to the CPC, dated November 29, 1963that the polemic be taken out of public view, as well as advancing a set of counterproposals which, it claimed, would ""normalize"" relations.
In sum, the split started after Khrushchev's ""secret speech"" denouncing Stalin and expanded from there as the Soviet Union had the ""rightist"" Khrushchev in charge.
Also see this page and this page which has scanned issues of the Peking Review.
The view from the anti-revisionist side of the fence Some of these sources come from here • Foreign Fanguage Press , In Refutation of Modern Revisionism , May-June 1958.
Malayan People, ""Malayan People’s Experience Refutes Revisionist Fallacies"" , Sixteenth Anniversary of the Malayan People’s Armed Struggle, June 30, 1964, published in 1965.
Khrushchov’s Peaceful Co-Existence Line"" on Nov., 1964, published in 1965.
Foreign Language Press , A Great Victory for Leninism — In Commemoration of the 95th Anniversary of the Birth of Lenin , 1965.
Chinese Communists, Carry the Struggle Against Khrushchov Revisionism Through to the End — On the Occasion of the Second Anniversary of the Publication of ‘A Proposal Concerning the General Line of the International Communist Movement’ , 1965.
Chinese Communists, Refutation of the New Leaders of the CPSU on ‘United Action’ , 1965.
Chinese Communists, The Leaders of the CPSU are Betrayers of the Declaration and Statement , 1965.
In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution , 1967.
How Capitalism has been Restored in the Soviet Union and What This Means for the World Struggle , 1974.
Bannedthought.net says ""All socialist states face a continuing, and at times acute, contradiction between the necessity of defending the socialist country—including through making agreements with imperialist and reactionary states—and the goal of promoting and supporting the world revolution.
This paper examines how socialist China handled this tension during four periods between 1949 and 1976.
It contrasts the strong internationalist support given to the Korean people and to the Vietnamese and other struggles for national liberation in the 1960s, with the development of bourgeois nationalist lines around the 1955 Bandung Conference and the reactionary “three worlds theory” of the early 1970s.
The Restoration of Capitalism in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and the Decline of the Soviet Economy , an article which appeared in Cultural Logic in 2010.
Response from the revisionists • USSR, In Connection with Mao Tse-tung's Talk with a Group of Japanese Socialists , 1964.
A Marxist Critique of Theories of Capitalist Restoration in the USSR , 1980.
How differences arose between China's Maoist leaders and the USSR and other socialist countries , 1981.
This may seem like a foreign concept to some but it is actually pretty easy to understand.
As the Sino-Soviet split exacerbated differences among revolutionaries across the world , many moved to protect the legacy of Stalin and against reforms that diluted communism.
One page on the Marxist Internet Archive, by a ""Paul C."" helps to define the term more in-depth and how its usage has changed Historically, in the Communist lexicon, the term “anti-revisionism” has been used to describe opposition to attempts to revise, modify or abandon the fundamentals of revolutionary theory and practice in a manner that was perceived to represent concessions to Communism’s adversaries.
In recent times, however, the term has taken on a more specific meaning.
Later on, the anti-revisionist movement expanded and diversified to encompass those communists who rejected a pro-Soviet orientation for one aligned either with Chinese or Albanian positions.
Anti-revisionism enjoyed its moment of greatest size and influence with numerous “Marxist Leninist” and “Maoist” parties, groups and publications springing up around the world in the period which began with the Sino-Soviet spht of the early 1960s.
Its growth was greatly accelerated by international enthusiasm for the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in China, but it began to decline in response to controversial Chinese foreign policy decisions in the last years of Mao’s life, his death and the subsequent defeat of the Gang of Four.
While some antirevisionists soldiered on, adapting to these changes, these later events spurred other elements to argue for a non-Trotskyist “left-wing” communism, independent of allegiance to foreign authorities or models.
Through the ‘economic reforms’, the Khrushchevite revisionists created the conditions for the growth of the second economy, which in turn undermined the socialist economy.""Halpar Brar • ""From that point onward , the aim of production was for profit.
In short, within the span of a few years, a dynamic, socialist system was replaced with a stagnant capitalist system.
It was this capitalist system that suffered slow-down and final dissolution in 1991.
According to a major tendency in Marxism, the leaders who came after Stalin were revisionists.
This tendency holds that these leaders wished to revise Marxism by mixing it with capitalist ideology.
The economic analysis given below provides evidence to support the anti-revisionist line.
To put it another way, the form of the Soviet system may have remained socialist, after 1953, in the sense that there was state-ownership and the semblance of central allocation of the means of production.
However, changes introduced following Stalin’s death meant that the means of production became commodities.
After 1953, what was being “planned” was in fact capitalist commodity production.
Therefore in essence the system after 1953 was capitalist, not socialist...after 1953, the means of production in the Soviet Union were sold at their prices of production, lik e capitalist commodities.
Their theses on the so-called «party of the whole people» and the state of the whole people are a great fraud.
We do not want to see the revisionists wreck the achievements of the October Revolution and push the country towards alliance with the imperialists for the restoration of capitalism over the soil watered with the blood of the best sons of the party, of the working class, of the Soviet people.
While it is not a theoretical analysis, it does say that the efforts of capitalists to impose their viewpoints is not as successful as they would want.
Clearly, anti-communist propaganda is faltering in the Russian Federation today and has for years, even with its right-leaning, capitalistic political party, United Russia, currently in power.
By 1933, with the capitalist world deeply mired in a devastating economic crisis, unemployment was declared abolished, and remained so for the next five and a half decades, until socialism, itself, was abolished.
The Communists produced social security more robust than provided even by Scandinavian-style social democracy, but achieved with fewer resources and a lower level of development and in spite of the unflagging efforts of the capitalist world to see to it that socialism failed.
Soviet socialism was, and remains, a model for humanity — of what can be achieved outside the confines and contradictions of capitalism.
But by the end of the '80s, counterrevolution was sweeping Eastern Europe and Mikhail Gorbachev was dismantling the pillars of Soviet socialism.
Others imagined a new era of a flowering multiparty democracy and expanded civil liberties, coexisting with public ownership of the commanding heights of the economy, a model that seemed to owe more to utopian blueprints than hardheaded reality.
Of course, none of the great promises of the counterrevolution were kept.
While at the time the demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed, not least by leftist intellectuals in the US, as a great victory for humanity, more than a decade later there's little to celebrate.
The dismantling of socialism has, in a word, been a catastrophe, a great swindle that has not only delivered none of what it promised, but has wreaked irreparable harm, not only in the former socialist countries, but throughout the Western world, as well.
Countless millions have been plunged deep into poverty, imperialism has been given a free hand, and wages and benefits in the West have bowed under the pressure of intensified competition for jobs and industry unleashed by a flood of jobless from the former socialist countries, where joblessness once, rightly, was considered an obscenity.
And with the threat of jobs migrating to low-wage, high unemployment countries of Eastern Europe, workers in Western Europe have been forced to accept a longer working day, lower pay, and degraded benefits.
Today, they fight a desperate rearguard action, where the victories are few, the defeats many.
For others, for investors and corporations, who've found new markets and opportunities for profitable investment, and can reap the benefits of the lower labor costs that attend intensified competition for jobs, the overthrow of socialism has, indeed, been something to celebrate.
Equally, it has been welcomed by the feudal and industrial elite of the pre-socialist regimes whose estates and industrial concerns have been recovered.
Prior to the dismantling of socialism, most people in the world were protected from the vicissitudes of the global capitalist market by central planning and high tariff barriers.
But once socialism fell in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, and with China marching resolutely down the capitalist road, the pool of unprotected labor available to transnational corporations expanded many times over.
Today, a world labor force many times larger than the domestic pool of United States workers — and willing to work dirt cheap — awaits the world's corporations.
Inevitably, incomes fall, benefits are eroded, and working hours extended.
Already, growing competition for jobs and industry is forcing workers in Western Europe to accept less.
Workers at Daimler Chrysler, Thomas Cook, and other firms are working longer hours, and in some cases, for less pay and without increases in benefits, to keep jobs from moving to the Czech Republic, Slovakia and other former socialist countries — which, under the rule of the Reds, used to provide jobs to all.
More work for less money is a pleasing outcome for the corporate class, and turns out to be exactly the outcome the fascists of Germany and Italy engineered for their countries' capitalists in the '30s.
The methods, to be sure, were different, but the anti-communism of Mussolini's and Hitler's followers, in other hands, has proved just as useful in securing the same retrograde ends.
Nobody who has to subject themselves to the vagaries of the labor market including workers in the United States — should be glad communism was abolished.
I, no less than others, have admired Zinn's books, articles and activism, though I've come to expect his ardent anticommunism as typical of left United States intellectuals.
To be sure, in a mi lieu so hostile to communism, it should come as no surprise that conspicuous displays of anti-communism become a survival strategy for those seeking to establish a rapport, and safeguard their reputations, with a larger audience.
But there may be another reason for the anti-communism of those whose political views leave them open to charges of being soft on communism, and therefore of having horns.
As dissidents in their own society, there was always a natural tendency for them to identify with dissidents elsewhere and the pro-capitalist, anti-socialist propaganda of the West quite naturally elevated dissidents in socialist countries to the status of heroes, especially those who were jailed, muzzled and otherwise repressed by the State.
For these people, the abridgement of civil liberties anywhere looms large, for the abridgement of their own civil liberties would be an event of great personal significance.
By comparison, the Red's achievements in providing a comfortable frugality and economic security to all, while recognized intellectually as an achievement of some note, is less apt to stir the imagination of one who has an income, the respect of his peers, and plenty of people to read his books and attend his lectures.
He doesn't have to scavenge discarded coal in garbage dumps to eke out a bare, bleak, and unrewarding existence.
Karol, 14, and his sister Alina, 12, everyday trudge to a dump, where mixed industrial waste is deposited, just outside Swietochlowice, in formerly socialist Poland.
There, along with their father, they look for scrap metal and second grade coal, anything to fetch a few dollars to buy a meager supply of groceries.
According to Gustav Molnar, a political analyst with the Laszlo Teleki Institute, ""the reality is that when foreign firms come here, they're only interested in hiring people under 30.
That may suit the bottom lines of foreign corporations and the overthrow of socialism may be a pleasing intellectual outcome for wellfed, comfortable intellectuals from Boston but it hardly suits that part of the Polish population that must scramble over mountains of industrial waste or perish.
And always a place to live, free schools to go to, and doctors to see, without charge.
That the overthrow of socialism has failed to deliver anything of benefit to the majority is plain to see.
More than a decade after counterrevolution swept through Eastern Europe, 17 former socialist countries are immeasurably poorer.
One child in 10 three million Russian children live l ik e animals, ill-fed, dressed in rags, and living, if they're lucky, in dirty, squalid flats.
Infant mortality and tuberculosis are on the rise, approaching Third World levels.
In Russia, the Kremlin passed a new labor code in 2001 that critics denounced as Dickensian for good reason.
Aimed at creating a climate conducive to profit-making, Soviet-era union guarantees were abolished, maternity leaves shortened, the minimum wage slashed, and the working day lengthened to a ""voluntary"" 12 hours.
That Aleksandr and Victor are now free to denounce the new government in the strongest terms, if they wish, hardly seems to be a consolation.
Next door, in Bulgaria, 80 percent are worse off now that the country has transitioned to a market economy.
Retired people and the disabled were provided for and got free medicine.
Ostalgie, a nostalgia based on the old regime's full employment, free health care, free education through university (with living expenses covered by the State), cheap rents, subsidized books and periodicals and dirt cheap public transportation.
During the Cold War era, East Germany's relative poverty was attributed to public ownership and central planning sawdust in the gears of the economic engine, according to antisocialist mythology.
But the propaganda conveniently ignored the fact that the eastern part of Germany had always been less developed than the west, that it had been plundered of its key human assets at the end of World War II by United States occupation forces, that the Soviet Union had carted off everything of value to indemnify itself for its war losses, and that East Germany bore the brunt of war reparations to Moscow.
On top of that, those who fled East Germany were said to be escaping the repression of a brutal regime, and while some may indeed have been ardent anti-Communists fleeing repression by the State, many were economic refugees, seeking the embrace of a more prosperous West.
Today, nobody of an unprejudiced mind would say that the riches promised East Germans, if only they would restore capitalism, have been realized.
Unemployment, once unheard of, runs at 25 percent, rents have skyrocketed, and nobody goes to the doctor unless they can pay.
The region's industrial infrastructure weaker than West Germany's during the Cold War, but expanding — has now all but disappeared.
And the population is dwindling, as economic refugees, following in the footsteps of Cold War refugees before them, make their way westward in search of jobs and opportunity.
Otto Jelinek, a Czech whose family fled to Canada after the Red Army booted the Nazis out and helped install an antifascist government, became a cabinet minister in Canada's conservative, pro-Reagan Mulroney government in the 80s.
And, of course, there's the lure of restitution—getting back property, some of it which can be pressed into service as a rent-bearing asset, they, and their families, used to own.
Vaclav Havel, the Czech playwright turned President, comes from a prominent, vehemently antisocialist Prague family.
Havel's father was a wealthy real estate tycoon, who developed a number of Prague properties.
One was the Lucerna Palace, ""a pleasure palace...of arcades, theatres, cinemas, night-clubs, restaurants, and ballrooms,"" according to Frommer's.
The Reds expropriated Lucerna and the family's other holdings, and put them to use for the common good, rather than for the purpose of providing the young Havel with more servants.
Four decades later, Havel, as president — and now celebrated throughout the West as a champion of intellectual freedom — presided over a mass return of nationalized property, including Lucerna and his family's other holdings.
As a business investment, Havel's anti-communism proved to be quite profitable.
The Roman Catholic Church is another winner, which may explain, in part, why the Vatican takes such a dim view of communism.
The pro-capitalist Hungarian government has returned to the Roman Catholic Church much of the property nationalized by the Reds, who placed the property under common ownership for the public good.
With recovery of many of the Eastern and Central European properties it once owned, the Church is able to reclaim its pre-socialist role of parasite — raking in vast amounts of unearned wealth in rent, a privilege bestowed for no other reason than it owns title to the land.
Hungary also pays the Vatican a US$9. mi llion annuity for property it has been unable to return.
The Church, former landowners, and CEOs aside, most people of the former socialist bloc aren't pleased that the gains of the socialist revolutions have been reversed.
Three-quarters of Russians, according to a 1999 poll regret the demise of the Soviet Union.
Almost 80 percent recognize democracy as a front for a government controlled by the rich.
The solution, in the view of the majority, is to return to the status quo ante , even if it means one-party rule.
Russians, laments the anti-Communist historian Richard Pipes, haven't Americans' taste for multiparty democracy, and seem incapable of being cured of their fondness for Soviet leaders.
In one poll, Russians were asked to list the 10 greatest people of all time, of all nations.
In some countries, reconstituted Communist parties have received popular mandates to govern.
And in Russia, Unity and Fatherland, the party that has become the parliamentary extension of the president, Vladimir Putin, has tapped into a deep well of nostalgia for Soviet socialism.
The former socialist economies have been mostly privatized and placed under the control of the market.
Those who accept the goals and values of capitalism have been recruited to occupy pivotal offices of the State.
And economic, legal and political structures have been altered, to accommodate private production for profit.
True, there are openings for communist parties to operate within the new multiparty democracy, but the pillars of socialism public ownership, central planning, and the lead role of the working class have been dismantled and carted away, tossed, we're told, into the dustbin of history.
Getting them back will take something more than returning Reds to parliament.
Of course, no forward step will be taken, can be taken, until a decisive part of the population becomes disgusted with and rejects what exists today, and is convinced something better is possible and is willing to tolerate the upheavals of transition.
That something better is indeed possible not a utopia, but something better than unceasing economic insecurity, private (and for many, unaffordable) health care and education, and vast inequality is plain.
It has been reality in the Soviet Union, in China , in Eastern Europe, and today, hangs on in Cuba, despite the incessant and far-ranging efforts of the United States to smash it.
It should be no surprise that Vaclav Havel, as others whose economic and political supremacy was, for a time, ended by the Reds, was a tireless fighter against socialism, or that he, and others, who sought to reverse the gains of the revolution, were cracked down on, and sometimes muzzled and jailed by the new regimes.
To expect otherwise is to turn a blind eye to the determined struggle that is carried on by the enemies of socialism, even after socialist forces have seized power.
The forces of reaction retain their money, their movable property, the advantages of education, and above all, their international connections.
To grant them complete freedom is to grant them a free hand to organize the downfall of socialism, to receive material assistance from abroad to reverse the revolution, and to elevate the market and private ownership once again to the regulating principles of the economy.
Few champions of civil liberties argue that in the interests of freedom of speech, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press, that Americans ought to be free to replace their republican form of government with a pro-British monarchy, or, more to the point, that Germans ought be allowed to hold pro-Nazi rallies, establish a pro-Nazi press, and organize fascist political parties, to return to the days of the Third Reich.
To survive, any socialist government, must, of necessity, be repressive toward its enemies.
This is demonized as totalitarianism by those who have an interest in seeing antisocialist forces prevail, regard civil and political liberties as the summum bonum of human achievement, or have an unrealistically sanguine view of the possibilities for socialist survival.
Life expectancy has soared, illiteracy has been wiped out, and homelessness, unemployment and economic insecurity have been abolished.
Racial strife and ethnic tensions has been reduced to almost the vanishing point.
And inequalities in wealth, income, opportunity, and education have been greatly reduced.
Where Reds have been overthrown, mass unemployment, underdevelopment, hunger, disease, illiteracy, homelessness, and racial conflict have recrudesced.
Communists produced gains in the interest of all humanity, achieved in the face of very trying conditions, including the unceasing hostility of the West and the unremitting efforts of the former exploiters to restore the status quo ante.
What they achieved surpassed anything achieved by social democratic struggle in the West, where the advantages of being more advanced industrially, made the promises of socialism all the more readily achievable and to a far greater degree than could be achieved elsewhere in the world.
Hidden, or at best, acknowledged but quickly brushed aside as matters of little significance, these are achievements that have been too long ignored in the West and greatly missed in the countries where they were reversed in the interests of restoring the wealth and privileges of a minority.
While East Germany wasn’t a ‘workers’ paradise’, it was in many respects a highly attractive model that was responsive to the basic needs of the mass of people and therefore was democratic in the substantive and original sense of the word.
It offered generous pensions, guaranteed employment, equality of the sexes and substantial wage equality, free healthcare and education, and a growing array of other free and virtually free goods and services.
While the distortions of Cold War history would lead one to believe it was the Soviets who divided Germany, the Western powers were the true authors of Germany’s division.
The hope of the Soviets, who had been invaded by Germany in both first and second world wars, was for a united, disarmed and neutral Germany.
First, Germany would be demilitarized, so that it could not launch a third war of aggression against the Soviet Union.
The United States intended to make post-war life as difficult as possible for the Soviet Union.
There were a number of reasons for this, not least to prevent the USSR from becoming a model for other countries.
Already, socialism had eliminated the United States’ access to markets and spheres of investment in one-sixth of the earth’s territory.
The United States ruling class didn’t want the USSR to provide inspiration and material aid to other countries to follow the same path.
The lead role of communists in the resistance movements in Europe, “the success of the Soviet Union in defeating Nazi Germany,” and “the success of the Soviet Union in industrializing and modernizing,” had greatly raised the prestige of the USSR and enhanced the popularity of communism.
Unless measures were taken to check the USSR’s growing popularity, socialism would continue to advance and the area open to United States exports and investment would continue to contract.
A Germany paying reparations to the Soviets was clearly at odds with the goals of reviving Germany and holding the Soviet Union in check.
The division of Germany began in 1946, when the French decided to administer their zone separately.
Soon, the Western powers merged their three zones into a single economic unit and announced they would no longer pay reparations to the Soviet Union.
The burden would have to be borne by the Soviet occupation zone alone, which was smaller and less industrialized, and therefore less able to offer compensation.
The new state would be based on a constitution written by Washington and imposed on West Germans, without their ratification.
In 1954, West Germany was integrated into a new anti-Soviet military alliance, NATO, which, in its objectives, aped the earlier anti-Comintern pact of the Axis powers.
The goal of the anti-Comintern pact was to oppose the Soviet Union and world communism.
NATO, with a mi litarized West Germany, would take over from where the Axis left off.
The Soviets had no interest in transforming the Soviet occupation zone into a separate state and complained bitterly about the Western powers’ division of Germany.
Moscow wanted Germany to remain unified, but demilitarized and neutral and committed to paying war reparations to help the USSR get back on its feet.
As late as 1954, the Soviets offered to dissolve the GDR in favour of free elections under international supervision, leading to the creation of a unified, unaligned, Germany.
This, however, clashed with the Western powers’ plan of evading Germany’s responsibility for paying war reparations and of integrating West Germany into the new antiSoviet, anti-communist military alliance.
And West Germany ceaselessly harassed and sabotaged its neighbor, refusing to recognize it as a sovereign state, regarding it instead as its own territory temporarily under Soviet occupation.
As Pauwels explains, “During the last weeks of the hostilities the Americans themselves had occupied a considerable part of the Soviet zone, namely Thuringia and much of Saxony.
When they pulled out at the end of June, 1945, they brought back to the West more than 10,000 railway cars full of the newest and best equipment, patents, blueprints, and so on from the firm Carl Zeiss in Jena and the local plants of other top enterprises such as Siemens, Telefunken, BMW, Krupp, Junkers, and IGFarben.
The Allies agreed at Yalta that a post-war Germany would pay the Soviet Union $10 billion in compensation for the damages inflicted on the USSR during the war.
This was a paltry sum compared to the more realistic estimate of $128 billion arrived at after the war.
The Soviets took $4. billion out of East Germany, carting away whole factories and railways, while the larger and richer FRG paid a miserable $600 million.
In the end, the GDR would compensate both the United States (which suffered virtually no damage in World War II) through the loss of its scientists, technicians, blue-prints, patents and so on, and the Soviet Union , through the loss of its factories and railways.
West Germany’s comparative wealth offered many advantages in its ideological battle with socialism.
For one, the wealth differential could be attributed deceptively to the merits of capitalism versus socialism.
East Germany was poorer, it was said, not because it unfairly bore the brunt of indemnifying the Soviets for their war losses, and not because it started on a lower rung, but because public ownership and central planning were inherently inefficient.
The truth of the matter, however, was that East German socialism was more efficient than West German capitalism, producing faster growth rates, and was more responsive to the basic needs of its population.
The counter-revolution in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and China’s opening to foreign investment, ushered in a rapid expansion worldwide in the number of people vying for jobs.
North American and Western European workers didn’t compete for jobs with workers in Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Russia in 1970.
Far from being inefficient, public ownership and central planning turned the eastern part of Germany into a rapidly industrializing country which grew faster economically than its West German neighbor and shared the benefits of its growth more evenly.
In the West, the people existed to serve the minority that owned and controlled the economy.
Excluding the war years, from 1928, when socialism was introduced, until Mikhail Gorbachev began to take it apart in the late 1980s, the Soviet system of central planning and public ownership produced unfailing economic growth, without the recessions and downturns that plagued the capitalist economies of North America, Japan and Western Europe.
And in most of those years, the Soviet and Eastern European economies grew faster.
The Communists produced economic security as robust than that of the richest countries, but with fewer resources and a lower level of development and in spite of the unflagging efforts of the capitalist world to sabotage socialism.
While at the time the demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed as a great victory for humanity, not least by leftist intellectuals in the United States, two decades later there’s little to celebrate.
If you were old, if you were a farmer, if you were a manual worker, the market was a great deal worse than even the relatively stagnant Soviet economy of Brezhnev.
The recovery under Putin, such as it was, came almost entirely as a side effect of rising world oil prices, the very process that had operated under Brezhnev.
While the return of capitalism made life harsher for some, it proved lethal for others.
By 2008, it had slipped to less than 60 years for Russian men, a full seven years lower than in 1985 when Gorbachev came to power and began to dismantle Soviet socialism.
Today “only a little over half of the ex-Communist countries have regained their pretransition life-expectancy levels,” according to a study published in the medical journal.
The Lancet. ...the propaganda conveniently ignored the fact that the eastern part of Germany had always been less developed than the west, that it had been plundered of its key human assets at the end of World War II by United States occupation forces, that the Soviet Union had carted off everything of value to indemnify itself for its war losses, and that East Germany bore the brunt of Germany’s war reparations to Moscow.
Almost 80 percent recognize liberal democracy as a front for a government controlled by the rich.
The solution, in the view of the majority, is to return to socialism, even if it means one-party rule.
Something better than unceasing economic insecurity, private health care and education, and vast inequality, is achievable.
It was the reality in the Soviet Union, in China , in Eastern Europe, and today, hangs on in Cuba and North Korea, despite the incessant and far-ranging efforts of the United States to crush it.
In Defense of Soviet Waiters • In Defense of Soviet Waiters There’s been a bit of a discussion about affective labor going around.
Employers, of course, would prefer equality to be established by imposing the love of work on both genders.
I’m just old enough to remember when people talked about the Communist world as a really existing place rather than a vaguely defined bogeyman.
And one of the mundane tropes that always came up in foreign travelogues from behind the Iron Curtain concerned the notoriously surly service workers, in particular restaurant waiters.
One can find numerous explanations of this phenomenon, from the shortcomings of the planned economy to the institutional structure of the Soviet service industry to the vagaries of the Russian soul to the legacy of serfdom.
But one factor was clearly that Soviet workers, unl ik e their American counterparts, were guaranteed jobs, wages, and access to essential needs like housing, education, and health care.
The fear that enforces fake happiness among capitalist service workers — culminating in the grotesquery of Pret a Manger — was mostly inoperative in the Soviet Union.
During the perestroika era, the American smile was a common reference point when the topic of rude Soviet service was discussed.
With the collapse of the USSR and the penetration of Western capital into Russia, employers discovered a workforce that adapted only reluctantly to the norms of capitalist work discipline.
In no time, however, the managers hit on what I’ve described as the third wave form of the work ethic.
The five United States managers — and colleagues from Pizza Huts in the United Kingdom, Belgium, Australia and other nations — spent 12 to 14 hours a day drilling the Russians on service and food preparation, Pizza Hut style.
It’s the Pret a Manger approach to enforced cheerfulness , combined with gamification, 1990-style.
But while they may have had the hamburgers, with the collapse of Communism they no longer had steady access to the means of payment.
The brusqueness of customer service interactions has typically been interpreted as an indication of Communism’s shortcomings, their low quality understood as a mark of capitalism’s superiority.
And it does indicate a contradiction of the Soviet model, which preserved the form of wage labor while removing many of the disciplinary mechanisms — the threat of unemployment, of destitution — that force workers to accept the discipline of the employer or the customers.
That contradiction comes to a head in a restaurant where both employees and customers are miserable.
But service work is a bit different from the kind of material shabbiness he discusses, since the product and the worker are inseparable.
To demand what we’ve come to think of as “good service” is ultimately to demand the kind of affective — and affected — labor that we see throughout the service industry and especially in female-gendered occupations.
But thirty years ago, journalists like Myerscough were the sort of people grousing about rude Moscow waiters.
In a system based on wage labor , the choice between company-enforced cheerfulness or authentic resentment is unavoidable.
Perhaps it’s time to look back with a bit of nostalgia on the surly Communist waiters of yore, whose orientation toward the system was at least transparent.
I have argued many times that the essence of the social-democratic project — and for the time being, the socialist project as well — is the empowerment of labor.
By means of full employment, the separation of income from employment, and the organization of workers, people gain the ability to resist the demands of the boss.
But the case of affective labor is another example that shows why this supposedly tepid and reformist project is ultimately radical and unstable.
Take away the lash of the boss, and you are suddenly forced to confront service employees as human beings with human emotions, without their company-supplied masks of enforced good cheer.
Revealing the true condition of service work can be a de-fetishizing experience, one just as jarring — and quite a bit closer to home — than finding out how your iPhone was manufactured.
In both cases, we are made to confront unpleasant truths about the power relations that structure all of our experiences as consumers.
True, growth slowed beginning in the 1970s, but the major culprits were the diversion of budgets and R&D to the military to counter threats of United States and NATO aggression, and growing resource extraction costs, not the alleged inefficiencies of public ownership and central planning, as is now widely believed.
In fact, Soviet socialism—while it existed-worked better than capitalism in producing economic growth.
From 1928 to 1989, GDP per capita grew in the USSR by a factor of 5.2, compared to 4. in Western Europe and 3. in the major industrial offshoots of Western Europe—the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
And importantly, Soviet growth happened without the recurrent recessions—and their attendant pain in unemployment, hunger, and despair-that were routine features of the capitalist economies over the same period.
Indeed, while capitalism was mired in a major depression during the 1930s, leaving hundreds of millions without work, the Soviet economy was expanding rapidly, absorbing all available manpower.
And while the dual ills of inflation and unemployment ran rampant in the stagflation crisis that roiled the capitalist economies during the 1970s, the Soviet economy expanded without interruption and without inflation or joblessness.
The received wisdom—rooted not in reality but Cold War propaganda—is that the Soviet economy collapsed under the weight of it inefficiencies, and that the demise of the USSR proves that an economic system based on public ownership, central planning and production for use, is unworkable.
Even many Marxists believe this, touting the merits of “market socialism” as the only workable alternative.
And yet the Soviet economy’s record of peacetime expansion and full employment remained unblemished until Gorbachev began to experiment with the very same market socialism that many Marxists now embrace.
Hence, Soviet socialism’s reputation for being unworkable is underserved.
A slow-down in economic growth—having as much to do with United States efforts to cripple the USSR by embroiling it in a ruinous arms race as it did with internal problems-has been transformed into a myth about economic collapse.
While they can turn successes into what appear to be failures, then can also turn failures into what appear to be successes.
Had the Soviet economy’s record been as bad, it would have long ago been judged, not as inefficient, but as an inhumane disaster—a pox on humanity to be eradicated as quickly as possible.
In 2009, Rossiya, a Russian TV channel, spent three months polling over 50 million Russians to find out who, in their view, were the greatest Russians of all time.
Prince Alexander Nevsky, who successfully repelled an attempted Western invasion of Russia in the 13th century, came first.
Second place went to Pyotr Stolypin, who served as prime minister to Tsar Nicholas II, and enacted agrarian reforms.
From its inception in 1928, to the point at which it was dismantled in 1989, Soviet socialism never once, except during the extraordinary years of World War II, stumbled into recession, nor failed to provide full employment.
Moreover, the Soviet economy grew faster than capitalist economies that were at an equal level of economic development when Stalin launched the first five year plan in 1928—and faster than the United States economy through much of the socialist system’s existence.
To be sure, the Soviet economy never caught up to or surpassed the advanced industrial economies of the capitalist core, but it started the race further back; was not aided, as Western countries were, by histories of slavery, colonial plunder, and economic imperialism; and was unremittingly the object of Western, and especially US, attempts to sabotage it.
The Cold War and arms race, which entangled the Soviet Union in battles against a stronger foe, not state ownership and planning, kept the socialist economy from overtaking the advanced industrial economies of the capitalist West.
According to a just-released Gallup poll, for every citizen of 11 former Soviet republics, including Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, who thinks the breakup of the Soviet Union benefited their country, two think it did harm.
Given that more prefer the former socialist system to the current capitalist one, and think that the USSR’s breakup has done more harm than good, we might infer that most aren’t better off— or at least, that they don’t see themselves as such.
Male life expectancy in Russia, for example, was 67 years in 1985, under communism.
A Russian return to socialism is far more likely to come about the way it did the first time, through revolution, not elections—and revolutions don’t happen simply because people prefer a better system to the one they currently have.
Now that they’ve had over two decades of multi-party democracy, private enterprise and a market economy, Russians don’t think these institutions are the wonders Western politicians and mass media make them out to be.
Most Russians would prefer a return to the Soviet system of state planning, that is, to socialism.
Even so, these realities are hidden behind a blizzard of propaganda, whose intensity peaks each year on the anniversary of the USSR’s passing.
We’re supposed to believe that where it was tried, socialism was popularly disdained and failed to deliver—though neither assertion is true.
Of course, that anti-Soviet views have hegemonic status in the capitalist core is hardly surprising.
So, on the anniversary of the USSR’s demise we should not be surprised to discover that socialism’s political enemies should present a view of the Soviet Union that is at odds with what those on the ground really experienced, what a socialist economy really accomplished, and what those deprived of it really want.
The Soviet Union was a concrete example of what a publicly owned, planned economy could produce: full employment, guaranteed pensions, paid maternity leave, limits on working hours, free healthcare and education , subsidized vacations, inexpensive housing, low-cost childcare, subsidized public transportation, and rough income equality.
It is widely believed that while the Soviet Union may have produced these benefits, in the end, Soviet public ownership and planning proved to be unworkable.
Yet, when the Soviet economy was publicly owned and planned, from 1928 to 1989, it reliably expanded from year to year, except during the war years.
To be clear, while capitalist economies plunged into a major depression and reliably lapsed into recessions every few years, the Soviet economy just as unfailingly did not, expanding unremittingly and always providing jobs for all.
Far from being unworkable, the Soviet Union’s publicly owned and planned economy succeeded remarkably well.
What was unworkable was capitalism, with its occasional depressions, regular recessions, mass unemployment, and extremes of wealth and poverty, all the more evident today as capitalist economies contract or limp along, condemning numberless people to forced idleness.
What eventually led to the Soviet Union’s demise was the accumulated toll on the Soviet economy of the West’s efforts to bring it down, the Reagan administration’s intensification of the Cold War, and the Soviet leadership’s inability to find a way out of the predicament these developments occasioned.
Military competition with its ideological competitor, the United States, had slowed growth in multiple ways.
First, R&D resources were being monopolized by the military, starving the civilian economy of the best scientists, engineers, and machine tools.
Second, military spending had increased to meet the Reagan administration’s abandonment of detente in favour of a renewed arms race that was explicitly targeted at crippling the Soviet economy.
To deter United States aggression, the Soviets spent a punishingly large percentage of GDP on the military while the Americans, with a larger economy, spent more in absolute terms but at a lower and more manageable share of national income.
Third, to protect itself from the dangers of relying on foreign imports of important raw materials that could be cut off to bring the country to its knees, the Soviet Union chose to extract raw materials from its own vast territory.
While making the USSR self-sufficient, internal sourcing ensnared the country in a Ricardian trap.
The costs of producing raw materials increased, as new and more difficult-toreach sources needed to be tapped as the older, easy-to-reach ones were exhausted.
Fourth, in order to better defend the country, the Soviets sought allies in Eastern Europe and the Third World.
However, because the USSR was richer than the countries and movements it allied with, it became the anchor and banker to other socialist countries, liberation movements, and states seeking to free themselves from despoliation by Western powers.
As the number of its allies increased, and Washington manoeuvred to arm, finance, and support anti-communist insurgencies in an attempt to put added strain on the Soviet treasury, the costs to Moscow of supporting its allies mounted.
These factors—corollaries of the need to provide for the Soviet Union’s defence—combined to push costs to the point where they seriously impeded Soviet economic growth.
With growth slowing, and the costs of defending the country increasing, it appeared as if it was only a matter of time before the USSR would find itself between the Scylla of an untenable military position and the Charybdis of arms race-driven bankruptcy.
He moved to end the Cold War, withdrawing military support from allies, and pledging cooperation with the United States.
On the economic front, he set out to transform the Soviet Union into a Western-style social democracy.
However, rather than rescuing the country from a future of ever slowing economic growth, Gorbachev’s capitulations on foreign and economic policy led to disaster.
With the restraining hand of the Soviet Union lifted, the United States embarked on a series of aggressions around the world, beginning with Iraq, proceeding to Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Iraq again, and then Libya, with numerous smaller interventions in between.
Gorbachev’s abandonment of economic planning and efforts to clear the way for the implementation of a market economy pushed the country into crisis.
Unemployment, homelessness, economic insecurity and social parasitism returned with a vengeance.
On Christmas Day, 1991, the day the USSR officially ended, Gorbachev said, “We live in a new world.
The arms race and the mad militarization of states, which deformed our economy, society and values, have been stopped.
Contained within Gorbachev’s words was the truth about why the world’s first conscious attempt to build an alternative to capitalism had been brought to a close.
The real reason for the USSR’s demise was that its leadership capitulated to an American foe, which, from the end of World War II, and with growing vigour during the Reagan years, sought to arms race to death the Soviet economy.
This was an economy that worked for the bottom 99 percent, and therefore, if allowed to thrive, would have discredited the privately owned, market-regulated economies that the top one percent favoured and benefited from.
It was this model of free enterprise and market regulation which made vast wealth, security and comfort the prerogatives of captains of industry and titans of finance, and unemployment, poverty, hunger, economic insecurity, and indignity—the necessary conditions of the top one percent’s riches—the lot of everyone else.
There would set in an era of the blackest reaction in all the capitalist and colonial countries.
And just as Stalin had accurately prophesied 10 years before Operation Barbarossa, the Nazi invasion of the USSR, that his country had only 10 years to prepare for an attack, so too did he accurately foresee the consequences of the Soviet Union’s falling to the forces of capitalism.
Washington now has more latitude to use its muscular military to pursue its reactionary agenda around the world.
Public ownership and planning hang on in Cuba and North Korea, but the United States and its allies use sanctions, diplomatic isolation and military harassment to sabotage the economies of the hold-outs , so that the consequences can be falsely hung on what are alleged to be the deficiencies of public ownership and planning.
They are in reality the consequences of a methodical program of low-level warfare.
Encouraged to believe that the Soviet economic system had failed, many people, including both communist supporters and detractors of the Soviet Union, concluded that a system of public ownership and planning is inherently flawed.
Communists abandoned communist parties for social democratic ones, or abandoned radical politics altogether.
Social democrats shifted right, eschewing reform, and embracing neo-liberalism.
At the same time, privatization in the former Soviet Union and formerly communist countries of Eastern Europe expanded the global supply of wage-labour, with predictable consequences for wage levels worldwide.
The world’s largest capitalist economies have been in crisis since 2008.
Some are trapped in an austerity death-spiral, some in the grips of recession, most growing slowly at best.
Austerity—in reality the gutting of public services—is the prescribed pseudo-remedy.
In some parts of Europe, official unemployment reaches well into the double-digits, youth unemployment higher still.
Yet, free to develop without the encumbrance of an organized effort to sabotage it, capitalism is not working.
By contrast, the Soviet model of public ownership and planning—which, from its inception was the target of a concerted effort to undermine it— never once, except during the extraordinary years of World War II, stumbled into recession, nor failed to provide full employment.
Yet it is understood, including by some former supporters of the Soviet Union, to have been unworkable.
Contrary to a widely held misconception, the experience of the Soviet Union did not demonstrate that an inherent weakness existed within its publicly owned, planned economy that doomed it to failure.
Moreover, it could do so year after year and continued to do so until the Soviet leadership pulled the plug.
It also demonstrated that the top one percent would defend private ownership by using military, economic, and ideological means to crush a system that worked against them but worked splendidly for the bottom 99 percent The defeat of the Soviet Union has, indeed, ushered in a period of dark reaction.
The way out remains, as ever, public ownership and planning—which the Soviet experience from 1928 to 1989 demonstrates works remarkably well—and struggle against those who would discredit, degrade or destroy it.
The benefits of the Soviet economic system were found in the elimination of the ills of capitalism—an end to unemployment, inflation, depressions and recessions, and extremes of wealth and poverty; an end to exploitation, which is to say, the practice of living off the labour of others; and the provision of a wide array of free and virtually free public services.
Among the most important accomplishments of the Soviet economy was the abolition of unemployment.
Not only did the Soviet Union provide jobs for all, work was considered a social obligation, of such importance that it was enshrined in the constitution.
On the other hand, making a living through means other than work was prohibited.
Workers employed at dangerous jobs or where sustained alertness was critical worked six or sevenhour shifts, but received fulltime pay.
The right to a pension was guaranteed by the Soviet constitution , rather than being revocable and subject to the momentary whims of politicians, as is the case in capitalist countries.
Women in the USSR were accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life , including the equal right with men to employment, rest and leisure, social insurance and education.
It was also the first country to bring women into top government positions.
An intense campaign was undertaken in Soviet Central Asia to liberate women from the misogynist oppression of conservative Islam.
Urban housing space, however, was cramped, about half of what it was per capita in Austria and West Germany.
The reasons were inadequate building in Tsarist times, the massive destruction of housing during World War II, and Soviet emphasis on heavy industry.
Prior to the October Revolution, inadequate urban housing was built for ordinary people.
After the revolution, new housing was built, but the housing stock remained insufficient.
Housing draws heavily on capital, which the government needed urgently for the construction of industry.
City-dwellers typically lived in apartment buildings owned by the enterprise in which they worked or by the local government.
This differed sharply with the United States, where rents consumed a significant share of the average family budget , and still do.
Food staples and other necessities were subsidized, while luxury items were sold well above their costs.
This is because efficient, affordable and extensive public transportation would severely limit the profit-making opportunities of automobile manufacturers, petroleum companies, and civil engineering firms.
In order to safeguard their profits, these firms use their wealth, connections and influence to stymie development of extensive, efficient and inexpensive public alternatives to private transportation.
Governments, which need to keep private industry happy so that it continues to provide jobs, are constrained to play along.
The only way to alter this is to bring capital under public control, in order to use it to meet public policy goals set out in a consciously constructed plan.
The Soviet Union placed greater stress on healthcare than their capitalist competitors did.
Income inequality in the Soviet Union was mild compared to capitalist countries.
An income 10 times larger would be $430,000—about what members of the capitalist elite make in a single week.
A factor that mitigated the modest degree of Soviet income inequality was the access all Soviet citizens had to essential services at no, or virtually, no cost.
Critics of the Soviet Union accused the elite of being an exploiting ruling class, but the elite’s modest incomes and humble material circumstances raise serious doubt about this assessment.
If it was indeed an exploiting ruling class, it was the oddest one in human history.
From the moment in 1928 that the Soviet economy became publicly owned and planned, to the point in 1989 that the economy was pushed in a free market direction, Soviet GDP per capita growth exceeded that of all other countries but Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
In other words, over the period in which its publicly owned, planned economy was in place, the USSR‘s record in raising incomes was better than that of the major industrialized capitalist countries.
The Soviet Union’s robust growth over this period is all the more impressive considering that the period includes the war years when a major assault by Nazi Germany left a trail of utter destruction in its wake.
Growth was highest to 1970, at which point expansion of the Soviet economy began to slow.
While Soviet GDP per capita growth rates compare favorably with those of the major capitalist economies, a more relevant comparison is with the rest of the world.
In 1928, the Soviet Union was still largely an agrarian country, and most people worked in agriculture, compared to a minority in Western Europe and North America.
Hence, the economy of the USSR at the point of its transition to public ownership and planning was very different from that of the industrialized Western capitalist countries.
It is therefore the rest of the world, not the United States and other advanced industrialized countries, with which the USSR should be compared.
From 1928 to 1989, Soviet GDP per capita not only exceeded growth in the rich countries but exceeded growth in all other regions of the world combined, and to a greater degree.
Hence, not only did the publicly owned, planned economy of the Soviet Union outpace the economies of richer capitalist economies, it grew even faster than the economies of countries that were most like the USSR in 1928.
For example, outside its southern core, Latin America’s GDP per capita was $1,332 , almost equal to the USSR’s $1,370.
Public ownership and planning had raised living standards to a higher level than capitalism had in Latin America, despite an equal starting point.
Moreover, while the Soviet peacetime economy unfailingly expanded, the Latin American economy grew in fits and starts, with enterprises regularly shuttering their doors and laying off employees.
Perhaps the best illustration of how public ownership and planning performed better at raising living standards comes from a comparison of incomes in Soviet Central Asia with those of neighboring countries in the Middle East and South Asia.
For Central Asians, it was clear on which side of the Soviet Union’s border standards of living were highest.
Advocates of a free enterprise economy would have you believe that public ownership and planning stifle innovation, while free enterprise encourages it.
In fact, the truth about innovation is the exact opposite of what free-enterprise promoters would have us believe.
It is not free enterprise, but planning and public funds, that drive it.
Soviet accomplishments in space, considered in light of the mistaken view that the USSR was always a poor second-best to the supposedly more dynamic United States, is truly startling.
Soviet achievements include the first satellite, first animal in orbit, first human in orbit, first woman in orbit, first spacewalk, first moon impact, first image of the far side of the moon, first unmanned lunar soft landing, first space rover, first space station and first interplanetary probe.
The panic created in Washington after the allegedly innovation-stifling Soviet economy allowed the USSR to beat its much richer ideological rival into space galvanized the United States to take a leaf from the Soviet book.
Just as the Soviets were doing, Washington would use public funds to power research into innovations.
This would be done through the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
The DARPA would channel public money to scientists and engineers for military, space and other research.
In this way, private investors were spared the trouble of risking their own capital, as free enterprise mythology would have us believe they do.
In this myth, far-seeing and bold capitalists reap handsome profits as a reward for risking their capital on research that might never pay-off.
It is far better for investors to invest their capital in ventures with less risk and quicker returns, while allowing the public to shoulder the burden of funding R&D with its many risks and uncertainties.
Using their wealth, influence and connections, investors have successfully pressed politicians into putting this pleasing arrangement in place.
A study by Block and Keller found that between 1971 and 2006, 77 out of R&D Magazine’s top 88 innovations had been fully funded by the United States government.
Summarizing research by economist Mariana Mazzucato, Guardian columnist Seumas Milne points out that the [algorithms that underpinned Google’s success were funded by the public sector.
In both the United States and Britain it was the state, not big pharma, that funded most groundbreaking ‘new molecular entity’ drugs, with the private sector then developing slight variations.
And in Finland, it was the public sector that funded the early development of Nokia and made a return on its investment.
Nuclear power, satellite and rocket technology, and the internet are other examples of innovations that were produced with public money, and have since been used for private profit.
United States president Barack Obama acknowledged the nature of the swindle in his 2011 State of the Nation Address.
The United States kick-started innovation in its economy by emulating the Soviet model of state-directed research because free enterprise was not up to the task.
Rather than emulate the Soviet model for public benefit, the United States channels public money into R&D for private profit.
The fact that the Soviets socialized the benefits that flow from socialized risk, while the United States privatizes them, reflects the antagonistic nature of the two societies: One, a massoriented society organized to benefit the masses; the other, a business society organized to benefit a minority of business owners.
That a system of public ownership and planning stifles innovation; That the profit system stimulates it.
While the Soviet economy grew rapidly from 1928 to 1989 it never surpassed the economies of North America, Western Europe and Japan.
Consequently, the USSR’s per capita income was always less than that of the industrialized capitalist economies.
The comparative disadvantage in incomes and living standards was falsely attributed to the alleged inefficiencies of public ownership and planning, rather than to the reality that, having started further back than the rich capitalist countries, the Soviet Union had more ground to cover.
When the race began in 1928, the Soviet Union was still a largely agrarian country while the United States was industrialized.
Hence, the Soviet Union had to cover ground the United States had already covered when Russia was under the stifling rule of Tsarist tyranny.
True, the USSR did have an empire of sorts—countries in Eastern Europe over which it exercised hegemony, but, except in the early post-WWII years, these countries were never exploited economically by the Soviet Union.
If anything, the Soviets, who exported raw materials to Eastern Europe in return for manufactured goods, came out on the losing end of its trade relationship with its satellites.
So long as they remained part of the Warsaw Pact—a defensive alliance formed after and in response to the creation of NATO—and maintained some semblance of public ownership and planning, Moscow allowed its Eastern European allies to chart their own course.
By the mid-1970s there was serious concern in Washington that the Soviet economy was on a course to overtake that of the United States.
Since Washington always pointed to the United States’ greater average income and higher living standards to mobilize the allegiance of its population to the free enterprise system, a Soviet lead would deal a mortal blow to the legitimacy of United States capitalism.
Careful estimates prepared in the United States showed that Soviet gross national product was gaining on that of the United States.
From the perspective of planners in Washington in the late 1950s, the danger loomed that at current rates of growth, the Soviet economy would overtake the United States economy by 1982.
At that point, the entire foundation of the United States population’s belief in the legitimacy of free enterprise—that it produced higher living standards than public ownership and planning—would crumble.
According to figures provided by Allen , Soviet GDP per capita grew at an annual rate of 3. percent from 1928 to 1970, but at less than half that rate, 1. percent, from 1970 to 1989.
Soviet leaders recognized that a planned, publicly owned economy was an anathema to the captains of industry and titans of finance who use their wealth and connections to dominate policy in capitalist countries.
The USSR had been invaded multiple times, and on two occasions by aggressive capitalist powers with the objective of wiping the Soviet system off the map.
In order to deter future aggressions, it was necessary to keep pace militarily.
However, the smaller size of the Soviet economy relative to that of its ideological competitors created problems.
The necessity of maintaining a rough military parity would mean spending a far higher percentage of GDP on the military compared to what the United States and other NATO countries spent on their armed forces.
From the 1950s through the 1970s, the Soviets spent 12 to 14 percent of their GDP on the military , a figure that would grow even higher later, when the Reagan administration hiked United States military spending, anticipating a Soviet effort to keep up that would harm the USSR’s economy.
Another constraint imposed on the Soviet economy by the need to deter military aggression was the monopolization of R&D resources by the military.
Keeping pace militarily involved an unceasing battle to catch up to United States military innovations.
When the United States exploded the first atom bomb in 1945, the Soviet Union raced to match the United States’ grim scientific feat, which it did four years later.
The United States introduction of the hydrogen bomb in 1952 was quickly followed by the Soviets exploding their own hydrogen bomb a year later.
A United States first in submarine-launched nuclear missiles was matched by the USSR a few years after.
Unlike the United States, the USSR had no military bases ringing its ideological rival, and therefore needed a way of delivering nuclear warheads over long distances.
Soviet consumer goods were often said to have been of low quality, but no one ever said the same about Soviet military equipment.
The necessity of channelling the bulk of, and best, R&D resources to the military meant that other sectors suffered, and GDP growth was impeded.
The Soviet Union had an abundant supply of all the raw materials an industrial economy needed, and at first, they were easy to reach and therefore could be obtained at low cost.
For example, in the early years of the USSR’s industrialization, open pit mines were dug near industrial centres.
Minerals were close to the surface and could be transported over short distances to nearby factories.
However, over time, the minerals that were close to the surface were scooped out and pits became deeper and narrower.
At deeper depths, the quantity of minerals that could be extracted diminished and the costs of reaching them increased.
Eventually, the mines were exhausted, and new mines had to be opened, but at greater distances from industrial centres, which meant higher costs to transport raw materials to factories.
In the early 1970s, the USSR was spending $4. billion per year to maintain its oil industry.
As oil became more difficult to reach, the Soviets had to drill deeper and through harder rocks.
The Soviets could have escaped the Ricardian trap by shopping around for less expensive imports.
The United States and its allies—who would always be hostile to the USSR, except when expediency dictated temporary alliances or easing of tension—could interdict raw materials heading to the USSR to bring the Soviet economy to its knees or extort concessions.
In other words, given the very high l ik elihood that the United States would exploit opportunities to place the Soviet Union at a disadvantage, shopping around for cheap imports, rather than implementing a policy of resource self-sufficiency, was not a realistic option.
Another reason the Soviet economy slowed was that the costs to the USSR to support its allies began to mount to unsustainable levels.
One way to bolster self-defence is to find friends who share the same enemy, and the Soviet Union set out to expand its alliance of friends by providing economic and military assistance to countries and movements hostile to the forces of reaction.
In doing so, it became the banker for national liberation movements, Eastern European socialist countries, and various Third World countries seeking to escape and remain free from domination by powerful capitalist states.
By 1981, the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies had 96,000 economic advisers in 75 countries and 16,000 military advisers in 34 countries, together with a contingent of 39,000 Cuban troops in Africa, an army for which Moscow was ultimately footing the bill.
Meanwhile, the war in Afghanistan was draining the Soviet treasury to the tune of $3 to $4 billion per year.
In other words, the costs of sustaining allies had grown enormous, raw material costs were mounting, the best scientists, engineers and machine tools were being monopolized by the military, and military expenditures were consuming a punishingly large percentage of national income.
A large part of the predicament the Soviets found themselves in was due to a decision the Reagan administration had taken to try to cripple the Soviet economy.
In October 1983, United States president Ronald Reagan unveiled what would become known as the Reagan Doctrine.
Instead, the “goal of the free world must instead be stated in the affirmative.
More formally, the Reagan Doctrine was spelled out in a series of national security decision directives, or NSDDs.
NSDD-66 announced that it would be United States policy to disrupt the Soviet economy, while NSDD-75 committed the United States to trying to drive up costs in the Soviet economy in order to plunge the USSR into a crisis.
It would not only force Moscow to divert more resources to the military, but would channel even more of the USSR’s scientists, engineers, machine tools, and budget into military R&D, reducing productive investments and hobbling the civilian economy even more than the Cold War already had.
The aim was to force the USSR “to expend precious lifeblood to run a race against a more athletic foe” , a foe which had a larger economy and more resources to last the race because it had started at a higher level of development and was plundering various countries around the world of their riches.
To keep up, Soviet military spending, previously at 12 to 14 percent of GDP, started to climb.
Already twice as large as the United States’ as a percentage of national income the defence budget grew larger still.
Military expenditures increased by 45 percent in five years, considerably outpacing growth in the Soviet economy.
At the same time, Moscow increased its military R&D spending nearly two-fold.
Meanwhile, the Reagan administration had taken a page out of Che Guevara’s book.
The Argentine revolutionary had called for not one, not two, but three Vietnams, to drain the United States treasury.
Turning Che’s doctrine against communism, CIA Director Bill Casey called for not one, not two, but a half a dozen Afghanistans.
To bog down the Soviets in “their own Vietnam,” the Afghan mujahedeen were showered with money and arms.
Soviet foreign secretary Andrei Gromyko complained that the United States’ military build-up was aimed at exhausting the USSR’s material resources and forcing Moscow to surrender.
Gorbachev echoed Gromyko, telling Soviet citizens that, The United States wants to exhaust the Soviet Union economically through a race in the most up-to-date and expensive space weapons.
By the mid-1980s, it was clear in both Washington and Moscow that the Soviet Union was in trouble.
It was not that the system of public ownership and planning was not working.
On the contrary, recognizing the advantages of the Soviet system, the United States itself had emulated it to stimulate innovation in its own economy.
Moreover, the Soviet economy was still reliably expanding, as it had done every year in peacetime since Stalin had brought it under public control in 1928.
However, defending the country in the face of a stepped up Cold War was threatening to choke off economic growth altogether.
It was clear that Moscow’s prospects for keeping pace with the United States militarily, while at the same time propping up allies under attack by US-fuelled anti-communist insurgencies and overthrow movements, were far from sanguine.
If Moscow continued to try to match the United States militarily, it would eventually bankrupt itself, in which case its ability to deter United States aggression would be lost.
If it did not try to keep pace, it could no longer deter United States aggression.
The only difference was how long it would take the inevitable to play out.
Gorbachev therefore withdrew support from allies and pledged cooperation with the United States.
The capitulation was hidden behind honeyed phrases about promoting international cooperation and fostering universal human values, but the rhetoric did not hide the fact that Gorbachev was throwing in the towel.
In reducing the threat of a global nuclear conflagration, Gorbachev had indeed achieved a victory for humanity.
However, the victory was brought about by caving in to the United States, which was now free to run roughshod over countries that were too weak to refuse United States demands that they yield to United States political, military and economic domination.
Economic growth had certainly slowed, and there was indeed a danger that continued slow growth would threaten the country’s position vis-a-vis its capitalist rivals.
The planning apparatus, which had unfailingly charted a course for unremitting growth during peacetime, was dismantled, in order to move the economy toward regulation by market forces.
Rather than boosting economic growth, as Gorbachev hoped, the abandonment of planning did the very opposite.
The economy tumbled headlong into an abyss, from which the USSR’s successor countries would not emerge for years.
Gorbachev is still widely admired in the West, but his popularity stops at the Russian border.
With few exceptions, what passes for serious discussion of the USSR is shot through with prejudice, distortion, and misconception.
Locked in battle with the Soviet Union for decades, Washington deliberately fostered misunderstandings of its ideological foe.
The aim was to make the USSR appear bleak, brutal, repressive, economically sluggish and inefficient—not the kind of place anyone of sound mind would want to emulate or live in.
Today, scholars, journalists, politicians, state officials, and even some communists repeat old Cold War propaganda.
It grew faster over the period it was publicly owned and planned than did the supposedly dynamic United States economy, to say nothing of the economies of countries that were as undeveloped as the USSR was in 1928, when the Soviet economy was brought under public control.
Moreover, the Soviet system of public ownership and planning efficiently employed all its capital and human resources, rather than maintaining armies of unemployed workers and inefficiently running below capacity, as capitalist economies regularly do.
Every year, from 1928 to 1989, except during the war years, the Soviet economy reliably expanded, providing jobs, shelter, and a wide array of lowand nocost public services to all, while capitalist economies regularly sank into recession and had to continually struggle out of them on the wreckage of human lives.
Yet at the same time, we are told that the Soviet economy never worked, and that capitalism, with its regular crises, and failure to provide employment, food, clothing and shelter to all, is both the only game in town and the superior system.
Clearly, it is neither superior—on the contrary, it is clearly inferior—nor it is the only choice.
It is time to tear down the wall of politically engineered misconceptions about public ownership and planning.
For too long, the wall has kept us from seeing a viable alternative model to capitalism whose track record of unequalled success points to a realistic and possible future for the bottom 99 percent—a future free from unemployment, recessions, extremes of wealth and poverty, and where essential goods and services are available at no cost to all.
The Chinese may have the most efficient and comprehensive rail network in the world, the Scandinavians may have the most expensive trains, but those soviet-era Russian trains leave everyone well behind when it comes to comfort.
Apart from the plush comfort of the sleeper compartment, they also boast those magnificent stainless steel toilets that simply open onto the track.
Not for a long time yet, since they are continually repainted and refurbished.
Try sitting on the hard, uncomfortable seats of a train in Western Europe after travelling on these and you’ll see what I mean.
One of the more stunning parts of east Berlin is the Soviet War Memorial in Treptower Park.
It’s the main memorial to the Soviet taking of Berlin yes, it was the Soviets who captured Berlin and put an end to Hitler’s efforts.,000 of the 80,000 Soviet soldiers who died in the battle are buried here.
But the most heart-warming moment is to discover that good old Iosef Stalin is everywhere: Or rather, direct quotations from the man are on each of the sarcophagi.
Churchill and Roosevelt may have been dispensable and the war still won.
So, at the most important of war memorials in Berlin, Stalin is there to stay, inscribed in stone.
So if you have some time in Berlin, forget the crappy tourist spots, the sausages and the beer , and get yourself to Treptower Park.
But here I’m interested in Stalin, or rather what was written about him yesterday.
The most breathtaking was an effort to attribute to Putin and his henchmen the increasing popularity of Stalin in the Russian Federation.
Putin is responsible for school textbooks that speak of Stalin’s ‘effective management’ during the 1930s program of industrialization.
He has been behind a campaign to return to name of Stalingrad to the city of Volgograd, the site of the battle that turned the tide of the Second World War.
He praises Stalin’s achievement of expanding Russia’s territory in the form of the USSR, describing the dismantling of the USSR under Gorbachev as a major disaster.
He has failed to condemn Stalin’s repressions, murders, gulags, failures at the Olympics, and pretty much every other sin in Russian history.
This was a line used in response to the veneration of Lenin after his death, and we find it here with all manner of icons of Stalin, signs of the cross, lighting candles in churches, and beliefs in Stalin’s mystical powers.
He deals with post-1991 Belarus, on language, independence, identity, economy and politics.
If we are to believe the corporate media, if not economic ‘experts’, Belarus’s economy should have collapsed ages ago.
Yet, throughout the 2000s the Belarusian economy actually grew, achieving 9. percent growth in 2006.
The country refused to undergo the ‘shock therapy’ imposed (and enthusiastically embraced by those who stood to gain) in neighbouring Russia, Ukraine and other parts of the former Eastern Bloc.
Thus, all of the main enterprises remain in state control, with only a quarter of the economy in private hands.
Most Belarusians simply saw no sense in squandering the significant industrial base that had been built up during the USSR, as they also saw no sense in destroying universal health care, education and so on.
Ioffe points out that Belarus has one of the most open trade policies, especially for its industrial products.
Yet, Ioffe convincingly shows that Lukashenka consistently has widespread popular support.
He admits that a few extra votes may have appeared from somewhere, but even without them, observers admit that he would have won the presidential elections anyway.
He has also presided over steady economic growth that is agreed to be socially equitable, which even more remarkable given international efforts to ruin the economy.
The intelligentsia hates him, mocking his mode of speech and his policies, but above all for depriving them of the power they feel is their birthright.
By contrast, Lukashenka has an uncanny ability to sense what common people are feeling.
We arrived on a slow train from Moscow to find a country that is a model for what the Eastern Bloc should have done after 1989.
Belarus had the balls to resists the vicious and retributive ‘shock therapy’ imposed by Western Europe and the USA in the 1990s.
This glorious building the KGB headquarters sits right on the main thoroughfare, so you can simply stroll past.
If you want to see eastern European communism in the 21st century, get yourself to Belarus.
We’ll definitely be back, Without theory we are dead • Without theory we are dead Sergey sent me this great link to Zyuganov‘s speech on the auspicious day of 27 October this year.
He points out that Gorbachev took advantage of theoretical stagnation in Marxist thought and was thereby able to defeat the CPSU ideologically.
But and here it becomes really interesting he has quite a bit to say about religion.
He reasserts the old party platform of freedom of conscience in the party on matters of religion, the need for religious institutions and the party to operate in peaceful coexistence, indeed to attract people with religious belief to the party.
And then he quotes Stalin to kick off a discussion concerning radical and revolutionary forms of religion, so much so that they share the goals of scientific socialism.
Che Guavara turns up, as does Hugo Chavez, along with liberation theology.
All of them oppose the Golden Calf of capital, whether socialist, Christian, Muslim, Buddhist and so on.
Stalin has not had a great press, although I have suggested once or twice that the man was a little more ambivalent than the standard accounts would have it.
It comes from a book called Towards a New Socialism by W Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell.
They argue quite persuasively that the full implementation of a communist economic system happened under Stalin.
Through the five year plans beginning in the late 1920s the capitalist mode of extracting surplus value was replaced by a planned economy, in which surplus was controlled and allocated by the planning mechanism.
Under Soviet planning, the division between the necessary and surplus portions of the social product was the result of political decisions.
For the most part, goods and labour were physically allocated to enterprises by the planning authorities, who would always ensure that the enterprises had enough money to ‘pay for’ the real goods allocated to them.
If an enterprise made monetary Tosses’, and therefore had to have its money balances topped up with ‘subsidies’, that was no matter.
On the other hand, possession of money as such was no guarantee of being able to get hold of real goods.
By the same token, the resources going into production of consumer goods were centrally allocated.
Higher wages would simply mean higher prices or shortages in the shops.
Under the circumstances of such rapid change and in the face of a sustained threat from international capitalism, that compulsion took the form of carrot and stick.
Genuine revolutionary fervour characterised much of the effort, but for those less inclined to engage, forced labour, exile and ‘terror’ were deployed.
Crucial to this process was the personality cult of Stalin, who embodied the sheer grit (thereby making up for what he lacked in oratorical skill) of the revolutionary ‘miracle’ required to adopt such a radically new economic system.
I would add that this combination, along with the deep strength of the communist economic system, enabled the extraordinary recovery during the Second World War and the eventual victory by the USSR over Germany and fascism.
Bloody amazing trip • Bloody Amazing Trip from Sofia to Yalta by train The full story soon enough, but this was one of those epic rail journeys, three days and nights without a wash, border guards who have developed the fine art of waking you in the middle of the night just when you fall into a deep sleep, bangs, thunks and shudders from an old, heavy train rolling slowly along tracks, and countries most people have never heard about.
A late night stop in Bucharest: And then at Ungheni on the Moldovan border I was roused from my snooze by a swaying, banging carriage.
Apparently, the rail guage was deliberately varied on the border in order to deny those pesky capitalist Americans a free ride into the USSR should they invade.
They’d have to stop first for three hours to change over all their wheels.
The Moldovan border guards were nice bunch, as were the Romanians, but not so the Ukrainians.
I was up for four hours from 1.30 am, questioned, had sniffer dogs in my compartment, had police, army, airforce, navy and the rest searching the train high and low.
Final leg was a luxurious and clean Ukrainian train from Kiev to Simferopol.
And they know how to pamper you: One more night on the train and I was in Simferopol in the Crimea.
Boris met me and insisted I board a mini-bus for the two-hour run over the mountains to Yalta.
The driver was one of those multiskilled types, able to smoke, talk on his mobile phone, change gear with his little finger and overtake slow trucks on tight mountain corners at the same time.
A shit, shower and shave in Yalta and I was whisked away to a conference on Religion and Civil Society all in Russian, but I had a lovely Tartar woman whispering the translation into my ear.
The evening ended with vodka-fuelled Ukrainians and Russians dancing wildly away to old Soviet numbers.
The distinct differences in the political systems of the two countries often prevented them from reaching a mutual understanding on key policy issues and even, as in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, brought them to the brink of war.
The United States government was initially hostile to the Soviet leaders for taking Russia out of World War I and was opposed to a state ideologically based on communism.
Although the United States embarked on a famine relief program in the Soviet Union in the early 1920s and American businessmen established commercial ties there during the period of the New Economic Policy , the two countries did not establish diplomatic relations until 1933.
By that time, the totalitarian nature of Joseph Stalin's regime presented an insurmountable obstacle to friendly relations with the West.
Although World War II brought the two countries into alliance, based on the common aim of defeating Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union's aggressive, antidemocratic policy toward Eastern Europe had created tensions even before the war ended.
The Soviet Union and the United States stayed far apart during the next three decades of superpower conflict and the nuclear and missile arms race.
Beginning in the early 1970s, the Soviet regime proclaimed a policy of detente and sought increased economic cooperation and disarmament negotiations with the West.
However, the Soviet stance on human rights and its invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 created new tensions between the two countries.
These tensions continued to exist until the dramatic democratic changes of 1989-91 led to the collapse during this past year of the Communist system and opened the way for an unprecedented new friendship between the United States and Russia, as well as the other new nations of the former Soviet Union.
After the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the ensuing Civil War produced acute food shortages in southwestern Russia.
Wartime devastation was compounded by two successive seasons of drought, and by 1920 it was clear that a full-scale famine was under way in the Volga River Valley, Crimea, Ukraine, and Armenia.
Conditions were so desperate that in early 1920 the Soviet government sent out a worldwide appeal for food aid to avert the starvation of millions of people.
Several volunteer groups in the United States and Europe had by then organized relief programs, but it became clear that help was needed on a larger scale because an estimated 10 to 20 million lives were at stake.
Although it had not officially recognized the Soviet regime, the United States government was pressed from many sides to intervene, and in August 1920 an informal agreement was negotiated to begin a famine relief program.
In 1921 President Warren Harding appointed Herbert Hoover, then secretary of commerce, to organize the relief effort.
Congress authorized $20 million, and Hoover proceeded to organize the American Relief Administration to do the job.
Under Hoover's terms, the ARA was to be a completely American-run relief program for the transport, storage, and delivery of relief supplies (mainly food and seed grain) to those in the famine region.
After Soviet officials agreed, hundreds of American volunteers were dispatched to oversee the program.
The ARA gradually earned the trust of the local Communist authorities and was given a virtually free hand to distribute thousands of tons of grain, as well as clothing and medical supplies.
This remarkable humanitarian effort was credited with saving many millions of lives.
ARA aid continued into 1923, by which time local farms were again producing and the famine's grip was broken.
Hoover and his ARA were later honored by the Soviet government for the care and generosity that the United States had shown in this desperate crisis.
During the 1920s and early 1930s, tensions between the Soviet Union and the West eased somewhat, particularly in the area of economic cooperation.
The economic situation was made even more difficult by the immense social and economic dislocation caused by World War I, the revolutions of 1917, and the Civil War of 1918-21.
As factories stood idle and famine raged in the countryside, Vladimir Lenin instituted the New Economic Policy in 1921 to infuse energy and direction into the fledgling Communistcontrolled economy.
NEP retreated from Communist orthodoxy and opened up the Soviet monolith economically.
For a variety of reasons—compassion for the sufferings of the Soviet peoples, sympathy for the great “socialist experiment,” but primarily for the pursuit of profit—Western businessmen and diplomats began opening contacts with the Soviet Union.
Among these persons were Averell Harriman, Armand Hammer, and Henry Ford, who sold tractors to the Soviet Union.
Such endeavors facilitated commercial ties between the Soviet Union and the United States, establishing the basis for further cooperation, dialogue, and diplomatic relations between the two countries.
This era of cooperation was never solidly established, however, and it diminished as Joseph Stalin attempted to eradicate vestiges of capitalism and to make the Soviet Union economically self-sufficient.
Lenin believed that a well-disciplined, hierarchically organized party was necessary to lead the working class in overthrowing capitalism in Russia and the world.
Petersburg and shortly thereafter began using the term Communist to describe themselves.
The next year, they created the Communist International to control the Communist movement throughout the world.
After the Comintern's dissolution in 1943, the Soviet party's Central Committee continued to use Communist parties from other nations as instruments of Soviet foreign policy.
Each national party was required to adhere to the Leninist principle of subordinating members and organizations unconditionally to the decisions of higher authorities.
Strongly influenced by the success of the Bolshevik Revolution, American socialists and radicals met in Chicago in 1919 to organize an American Communist party.
One group consisted primarily of relatively recent Russian and East European immigrants, who emphasized adherence to Marxist orthodoxy and proletarian revolution.
The other group, dominated by native-born, somewhat more pragmatic American radicals, sought mass influence.
Such conflicting goals combined with the discrepancy between Communist doctrine and American reality, kept the Communist movement in the United States a small sectarian movement.
In 1922 the Comintern forced the two American parties, which consisted of about 12,000 members, to amalgamate and to follow the party line established in Moscow.
Although membership in the American party rose to about 75,000 by 1938, following the Great Depression, many members left the party after the signing of the Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact of 1939.
Others left in 1956 after Nikita Khrushchev exposed some of Stalin's crimes and Soviet forces invaded Hungary.
Only the hardcore members remained after such reversals of Soviet policy.
The American party, a significant although never major political force in the United States, became further demoralized when Boris Yeltsin outlawed the Communist party in Russia in August 1991 and opened up the archives, revealing the continued financial as well as ideological dependency of the American Communists on the Soviet party up until its dissolution.
Three months after the invasion, the United States extended assistance to the Soviet Union through its Lend-Lease Act of March 1941.
Before September 1941, trade between the United States and the Soviet Union had been conducted primarily through the Soviet Buying Commission in the United States.
Lend-Lease was the most visible sign of wartime cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union.
About $11 billion in war materiel was sent to the Soviet Union under that program.
Additional assistance came from United States Russian War Relief and the Red Cross.
About seventy percent of the aid reached the Soviet Union via the Persian Gulf through Iran; the remainder went across the Pacific to Vladivostok and across the North Atlantic to Murmansk.
Lend-Lease materiel was welcomed by the Soviet Union, and President Roosevelt attached the highest priority to using it to keep the Soviet Union in the war against Germany.
Nevertheless, the program did not prevent friction from developing between the Soviet Union and the other members of the anti-Hitler alliance.
The Soviet Union was annoyed at what seemed to it to be a long delay by the allies in opening a “second front” of the Allied offensive against Germany.
As the war in the east turned in favor of the Soviet Union, and despite the successful Allied landings in Normandy in 1944, the earlier friction intensified over irreconcilable differences about postwar aims within the antiAxis coalition.
Lend-Lease helped the Soviet Union push the Germans out of its territory and Eastern Europe, thus accelerating the end of the war.
With Stalin's takeover of Eastern Europe, the wartime alliance ended, and the Cold War began.
The guns of distant battles fell silent long ago, but unanswered questions concerning United States servicemen missing in action and unrepatriated prisoners of war continue to concern the nation.
Recently, the missing and prisoners of war from the Vietnam War have been the focus of attention.
Through such efforts and additional cooperation, the fate of those missing in the Cold War may become known as well.
Russian news reports tell of a United States B-29 aircraft shot down by Soviet interceptors over the Baltic Sea in April 1950.
One of the Soviet pilots who downed the B-29 reported that the aircraft was recovered from the sea, but the fate of the crew is unknown.
The history of warfare cruelly suggests that some questions concerning the missing in action and prisoners of war will never be answered.
Nevertheless, candor, goodwill, and a spirit of cooperation on all sides can minimize such questions.
The opening of archives is a step forward in getting at the truth which can clear up the confusion and suspicion created in the past.
After the war, disputes between the Soviet Union and the Western democracies, particularly over the Soviet takeover of East European states, led Winston Churchill to warn in 1946 that an “iron curtain” was descending through the middle of Europe.
For his part, Joseph Stalin deepened the estrangement between the United States and the Soviet Union when he asserted in 1946 that World War II was an unavoidable and inevitable consequence of “capitalist imperialism” and implied that such a war might reoccur.
The Cold War was a period of East-West competition, tension, and conflict short of full-scale war, characterized by mutual perceptions of hostile intention between military-political alliances or blocs.
There were real wars, sometimes called “proxy wars” because they were fought by Soviet allies rather than the USSR itself—along with competition for influence in the Third World, and a major superpower arms race.
After Stalin's death, East-West relations went through phases of alternating relaxation and confrontation, including a cooperative phase during the 1960s and another, termed detente, during the 1970s.
A final phase during the late 1980s and early 1990s was hailed by President Mikhail Gorbachev, and especially by the president of the new postCommunist Russian republic, Boris Yeltsin, as well as by President George Bush, as beginning a partnership between the two states that could address many global problems.
After Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev stated in 1956 that imperialism and capitalism could coexist without war because the Communist system had become stronger.
The Geneva Summit of 1955 among Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and the United States, and the Camp David Summit of 1959 between Eisenhower and Khrushchev raised hopes of a more cooperative spirit between East and West.
In 1963 the United States and the Soviet Union signed some confidence-building agreements, and in 1967 President Lyndon Johnson met with Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei Kosygin in Glassboro, New Jersey.
Interspersed with such moves toward cooperation, however, were hostile acts that threatened broader conflict, such as the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 and the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia of 1968.
But the Soviet stance toward the United States became less overtly hostile in the early 1970s.
Negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union resulted in summit meetings and the signing of strategic arms limitation agreements.
Brezhnev proclaimed in 1973 that peaceful coexistence was the normal, permanent, and irreversible state of relations between imperialist and Communist countries, although he warned that conflict might continue in the Third World.
In the late 1970s, growing internal repression and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan led to a renewal of Cold War hostility.
Soviet views of the United States changed once again after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in early 1985.
Arms control negotiations were renewed, and President Reagan undertook a new series of summit meetings with Gorbachev that led to arms reductions and facilitated a growing sympathy even among Communist leaders for more cooperation and the rejection of a class-based, conflict-oriented view of the world.
With President Yeltsin's recognition of independence for the other republics of the former USSR and his launching of a fullscale economic reform program designed to create a market economy, Russia was pledged at last to overcoming both the imperial and the ideological legacies of the Soviet Union.
The Soviets, opposed ideologically to the capitalist values of the United States, had much to say.
