I’m Steve Ember This week in our series, we continue the story of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy.
Kennedy, a Democrat, defeated Republican Vice President Richard Nixon in one of the closest elections in United States history.
On April seventeenth, armed Cuban exiles tried to invade Cuba, less one hundred fifty kilometers from the American state of Florida.
Their goal was to overthrow the island's communist leader, Fidel Castro.
In nineteen fifty-nine he and his guerrilla forces had overthrown Fulgencio Batista, the president who was supported by the United 2 States.
The last administration, under President Dwight Eisenhower, had planned the invasion.
After the failure, some Americans again wondered if the forty-three-year-old president had enough experience to lead the nation.
In May nineteen sixty-one, Kennedy went to Paris and met with French President Charles de Gaulle.
Kennedy visited France with his wife Jacqueline, who spoke French and had studied there.
In June, Kennedy met in Vienna, Austria, with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
He threatened to have the East Germans block all movement into and out of the Allied-controlled western half of Berlin.
In November, the East Germans, with Soviet support, started building the Berlin Wall to separate east and west.
President Kennedy quickly announced a large increase in American military forces in Germany.
On October twenty-second, nineteen sixty-two, President Kennedy made an announcement to the American people.
Several of them include medium range ballistic missiles, capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than one thousand nautical miles.
Kennedy and his national security advisers debated what to do about the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy decided to use a naval blockade -he called it a ""quarantine"" -to prevent any more Soviet ships from reaching Cuba.
Khrushchev demanded a promise that the United States would not invade Cuba.
He promised that the United States would remove its Jupiter missiles based in Turkey, after the crisis was over.
But it ended peacefully when the Soviets agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba, and turned their ships around.
In Asia, the Kennedy administration tried to fight communism in Vietnam by increasing the number of American military advisers there.
The United States and the Soviet Union did make some progress on arms control.
In nineteen sixty-three, the two countries agreed to ban tests of nuclear weapons except underground.
Kennedy also had to deal with domestic issues, including discrimination against blacks.
His brother Robert was attorney general, the nation's top law enforcement official.
The Justice Department took legal action against states in the South that violated laws on voting rights.
The administration also supported a voter registration campaign to sign up more 5 black voters.
Robert Kennedy repeatedly called on National Guard troops to protect blacks when they tried to register to vote or attend white schools.
President Kennedy said the situation was causing a moral crisis in America.
He decided it was time to propose a new civil rights law that would guarantee equal treatment for blacks in public places and jobs.
Congress did not pass a wide-reaching civil rights bill until nineteen sixty-four.
The dispute might have affected his chances for re-election in nineteen sixty-four.
AP President Kennedy rides in a motorcade with his wife, Jacqueline, moments before he was shot and killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 Kennedy arrived in Dallas in the late morning of November twenty-second.
The president and his wife were seated in the back of an open-topped car as his motorcade drove through the city.
In Dallas, Texas, three shots were fired at President Kennedy's motorcade in downtown Dallas.
Lee Harvey Oswald worked in a building near where Kennedy had been shot.
He had lived for a while in the Soviet Union and had tried to become a Soviet citizen.
He worked for a committee that supported the communist government in Cuba.
AP Lee Harvey Oswald at police headquarters in Dallas Police questioned Oswald about the shooting of President Kennedy.
He said he shot Oswald to prevent the Kennedy family from having to live through a trial.
The chief justice of the United States, Earl Warren, led the investigation.
In its report, the Warren commission said that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone.
AP The eternal flame honoring President Kennedy at Arlington National Cemetery President Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery, across the Potomac River from Washington.
You can find our series online with transcripts, MP3s, podcasts, and pictures at voaspecialenglish.com.
I’m Steve Ember, inviting you to join us again next week for THE MAKING OF A NATION -American history in VOA Special English.
