He was telling us off for surrounding ourselves with people who look and sound like ourselves.
Even the best companies in our sector aren’t anywhere near equal in gender mix at that level.
And the fact that they make our mix of people more diverse strengthens the teams working together immeasurably.
There isn’t a business in the media and advertising sector that can be complacent about the proportionate mix of its workforce in terms of BAME diversity.
Without doubt we need to work harder at this, and without doubt it will pay dividends in terms of making the business stronger.
Meanwhile, and in addition, even if we look and sound alike, we can stop agreeing with each other.
The first televised presidential debate between JFK and Nixon, said to have changed the course of politics as image became more important than it had ever been to getting elected.
Fifty-five years ago the CIA launched a strike against Fidel Castro, the Soviet-backed leader of Cuba and the ouster of the US-backed President General Batista.
American trained troops were overwhelmed by Castro's army, and swiftly surrendered.
As a response Castro requested Soviet nuclear missiles be placed in Cuba to deter future harassment.
When the news broke in America of Soviet missiles being installed 90 miles from Florida a crisis began.
A United States blockade began, and so did long and very tense negotiations.
Then for 13 days in October 1962 the situation worsened and the world was on the brink of nuclear disaster.
In the deliberations in the White House during this period various options were considered.
These included bombing the missile sites and a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
United States defence secretary Robert McNamara said, ""I thought it was the last Saturday I'd ever see"" when on 27 October an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba and the United States invasion force was prepared.
Afterwards JFK talked about the crucial importance of challenging your colleagues, not just your opponents.
This sounds like reflection from a man who was in the centre of conflicting advice, and a furious and crucial debate.
Whilst it's unlikely that you're about to face decision-making in your next meeting that is a fraction of the importance of the Oval Office discussions during that October, it's useful to bear in mind that there's nothing healthy about consensus.
If your office culture means you're surrounded by people who don't challenge you, then you're never going to get to a good decision.
It's irrelevant whether the lack of challenge comes from niceness and kindness or fear and trembling.
Either way it's dangerous – for your business, your career, and your customers and clients.
Facebook Twitter Linkedin Instagram Youtube Help and Information About us Contact us Membership information Register Renew Membership Email sign up Advertise FAQs Accessibility Editorial complaints International Campaign US Campaign Asia Pacific Campaign India Campaign Middle East Campaign Turkey PRWeek US PRWeek Asia Medical Marketing & Media Site Hubs Media Brands Agencies Campaign Insight Campaign Jobs © Haymarket Media Group Ltd.
