The author cites a document, which she admits is of dubious origin, to illustrate the venal and predatory character of the Jesuits, who were encouraged to use all means to collect the last wills of ‘‘wealthy widows’’ and to persuade other benefactors to offer gifts for their schools and properties.
The author also underlines the incongruity between the Jesuits’ vow of poverty and their corporate wealth.
In another section she also points to the contrast between Jesuit extravagance in their churches and liturgies and the Christian model of simplicity.
A better knowledge of Jesuit origins and history would have helped at this point.
Jesuits, for example, distinguished themselves from other orders by their emphasis on obedience.
Individual Jesuits were expected to lead austere lives (and colonial literature seems to bear this out) in the service of their educational works and churches, which they wanted to be among the best.
Finally, the author lists the Jesuits’ ‘‘religious fanaticism’’ among the reasons for their expulsion.
She would have done well to explain what is meant by ‘‘religious fanaticism,’’ especially since the Jesuits, who were practical businessmen and were well versed in the humanities, were not considered ‘‘fanatics’’ by their friends and students, only by the enemies who expelled them.
The author is on surer, and more documented, ground when she cites James D Riley’s pioneering work on Jesuit haciendas in Mexico to discuss the Jesuits’ treatment of their slaves.
For example, the Jesuits favored marriages in order to guarantee stability.
The author also notes that slaves on Jesuit haciendas probably worked less than slaves on sugar plantations in the nineteenth century, when the modern efﬁciency mentality was fully applied.
Other facets—such as health and longevity—are also documented and included in this work.
This is unquestionably a very useful history of Cuba’s sugar economy in the late colonial period; it is less helpful for understanding the Jesuits themselves.
Jeffrey Klaiber Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica, Lima Tomás Diez Acosta.
He has used Cuban and American archives and the Fidel Castro–Nikita Khrushchev 1962 letters that were published in 1990.
The Soviets, who were not ready to die for Cuba and world socialism, left Cuba out of the decision to withdraw not only most of their troops, but the missiles and IL-28 jets.
Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis), Diez saves his ire for the United States.
Hence this book gives Castro’s version of events, which is important for an American audience that has focused on reactions of the Soviets and the United States.
In 1962 the Cubans were being harassed by John Kennedy’s administration.
In addition, Cuba had been expelled from the Organization of American States; was negotiating over the fate of the Cuban exiles taken prisoner in Cuba during a U.S.-backed invasion of the Bay of Pigs in 1961; was facing a steppedup United States trade embargo; and was being sabotaged and terrorized by Operation Mongoose, a covert operation against Cuba headed by Robert Kennedy.
Soviet and Cuban intelligence took seriously the threat of an imminent United States invasion.
This threat loomed larger during the ‘‘Caribbean Crisis’’ (as the Soviets called it) and led to Castro’s accepting Soviet missiles, rocket launchers, and 40,000 troops on Cuban soil.
Soviet acquiescence to United States demands left Cuba vulnerable to a United States attack.
United States actions are simplistically categorized as sheer imperialism.
Diez does not understand United States perceptions of Cuban behavior in the cold war context.
He forgets that the Soviet Union also was imperialist, as Castro charged in his 1968 speech, kept secret because Cuba depended on Soviet aid.
In the end, both larger countries ignored Cuba, the fate of smaller nonnuclear countries when superpowers lock horns.
For the Soviets, rapprochement with the United States took precedence over dying for the Cuban cause.
From the beginning, the Soviets ignored Cuba, discarding Castro’s advice to publicly announce the placement of missiles in Cuba.
Reviews Clinton to loosen the embargo, attempts that were rebuffed by Castro.
The nation’s white imaginary has conceived and constructed the mulatta as a standin for Cuba’s hybrid/syncretic ethnic composition.
Hacia una historia de la zarzuela cubana uses the mulatta as a unifying national symbol.
The author uses the term zarzuela to refer to all forms of lyric theater that have alternating spoken and sung scenes in their dramatic development.
Rather than starting in 1927 with the classical Cuban zarzuelas, the author traces their development from 1868 with the vernacular’s teatro bufo.
He thus underscores the connections between the nineteenth-century one-act farces geared to the audience’s ‘‘popular sensibility’’ and the twentieth-century classic zarzuelas such as Cecilia Valdés.
The ﬁrst section comprises six chapters in which the author presents a sociohistorical analysis of the four periods in which he divides the development of the zarzuela in Cuba.
It is followed by two important documentary sections that are an attempt to deﬁne the very corpus of such history.
The ﬁrst documentary section includes a transcription of important related documents such as newspaper reviews of different zarzuelas.
The second one is a complete repertoire with technical information of the zarzuelas produced in Cuba between 1931 and 1936, the focus of Río Prado’s study.
Given the lack of existing bibliography in this area, as well as the poor state of Cuba’s periodical publications, which form the basis of the study, these last two sections are an important addition for future critical studies in the ﬁeld.
