If the President and Government of the United States would give their assurances that the United States would itself not take part in an attack upon Cuba and would restrain others from such action; if you recall your Navy – this would immediately change everything… Then the question of armaments would also be obviated, because when there is not threat, armaments are only a burden for any people.
This would also change the approach to the question of destroying not only the armaments which you call offensive, but of every other kind of armament… Let us therefore display statesmanlike wisdom.
You will declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its tropps and will not support any other forces which might intend to invade Cuba.
Then the necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will be obviated.
The olive branch was extended but it took almost twelve hours to be translated, transmitted, and reach the President.
Meanwhile, U Thant, not aware of the message from Khrushchev or the information that Khrushchev held regarding potential invasion, continued his efforts of diplomacy, this time with Castro.
Cuba represented the unpredictable wild card in the crisis at this point.
Castro determined that it would be better to martyr Cuba than to back down from the aggressor.
At that point, time had expired and a solution had to be found quickly to ensure war did not break out.
Castro, further aggravated the situation by issuing orders to his general staff that, effective Saturday, 27 October, Cuban anti-aircraft batteries were authorized to fire on any breaches of Cuban airspace.
Castro represented the most dangerous participant in this crisis and this action threatened to upset the tenuous balance between the United States and the Soviet Union.
To this point, the Soviets and the Cubans were passively defensive and no shots had been fired.
Ambassador Hare concurred with Ambassador Finletter’s response that removing the Jupiters from Turkey would damage US-Turkish relations as the Turks placed great confidence in the missiles.
In Cuba, Soviet General Pliyev had the authority to arm the tactical nuclear weapons and he reported that by the 26th all strategic weapons systems were operational.
He did not give the order to arm any of the weapons, but it would only take three and a half hours to arm a missile and fuel it for launch.
Friday morning, John Scali, Washington correspondent for ABC News, received a call from Feklisov asking for an urgent meeting.
Scali told Feklisov that a landing in Cuba was imminent, and an offer was proposed.
By that afternoon, Roger Hilsman was aware of the encounter and assumed that it was a backchannel message to the United States.
He and Secretary Rusk agreed that if this were a message, then quick response was required to ensure the Soviets knew the United States’ government was considering it seriously.
Scali and Feklisov met for the second time that day at 7:30m. near the Soviet embassy.
Feklisov added a caveat about the UN watching United States troop withdrawals, but Scali replied that he was not in a position to comment on this aspect.
The United States wanted to ensure that the Soviets were convinced that the United States was willing to go to war over this issue, but would not do so recklessly.
Scali relayed to Feklisov that the United States could agree to the Soviet demand that it pledge not to invade Cuba, but the missiles had to be removed.
This represented the first time the two proposals from opposing sides were joined.
The next morning, the Executive Committee learned of the details of this second meeting as the 27 October letter from Khrushchev arrived at the State Department.
