In a world of growing specialization, the Institute emphasized broad topics and brought together historians and political scientists.
The Institute did, however, make a point of inviting some of the younger Russian and even Chinese scholars to Norway.
At least they were young when they first came; they may not be so young now.
The increasingly global approach of the Nobel Peace Prize should also be reflected in the focus of the Institute's research program.
The purpose of the research program was to take away any excuse the selected fellows might have had for not doing good research.
The Nobel Institute provided them with a sparsely furnished office equipped with modern means of communication, a superb library, interesting colleagues, and a professional staff.
The only obligation the fellows had was to present a research paper at the biweekly research seminar and to take part in the discussion about the papers of the other fellows.
And for many years virtually all the leading books on the Cold War were produced by scholars who had spent at least some time at the Nobel Institute.
It was decided to invite a group of them back to discuss what we had learned during that time.
So, from June 22-6, 2011, about twenty-five of us met in Nyvagar in scenic Lofoten in Northern Norway to present our papers.
As always, the papers were available in advance so that we could concentrate on spirited discussion.
The current volume presents the heavily revised papers from this Nobel Symposium.
Symposium is Greek for ""drinking together""—we certainly did that, as well as swimming in the ocean way inside the Arctic Circle.
Most unfortunately both of them were unable, for totally different reasons, to participate in the book project.
The editor would like to thank Asle Toje and Sigrid Langebrekke for their assistance before and during the symposium.
The Evolving Structure of World Politics, 1991-2011 16 Stewart Patrick 2.
The Past Geir Lundestad A new world order Every now and then new international orders are created.
Events take place that have dramatic consequences for the international structure.
The biggest and most dramatic of these changes are associated with wars between the major powers.
Thus, the First World War resulted in the defeat of no fewer than four long-lasting empires.
The Austro-Hungarian empire was dissolved; the Ottoman empire was transformed into modern Turkey; the Russian empire became the Soviet Union; the German empire was pronounced the aggressor, cut down in size, and became the Weimar Republic.
The two leading powers were now, in many ways, the United States and the Soviet Union.
Yet, Woodrow Wilson was forced to see his United States retreat into isolation again, at least in security matters vis-a-vis Europe.
The country would not join the president's much cherished League of Nations.
The new communist Soviet Union in part chose to isolate itself from the capitalist world, and, in part, was kept in isolation by the other leading powers.
The Second World War led to even larger changes in the international structure.
Their populations had to be 're-educated' before they could be let loose again.
West Germany, Italy, and Japan all became close allies of the United States.
Britain and France were among the victors, but had both been badly damaged, although in very different ways.
The fall of France in the spring of 1940 had been so sudden and complete that even President Charles de Gaulle could not win back France's traditional place in the international order.
The Past the Second World War, but the war had turned the old imperial power into the debtor of the United States, not only economically, but also militarily and even culturally.
It turned out, surprisingly quickly, that the promises London made to India could not be held back even from the British colonies in Africa.
The other colonial powers also had to adjust to what Britain had conceded.
The United States and the Soviet Union, the two powers that had made such dramatic but rather brief appearances in 1917, were now prepared to play their full roles.
So complete was the defeat of the Old World that Western and Eastern Europe were now put under the administration of the two new powers.
The United States ruled relatively benignly in the West, while the Soviet Union had to use blunter instruments in the East.
The Cold War did not result in direct war between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Iron Curtain meant the separation of the Eastern and the Western parts.
True, outside Europe the two superpowers fought many wars by proxy—from Korea and Vietnam, to Angola, Ethiopia, and Afghanistan.
In Niall Ferguson's phrase, while there was no Third World War, there was indeed the Third World's War.
The long-term story of the Cold War appeared to be the rise of the Soviet Union to at least military equality with the United States.
In the 1970s, the agreements about strategic weapons were based on this equality.
Like the United States, the Soviet Union had gradually acquired the capability to intervene in the most distant corners of the world.
The sad reality for the Kremlin, however, was that it was simply impossible for the Soviet Union to be the military equal of the United States when it was lagging so far behind in every other respect, particularly economically.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the economic growth of the Soviet Union, which had been so promising in the earlier decades, came to a screeching halt.
The United States had been the leading economic power in the world, in terms of the size of its production, since around 1870.
Only after the Second World War was the United States prepared to play a role fully in accordance with its vast resources.
Yet, Washington's One World visions were always limited by the role of the Soviet Union.
During the Cold War there were at least two worlds—the one dominated by the United States, ""the free world,"" and that dominated by the Soviet Union, the communist world.
In the first decades after 1945 the expansion of the Soviet Union did indeed appear to be the most striking phenomenon in 2 Ceir Lundestad international relations.
In the 1950s, Mao Tse-tung did definitely ""lean to one side,” the Soviet one.
Only in hindsight did we see that the expansion of the United States may have been even more dramatic, in Western Europe, in Japan and the Pacific, and in many other parts of the world.
With the Soviet Union in great trouble, even after Mikhail Gorbachev launched his economic reforms in 1985, and the country abolished entirely in December 1991, the United States had a new freedom to act.
This was the background for the Gulf War in 1991 and the Iraq War in 2003.
If the Soviet Union had continued in existence, these wars would both have been too risky.
The United States also intervened against Serbia, both over Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, in Somalia, in Haiti, and in Afghanistan after September 11,2001.
The primary restraint on Washington was now its own doubts about what its role should really be.
Bush who had stood so triumphant in 1991 after the victory in the Cold War and the Gulf War.
Despite the celebration of Mikhail Gorbachev for his essential contributions in ending the Cold War, as reflected for instance in his receiving the Nobel Peace Prize all by himself in 1990—neither Ronald Reagan nor Bush was included with him—in power terms the essence of the new situation was the domination of the United States and the West.
The old structures were all kept; they were simply updated to include the now liberated countries of 1 George W Bush and Brent Scowcroft, A World Transformed , 253.
Efforts by Gorbachev and French president Francois Mitterrand to create new European institutions were turned down by Washington, with the strong support of most European governments.
It took a little longer for these countries to qualify for membership of the European Union , but soon they were members even there.
Bill Clinton tried to combine this reversal of history with good relations with Russia.
He cultivated his friendship with Boris Yeltsin; he brought Russia into the G7, which then became the G8; Russia entered into a partnership agreement with NATO; credits and loans were given to Moscow, although more from the new Germany than from the United States.
Yet nothing could hide the simple fact that Russia was no longer a country of the first order.
Many academics in the United States warned against the American expansion into former Soviet territory, but even Russia had, to a large extent, collapsed.
When you ended socialism and planning, you produced chaos, not capitalism.
As always, the end of a major conflict produces optimism about the future.
After the fall of the Soviet Union and the American triumph in the Gulf War, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell had declared that ""I am running out of enemies.
In more general terms, the transition from the Cold War to the post-Cold War was relatively bloody.
The number of wars after the Second World War actually reached a climax in the early 1990s, as could be illustrated by the numerous wars in the former Yugoslavia and the Caucasus.
The highest number, fifty-three wars at the same time, was recorded in 1992.
As Stewart Patrick also makes clear in his contribution in the present volume, since then there has been a decline in the number of wars.
Since 1999 the number of wars going on has been in the thirties, with the lowest number, thirty, reached in 2010.
Between the years 2004 and 2010 only one minor interstate conflict was actually recorded, between Djibouti and Eritrea in 2008.
Yet it should be hastily added that, of the thirty conflicts in 2010, nine were ""internationalized,"" meaning that there was support from the outside to one or more of the warring parties.
This is actually the highest number of such ""internationalized"" conflicts since the Second World War, and included the major wars in Afghanistan and Iraq/ There are many reasons for the decline in the number of wars, relative as it is.
Decolonization is over, and virtually all colonies have become independent.
With the end of the Cold War the interest in intervention from the outside has been reduced.
The United Nations has become increasingly interested in, and able to control, war.
The number of democracies in the world has increased, and on the whole democracies are more peaceful than authoritarian states.
A norm against war and territorial expansion has been evolving in many parts of the world.
Finally, in some cases, economic growth may have improved the situation and even made war less likely.
The seeds of a new historical period are always found in the earlier period.
And elements from the earlier period almost always linger on in the new period.
This was certainly the case with the years after the Cold War where the changes were less immediately dramatic than in many earlier periods.
Although the major powers moved up and down in the international power hierarchy, the powers as such remained the same, with the exception of the Soviet Union that was transformed into Russia and many smaller states.
The years since the end of the Cold War are neatly divided into two parts of almost equal length, before and after September 11, 2001.
While the years from 1990 to 2001 are often referred to as the post-Cold War years, the later years have frequently been described as the age of terror.
In the latter case we are not referring to a completed historical epoch.
Writing history in the middle of a process presents many different challenges.
It related the current to the earlier period; it explicitly stated that something undefined followed something that had been much more clearly defined.
This led to a rather frantic search for a better definition of the 1990s, both by the Clinton administration and by academic observers.
Kennan's ""containment"" had provided the definition of the heart of the Cold War.
In the present volume, most of the contributors have maintained the term ""Post-Cold War years"" for the 1990s—or even for the entire period from 1989 until the present.
All of the alternative terms did, however, tell us something important about the overall nature of the 1990s and even the later decades.
America was to be the assertive country; as always, the United States would provide the leadership.
It did so both in the 1990s under Clinton and, more directly—but definitely not more effectively—after the turn of the century, under George W Bush.
With the fall of the Soviet empire, democracy spread to most of the countries in Central and Eastern Europe.
The major hold outs, as far as democracy and human rights were concerned, were the Muslim, particularly the Arab, world, and China.
In 2011, the winds of change were finally affecting even the Arab countries in dramatic ways, particularly Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, and Syria.
In all of them, with the temporary exception of Syria, the old regime was overthrown, although with increasing costs in terms of human lives.
Much of history has even been described as one long process of globalization.
Thus, this process has been going on for a long time, although use of the term increased dramatically in the 1990s.
The spread of religions from the Middle East to the rest of the world, as seen with the Jewish, the Christian, and the Muslim faiths, illustrated the long-term perspective very clearly, as did the development of plagues and illnesses as well as economic cycles, particularly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The current papers were presented at a symposium in Lofoten, where the price of cod on the European continent has been decisive for the well-being of the inhabitants for about a thousand years.
The economies of the world were in many respects as integrated before the First World War as they were for many decades after the Second World War.
In some respects, they were much more integrated, as we see in how much easier it was for common people to move from one continent to another in the nineteenth century compared to the situation today, where all kinds of papers are needed to cross most international borders.
What was new about globalization in the 1990s and later was that the world did indeed become smaller.
Most of us were able to experience events live, at least through the media, as they happened virtually all around the world.
We could communicate instantly with each other in several different ways.
Enormous amounts of money constantly moved around seeking the best possible terms.
Intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations increased tremendously in numbers and influence.
And international norms were developing, such as the importance of human rights and even the protection of the peoples of the world against the most dramatic forms of exploitation.
Yet it is easy to exaggerate how comprehensive globalization has become.
Most of the big multinational states have been under separatist pressure.
The Soviet Union has been replaced by Russia and 14 other states; Yugoslavia has been broken into seven parts.
Separatism is strong in China, in India, in the United Kingdom, and in Canada.
The United States, which had its own civil war, is virtually the only really big state where the territorial unit is not questioned.
True, regional organizations have proliferated in most parts of the world.
Yet, even in the EU—the strongest of the new regional units—polls clearly indicate that the attachment to the nation state is far stronger than to the European level.
Despite the growth of the international market, most production, by far, is still done for the national market.
The vast majority of people still study and work in their home countries.
The development of international norms and standards is still hesitant; most countries insist, very firmly, on their national sovereignty.
That goes not only for China and the United States, but for most of the rising regional powers.
While there is confusion about what to call the 1990s, after September 11, 2001, the focus has been very much on terrorism.
There had been several terrorist attacks in the 1990s, but the dramatic new focus came with the attacks of September 11.
It doesn't matter to me how long it takes, we're going to rout out terror wherever it may exist.
Even in 2011 it has been estimated that there are about six non-fiction books being published per week with terrorism in the title.
Yet, like war, terrorism had been part of history since time immemorial.
The histories of Russia and Ireland provide many examples, as do the more recent histories of Spain, Italy, and Germany.
After September 11, terrorist attacks have proliferated virtually all over the world.
Yet, whatever the explanation might be, after September 11 there has been no major terrorist attack in the United States.
While there is broad international cooperation against terrorism, this struggle has not really become the catch7 Philip Zelikow, ""US Strategic Planning in 2001-02,"" in Leffler and Legro, In Uncertain Times, 102, 104.
While such comparisons may provide a broader perspective, accidents are still clearly different from conscious political acts.
Bathtub drowning comes in single accidents; terrorism in dramatic and terrible political acts.
Politicians can do little about the first category; they neglect the second at their peril.
Yet the two phenomena were not necessarily connected, as the extended wars in the Democratic Republic of Congo illustrated.
There, hundreds of thousands of lives had been lost in the wars that had convulsed the country since the mid-1990s.
Still, this had little or no influence on most of the rest of the world.
Yet modern, effective states were a new development, and states had failed throughout history; most states of the world were, in fact, becoming increasingly better organized.
In the current volume there is no general agreement on what we should call either the 1990s or the later years.
The search for the most appropriate terms to describe these years will have to go on.
Japan was still important, as were the EU and even Germany, France, and Britain by themselves.
Decolonization was the competing theme in the first decades after the Second World War; globalization and fragmentation might be a somewhat alternative view on the most recent years.
After the Second World War, economic growth had come to be taken as given.
Politicians could apparently promise growth year in, year out, and it would happen.
A feeling had developed among economic experts that through the different economic instruments at their disposal the traditional financial fluctuations would be fine-tuned out of existence.
If economic growth would slow down, or even stop entirely, it would have dramatic consequences for relations both between and inside countries.
With a longer perspective we may, perhaps, be better able to understand how these various alternative processes were related.
The contributions in the current volume The first three chapters deal with various aspects of the overall international level as it has developed since the end of the Cold War.
To cope with this daunting global agenda, states increasingly turned not only to formal treaty-based organizations, but to more flexible arrangements of collective action.
Twenty Years of Research on the Causes of War,"" John Oneal provides strong reasons for optimism about the future.
The earlier emphasis in the study of international relations on a realist orientation has allegedly been replaced by a liberal understanding.
Based on the summing up of a vast empirical base, Oneal strongly argues that democratic rule is indeed more peaceful than more authoritarian forms.
As democracy spreads, we should therefore expect the world to become more peaceful.
And growing interdependence, in the form of increased international trade, should have a similar effect.
Democracy, capitalism, and globalization are all likely to be strengthened in the future, providing the basis for this optimism.
While Mueller shares Oneal's optimism, the two prominent political scientists definitely disagree about the reasons for this optimism.
This aversion is relatively new; it basically arose with the reaction to the horrors of the First World War.
Experiences in the former Yugoslavia and between India and Pakistan also indicate that the relationship between democracy and peace is far less absolute than Oneal suggests.
The 'State,' the 'West,' and the Cold War"" against the pervasive feeling in the United States that unhampered capitalism won the victory for the United States in the Cold War.
Not only in Western Europe, but also in the United States, the role of the government increased tremendously in the decades after the Second World War.
The government insured minimal social provisions, spurred research and innovation, and dispensed compensatory income in hard times.
The United States was far superior to the Soviet Union in striking the right balance between the private and public elements.
The chapter is also clearly relevant in the discussion about how the United States should be handling its economic future.
Four Ideas that Shaped the Twentieth-Century World,"" Jeremi Suri, in line with many recent writings on international relations, stresses the importance of ideology.
After the end of the Cold War, Washington drifted away especially from collective security and solvency.
The task today is to articulate ideas that are relevant for the challenges of our time.
Deterrence forced both sides to work with greater restraint and responsibility than they would otherwise have done.
The end of the Cold War has now deprived the United States of its main mission.
The new Russia is struggling with some of the same problems as did the Soviet Union, and the United States and the West have clearly taken advantage of Russia's weakness by filling in power vacuums left by the Soviet collapse.
Pechatnov expresses the hope that America's present problems can bring some much needed humility and openness, and new ideas that will make it possible to break away from the Cold War and its legacy.
How the End of the Third World and the End of the Cold War Are Linked,"" Odd Arne Westad argues that the entire Third World project collapsed in the 1970s and 1980s.
While Westad has elsewhere argued strongly that local factors have not been given their due influence in accounts about the Cold War, 11 he still sees the Cold War as ""probably the predominant feature of the international system in the latter half of the twentieth century.
Yet, nuclear weapons have been woven into regional politics, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and on the Korean peninsula.
A few new states are getting such weapons, yet some major states are choosing not to develop them, and a few have even given up their weapons.
The United States and the nuclear powers have to do more to reduce their numbers toward zero.
Yet, while the nuclear arms race did not cause the Cold War, it put its distinct mark on it.
In his optimistic conclusion, also compared to Holloway, Njolstad argues that ""Arms races, it seems, are less of a threat to international peace than to the economic wellbeing of nations""—although the latter may, of course, be serious enough.
A substantial part of the Lofoten symposium was devoted to the status of the world's leading powers and the roles they play.
There was broad agreement that while the United States had experienced relative decline, it was still the leading power in the world.
Its economic growth has been unrivalled, but there was skepticism that China would be able to challenge the United States for the leading role, at least in the foreseeable future.
Russia's role is discussed, in part, as a continuation of its Cold War role.
It is facing considerable problems in transforming itself into a modern state politically and economically.
While Japan is still an important economic power, the last twenty years have represented a period of standstill.
While countries such as India and Brazil are clearly rising, they still have a distance to go before they become powers of the first rank.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World,"" Jussi Hanhimaki argues that while the predictions in so many of the earlier debates about America's fall have proved wrong, this is ""in part because these debates have had—and continue to have—strong policy relevance.
America continues to be the leading global power and a key advocate of the prevalent liberal international order based on growing interconnectedness.
The challenges are not primarily the rise of China and the other BRIC countries, but whether the United States can continue wielding influence and leadership with fewer resources.
Twenty Difficult Years,"" Vladislav Zubok addresses the question of why Putin and his regime emerged in Russia.
He points instead to contemporary and immediate factors as the crucial ones.
So did the acute degradation of the elites in the post-Soviet environment and the ""generational skip” when new graduates replaced the depleted Soviet intelligentsia and middle groups.
The abrupt transition from old to new destroyed the base for political reform in Russia.
Zubok also thinks that the West acted with little wisdom and energy toward the new Russia.
For decades, the EU and its predecessors were able to combine a geographical widening and a deepening of content.
With the EU prospering in the 1990s, the Maastricht treaty of 1991-2 at first appeared to be a great success.
In the new millennium the EU was, however, facing increasingly bigger problems.
It proved increasingly difficult to work out a common foreign and security policy; the EU quite simply did not become the global power many had hoped.
Even more seriously, the increasing economic problems of some of the EU countries raised questions about the EU's sustainability that most observers thought had already been answered in the affirmative.
Yet the outcome, he suggests, could well be another round of muddling through.
China's dramatic rise has probably been the most striking change in international affairs in recent years.
In foreign policy, China has been increasingly incorporated into the international economic order, while at the same time insisting that aspects of this order be changed.
First, while there have been major changes in the international economic system, these may not necessarily add up to a power shift.
Second, the United States and the West still possess more capabilities and assets than many observers now seem to think.
Third, Cox even suggests that we should stop thinking of the international system in terms of certain powers and regions rising and falling in some zero-sum game, and instead focus on the many ways in which all of the major states in the new world order are compelled to play by a very similar set of rules drawn up in the West.
This spread of the West will not resolve all differences, but it will nevertheless represent some sort of common club or society, although with different kinds of membership.
In his conclusion, the editor then speculates on what might become the key dimensions in international relations in the future.
China is likely to overtake the United States in terms of the size of its production—a dramatic phenomenon, since the United States had had the world's largest gross domestic product since around 1870.
Still, China, with four times the population of the US, will remain a relatively poor country.
The United States also holds a larger lead over China in military terms and, quite significantly, in terms of its allies.
While the United States has several of the world's leading countries as its allies, China remains quite isolated internationally.
More generally, it is true that the world is becoming increasingly globalized and that international organizations are being strengthened at both the international and the regional levels.
Still, the nation state is likely to remain the basic unit in the international system.
Virtually all the new great powers, with China and India in the lead, are rather explicit on this point.
The United States is also rather unwilling to give up any of its sovereignty.
On a moral note, the editor concludes that despite the mass killings of the twentieth century, in recent years the world has made progress in the reduced number of wars in the world, in the increased number of democracies, and in the reduction of poverty.
This progress could well continue in the future, although the financial crisis after 2008 indicates the tenuous nature of predictions in general.
The collapse of the Soviet Union appeared to vindicate the Western model of democracy and free markets, and raised the prospect, at least in some United States minds, of a more peaceful ""new world order"" under benevolent American hegemony.
By 2011, globalization and other forces had transformed the structure of world politics by altering the security, economic, normative, and institutional context in which sovereign states operated, and complicated the challenge of building a cooperative world order.
These major structural changes included the decline of American hegemony; a shift of global economic power to emerging economies; the declining incidence of war; the rise of a new transnational security agenda; the persistence of authoritarian rule and the rise of failing states as major strategic concerns; the emergence of regionalism and regional organizations; and evolving norms of sovereignty and non-intervention.
To cope with this daunting global agenda, states increasingly turned not only to formal treaty-based international organizations, but to more flexible arrangements of collective action.
The unipolar moment ""The structure of the international system is always oligopolistic,"" the great French political theorist Raymond Aron wrote in 1967.
He meant that world Stewart Patrick order has always depended on the managerial role of multiple great powers.
Aron, however, did not envision the international system that suddenly emerged in 1991.
The abrupt demise of the Soviet Union left the United States as the world's sole superpower.
The advent of the ""unipolar moment,"" as Charles Krauthammer christened it in Foreign Affairs , 1 was unprecedented in the history of the Westphalian state system, in at least two senses.
First, the new order emerged not in the aftermath of major interstate war, as in 1815, 1919, or 1945, but through the peaceful collapse of one major player.
Second, the new landscape left a single dominant power with no conceivable peer competitor.
Not even imperial Britain, at the height of its nineteenth-century maritime influence, had enjoyed such status.
Contrary to the assumptions of classical balance of power theory—and the predictions of some officials and academics 3 —US preponderance did not inspire the formation of a counter-hegemonic coalition, either in the form of ""hard"" or ""soft"" balancing.
During the 1990s, the overwhelming response was ""bandwagoning,"" as potential rivals sought to align themselves with United States power.
The Soviet Union had collapsed, leaving an anemic Russia and multiple successor states.
Europe, meanwhile, was mired in slow growth, preoccupied with German reunification and, more generally, absorbed with the deepening and enlargement of the European project.
Japan, so recently viewed as a rising challenger, was entering its ""lost"" decade of zero growth.
Finally, China was engaged with its own internal development and only beginning its meteoric rise.
Given this global correlation of forces, the determination of United States defense strategists to thwart any ""peer"" competitor 5 was irrelevant.
The ease with which the US-led coalition reversed Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait during 1991 reinforced this sense of United States omnipotence.
Bush heralded the advent of a ""new world order"" under benevolent American hegemony.
But it was not merely United States material power that deterred potential challengers.
It was also the open, liberal nature of the US-led hegemonic order, which proved more attractive than threatening to major centers of world power.
Pentagon would Preclude a Rival Superpower,” Washington Post, March 11, 1992; Barton Gellman, ""Pentagon Abandons Goal of Thwarting United States Rivals,” Washington Post, May 24, 1992.
The first, ""outside” order was bipolar and pit the United States and its allies against the Soviet Union and its satellites, with intense competition for the loyalties and resources of peripheral states.
The second, ""inside” order was liberal, and centered on core ""Western"" states, notably—North America, Western Europe, and Japan.
Relations among these states (and to a lesser degree other partners) were based on shared liberal principles, including common attachment to political democracy, market economics, and institutionalized cooperation, with multilateral regimes governing trade, security, and political relations.
In stark contrast to the Soviet system, this was no coercive ""empire,"" but a consensual system marked by consultation and compromise between the hegemon and its partners, who themselves enjoyed ample ""voice opportunities"" and were able to bargain over the norms and rules of Western order.
In return for shouldering disproportionate burdens, including in providing armed protection and promoting economic growth within an open capitalist world economy, the United States enjoyed a legitimate form of leadership, including authority to shape Western agendas, set the parameters of policy debates, and take the initiative in decision-making.
Reinforcing this optimism was the conviction, most palpable in the United States, that the defeat of communism had discredited the last serious ideological challenge to political and economic liberalism.
Francis Fukuyama expressed this sentiment most forcefully in a celebrated essay in The National Interest.
To be sure, ""history"" would continue as a succession of prosaic events—""one damn thing after another""—as Toynbee once said.
But the human experience would no longer be marked by the clash of universalist world views.
Certainly, the demise of the Soviet threat removed some of the security ""glue"" binding Western allies to Washington, reducing United States leverage.
The Origins, Crisis, and Transformation of the American World Order , 161.
Of course, the ""consensual"" nature of United States hegemony was far more consistent in the OECD core than in the developing world.
The Clinton administration encapsulated this vision in its 1994 A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement.
The strategy envisioned gradual incorporation of Cold War adversaries and the developing world into an ever-expanding coalition of market democracies.
Throughout the 1990s, the United States worked to expand and consolidate major multilateral global and regional institutions and alliances.
With vigorous support from Washington, the 1990s witnessed advances in economic integration.
Globalization accelerated, driven by advances in information and telecommunications technology, new financial instruments, deregulation, and the privatization of public sector assets under the Washington Consensus.
By 2000, it spent as much on defense as the next ten countries combined.
Clinton administration officials acknowledged the unique United States position, but sought to reassure the world that its power would be used beneficently, for all humanity.
As Secretary of State Madeleine Albright observed, the United States was the world's ""indispensable power,” one that ""stands taller and sees further into the future"" than other actors.
French foreign minister Hubert Vedrine fretted that the United States had become a “hyperpuissance"" , unbalanced by other international actors.
The United States was at peace and enjoyed good relations with all major centers of world power—not only with its allies in Western Europe and Japan, but also with Russia and China.
The United States, of course, has long possessed an ambivalent and selective attitude toward multilateral cooperation—a function of its overwhelming power, its exceptionalist political traditions, and its constitutional separation of powers.
Yet, from the presidency of Franklin D Roosevelt, the United States had promoted international institutions as the foundation for United States global leadership.
From the moment it assumed office, however, the George W Bush administration signaled its desire to escape from these historical constraints.
The new president presided over an administration deeply skeptical of the United Nations and other standing international organizations, alliances and treaties.
The attacks of September 11, 2001 accentuated these instincts, 15 reinforcing the administration's insistence on absolute freedom of action to defend national security.
In an age of catastrophic threats, other countries or international organizations could not be permitted to limit America's use of its massive military capabilities.
The rise of mass casualty terrorism and the proliferation of WMD meant that dangers could arise with little warning from non-state actors, rendering traditional models of deterrence obsolete.
Consequently the time-consuming process of multilateral diplomacy became a luxury the United States could no longer afford.
By erasing the comforts of time and distance, the new threat environment required a new national security strategy based on anticipation, speed, and flexibility.
The Causes and Consequences of United States Ambivalence,"" in Stewart Patrick and Shepard Forman , Multilateralism and United States Foreign Policy: Ambivalent Engagement , 1-44.
The Bush administration's 2002 National Security Strategy explicitly articulated a new doctrine of unilateral ""pre-emption,"" expanding traditional conceptions of imminence to include emerging catastrophic threats.
In effect, the new strategy embraced a doctrine not of ""pre-emption"" in the classic sense (as an enemy prepares to strike), but rather a doctrine of preventive war.
The administration seemed to be challenging international order, declaring itself unbound by traditional constraints on the use of force.
Not only would it serve as the unilateral guarantor of world order but, more radically, the country would lead a global democratic revolution.
The Bush administration's grand strategy was, in effect, one of Wilsonianism without international institutions.
The unilateralist thrust in United States foreign policy, especially the controversial doctrine of ""pre-emption,"" was deeply unsettling across the globe.
But it was the Iraq crisis of 2002-2003 that most damaged international confidence in a benevolent United States hegemony.
After failing to secure UN Security Council authorization for military action to end Iraq's suspected WMD program and enforce past UNSC resolutions, the United States and coalition partners launched Operation Iraqi Freedom.
On March 19, 2003, they invaded Iraq, despite the objections of close postwar allies like Germany and France.
The collapse of Security Council diplomacy reinforced Bush administration skepticism of UN-centered collective security, while leading many abroad to doubt that Washington would accept any constraints on its power.
It was unacceptable abroad, suggesting an America that wanted to ""rule,"" but not be bound by rules.
It was also unsustainable at home, promising to entangle the United States in unending overseas adventures that required it to bear disproportionate costs and risks.
Indeed, despite its instincts, the Bush administration wound up returning to the United Nations repeatedly over the next several years, not only to assist in the stabilization and recovery of Iraq, but also to address multiple trouble spots throughout the world—from Haiti, to Lebanon, to Sudan.
More enduring, arguably, was the Bush administration's distinct approach to multilateral cooperation itself.
Beyond its willingness to act alone, the administration preferred a selective and limited form of collective action, including the use of ""coalitions of the willing"" that could coalesce for discrete purposes.
First, the Bush administration believed that multilateralism must be a means to concrete foreign policy ends, rather than—as liberal internationalists seemed inclined to believe—an end in itself.
Second, the administration regarded many standing international institutions, including the United Nations, as hopelessly dysfunctional, given to lowest common denominator policymaking and reflecting a consensus often at odds with United States interests or ideals.
Third, conservatives within the administration regarded ""unaccountable"" international institutions and the expanding reach of international law as a growing threat to United States sovereignty and the supremacy of the Constitution.
Fourth, America's traditional multilateral alliances, notably NATO, were of dwindling utility, given widening asymmetries in military and technological capabilities between the United States and its allies; such arrangements reduced United States freedom of action without any appreciable benefit.
Fifth, the Bush administration was convinced that unilateralism—or its threat—could, at times, be an essential catalyst for effective multilateral action.
Finally—and most fundamentally—the Bush administration believed that multilateralism was most successful when it reflected a true convergence of interests and values.
Rather than relying primarily on the UN and standing alliances, the United States should adopt what State Department policy planning chief Richard N Haass termed an ""a la carte"" approach, by assembling opportunistic and flexible coalitions to address specific challenges.
A case in point was the Proliferation Security Initiative, a voluntary arrangement under United States leadership to interdict shipments of weapons of mass destruction and related technology.
Central components of this strategy included a return to multilateral cooperation, the collective management of transnational problems, the peaceful accommodation of rising powers, and the modernization of international institutions.
His approach presumed an enduring role for United States leadership, but placed less emphasis on the pursuit of American primacy.
Obama's strategy reflected new geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century.
Economic and political power is diffusing, particularly to fast-growing emerging nations—notably to China, but also to India, Brazil, Russia, Turkey, and others.
By 2010, the developing world was, for the first time, responsible for nearly half of all global economic activity; by 2025, its share may exceed 60 per cent.
Power, of course, has multiple dimensions, making power analysis a tricky business.
On nearly all of these measures, United States power has declined in the twenty years since the end of the Cold War.
When it comes to military might, it is true that the United States retains overwhelming advantages.
In 2009, United States defense expenditures represented 43 per cent of the world's total, six and a half times what China , its nearest competitor, was spending.
When it comes to economic power, however, the world is clearly multipolar.
According to the International Monetary Fund , in 2009 the EU possessed the world's largest economy as measured in nominal United States dollars, with a gross domestic product of $16,447 billion, followed by the United States at $14,119 billion, Japan at $5,068 billion, and China at $4,984 billion.
But even within the military sphere the United States often struggles to translate technological dominance into desired outcomes, particularly as potential or actual opponents employ so-called ""asymmetrical"" strategies that serve to level the playing field.
A case in point is the decade-long US-led counterinsurgency and nation-building effort in Afghanistan.
More generally, the changing nature of world politics has complicated United States relational power.
As the ""game"" of international relations shifts from great power competition to the management of transnational issues, success requires cooperation among multiple actors.
At a minimum, emerging market economies retain impressive ""blocking” power.
Moreover, institutionalized multilateral cooperation—increasingly required to address issues from climate to trade—tends to level the playing field by devaluing and delegitimizing the brute exercise of power.
As conceived by the late political economist Susan Strange, ""structural power” is the ability to define the global context in which other countries operate.
The United States depended on massive credit from China to cover enormous United States current account deficits and to maintain the role of the beleaguered dollar as the world's main reserve currency.
America's soft power, so celebrated in the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, may also be a dwindling asset.
The coercive turn in United States foreign policy during the Bush administration—including an overreaching ""freedom agenda"" and the excesses of the ""global war on terrorism""—is partly to blame for damaging the United States ""brand,"" as well as discrediting United States global efforts to promote democracy and human rights around the world.
Likewise, the United States economic model—to say nothing of the long-reigning ""Washington consensus""—has been badly tarnished by the global economic crisis that began in the United States itself in autumn 2008 and had devastating international consequences.
Finally, the domestic foundations of United States global leadership—economic as well as political—have eroded since the end of the Cold War.
Historically, the USled liberal world order has depended on United States willingness to provide global public goods, from an open world economy, to stable and secure oil supplies.
America's parlous fiscal situation, however, is likely to encourage a period of retrenchment in United States global engagement, particularly after an era of perceived overstretch.
Domestic political dynamics will likewise complicate United States leadership, given the collapse of the post-1945 internationalist consensus and toxic levels of partisanship within the United States Congress and broader polity.
In the coming decades, these trends suggest the critical world order problem will shift from harnessing United States power, to managing relative United States decline.
The trick will be to do so while preserving the stability of the Western liberal order the United States and its allies endeavored to promote and protect for six and a half decades.
The strategic challenge of integrating rising powers Effective multilateral cooperation in the twenty-first century will depend on mutual accommodation between established and rising powers on the basic norms and rules of international conduct—and on the willingness of emerging players to embrace the responsibilities inherent in their global power.
Integrating emerging players as ""responsible stakeholders"" (in the 26 This was apparent, for example, in the determination of House Republicans to cut United States foreign aid, as well as contributions to international organizations.
See Mary Beth Cheridan, ""House Moves to Restrict United States Foreign Aid,” Washington Post, July 21, 2011.
First, established and rising powers are often locked in strategic competition and fundamental clashes of interest.
This duality of great power relations is most obvious in Sino-American relations.
Notwithstanding their high levels of economic interdependence, the two nations hold fundamentally incompatible visions for the future of East Asian security—one predicated on Chinese dominance, the other on a balance of power.
Second, most emerging powers do not share Western views on global order—at least not entirely—and are determined to test, dilute, and revise existing principles, norms, rules, and institutions to suit their values, interests, and preferences.
Whereas the Cold War United States could be confident of normative solidarity within its broad ""Free World"" coalition, today's rising powers are at least moderately revisionist in outlook, and intent on being rulemakers, rather than merely rule-takers.
Nor do they recognize the authority of the United States—or the wider ""West""—to define what constitutes ""responsible"" behavior—and indeed they are all too ready to point out the hypocrisy and shortcomings in Western conduct.
One should not expect major emerging countries to endorse a US, or even a broadly Western agenda, simply out of gratitude for being able to join those exclusive clubs and have a seat at the table.
Cooperation may be especially difficult between established democracies and authoritarian regimes like China, or quasi-authoritarian ones like Russia.
A crude analogy might be with the nineteenth-century Concert of Europe, which involved not simply a multipolar balance of power, but a balance of rights, satisfactions, and responsibilities among major players—within a system capable of bridging differences in domestic regime type and political values.
Third, rising powers are more inclined to enjoy the privileges than shoulder the obligations of power.
Their status as developing countries reinforces an instinct to free ride on the contributions of established nations, including the United States, Europe, and Japan.
They are status conscious, and seek entree into, and weight within, the major decision-making forums of international life, from the IMF to the UNSC to the G20.
At the same time, they are preoccupied with enormous internal development challenges, including bringing tens or even hundreds of millions of citizens out of grinding poverty.
They naturally resist commitments, such as binding greenhouse gas emissions reductions that might constrain or jeopardize their growth prospects and social welfare goals.
In some cases, emerging powers lack objective capacities to exercise leadership, adequate regulatory capacity to meet international obligations, or military assets to help guarantee global security.
Beyond this impulse to ""free ride,"" the tumultuous internal politics of many emerging powers— particularly democracies—can hinder cooperation with established powers, as political leaders seek to reconcile an increasingly complicated and intrusive multilateral agenda with complex domestic bargains and the volatile force of nationalism.
A common commitment to democracy provides no guarantee of smooth cooperation with established Western powers.
Indeed, some of the most robust developing world democracies—Brazil, India, Indonesia, and South Africa—are also leaders of blocs such as the G77 and the Non-Aligned Movement , whose ideologies put them at frequent loggerheads with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development nations.
Although the future is difficult to predict, the fact that today's rising powers are revisionist rather than revolutionary offers grounds to hope that the coming era will see gradual adjustments to the status quo, instead of a frontal assault on the existing order.
Given the diversity of interests and identities of the world's emerging powers, we are unlikely to witness the consolidation of a single, coherent, counterhegemonic bloc.
Rather, emerging countries will continue to coalesce into more flexible ""minilateral"" associations and forums to pursue particular interests—as they have already in the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa) grouping, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization —uniting Russia and China with four Central Asian states—the IBSA forum, and the BASIC (Brazil, South Africa, India, China) caucus.
Finally, integrating rising powers will require difficult negotiations to adapt existing international institutions to newcomers.
Global institutions are, of course, notoriously resistant to change, thanks to the vested interests of current power-wielders.
The first of these calls for the smallest possible grouping; the second, the most representative body possible; and the third, a membership that shares a similar normative outlook.
In the wake of the global financial crisis there has been some modest adaptation of institutional arrangements governing the world economy.
The most significant of these is the elevation of the Group of Twenty to the leaders' level, and its designation as the ""premier forum"" for global economic coordination.
The G20—the only international body in which the world's most important established and rising powers meet exclusively at the highest level in a situation of formal equality—is arguably the most important innovation in global governance since the end of the Cold War.
G20 members have also agreed to modest adjustments to ""chairs and shares"" (that is, seats on the executive boards and voting quotas) within the international financial institutions, to the benefit of major emerging economies.
The most glaring is the United Nations Security Council , the world's primary body for international peace and security, whose permanent membership has not changed since 1945.
Barring a cataclysm, such as a world war or nuclear use, reallocating influence within the UNSC will be an uphill struggle.
China and Russia oppose any new permanent UNSC members, and the United States— despite the Obama administration's determination to integrate rising powers—remains ambivalent at best.
On the one hand, United States officials acknowledge that the Council is increasingly removed from global power realities, threatening its long-term credibility and perceived legitimacy.
On the other hand, the administration remains skeptical that any conceivable enlargement would be in the United States national interest and—even if it were—that the United States could possibly bring it about.
For the United States to eventually support and spearhead such a change, Washington would need to be confident that any expansion would be modest in size, and that any new permanent members would be prepared to accept the weighty responsibilities of defending global peace and security.
The declining incidence of war Among the most noteworthy trends since the end of the Cold War has been the declining incidence of war, not only between states—where it has become extremely rare—but also within them.
Globally, the number of armed conflicts peaked in 1992, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, at more than fifty.
It has since fallen steeply, so that by 2010 analysts recorded only thirty active armed conflicts in some twenty-five locations.
The average intensity of violence—measured in terms of actual battle deaths—has also declined.
These changes have been most impressive in sub-Saharan Africa, where armed violence declined from sixteen active conflicts in 1998, to only eight in 2010.
At the same time, nearly a third were internationalized —involving the presence of foreign or international troops assisting one or both of the parties to the conflict.
Such was the case in Afghanistan, for instance, where the US-led coalition Operation Enduring Freedom sought to bolster the government of President Hamid Karzai against the Taliban; and in Somalia, where the African Union Mission in Somalia sought to protect the beleaguered Somali government from al-Shabaab extremists.
Analysts have proposed several hypotheses for the declining incidence of intrastate war.
These include rising levels of economic development, a growth in the number of democracies, the end of Cold War proxy wars, and the actions of the international community.
While all have played a role, the most important factor may well be an extraordinary surge in international security activism, particularly through the United Nations.
As Andrew Mack of the Human Security Report enumerates, these initiatives include a tripling of UN and non-UN mandated peace operations between 1988 and 2008; a surge of UNSC Chapter VII resolutions from zero to forty between 1989 and 2009; increased use by the UN Secretary-General of special representatives and ""contact groups"" to mediate conflicts; a thirteen-fold increase in multilateral sanctions regimes from 1991 to 2008; and a dramatic growth in programs for the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of former combatants.
Transnational threats and security interdependence It is not only the structure of world politics that has changed since the end of the Cold War, but in many respects also its substance.
For centuries, the primary focus of international security has been managing the balance of power among the world's leading nations, particularly during periods of rapid power transition.
That imperative has not disappeared, as persistent frictions between the United States and China , and between China and Japan attest.
These cross-border concerns include both purposive, malevolent threats—such as terrorism, crime, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction—as well as ""threats without a threatener,"" such as pandemics and climate change.
This new threat environment poses fundamentally different strategic challenges to the world's leading states than the management of global and regional balances of power.
While zero-sum competition persists in some areas, major powers also find themselves coping with new logics of security interdependence.
From Guy Fawkes's efforts to blow up the Houses of Parliament, to Gavrilo Princip's assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, individuals and groups have planned and executed terrorist acts to advance political and ideological agendas.
What has changed is the potential scale of such attacks, and the sweeping objectives of some perpetrators.
Terrorist groups have emerged that aspire not merely to local goals, but to undermine global order and transform the international system.
Simultaneously, the diffusion of new technologies of mass destruction could provide them with the means to accomplish their ends.
Despite the death of its leader Osama bin Laden in spring 2011, al Qaeda remains the most dangerous transnational terrorist group the world has ever known.
Since 9/11, al Qaeda has evolved from a hierarchical organization into a looser network of affiliates and franchises, with cells in scores of countries worldwide.
The experience of 9/11 illustrated how damaging even a conventional attack by a modern terrorist group could be—and how difficult it is for even the world's most powerful state to respond to such asymmetric threats.
Bin Laden boasted that 9/11 had cost the terrorist group just $500,000 to pull off, and yet cost the United States economy some $500 billion—giving al Qaeda a return on its investment of a million to one.
Were al Qaeda to gain access to, or develop, WMD capability, the implications for global security could be catastrophic, particularly given the lack of a clear ""return address,"" which could render traditional strategies of deterrence irrelevant.
Beyond the terrorist threat, the proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons poses perhaps the greatest threat to global security in the early twentieth century.
Contrary to the dire expectations several decades ago, actual nuclear proliferation to date has been limited.
Beyond the five acknowledged nuclear weapons states under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty —the United States, China, Russia, France, and the United Kingdom—only four states have developed this capability.
The development of nuclear weapons by Iran and North Korea threatens to set off regional arms races.
Exploitation of nuclear energy raises problems of misuse of dualuse technology and diversion of fissile materials.
Today, some forty-nine nations possess the know-how to produce nuclear weapons.
Even if most states' intentions are peaceful, the spread of nuclear technology could present opportunities for sophisticated terrorist groups such as al Qaeda to pursue their nuclear ambitions.
Although likely to be less devastating than nuclear terrorism, biological weapons, including ""designer bugs,"" could still kill people on a massive scale, cripple public health systems, induce widespread fear, and cause catastrophic economic shocks.
Of course, naturally occurring pathogens are also capable of generating global public health crises.
The scourge of HIV/AIDS, which has claimed some 30 million lives over the past thirty years, and which continues to infect more than 6,500 new victims per day, 42 is the most prominent example.
Potentially scarier are rapid-onset, short-wave pandemics, of which influenza is the most serious.
Medical experts concur that with the right mutation, a major flu pandemic could kill tens of millions of people worldwide, and cause a prolonged global economic crisis.
The dire consequences of global warming are likely to include melting of polar ice caps and dramatic rises in sea levels, extreme weather patterns, desertification, water shortages and famine, accompanied by mass population movements and, conceivably, violent conflict.
While some regions may benefit from climate change, these are likely to be dwarfed at the global level by negative effects.
Avoiding the worst consequences of a warming planet will require dramatic cuts in greenhouse gases and major investments in adaptation, neither of which appears on the immediate horizon.
Deepening security, economic, and ecological interdependence is transforming the nature of world politics, increasing incentives for cooperative problem-solving to address mutual vulnerabilities.
It refers rather to pragmatic problem-solving, through both formal and informal structures.
The persistence of autocracies and the specter of failing states Over the past two decades, world politics has come to focus less on great power rivalry than on the spillover consequences of venal or dysfunctional governance in the developing world.
The frustrating vitality of authoritarian regimes and the failure and collapse of other states have become major threats to global order.
In fact, the road to democracy has proven far bumpier and uneven than many in the West predicted following the collapse of the Berlin Wall.
In country after country, politicians have exploited electoral processes, only to subsequently subvert constitutional liberalism, including the rule of law and basic human rights, and to govern in an autocratic fashion.
The hard lesson, as Fareed Zakaria observed in 1997, is that democracy is no guarantee of liberty.
The Authoritarian Challenge to Democracy , 48 the non-governmental organization Freedom House reported that global freedom had declined for the fifth year in a row.
Authoritarian rulers everywhere have found support and succor in the examples of the world's most influential autocracies, including China, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.
Finally, and disappointingly, established democracies in the developing world, such as India, Brazil, and South Africa, have shied away from criticizing the authoritarian tendencies of autocratic leaders, such as Robert Mugabe or the repressive Burmese junta.
They ignore their brutality on grounds of Third World solidarity and an absolutist, postcolonial respect for the internal sovereignty of fellow developing countries.
Historically, students of international relations have conceived of world politics as an ""anarchical,"" Hobbesian realm, in contrast to the relative stability of the sovereign domestic political arena.
Put simply, the locus of instability and violent conflict has shifted from the interstate to the intrastate realm.
Since 1991, the world has experienced very little warfare among states, but high levels of internal conflict and civil war.
These include protracted situations of often brutal violence such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where some four million people may have died of war-related causes since 1997.
Nevertheless, internal conflict remains a central preoccupation of the UN Security Council.
As of 2010, the United Nations had some 100,000 troops—the second-largest globally deployed armed force after the United States—in sixteen peace operations around the globe.
The ""failed state"" phenomenon first rose to international prominence in the early 1990s, in the wake of the collapse of Somalia, the dissolution of Yugoslavia, and the horrific genocide in Rwanda.
During the 1990s, the West's primary preoccupation with such states was humanitarian—a desire to alleviate human suffering.
This strategic calculus changed fundamentally following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
A1 Qaeda was able to launch the most devastating assault on the United States in United States history from Afghanistan, one of the world's poorest and most wretched countries.
In recent years, senior UN officials have depicted state failure as the Achilles heel of global collective security, and UN reform initiatives have underscored the need for effective, sovereign states to contend with today's transnational dangers.
In sum, much of the focus of global collective security has shifted from counterbalancing potentially aggressive powers, to assisting fragile, conflict-affected, and postwar countries in achieving effective statehood, including over so-called ""ungoverned"" areas.
The rise of regionalism One of the most dramatic changes of the last two decades has been the rise of regional and subregional organizations as frameworks for collective action in addressing this new global agenda.
Regional integration is most pronounced in Europe, of course, where European Union member states have pooled their sovereignty in unprecedented degrees.
This includes the adoption by a majority of EU states of economic and monetary union, and the EU's movement, still formative, toward a common foreign and security policy.
Notwithstanding the 2010-11 eurozone crisis, European integration remains an historic achievement in a region that for centuries witnessed recurrent, bloody struggles for continental hegemony.
Beyond Europe, regionalism is most developed in East Asia, which boasts a bewildering array of regional and subregional bodies to advance political, security, and economic cooperation.
In the wake of the Asian financial crisis of 1997, East Asian countries embraced the Chiang Mai Initiative, as a form of self-insurance against volatile capital flows.
In the Western Hemisphere, the venerable Organization of American States continues to be the most encompassing regional body.
At the same time, South American states are building economic and security links through the Common Market of the South and the Union of South American Nations , respectively, even as Hugo Chavez of Venezuela has sought to organize a populist grouping, the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas.
Perhaps the most surprising advances in regional cooperation over the past decade have taken place in Africa, where the dysfunctional Organization of African Unity has given way to the African Union and its regional economic communities.
In contrast to its predecessor, the AU has embraced an ambitious mandate for regional peace and security, including a doctrine of ""non-indifference"" to undemocratic transfers of power.
At the same time, the AU lacks the robust capabilities—and often the political will—to put its ambitions into practice.
Generally speaking, the emergence of regional and subregional organizations is a positive development.
Chapter VIII of the UN Charter clearly envisioned a role for such bodies, which may be more effective vehicles for addressing transnational problems and providing global public goods.
The members of regional organizations may face similar threats, have more at stake with a given challenge, possess closer cultural ties, and have longer histories of cooperation.
Ideally, regionalism can provide a building block for more effective global governance, as well as permitting useful divisions of labor with more encompassing institutions.
Regional bodies can also increase the risk of global fragmentation into competing political, economic and security blocs, and create tensions with universal, treaty-based multilateral institutions, ranging from the WTO to the United Nations.
Regional and subregional organizations also vary enormously in their capabilities and perceived legitimacy.
At times, burden sharing may become ""burden shifting,"" as universal bodies like the United Nations slough off responsibilities to entities (say, the AU) that may be unprepared to fulfill those mandates.
Such bodies also run the risk of being dominated by regional power centers, whether China in East Asia, India in South Asia, Brazil in South America, or South Africa in sub-Saharan Africa.
Despite these risks, regionalism seems destined to grow as an international force.
Since the end of the Cold War, however, it has come under significant stress.
To be sure, sovereignty has never been sacrosanct, and has often been violated in practice.
And yet, as the preceding section noted, many weak and failing states lack de facto sovereignty, finding themselves unable to marshal the capacity or legitimacy to translate their legal status into effective action.
Over the past two decades, the international community has devoted hundreds of billions of dollars to advance state-building in the developing world.
Beyond Afghanistan and Iraq, these efforts have ranged from East Timor, to Liberia, to Haiti.
Second, globalization is testing capabilities of all states, including the most powerful, to control flows across their borders.
The past two decades have seen an explosion of cross-border transactions, driven largely by private corporations and other non-state actors.
States are struggling to cope with the swelling volume and accelerating velocity of the movements of goods, capital, technology, ideas and people.
In an effort to regain some sovereign control over these transactions, countries are entering into new bilateral and multilateral arrangements to manage risks ranging from financial instability, to transnational terrorism, narcotics production, WMD proliferation, and infectious disease.
Third, in some cases, states are choosing to pool or delegate sovereign rights in return for the benefits of multilateral cooperation.
Existing Rights, Evolving Responsibilities,"" which the author assisted in drafting as a member of the State Department Policy Planning Staff.
But all states face a basic conundrum of how much freedom of action and policy autonomy to relinquish in return for the benefits of institutionalized multilateral cooperation.
The United States—by virtue of its unmatched power, tradition of ""exceptionalism,'' and unique constitutional structure—has been among the most resistant to delegating sovereignty to international bodies and treaties.
Under the Chemical Weapons Convention, for instance, the United States has accepted an intrusive inspection regime that requires it to open its military installations and private industry facilities to international scrutiny.
Likewise, under the World Trade Organization, the United States has accepted to submit any trade complaints to a binding dispute settlement mechanism, foreswearing unilateral action.
Fourth, and most dramatically, the past two decades have seen renewed debates over the limits of sovereignty.
There is an increasing tendency to treat it as something not absolute, but contingent on whether the state meets fundamental obligations, both to its own citizens, and to wider international society.
From the very foundation of the United Nations, of course, there has been a tension between the principles of state sovereignty and non-intervention , and the UN's parallel concern (embodied in the Charter, and also in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights) with the dignity and freedom of the individual.
The contingency of state sovereignty is clearest in the rise of a new norm, the so-called ""responsibility to protect"" , which UN member states unanimously endorsed at the UN World Summit in September 2005.
Intended to help prevent future Rwandas, Srebrenicas, and Kosovos—instances in which murderous regimes, or their proxies, slaughtered thousands of unarmed civilians—the norm of ""R2P” establishes that each state has an unconditional obligation to prevent atrocities from being committed against its inhabitants.
Each UN member state has an obligation to protect citizens from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing.
At the same time, the concept recognizes that sovereignty is, in effect, contingent, dependent on the state's fulfillment of these fundamental obligations.
When a government fails to discharge those obligations, either by making war on it citizens—or failing to prevent atrocities from being committed against them—the ""responsibility to protect"" transfers to the international community, which may take a variety of actions—including resorting to military force.
The international community continues to struggle with transforming the responsibility to protect into an operational norm.
To preserve the fragile consensus, and in the face of considerable ""buyers' remorse"" from some member states, the United Nations has placed much of its practical focus on capacity building, in accordance with the principle of state responsibility.
What the international community has not yet done is to establish a clear threshold and triggering mechanism for launching more coercive interventions when states fail to meet their obligations.
Such debates came to the fore in debates over UNSC Resolution 1973 of March 2011, which authorized the creation of a ""no-fly zone"" and the use of ""all necessary means"" to protect civilians from the threat of atrocities at the hands of Libyan leader Moammar Qaddafi.
Carr indicted the statesmen of the interwar years for neglecting the centrality of power in world politics, and for falling prey to utopian thinking.
And yet Carr was no pure realist, for he understood the power of morality and idealism in international politics.
In the two decades since the end of the Cold War, the world has experienced massive geopolitical, technological, economic, and normative shifts.
Immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States embraced a privileged position as a benevolent global hegemon, inspiring many other countries to bandwagon with it, rather than oppose it.
The result was a brief window of unchallenged United States primacy, at a time of deepening global interdependence.
By the second decade of the new millennium, the structure and nature of world politics had altered.
New centers of world power had risen, potentially challenging the US-led, Western liberal order.
On the positive side, traditional warfare, both interstate and intrastate, had declined dramatically.
More negatively, rapid technological change and deepening interdependence had transformed the global security agenda, enabling transnational threats—from WMD proliferation, to pandemic disease, to climate change.
Meanwhile, the once-hoped-for worldwide democratic revolution had stalled, leaving authoritarian and failing states populating much of the developing world.
Coping with this daunting agenda will require reinvigorating multilateral cooperation.
One approach is to retool and reform international institutions—always an arduous task, in the best of circumstances.
Another is to experiment with new forms of collective action to generate global public goods and mitigate global ""bads,"" whether through ad hoc arrangements or new, standing regional and subregional organizations.
And a third is to negotiate new legal norms and principles to make state sovereignty—and its attendant doctrine of non-intervention—conditional on the discharge of certain fundamental obligations.
The world of the twenty-first century is quite different than Carr's day, of course.
Contemporary statesmen and women, no less than their predecessors, face the challenge of negotiating rapid power transitions, finding common ground amid competing interests and preferences, and developing new multilateral norms mechanisms to manage conflict and growing levels of interdependence.
In navigating this age of turbulence, they too must strike a balance between the world as it is, and the world as they would have it be.
National capabilities, they maintained, shape the behavior of states and determine the outcomes of their interactions as each pursues its national interests in the absence of world government.
Carr, Hans Morgenthau, and others of the early postwar years, had little to offer beyond a conceptual framework and maxims for the conduct of foreign affairs.
National leaders must respond to the constraints imposed by the global distribution of power, so the use of force is not associated with particular forms of government or economic systems.
Even the actions of a country with purely defensive motives may have violent consequences because others may be unsure its intentions are peaceful.
The solution is a self-organizing balance of power, with networks of alliances to preserve the independence of states while minimizing armed conflict.
Waltz, like his predecessors, relied on historical examples to illustrate his arguments.
Today, liberal rather than realist theories dominate research on the causes of war in political science.
Social scientific studies show that democracies are * The author would like to thank Margit Bussmann, Karl DeRouen, Michael Mousseau, and Bruce Russett for their helpful comments.
John R Oneal unlikely to fight one another; and economic interdependence, too, increases the prospects for peace.
Importantly, democracy and trade have effects at least as great as those of power and alliances, and they are more amenable to manipulation.
These conclusions are based on quantitative studies of many pairs of states through time.
By considering virtually all countries for more than a century, these analyses have great statistical power.
In the next section I review the pre-eminent position of realism twenty years ago, and discuss the reasons for its decline.
Then I provide evidence that liberalism has dominated the discourse over the past ten years.
To indicate the contributions democracy and interdependence make in reducing the risk of war, I report the results of new analyses of over 12,000 pairs of states over the period 1885-2001, using the same statistical techniques employed by medical epidemiologists.
These tests are conducted using a liberal-realist model of armed interstate conflict that incorporates key elements from both schools of thought.
Key elements of realism also receive support in these analyses, but realism does not provide a path to world peace.
The best hope is continued liberal reforms—the expansion and deepening of democracy and capitalism and the inclusion of more countries in the international economic system.
Fortunately, globalization has advanced rapidly in recent decades, and the prospects for its continued expansion, despite the travails of the Great Recession, are good.
Realist theories of the causes of war After the First World War, idealists presented moralistic arguments that inspired efforts to abolish war by international agreement.
Carr's The Twenty Year Crisis, and the first of many editions of Hans Morgenthau's Power Among Nations, the most widely used international relations text in American colleges.
Central to Morgenthau's analysis was the inevitability of the quest for power by states wishing to remain independent.
But Morgenthau did not offer a testable theory of world politics, and the ""balance of power"" had many meanings.
Realism was a conceptual framework that oriented study or a paradigm within which advice on foreign affairs could be offered.
Its power must be adequate to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity and to promote its national interests.
The power of potential adversaries is mortally dangerous, and states must be able to mobilize, unilaterally or in combination, power equal or superior to that of its rivals, because there is no world government and international law is an empty phrase.
His Theory of International Politics, published in 1979, set the standard against which theoretical works would be judged for a generation.
Waltz, like Morgenthau, emphasized the importance of the balance of power; but he focused on the structure of the international system, not diplomacy and foreign policy.
In Waltz's neorealism, what matters are the number of great powers and the distribution of militarily relevant capabilities.
A bipolar system is best because it is simplest, allowing the rivals to focus their attention.
The danger of war is also reduced by uncertainty about who would win a contest of arms.
Neither state can be confident of victory so, especially with all that is at stake, each will act cautiously.
The superpowers should also prevent adventurism by small states, fearing that they will be drawn into a costly war.
Waltz supported his theoretical claims in traditional, humanist fashion, by erudite argument and telling examples; but his historical references were illustrative, not systematically generated or subject to statistical testing.
The importance of realism and Waltz's standing are indicated in a 1990 survey of the field widely used in graduate schools.
Norman Angell's view that war in the industrial age is an unprofitable anachronism is briefly discussed in the same section.
Dougherty and Pfaltzgraff note only in passing that there has never been a war between two democracies.
Realism's dominant position twenty years ago is confirmed in a recent review of the quantitative literature published from 1970 to 2000.
Except for 1970-4, when 49 per cent were, this was the highest percentage for any five-year period over the thirty years examined.
Only 16 per cent of the articles, 1985-9, were liberal in theoretical focus, versus 8 per cent in 1970-4.
Despite realism's success, there was no agreement among realists on key points.
Doubts about the advantages of bipolarity had been expressed early on by Karl Deutsch and Singer, who argued that war should be less frequent in multipolar systems than in bipolar ones.
Then, cross-cutting cleavages are more likely, and the consequences of uneven development, anticipated by Lenin, can be offset by shifting alliances.
Nor was there a consensus regarding the consequences of an equal balance of power for bilateral relations.
Waltz believed balanced bipolar systems are most peaceful; but Kenneth Organski, echoing Thucydides and Hobbes, argued that peace, if not justice, is most likely when one state holds a preponderance of power.
Organski, like Waltz, was primarily interested, however, in the systemic implications of the bilateral balance between the leading state and potential challengers.
Because a preponderance of power discourages conflict, a unipolar system is best, he believed.
Debates were lively from the 1960s through the 1980s; but disagreement persisted.
In a book that ""ranks with, and in many respects supersedes, the works of Morgenthau and Waltz,"" John Mearsheimer has again argued for the greater peacefulness of bipolar systems.
J David Singer, and others of the Correlates of War project, collected information on wars among the major powers after 1815.
In keeping with the then dominant approach, they focused on the international system, emphasizing the structural conditions within which great powers act.
There was no consistent relationship between the distribution of capabilities and either the frequency or severity of war.
On the Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Politics , 659.
Realism does not meet the standards for a progressive scientific research program.
If realists failed to provide convincing answers twenty years ago regarding the causes of war, liberals did no better.
Several quantitative studies sought to determine whether democracies have been more peaceful than nondemocratic states.
In contrast to Singer etal., these investigators used the individual country, not the international system, as the unit of analysis, examining the behavior of many countries over time.
Liberals hypothesized that several mechanisms might operate to make democracies more peaceful.
There might be institutional constraints involving the political accountability of democratic leaders, limits on executive power, competitive political parties, and free media.
Democracies might also be more peaceful because non-violent norms of conflict resolution characteristic of their domestic politics are externalized.
The results of these studies, too, were inconclusive; but most failed to find a strong association between democracy and more peaceful foreign policies.
The ascendance of liberal theory through statistical studies of pairs of states Recently, there has been rapid progress in research on the causes of war by analyzing pairs of states through time.
Considering pairs of states eliminates some serious methodological problems.
It avoids the ecological fallacy that plagued systemic studies and, unlike research with individual states, it can easily accommodate relational variables like trade, alliances, or the balance of power.
Early works by Solomon Polachek and Bueno de Mesquita were path-breaking, but Stuart Bremer's research in the early 1990s—using a liberal-realist model of dyadic interstate conflict—sparked most new studies.
The analyses below confirm that both theoretical traditions help explain who fights whom.
Two democracies are unlikely to be involved in a militarized dispute, and economic interdependence dramatically improves the prospects for peace; but the bilateral balance of power and the ability of states to project military force at a distance also matter.
Surprisingly, however, the liberal factors are at least as influential as power; they are much more important than alliances.
All states can become democratic and integrated into the international economy.
It is this potential for constructive social engineering that gives liberalism its special appeal.
Presidential addresses to the American Political Science Association in 2002, and the International Studies Association in 2008, further emphasize the importance of liberalism.
Walker and Morton also document the growing application of the scientific method.
In the earliest period, 1970-4, only thirty-seven data-based articles were published in the journals they surveyed.
About half of all articles in political science journals now include statistical analyses.
Analyzing the onset of fatal militarized disputes, 1885-2001, using the liberal-realist model In this section, I analyze the behavior of thousands of pairs of states from 1885 to 2001.
The liberal-realist model is designed to explain the state of relations between two countries in a year.
Analyses with the LRM provide estimates of the probability of a militarized dispute between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War or the United States and Russia today, for example, or any other pair of states in particular years.
The LRM can also be used to predict the likelihood of interstate violence for hypothetical cases of theoretical interest.
The pooled time series of over 12,000 pairs of states for more than a century are considered here, yielding more than 430,000 dyad-years.
These observations are examined using statistical techniques common in medical epidemiology.
Quantitative methods can summarize information regarding the influence of democracy, the volume of trade, measures of national capabilities, etc. that would take hundreds of books to record. 1 focus on militarized interstate disputes involving a use of force by one state against another that results in the death of at least one combatant.
Such ""fatal disputes"" are more numerous than large wars, increasing the precision of the statistical estimates; but they are of greater seriousness than mere threats or demonstrations of force, which are more apt to involve bluffing.
The analysis of fatal MIDs also protects against the bias that comes from under-reporting minor incidents in remote regions.
Liberal theory is represented in the tests below by measures of the political character of the two states, assessed along an autocracy-democracy continuum, and the degree to which the countries are economically interdependent.
The latest Polity data provides independent assessments of political regimes.
The sources for economic data prior to 1950 are 49 From Realism to the Liberal Peace The third element of the Kantian peace, international organizations, is not considered.
Recent work with improved measures of institutional effectiveness provides evidence for the beneficial role intergovernmental organizations play in managing the process of globalization, but these measures are not available for the many cases examined here.
Recall that the Correlates of War project measures power along demographic, industrial, and military dimensions.
The balance of power is calculated by dividing the larger state's composite index of national capability by the sum of the dyadic members' scores.
This approximates the probability that the more powerful state would win a military contest.
The power-projection indicator is meant to capture the ability of the larger, less constrained state to use military force at a distance.
There is also an indicator in the LRM of whether the members of a dyad in each year were allies.
Realists stress the importance of geography; though liberals, too, recognize that trade and other international interactions are affected by geographic proximity.
I use both a continuous measure of the capital-to-capital distance separating two countries, and an indicator of contiguity.
Finally, I consider each dyad's historical experience of violence, measured for each observation by the years of peace since the pair's last fatal dispute.
This is a way of taking into account the influence of past conflict on current dyadic relations.
Taking Time Seriously in Binary-Time-Series-Cross-Section Models,"" American Journal of Political Science, 42 , 1260-88.
Only the onset of a dispute is considered; subsequent years are excluded.
There is also a statistical control for the number of states in the international system in each year.
Two democracies are very peaceful, two autocracies less so; and mixed pairs of states fight a lot.
Wars are less likely when those who pay the price are involved in deciding whether they will be fought, while ideological differences fuel conflict between autocracies and democracies.
The animosity of these political rivals obscured the separate peace among democracies in early studies of individual states.
Economic interdependence reduces conflict because countries are reluctant to kill the goose laying golden eggs.
Commerce also permits costly signals to be sent, reducing uncertainty and helping states avoid military conflict.
A preponderance of power increases the prospects for peace; a balance of capabilities is more dangerous.
Leader's private information about military capabilities is less important when there is a clear imbalance of power, decreasing the risk of miscalculation and war.
Large powers are prone to fight because their interests are widespread and their capabilities for defending and promoting them are substantial.
The cumulative effect of power through these two channels—the balance of power and power-projection capabilities—is discussed below.
The democratic peace and good economic relations provide much greater assurances of peace than does an explicit security agreement.
Conflict is much more likely for states that are geographically proximate, especially those that share a border, finally, countries that have fought recently are more likely to fight again.
Based on historical values of the explanatory variables for 1953, the probability of a fatal militarized dispute between the United States and the USSR is estimated to have been 26 per cent in 1954.
The risk of a serious incident between the superpowers peaked at 47 per cent in 1967.
Estimated probabilities of the onset of a fatal militarized dispute, selected pairs of countries and years United States-Soviet Union, 1954 25.7% United States-Soviet Union, 1965 46.
France-Germany, 1938 8.3% France-Germany, 1999 <0. from a dispute to its predictors.
The analysis is limited to countries with populations greater than 500,000.
Then the probability of a fatal MID between the former adversaries was about 1 per cent; but as expected, the risk of conflict was even less for the United States and Canada—a mere 0. per cent that year.
The success of reconstruction in Europe after the Second World War, and development of the European Union, is evident in the second set of comparisons, which shows that the estimated risk of conflict between Germany and France fell from 8. per cent in 1939, to less than 0. per cent in 2001.
These values are consistent with common understandings of historical developments, suggesting that the LRM does capture important aspects of the causes of war.
Because the LRM produces plausible historical estimates, we can have greater confidence in using it to clarify the influence of theoretical factors on the prospects for peace.
This is a very ""dangerous dyad,"" like the Cold War rivals; all the variables in the LRM are set at levels conducive to war.
The annual risk of a fatal dispute for this hypothetical pair of powers is 10. per cent, and the 95 per cent confidence interval is ±1. per cent.
Making both states autocratic reduces the probability to 5. per cent, but the danger of a fatal MID declines by over 80 per cent to 1. per cent if both states are democratic, ceteris paribus.
Rows 2-8 indicate the change in the baseline conditions, ceteris paribus.
Large democracies have wide-ranging interests and extensive military capabilities.
Covert action may be particularly tempting for them; but large autocratic countries are much more violent.
These statistical results confirm that for every instance like the United States helping to overthrow Salvador Allende's democratically elected government in 1973, there are many more cases like the Soviet interventions in East Germany in 1953, Hungary in 1956, and the 1968 Prague Spring.
These results indicate the value of analyzing interstate conflict using pairs of states rather than individual countries.
The probability of war is influenced by the political character of a state's government and that of its potential adversary, an influence easily modeled in the dyadic format.
Early studies assumed that institutional constraints or non-violent norms of conflict resolution would uniformly influence a democracy's relations with all other states.
Democracies and autocracies fight a lot because they have a lot to fight about, and not just security and foreign policy; the LRM includes controls for these realist influences.
They also contend over the organization of their political and economic systems, including rule of law, human rights, and other domestic issues.
The superpowers avoided a general war during the ""long peace"" after the Second World War, but there were numerous fatal disputes that could have escalated.
Early studies were inconclusive because they did not take into account the political character of the opposing state.
Clearly, a world of democracies would be more peaceful than one filled with autocracies.
The democratic advantage compounds as the number of states in the system grows.
The potential for promoting world peace through democratization seems apparent, but some worry that it is not democracy that promotes peace, but peace that leads to democracy.
Including the years of peace in the regression equation addresses this concern, however.
Introducing this variable into the statistical model would then eliminate evidence for the democratic peace.
As we have seen, however, joint democracy reduces the risk of a fatal dispute by 80 per cent, controlling for past conflict.
Five studies explicitly estimate the reciprocal effects of democracy and peace.
Three find evidence for the democratic peace, but not for a salutary effect of peace on democratization.
Nor are the results reported here consistent with the view that democracy and peace are ideas that have merely spread simultaneously, but are causally unrelated.
Nor has a cultural norm of non-violence affected relations among autocratic nations to nearly the same degree.
The probability of conflict drops from 10. per cent in the baseline case, to 3. per cent if the pair of states has strong trading ties and all other factors are held constant.
If the interdependent states are also democratic, the risk of a fatal MID is only 0. per cent, a reduction of 94 per cent from the baseline rate.
National capabilities, too, affect the risk of violence, through both the balance of power and the ability of states to project military force.
The probability that the two large states of the dangerous dyad will fight is 10. per cent.
The existence of an alliance has a relatively small, statistically insignificant effect on the likelihood of a fatal dispute, as shown in line 8.
It is hardly remarkable that a country's demographic, industrial size, and military capabilities influence the prospects for peace.
It is surprising, however, that the liberal variables are more influential; and it is nice that states' political regimes and their economic relations are amenable to 90th percentile relative to all other states, even over a long period of time.
Consequently, realists can counsel little more than an acceptance of fate.
In contrast, a country can become democratic or remove barriers to trade with its neighbors, though liberal reforms may be difficult to achieve in practice.
Similarly, some risk factors associated with heart disease— smoking or a sedentary lifestyle, for example—are under our control; but others—like gender, race, and a family history of heart attacks—are not.
Fortunately, research on the liberal peace shows that nations and the international community can take actions that materially affect the prospects for peace.
Moreover, most people consider democratic reform and integration into the world economy intrinsically desirable because they increase freedom and prosperity.
Autocrats and economic interests that depend upon protectionism will, of course, resist; but modern history, including the ongoing Arab spring, suggests a good prognosis for world peace.
Some stress the importance of capitalism and economic development, rather than democracy, in creating a more peaceful world.
Of course, Adam Smith and other Enlightenment figures favored democracy and free markets domestically and internationally, so this is a debate within the liberal camp.
Estimating empirically the relative importance of democracy and capitalism can, however, guide the staging of reforms.
Capitalism is thought to encourage peace because militarized disputes disrupt commerce.
In addition, large conflicts lead to greater government control of the economy, higher taxes, conscription, and increased public debt.
An advanced economy is characterized by a complex division of labor, a greater role for investment in the process of production, and an educated work force.
Thus, holding constant the balance of power, peace is more likely when two states are economically developed.
Impersonal transactions in developed economies with contract-intensive markets, according to an extensive literature in economics, anthropology, and sociology, promote values that encourage the non-violent resolution of conflict.
To assess the relative importance of democracy and economic development in discouraging the use of military force, I added to the LRM for each dyad-year the geometric mean of the two states' real gross domestic product.
The increase from 10. per cent, the baseline rate with the simple LRM, confirms that less developed states are at greater risk of violence than a randomly selected pair, ceteris paribus.
Making both states democratic dramatically reduces the danger to 2. per cent.
With this augmented LRM, economic interdependence has the greatest effect of the liberal variables.
Raising the trade-to-GDP ratio from the 10th to the 90th percentile reduces the risk of a fatal dispute to 1. per cent.
As would be expected, two interdependent, developed democracies are very peaceful indeed.
If there is consensus that democracies are more peaceful, there is little agreement as to why.
Autocracies and democracies are prone to violence, perhaps because democracies pose an existential threat to autocrats.
West German television is said to have undermined totalitarianism in Eastern Europe during the Cold War.
If democracies threaten authoritarian leaders, they must be prepared to defend themselves against autocrats willing to use force to stay in power.
Thus far, I have analyzed non-directed dyads; no attempt has been made to determine who initiated a dispute.
Each state is then paired twice with every other state in each year, once as the focal state that might use force, and once as the potential target of such action.
To assess further their relative peacefulness, we can compare the likelihood that an autocracy will initiate military action against a democracy to the probability the democracy will resort to violence first.
The liberal-realist model can be easily adapted to analyze initiations of armed conflict.
The results of estimating this directed LRM confirm that a democracy is unlikely to use force against another democracy.
There are good reasons to prefer non-directed analyses of the onset of disputes to directed tests of conflict initiation.
It is sometimes difficult to determine who launched the first attack, and even then the data only indicates which state initiated the use of military force, not whether it was a preemptive strike.
They may even ""Bushwhack"" the democratic peace, citing the greater peacefulness of democracies as a rationale for aggression.
Perhaps autocracies and democracies are prone to fight because democracies model good government, threatening the positions of autocratic rulers.
Future tests utilizing indicators of countries' commitments to human rights can shed light on this question.
Beth Simmons has shown that international treaties matter most for states of mixed political characteristics.
Democracies guarantee human rights, and autocracies do not; international commitments are unnecessary in the first case, and ineffective in the second.
If mixed regimes committed to human rights are also frequently involved in militarized disputes with autocracies and are at peace with democracies, it would clarify why autocracies and democracies frequently fight, and why relations between democracies are remarkably peaceful.
It would indicate that a separate peace is possible among democracies because they share many values and good governance is not threatening.
Democratization in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union at the end of the Cold War led some to fear a wave of international conflict fueled by domestic instability.
While acknowledging that a separate peace exists among established democracies, Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder warned that leaders in new democracies might use force for diversionary purposes.
Dramatic changes in government often occur in tumultuous times, which might encourage newly democratic leaders to divert attention from domestic problems by initiating conflict abroad.
Perhaps demagogues can rally support for aggression because jingoism is more effective when the populace is politically inexperienced and democratic institutions undeveloped.
Still, it is not obvious that new democracies should be prone to fight.
In this view, democratic leaders are more likely to use force when they are popular, rather than using force to become popular.
To determine if new democracies are prone to violence, I estimated the probability that a country would initiate a fatal dispute within five years of becoming democratic.
The results indicate that a new democracy is more likely than an older one to use military force against an autocracy; the probability of initiating a fatal dispute is 4. per cent versus 4. per cent.
The probability that a new democracy will use force against another democracy is 4. per cent, far above the risk that an established democracy will do so (0. per cent); but this finding rests on only seven cases; and five of these occurred within two years of the democratic transition, suggesting that any danger associated with democratization is short-lived.
This was confirmed in an additional test incorporating a count of the years the focal state had been democratic.
The longevity of democracy in this test was not significantly related to the risk a democracy would initiate conflict.
Conclusion Twenty years ago research on the causes of war was dominated by realists.
Kenneth Waltz and others emphasized the influence of the international system on national behavior and worked in the humanistic tradition, artfully blending political theory and contemporary history.
The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy ; Barry Blechman and Stephen Kaplan with others.
The Balkan conflicts of the 1990s are not inconstant with the democratic peace.
Immanuel Kant, Adam Smith, and other classical liberals believed that democracy, free markets, and international commerce would produce not only freedom and prosperity, but peace.
Analyses of the behavior of over 12,000 pairs of states during the period 1885-2001, using a liberal-realist model, corroborate this view.
Given the prospects for globalization and the continuing spread of liberal institutions, the prognosis for world politics in the twenty-first century is good.
The statistical results reported here indicate that a world of democracies would be remarkably peaceful.
The annual risk of a fatal dispute for two hypothetical states that are large, geographically proximate, non-allies—one a democracy, and the other an autocracy—with no trade, is 10. per cent.
The liberal-realist model predicts that, if both states are democratic, the risk of conflict drops by 83 per cent to 1. per cent, ceteris paribus.
Authoritarian countries have historically been more likely to initiate force against their democratic rivals, but the difference is not large enough to be statistically significant.
Economic interdependence and the wealth of nations also beneficially affect the prospects for peace.
Economically developed countries are less likely to fight, though the effect is smaller than the benefit of democratization.
Raising two states from the 10th to the 90th percentile in real gross domestic product per capita reduces the annual risk of a fatal dispute by 63 per cent, versus an 81 per cent reduction if both states are made democratic.
Wealthy, interdependent democracies enjoy a resilient security community.
The likelihood of armed interstate conflict is also affected by the size and military capabilities of countries, as realists suggest, though an alliance has little effect.
A preponderance of power, not a balance, raises the prospects for peace; but, surprisingly, the liberal variables are just as influential and much more amenable to manipulation.
No state can increase its population, industry, or military from the 10th to the 90th percentile relative to all other states.
But countries can become democratic, institute economic reforms, or remove barriers to trade relatively quickly—actions in themselves desirable.
With any mixture of large and small countries, countries of similar size—absent the liberal effects—will fight.
Nor are hopes for peace through the influence of a hegemon supported in social scientific tests.
The importance (or danger) of pax Britannica or Americana is generally exaggerated.
The implications of these systematic, quantitative analyses for public policy seem clear.
To promote world peace we should encourage democratization and liberal economic reforms by peaceful means.
Attempting to impose democracy and capitalism by force is fraught with practical as well as moral danger, as systematic analyses and current events in Iraq and Afghanistan indicate.
The best advice today seems much the same that George Kennan offered in 1946 when the West faced the Soviet threat.
We must be prepared to defend ourselves, and to contain those who would do us harm, while demonstrating the superiority of liberal institutions and encouraging reformist movements abroad.
The better alternative to regime change by force is democracy by example, and the extension of peaceful incentives for change.
Future social scientific research should clarify the reasons for the democratic peace.
Why wealth and commerce are beneficial seems evident, a consequence of economic self-interest; but there is no consensus on why democracy matters.
Theories emphasizing institutional constraints, nonviolent norms, or signaling predict that democracies will not only avoid war with one another, but also fight less with autocracies.
Democracies may enjoy a separate peace because their leaders see one another as legitimate and voters are unlikely to support the use of force.
They also have less to fight about because they generally agree on political and economic fundamentals.
This encourages autocratic aggression, but also pre-emptive or preventive wars by democracies.
New analyses of the effects of nations' commitments to human rights on the likelihood of military conflict may shed important new light on the foundations of the democratic peace.
A remarkably simple form of government, democracy can rather easily be established whenever the process remains uninhibited by thugs with guns.
The rise of democracy has been correlated with the growing acceptance of another, essentially unrelated, idea, war aversion, a relationship that has been seized upon by theorists and more recently, politicians, to be a causal one.
Putting theory into practice, leaders in the United States have sought to impose democracy on the Middle East, partly operating under the misguided, if theoretically consistent, belief that this will cause peace to blossom in the area.
Democracy and the aggregation of preferences Democracy is a device for aggregating and expressing policy preferences.
One is free to try to increase one's political importance by working in politics or by supplying money in appropriate places, or one can reduce it by succumbing to apathy and neglecting even to vote.
Some people, because of superior manipulative skills, social position, or sheer luck, will do better under the system than others.
Unlike other systems, however, democracy gives to everyone the opportunity, without regard to social status or ideological conviction, to seek to manipulate the system in their favor.
However, those who make little effort to do so may well be ignored, or maybe even persecuted by it.
Democracy is, and will always be, distressingly messy, clumsy, and disorderly, and people are permitted loudly and irritatingly to voice opinions that are clearly erroneous and even dangerous.
Although there have been mistakes and exasperations and sometimes even disasters, it can be plausibly argued that democracies, on the whole, have done comparatively rather well at choosing leaders, at managing their affairs, and at correcting their inevitable mistakes.
Although democracy does, by definition, require that opposition and contention and special interest activity be peacefully preserved, and although it may be a desirable gimmick for aggregating policy preferences, it does not create the policy preferences themselves.
Moreover, they have welcomed or committed naked aggression and fought to reverse it; devolved into vicious civil war and avoided it by artful compromise; embraced colonialism and rejected the practice entirely; tolerated and sometimes caused humanitarian disaster in other parts of the world and sought to alleviate it; adopted protectionist economic policies and been free traders; and gone to war with enthusiasm and self-righteousness and sought to outlaw the institution.
The rise of democracy to the end of the Cold War It follows from this perspective that no elaborate prerequisites or cultural preparations are necessary for democracy to emerge, and that an agonizing process of ""democratization"" is not required.
That is, democracy is easy to establish and maintain because it is essentially based on giving people the freedom to complain—and, importantly, the freedom to organize with other complainers to attempt to topple or favorably influence the government.
Thus, as Americans should surely know by now, any dimwit can do democracy.
It has triumphed because its ideas, ably executed and skillfully promoted—or marketed—at one point in the world's history, have increasingly managed to catch on.
On the other hand, since literacy, economic development, and modern communications do not seem to be required for a country to become democratic, the world—or substantial portions of it— could have become democratic centuries earlier if the right people at the right time had gotten the idea, had deftly promoted and market tested it, and been graced by the right kind of luck.
By 1945, modern democracy had been on the market for less than two centuries.
During that time it had been suitably tested, refined, and packaged to increase its appeal.
It had rebounded from such potentially discrediting calamities as the reign of terror in France and the Civil War in America, and it had seen its comparative appeal and credibility enhanced as it survived two wars in which some of its major competitors had been destroyed.
Despite the successful imposition of democracy upon the losers of the Second World War, and despite other postwar advances, however, democracy didn't look all that well in 1975.
In consequence, between 1975 and the end of the Cold War, democracy burgeoned in the three remaining nondemocracies in Europe outside the communist bloc, in Latin America, and in East and Southeast Asia.
For some it followed that periodic wars were necessary to cleanse the nation from the decadence of peace.
The institution of war came under truly organized and concentrated attack only after 1815, and this peace movement developed real momentum only by the end of the century.
The idea entrepeneurs seeking to change opinion on war stressed various arguments.
Some, like the Quakers, opposed war primarily because they found it immoral.
These protesters were joined by socialists and others who had concluded that war was a capitalistic device in which the working class was used as cannon fodder.
Also important were a number of practical people who had concluded that war and conquest, which they took to be the chief goal of war, were economically counterproductive.
One of the most influential proponents of the economic position was an English journalist, Norman Angell.
As if to prove the argument correct, several important businessmen joined the movement.
Angell helped to crystallize a line of reasoning that has been gaining in acceptability ever since.
War is unlikely if countries take prosperity as their chief goal and if they come to believe that war is a poor way to achieve that goal.
Peace advocates were a noisy gadfly minority in the years before 1914 as they explored alternatives to war such as arbitration and international law and organization and developed mechanisms, like disarmament, that might reduce its frequency or consequences.
Their arguments were inescapable, but for the most part they were rejected and derided by the majority which still held to the traditional view that war was noble, natural, thrilling, progressive, manly, redemptive, and beneficial.
Occasionally the idea surfaced in the years before the First World War that what the peace activists really needed was for war to become much worse.
He was ""pessimistic about mankind"" and decided that ""the only thing that will ever prevent them from waging war is terror""—perhaps germ warfare could do the trick.
There is no way to quantify this change except perhaps through a rough sort of content analysis.
After the war, however, such people become extremely rare, though the excitement of the combat experience continued to have its fascination to some.
This abrupt and remarkable change has often been noted by historians and political scientists.
In his impressive study of wars since 1400, Evan Luard observes that ""the First World War transformed traditional attitudes toward war.
Obviously, this change of attitude was not enough to keep developed countries out of all wars altogether.
Most disastrously, it did not prevent the war of 1939-45—although the European half of that conflagration may not have been in the cards in any sense and was mostly the product of the machinations of a single man, Adolf Hitler.
However, the existence of this war should not be allowed to cloud an appreciation for the shift of opinion that occurred at the time of the First World War, one that was dramatically reinforced by the Second.
Shattering centuries of bloody practice, developed countries, including those in what was once the world's most warlike continent, have since 1945 substantially abandoned war as a method for dealing with their disagreements.
This is particularly 12 Evan Luard, War in International Society , 365; Bernard Brodie, War and Politics , 30; Arnold J Toynbee, Experiences , 214.
Number of ongoing wars by year, 1946-2010 The data is for ""wars,"" violent armed conflicts which result in at least 1,000 military and civilian battle-related deaths in the year indicated.
Uppsala Conflict Data Program and correspondence with Kristian Gleditsch. impressive because the number of entities capable of conducting international war so greatly increased during the period.
Another great, if often undernoted, change during the Cold War was the final demise of the whole idea of empire—previously one of the great epochdefining constants in human history.
The norm against conquest and its associated institutional structure stress peace, but they are not so much the cause of the desire for peace as its result.
That is, the norm was specifically fabricated and developed because war-averse countries, noting that disputes over territory had been a major cause of international war in the past, were seeking to enforce and enshrine the norm.
Its existence did not cause them to be war averse, but rather the reverse.
It is probably not a matter of cause and effect, but ever since that time there has been great progress in expanding democracy even as war, including even civil war, has been in pronounced decline.
Democracy Democracy replaced communism almost overnight and even more smoothly than had monarchy, not only in East Europe after 1989 but also in much of the splintered USSR after 1991.
The 1989 experience suggests that only the tanks were necessarily hampering democratic development, and that most of the countries in Eastern Europe (and probably those on the Baltic Sea) would have been democratic but for the artificial dictates of the occupying forces of the Soviet Union.
In Africa, there has been notable democratic progress in quite a few places.
The most spectacular, of course, is South Africa, but there has also been democratic development in Tanzania, Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, Mozambique, Ghana, Benin, Kenya, Zambia, Madagascar, Gambia, Senegal, and Mali.
Just about the only set of countries where democracy has yet to penetrate deeply are the Islamic ones.
However, where leaders have allowed elections in the Middle East, as in Algeria and Iran in 1997, the voters displayed considerable ability to differentiate and express their interest even though the choice of candidates and the freedom of speech were limited.
And some Muslim states, such as Mali, Turkey, Pakistan, and Qatar have certainly been able to move substantially toward democracy.
Most importantly, the world's most populous Muslim country, Indonesia, successfully navigated its way to democracy after 1997.
And the popular revolutions waged throughout the Middle East in 2011 suggest further progress is in the offing.
Some of these devices are diplomatic, social, or economic, but the judicious application of military force—or something that looks a great deal like war—is also potentially available.
There have been military interventions in Panama in 1989, in Kuwait and Iraq in 1991, in Somalia in 1992-3, in Haiti in 1994, in Bosnia in 1995, in Kosovo and East Timor in 1999, in Sierra Leone in 2000, in Afghanistan in 2001, and in Iraq in 2003.
Except for the last, however, the developed countries were able to engage in these ventures at remarkably little cost to themselves, particularly in casualties, and, since they were most focused on thuggish regimes or on thugdominated civil wars, they were generally successful.
However, despite a degree of success, the post-Cold War phenomenon of policing wars, rather tentative at best, seems more likely to wane than to grow.
There are several reasons for this, among them a lack of interest, an extremely low tolerance for casualties in military missions that are essentially humanitarian, and an aversion to long-term policing.
The experience of the wars in Iraq and, increasingly, Afghanistan are likely to further magnify a reluctance to intervene.
The reluctance to intervene directly into the chaos in western Sudan in 2004 or in Libya in 2011 is suggestive of the process.
Civil wars are least likely to occur in stable democracies and in stable autocracies—that is, in countries with effective governments and policing forces.
It is far too early to be certain, but it could be that civil war, following the pattern found with international war in the developed world, is going out of style.
One key may have been in the rise of competent governments which have increasingly been able to police domestic conflicts rather than exacerbating them as frequently happened in the past.
Certainly the number of first-class tyrannies has diminished greatly in the last decades.
Some argue that peacekeeping efforts by international organizations have often proved effective at keeping the wars from reigniting.
International bodies and consortiums of developed countries may not be able to stop a war when the combatants are determined to continue fighting, but they can usefully seize the opportunity to stabilize a shaky peace when the combatants have become exhausted.
But perhaps the ""blip"" is in the rise in the number of such wars that took place from the 1960s to the early 1990s.
Much of this seems to have come from rapid decolonization which led to the creation of a host of countries that were, to put it mildly, ill-governed and therefore prime candidates to become civil war arenas.
If that is the case, it is 20 For an extended development of this point, see Mueller, The Remnants of War, chapter 9.
War, as conventionally, even classically, understood then, has become a remarkably rare phenomenon.
Indeed, if civil war becomes as unfashionable as the international variety, war could cease to exist as a substantial phenomenon.
At base, it may turn out that war is merely an idea, an institution that has been grafted onto human existence, rather than a trick of fate, a thunderbolt from hell, a natural calamity, a systemic necessity, or a desperate plot contrivance dreamed up by some sadistic puppeteer on high.
And the institution may be in pronounced decline as attitudes toward it have changed, roughly following the pattern by which the ancient and once formidable institution of formal slavery became discredited and then obsolete.
Like many important ideas over the last few centuries, the notion that war is 23 However, a counterfactual argument remains popular contending that it was only the existence of nuclear weapons that prevented major war.
In this view, the rise of democracy is not only associated with the rise of war aversion, but also with the decline of slavery, religion, mercantilism, capital punishment, and cigarette smoking, and with the growing acceptance of capitalism, scientific methodology, international trade, women's rights, environmentalism, abortion, and rock music.
In the last couple of decades there has been a burgeoning and intriguing discussion about a possible connection between democracy and war aversion.
Most notable has been the empirical observation that democracies have never, or almost never, gotten into a war with each other.
This relationship seems more correlative, or coincidental, than causal, however.
A necessary, logical connection between democracy and war aversion is far from clear.
Thus, it is often asserted that democracies are peaceful because they apply their domestic penchant for peaceful compromise (something, obviously, that savagely broke down in the United States in 1861) to the international arena, or because the structure of democracy requires decision makers to obtain domestic approval.
But authoritarian regimes must also necessarily develop skills at compromise in order to survive, and they all have domestic constituencies that must be serviced such as the church, the landed gentry, potential urban rioters, the nomenklatura, the aristocracy, party members, the military, prominent business interests, the police or secret police, lenders of money to the exchequer, potential rivals for the throne, the sullen peasantry.
Since the First World War, the democracies in the developed world have been in the lead in rejecting war as a methodology.
The Democratic Governance of National Security ; Russett and Oneal, Triangulating Peace.
In addition, they have been willing actively to subvert or to threaten and sometimes apply military force when threats appeared to loom during the Cold War contest.
At times this approach was used even against regimes that had some democratic credentials such as in Iran in 1953, Guatemala in 1954, Chile in 1973, and perhaps Nicaragua in the 1980s.
And they have also sometimes used military force in their intermittent efforts to police the post-Cold War world.
It is true that they have warred little or not at all against each other—and, since there were few democracies outside the developed world until the last quarter of the twentieth century, it is this statistical regularity that most prominently informs the supposed connection between democracy and peace.
However, the developed democracies hardly needed democracy to decide that war among them was a bad idea.
In addition, they also adopted a live-and-let-live approach toward a huge number of dictatorships and other non-democracies that did not seem threatening during the Cold War.
Moreover, the supposed penchant for peaceful compromise of democracies has not always served them well when confronted with civil war situations, particularly ones involving secessionist demands as in democratic Switzerland in 1847 and in democratic America in 1861.
Democracies have also fought a considerable number of wars to retain colonial possessions and these, as James Fearon and David Laitin suggest, can in many respects be considered essentially to be civil wars.
To be sure, democracies have often managed to deal with colonial problems peacefully, mostly by letting the colonies go.
Thus, while democracy and war aversion have often been promoted by the same advocates, the relationship does not seem to be a causal one.
And when the two trends are substantially out of step today, democracies will fight one another.
Various warlike sentiments could be found in the elected parliaments in the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, or in India and then-democratic Pakistan when these two countries engaged in armed conflict in 1999.
If Argentina had been a democracy in 1982 when it seized the Falkland Islands , it is unlikely that British opposition to the venture would have been much less severe.
As she further points out, the countries of Latin America and most of Africa have engaged in very few international wars even without the benefit of being democratic.
And, of course, the long peace enjoyed by developed countries since the Second World War includes not only the one that has prevailed between democracies, but also the even more important one between the authoritarian east and the democratic west.
Even if there is some connection, whether causal or atmospheric, between democracy and peace, it cannot explain this latter phenomenon.
In this spirit the United States has repeatedly and often evangelically urged democracy upon its neighbors to the South, and has often been quite prepared to use money and sometimes military force to coat the philosophic pill.
Latin America's remarkable move toward democracy after 1975 was accomplished almost entirely by the people there themselves when market conditions improved.
Critics have argued that democracy can't be spread at the point of a gun, but these cases suggest that it sometimes can be.
Even Bruce Russett, a prominent democratic-peace analyst, eventually, if rather reluctantly, concedes the possibility.
Similarly, when Panama's Manuel Noriega stole an election that went against him in 1989 in the midst of Latin America's transition, he was deposed by an American military invasion and, liberated from this anachronistic tyrant, the country became a democracy.
The United States also successfully imposed, or reimposed, democracy on Grenada in 1983.
However, a somewhat similar process in Haiti in the 1990s met with far less success.
If democracy is so wonderful, and if in addition it inevitably brings peace, then forcefully jamming it down the throats of the decreasing number of nondemocratic countries in the world must be all to the good.
In an address shortly before he launched into the Iraq War, George W Bush confidently proclaimed, ""The world has a clear interest in the spread of democratic values, because stable and free nations do not breed the ideologies of murder.
Moreover, after Iraq was forced to enter the democratic (and hence peaceful and nice-thinking) camp, military force would be deftly applied as necessary to speed up the domino-toppling process wherever necessary in the area.
And war architect Paul Wolfowitz also seems to have believed that the war would become an essential stage on the march toward freedom and democracy.
It should be noted, however, that, although Bush and at least some of the neocons may actually have believed their pre-war fantasies about the blessings that imposed democracy would in turn impose on the Middle East, the democracy argument rose in significance, notes Russett, only after those security arguments for going to war proved to be empty.
Saddam's Tyranny and America's Mission , 98-9; Frum and Perle, An End to Evil, 163.
Iraq is acting very much like a standard democracy, albeit one with an exceptionally high crime and violence rate.
Politicians are squabbling continuously, interest groups are seeking to loot the public treasury as best they can, people are rather freely expressing themselves even where this may entail the airing of ethnic and racial hatreds (those who use violence to do so are not democratic, however), and politicians are seeking to manipulate the system to advantage their supporters.
However, those elected will remain loyal to the wishes of their constituencies and that may well mean intensified hostility to Israel and ungrateful animosity toward Iraq's naive, clumsy, and destructive democratic liberators.
It is wrong to celebrate the triumph of capitalism over communism in the Cold War as a simple victory of free markets and free men over totalitarian government and intrusive planning.
As we re-examine the virtues of free markets and private enterprise, we must not forget the role of the ""state""—the importance of governmental capacity—in creating the conditions for victory in the Cold War.
In the ""West,"" broadly defined, governmental policies modulated and stabilized the business cycle, nurtured economic growth, provided minimum social * I am extraordinarily indebted to Stephen Macekura for his research and insights on this chapter.
The state complemented markets, structured markets, liberated markets, and helped allay the hardships caused by markets.
After two world wars, a great depression, and mass extermination, liberal capitalism was in disrepute.
The magic of the market was not part of people's vocabulary after the despair of the depression and the misery of war.
In 1944, in The Road to Serfdom, Friedrich von Hayek lamented, ""If we take the people whose views influence developments, they are now in the democracies all socialists.
And even a decade later, Walter Lippmann wrote in The Public Philosophy, ""We are living in a time of massive popular counter-revolution against liberal democracy.
Also see Tonyjudt, III Fares the Land , 55; Walter Lippmann, Essays in the Public Philosophy , 63.
National Security, the Truman Administration, and the Cold War , 35-6, 63-4.
Europe and the United States, 1945 to 81 Victory revolutionary nationalist movements were forming.
They clamored for independence and sought transformative changes in political economy, national identity, and race relations.
Planned economies, many revolutionary nationalist leaders believed, might propel their emerging nations into modernity and might earn their people the dignity they merited in the international arena.
President Franklin D Roosevelt, governing in a country spared of wartime devastation but scarred by years of depression and rife with fears of looming unemployment, grasped the challenges ahead.
He understood that the American ""state"" had to act boldly at home so that the United States could exert leadership abroad.
A liberal international economy, he explained, required a strong state at home.
The war, he knew, would bequeath fundamental problems for the world economy and the national economy.
He, therefore, supported the work of his Treasury and State Department subordinates to create the Bretton Wood institutions of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund as well as the United Nations.
These commitments were the legacy of nineteenthcentury industrialization and of the turmoil wrought by business fluctuations in free market economies.
These commitments were the promises of democratic statesmen to their citizenry for enduring the hardships and misery of two world wars and a great depression.
Yet, in the literature on the international relations and political economy of the Cold War, these commitments receive scant attention.
There is much stress on how the United States helped to forge new multinational organizations like the World Bank and the IMF, formulated new initiatives like the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, practiced containment, embraced the politics of productivity, and struggled tenaciously to curtail the enlargement of the state, to open markets, to combat autarky, and to thwart the drive to nationalization.
As we have illuminated these matters, however, we have tended to minimize how, amidst all these efforts, the role of the state grew.
The success of the West inhered in its ability to marry the state with the market, to reconcile the rights of social citizenship with the dynamics of the marketplace, to insure minimal social provision while nurturing private incentives, to socialize key elements of risk-taking (in housing, insurance, and banking) while spurring private entrepreneurship and technological innovation, and to mitigating class conflict while nurturing income equality and championing consumer sovereignty.
Indeed, the Bretton Woods institutions themselves had been organized to reconcile the liberalization of trade and the maintenance of currency stability with the empowerment of national governments to exercise autonomy over their own economic fortunes and social policies.
In Italy, with considerable United States assistance to the government of Alcide de Gasperi, the communists were also thwarted in the closely contested elections of 1948 and, thereafter, they never garnered the power they yearned for.
But successive Italian postwar governments embraced the principles of minimal social provision, welfare assistance, health insurance, and regional development.
From 1950 to 1980, public expenditures as a percentage of gross domestic product increased from about 25 per cent of GDP to about 45 per cent; social expenditures from about 13 per cent of GDP to about 27 per cent.
In West Germany, Ludwig Erhard, the economics minister, repudiated the Nazi legacy of statism and embraced the free market.
To boost individual standards of living, he championed growth, competition, low taxes, monetary stability, and foreign trade, but he could not disregard the clamor for social protection.
Erhard and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer updated and expanded the already elaborate pension systems and accident and health insurance laws that went back to the late nineteenth century.
By 1953, 20 per cent of the West German population received some kind of state assistance, and, by 1955, perhaps as many as 50 per cent of all German households received government largesse.
The annual real growth rate of social expenditures from 1951 to 1966 was 8. per cent annually.
But the American state grew, instituted new monetary and fiscal practices, assumed huge responsibilities for promoting the health and welfare of the American people, and taxed Americans at unprecedentedly high peacetime levels.
In other words, Roosevelt's aspirations for postwar America were slowly realized despite the conservative reaction that culminated in a Republican takeover of Congress in 1946, the end of wartime controls, the dilution of the Full Employment Act of 1946, and the passage of the Taft-Hartley labor law in 1947.
For example, for 16 million veterans, the GI Bill of 1944 provided unemployment benefits, as well as tuition and subsistence allowances for education and training, and loans for farms, homes, and businesses.. million veterans made use of the unemployment benefits; and 7. million veterans availed themselves of the education benefits.
Between 1945 and 1966, 20 per cent of all single-family residences were financed by GI bills.
In addition, in 1950, social security was extended to an additional 10 million persons; in 1954, the Agricultural Act brought 3. million farm operators and 2. million farm workers into the social security system; and, in 1956, disability insurance was added to old age and survivors' insurance.
Overall, between 1945 and 1960 the number of people receiving Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance increased from 3. to 14. million.
Poverty in the United States fell dramatically, from 51 per cent of the American people in 1935-36, to 30 per cent in 1950, to 20 per cent in 1960, and to 17 per cent in 1965.
States embraced new forms of fiscal and monetary policies, helped mobilize capital and socialize risk, organized cartels, nurtured various forms of planning schemes, and sustained purchasing power in bad times.
In short, governments modulated the business cycle, buttressed markets, slowly embraced liberalized trade, and boosted standards of living.
Throughout non-communist Europe in the 1950s and 1960s, the most advanced countries increased educational expenditures by almost 15 per cent a year—and eliminated gender discrimination in many levels of schooling.
The government nurtured growth and spawned technological innovation while building safety nets.
GDP in the United States grew by about 3. per cent per annum in the 1950s, and 4. per cent a year in the 1960s.
During these years, United States government spending as a percentage of GDP increased from 17. per cent in 1948, to 29. per cent in 1970.
In fact, defense spending as a percentage of GDP dropped from a Korean War level of 14 per cent in 1952, to 8. per cent of GDP in 1970, while government expenditures on payments to individuals increased from 3. per cent of GDP in 1952, to 6. per cent in 1970.
The historian David Freund calculates that between 1947 and 1958 these agencies financed almost 50 per cent of new single-family homes purchased in the United States.
The United States government also nurtured a recalibration of power relationships between labor and capital.
Union membership soared after the passage of the National Labor Relations Act and during the wartime emergency.
The National Labor Relations Board, the War Labor Board, and the Office of Price Administration, among other state agencies, helped bolster the power and influence of organized labor in the United States.
From the 1940s through the 1960s, workers, especially organized workers, could count on the state to be a neutral, if not partial, supporter of their efforts to get a larger part of the income pie and to join the middle class.
The United States government also played a decisive role encouraging technological innovation and catalyzing the electronics, computer, and communication revolutions that transformed the American economy and society.
Government spending for research and development increased from $940 million in 1949, to $16. billion (or 11. per cent of total government expenditures) in 1965.
In 1959, a congressional committee estimated that about 85 per cent of electronics research and development in the United States was funded by the federal government, much of which went to major corporations like IBM, Burroughs, Control Data, and Sperry.
The spillover impact on the civilian economy of these research endeavors was enormous.
The work on electronics, transistors, computers, and communications—initially supported and expedited by the state—was quickly reconfigured, re-engineered, and adapted by other large corporations and by much smaller competitors for the consuming public.
These efforts gradually reshaped habits, leisure, entertainment, and expectations in the United States and around the globe.
At first, it meant a transformation of homelife, meaning the possession of indoor plumbing, stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, televisions, and cars—and later on it meant computers and cell phones.
The state and the market together encouraged innovation, improved standards of living, and empowered the West to compete successfully with the East.
That competition between the communist and non-communist worlds was extremely intense during these early decades of the Cold War because it was by no means certain that the West was ahead in stimulating economic growth and boosting standards of living.
Soviet officials and their comrades in Eastern Europe took the competition extremely seriously, and—although we tend to forget or ignore it—communist governments did reasonably well during the first decades of the Cold War.
In Eastern Europe, the growth rate was 5. per cent in the 1950s and 4. per cent in the 1960s, compared to 4. and 4. per cent in Western Europe.
During these decades, life expectancy in Eastern Europe pretty much caught up with that experienced in the West, and infant mortality rates actually dropped more quickly in the East during these years.
Despite housing shortages, there were remarkable improvements in social services and health care.
Between 1965 and 1970, household consumption in East Germany increased by nearly 25 per cent; the percentage of homes with a refrigerator rose from 6 to 56 per cent, and with a television from 16 to 69 per cent.
At meetings with his comrades and in speeches to his countrymen he stressed that his overriding priority was to demonstrate the superiority of socialism.
By 1970, Khrushchev asserted, the Soviet Union would equal America's gross national production, and then surpass it a decade later.
Many observers in the 1950s and 1960s feared that Khrushchev might be right.
In a generation, the Soviet Union had emancipated itself from the shackles of capitalists, managed a command economy to accelerate industrialization, developed immense military capabilities, and garnered power and prestige.
Its trajectory was hugely appealing to nationalist leaders in the Third World, leaders who yearned to modernize and hungered for status.
At a meeting of the United States National Security Council in January 1956, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles observed that his colleagues ""had very largely failed to appreciate the impact on the underdeveloped areas of the world of the phenomenon of Russia's rapid industrialization.
In 1974 and 1975, industrial output in the West plummeted by almost 10 per cent, and unemployment rates jumped to postwar highs.
Approaches for a Future History,"" History Workshop: A Journal of Socialist and Feminist Historians, 31 , 40-1; for figures regarding East Germany, see Greg Castillo, Cold War on the Home Front: The Soft Power of Midcentury Design , 200.
The familiar narrative is that Western governments responded by jettisoning their Keynesian commitments, raising interest rates, deregulating their economies, privatizing state-owned enterprises, lowering taxes, and embracing more open markets, freer trade, and capital inflows and outflows.
In this analysis, Jimmy Carter, Margaret Thatcher, and Ronald Reagan led the way, and Helmut Kohl and Francois Mitterrand soon followed.
In general, we think we know that a neo-liberal turn occurred, rejecting the state and embracing a globalized future.
Again, much of that narrative tells an important part of the story, but it is only a part of the story.
What it omits is the continued role of the state in cushioning people from the hardships they faced, sustaining purchasing power, and modulating even more severe fluctuations in the business cycle.
In the late 1970s, Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, lamented the erosion of European economic vitality and feared the consequences of high unemployment and soaring inflation.
Non-communist governments in the West increased spending as a percentage of GDP from 33 to 42 per cent.
During the last two decades of the Cold War social security expenditures as a percentage of GDP in Japan went from 5. per cent to 14 per cent.
In England, Margaret Thatcher talked about reconfiguring the relationship of the state and the individual, but welfare spending as a percentage of government expenditures and welfare spending as a percentage of GDP (about 23 per cent) remained virtually constant.
Spending on housing plummeted, but spending on health and education did not decline significantly.
In France, Mitterrand ceded power from the state to the market and embraced privatization, deregulation, lower public spending, and higher productivity, as well as monetary stability and European integration.
During the 1980s, social expenditures as a percentage of GDP in France actually went from 20. per cent to 24. per cent, dipping slightly in the late 1980s.
Across the border, in West Germany, social expenditures as a percentage of GDP grew by almost 4. per cent a year from 1970 to 1982, and contracted only minimally thereafter.
In Italy, social expenditures as a percentage of GDP also increased during the 1980s from 18 per cent to 20 per cent.
Nor did social spending drop much in the United States, and neither did the size of the public sector.
Notwithstanding all the rhetoric about a Reagan revolution, total government expenditures in the United States as a percentage of GDP in 1980 were 31. per cent; in 1990, they were 32. per cent.
Social security and Medicare spending was 5. per cent of GDP in 1980 and 6. per cent in 1990.
Without acknowledging what they were doing, lawmakers were, in fact, using the state in creative new ways to expand the social net.
What all this means is that while deregulation, privatization, and liberalization proceeded to unfetter markets and trade, erode the power of labor unions, and increase levels of income inequality, the role of the state in shaping monetary policy, insuring minimum safety nets, promoting technological innovation, encouraging fuel production, and nurturing consumption and economic growth, did not abate.
He raised interest rates to astounding levels to thwart inflation and promote a strong dollar.
The Housing Act of 1968 and the Emergency Home Finance Act of 1970 created the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and encouraged the development of mortgage-backed securities.
It encouraged the production of oil shale, alcohol fuels, and geothermal and solar energy.
And after protracted study and legislative logrolling, Congress passed the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988.
It institutionalized new forms of private-public collaboration and allocated new powers to the executive branch to negotiate trade agreements and expand commerce.
West European governments, meanwhile, negotiated ""The Single European Act of 1987,” further buttressing market forces and igniting increases in productivity.
How the United States Traded Factories for Finance in the Seventies , 218.
They enlarged their Social Action Program and scripted basic guidelines for full employment, better living and working conditions, and increased participation of labor and management in the economic and social decisions of the Community itself.
In other words, while European governments were integrating their economies as never before, and embracing free markets, they reconfirmed their commitment to social provision, safety nets, research, training, education, and higher standards of living.
The 1989 Social Charter underscored the EC's commitments to maximum working hours, minimum working age, a right to join unions, gender equality, and assistance to people with disabilities—even though only small amounts were earmarked for these purposes.
Compensatory social spending by governments helped preserve consumption even as unemployment increased in Europe and inequality began to grow in America.
In other words, safety nets, unemployment insurance, and retraining initiatives helped preserve individual opportunity and standards of living, even as liberalized world trade increased competition from low-wage producers in Asia, undercut domestic wage levels in the West, and threw millions of people out of work.
Overall, there were few radical backlashes and only modest social turmoil in the West in the 1980s.
Notwithstanding the tougher economic circumstances in Western Europe, communism lost the appeal it once had; Eurocommunism floundered in France and Italy; and Spain, Portugal, and Greece rid themselves of their neo-fascist pasts and opted for social democracy and market economies.
In fact, European workers increasingly embraced lifestyles that emulated and then began to surpass their American counterparts.
They jettisoned their self-identity in terms of their relationship to the means of production and embraced a new sense of self based on their status as consumers.
Women, teenagers, and men were tantalized by household gadgets that eased their lives, by images of glamour and sexuality that whet their deepest appetites, and by symbols of power and wealth that eroded class distinctions.
Through museum exhibitions and radio broadcasting, United States (and other Western) officials tried to illuminate the false promises of communism and convey the superiority of democratic polities where diverse peoples could speak freely, express their individual creativity, vote for whom they wanted, and feel secure in their ownership of private property.
For United States leaders in particular, a key component of their system's strength was its capacity to deliver a superior standard of living, the universally accepted benchmark of a successful system of political economy.
Capitalism, they insisted, did not exploit workers as producers; it empowered them as consumers.
Capitalism bred dignity among workers, dignity that was exemplified through personal buying power, household appliances, cosmetics, leisure, travel, and entertainment.
Impact 95 Victory After 1975, these messages from the West increasingly resonated in the East.
During the first decades of the Cold War, growth rates in the USSR compared favorably to those in the United States (starting, of course, from a much lower base), those in Eastern Europe compared nicely to those in Western Europe, and those in East Germany to those in West Germany.
But economic growth rates in communist Europe fell in the 1970s and 1980s.
As a percentage of Western European per capita GDP, Eastern Europe declined from 49 per cent in 1973 to 37 per cent in 1989.
Infant mortality rates and life expectancy statistics in Eastern Europe also suffered in comparison to what was happening in the West.
Basically, communist regimes were unable to make the adjustments to new economic circumstances that their counterparts in the West were making, however jarringly.
After 1968, Eastern Europe retreated from economic reform, failed to adjust to the oil shocks of the 1970s, and became increasingly dependent on loans from the West.
Communist leaders in Eastern Europe could not institute a functioning price system that provided incentives to innovate; could not boost productivity; and could not satisfy consumer demand at home or compete successfully in international markets.
Meanwhile, more travel, increased tourism, better communication, and the influx of films and television programs into the East highlighted the discrepancies to more and more people.
Soviet leaders from Khrushchev to Gorbachev never stopped believing and saying that the goal of communism or advanced socialism was to improve the living conditions of individuals and families.
United States Exchange Exhibits and Their Reception in the Soviet Union, 1959-1967,"" Journal of Cold War Studies, 12 , 3-31.
Soviet leaders promised their people full employment, higher and more equal wages, and improving standards of living.
After the Kremlin crushed the reform movement in Czechoslovakia in 1968, Soviet economists who had been pondering ways to reconcile planning with the market were squelched.
And when Gorbachev tried to revitalize their thinking and catalyze reforms in the command economy, he made things much worse.
Per capita spending on social services actually began declining in the 1970s and, after 1981, fell absolutely for overall consumption, health, and education.
Not only were they failing to catch up to the United States and Western Europe, but equally distressing was their growing knowledge that they were now trailing the modernizing economies of East and Southeast Asia.
But it was not being crushed simply by the superiority of a free market system.
It was crushed by reformed forms of capitalism, by social democracy, and by social market economies in which governments played critically important roles in providing safety nets, insuring minimal social provision, spurring research and innovation, and dispensing compensatory income in hard times.
Communism, in other words, was defeated by people in democratic polities who expected their governments to structure, support, regulate, liberalize, and ameliorate market forces.
This required judgment, fine-tuning, continual recalibrations of the role of the state and the role of the market.
The Soviet Collapse, 1970-2000 , 19; also see Kotkin, Steeltown, 142; Kotkin, ""Kiss of Debt,"" 86-9.
Taking office at a harrowing time in the Cold War and in a dismal economic climate, Ronald Reagan declared that governments were not the solution; they were the problem.
But any fairminded assessment of Western policies during the Cold War would affirm that the ""state"" was an indispensable part of the solution, an indispensable key to victory in the Cold War.
Thinking that free markets alone won the Cold War is fraught with ominous consequences.
Since the Soviet Union collapsed, and since communism as a serious competitor to capitalism has withered, some commentators, think tanks, political leaders, and government officials have proceeded ever more vigorously to attack entitlements and safety nets, dismantle or weaken regulatory agencies, deride the value of the state, and erode its powers to collect revenue.
Some initiatives of this sort no doubt contributed to the revitalization of the West in the 1980s.
And, surely, generous welfare benefits and safety nets in a globalized economy bloated the budgets of Western governments, saddled them with onerous debt burdens, increased costs of production, and weakened the capacity of their entrepreneurs to compete in international markets.
When Bill Clinton famously stated, ""it's the economy, stupid,"" he might have added that it is the state and the market, neither alone, that nurture a thriving economy.
Creating that balance, recalibrating it, and sustaining it were one of the greatest accomplishments of the West during the Cold War, the success of which could not have been predicted in 1945, and one which we forget at our peril today.
At the end of the Second World War, for example, the United States invested in global industrial development, on the model of the Tennessee Valley Authority and comparable big domestic public works.
David Ekbladh, Nick Cullather, and others have shown how this internationalization of the New Deal damaged many of the societies it hoped to serve.
Similarly, in the 1960s the United States merged ideas of development and counterinsurgency to redesign ""backward"" villages—""strategic hamlets""—in Southeast Asia for ""modern"" security and prosperity.
Michael Latham, Philip Catton, and others have analyzed how these American rural projects exacerbated the very communist threats that policymakers in Washington hoped to forestall.
This process continued through the last decade of the Cold War, when President Ronald Reagan pledged to mobilize American technology to create an impregnable space shield against nuclear attacks—the Strategic Defense Initiative.
Like the previous promises of global industrial development and rural modernization, the Strategic Defense Initiative was an idea that overextended American resources, underserved the promised beneficiaries, and antagonized many American adversaries.
Big dreams were alluring to self-confident Americans in the Cold War, but they frequently had nightmarish implications.
For more than a decade, historians have made a career of identifying, deconstructing, and ultimately condemning the intellectual orthodoxies that underpinned America's misguided Cold War dreams.
Scholars have exposed how naive, ahistorical, and self-serving assumptions about ""development,"" ""modernization,"" ""civilization,"" and even ""health,"" encouraged intervention, violence, and authoritarianism—exactly the opposite of the aims American policymakers claimed to serve.
Another group of writers has furthered this cultural ""outing"" of American foreign policy, focusing on the racist and sexist underpinnings of policies that encouraged particular kinds of nationalism and statehood in former colonial areas.
America's liberal democratic promises, according to these authors, exported racist and chauvinist practices to societies in transition.
Reading this exciting and innovative new work, one might conclude that American foreign policy in the Cold War was intellectually bankrupt.
Despite all the misguided and harmful ideas promoted by the United States, American foreign policy during the Cold War contributed to the spread of four basic propositions that, on the whole, enhanced global peace and prosperity.
These propositions were not unique to the United States or the post-1945 years.
They were empowered internationally, however, by an American government with global capabilities and commitments that knew few previous historical parallels, at least since the growth of British influence in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The traditional American posture in all previous postwar periods emphasized a mix of unilateralism and isolationism.
American institution building, alliance formation, and containment doctrine after the Cold War championed multilateralism.
For the first time, the United States prepared to confront foreign threats as part of a permanent set of partnerships that spanned from London and West Berlin, to Tokyo and Seoul.
Second, Americans supported free trade across the globe, believing that open competition—not just open markets—would increase everyone's prosperity.
Moving far beyond ""Open Door"" efforts to reach foreign consumers and ""Dollar Diplomacy"" investments in foreign infrastructure, Americans now cut their own traditional high protectionist walls to spur growth in bidirectional trade volume and spread production—not just consumption— across the globe.
Building factories and disseminating innovation for foreign competitors, Americans placed unprecedented faith in the comparative advantages that would come from the economic advancement of all societies.
The United States continued to maintain high tariffs on many industrial products and luxury items produced abroad.
Similarly, the American government offered lucrative financial supports for farmers and numerous manufacturers, protecting their incomes from foreign competition.
Overall, American trade policy remained restrictive, but it was still freer than it had ever been before.
In comparison to any other period in the country's history, this was a high point for the practice and advocacy of free trade by the United States.
Third, and most often neglected by historians, American policymakers pursued collective security and free trade with a strong commitment to financial solvency —the belief that American resources were finite, that budgets had to be balanced, and that too much spending undermined domestic dynamism.
The American aversion to traditional empire building reflected a belief that empire was simply too expensive.
American policy during the Cold War sought influence through preponderance and efficiency.
The United States would do more than others because it could, but also because it knew how.
Time and again, this meant a preference for technology over manpower, for incrementalism over bold risk-taking.
Fourth, and perhaps most misunderstood, the United States promoted a concept of democracy, and a broader free society, to allies and adversaries alike after the Second World War.
This was a long-standing vision for global change, now married to unique and unprecedented power.
For those who were more skeptical, democratic aspirations were unavoidable.
The United States had the extraordinary postwar opportunity to help build participatory, representative, humane governments—especially in Europe and Asia—where they had not existed before.
Americans blamed the absence of democracy for the rise of fascism and communism, and they sought to secure themselves by making the world safe for democracy, to paraphrase President Woodrow Wilson's famous statement.
Democratic nation building became a guiding idea for all American foreign interventions.
This vision remained powerful, even when policy practice departed from hopes and expectations, as it often did.
This contradiction did not reflect a lack of sincerity among Americans, but instead an impatience with the slow and complex paths to change in foreign societies.
Too often, Americans supported ""strongman” figures who promised a quick and orderly road to reform.
Too often, Americans came to believe that long-term democratization was best served by short-term dictatorship.
Racism and cultural prejudice contributed to this process with common assertions that particular societies were allegedly ""not ready” for democracy and in need of paternalistic guidance.
The strength of American democratic convictions drove anti-communism and interventionism in the Cold War, with very controversial results.
The standards of democracy that the United States promoted frequently provided the framework for criticizing Washington's specific policies.
The spread of democracy in the Cold War occurred because of and despite the United States.
These ideas—collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy— entered a period of collective crisis during the last decades of the Cold War.
In the aftermath of detente, the oil crisis of 1973, the unprecedented growth of domestic spending, and the emergence of many new states throughout the ""Third World,"" Washington found itself more constrained than it had been since the end of the Second World War.
Inherited assumptions about alliances, resources, and popular consensus broke down.
The global ""shock"" of the 1970s had lasting effects that historians have only begun to examine.
Despite these fundamental shifts, the four foundational Cold War ideas continued to exert a strong hold on American strategic thinking.
Policy planners relied, almost instinctively, on the lessons of the early Cold War.
The ideas that shaped the years after 1945 acquired a staying power that they still have not lost.
In many ways, President Barack Obama has reaffirmed this conventional wisdom.
They are attitudes, aspirations, and ideal types whose complex practices never match their simple definitions.
You either believe in the first principles of each claim, or you do not.
Most social scientists would respond affirmatively to each of the above questions, but none of us can actually prove our answers, beyond a series of cases selected to demonstrate what we already think.
Certainly, if asked these questions in, say 1938, many Americans would answer differently from citizens in 2012.
Answers vary with context, and the assumptions that a particular context promotes.
The emergence of an international consensus on collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy during the Cold War was not preordained.
Americans never supported these ideas as strongly or as globally before the Second World War.
The new consensus was manufactured by elites in Washington and other Western capitals, and it was promoted actively by the United States government from Franklin Roosevelt's presidency to the present.
With historical hindsight, spreading this American dream was the most successful thing that Washington did in the second half of the twentieth century.
The consensus on collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy was not hegemonical, in ways that many scholars use the term.
Other contrary ideas—communism, Keynesianism, import-substitution, environmentalism, even enlightened authoritarianism— continued to challenge these propositions into the present day.
Although the application of these ideas in the Cold War correlates with relative peace and expanding prosperity in many parts of the world, it surely does not mean that they are the ""correct"" ideas, or that they have some special purchase on the ""truths"" of history.
Just as these ideas looked suspect to many well-informed observers in 1938, they may appear wrong-headed again in the future.
To say that these ideas contributed to American successes, as they did, is not to say that these ideas or their promoters ""won"" the Cold War.
Ideas do not win or lose wars any more than they win or lose political debates.
Collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy helped Americans to take advantage of unique opportunities and deflect dangerous challenges in the second half of the twentieth century.
The application of these ideas, in the peculiar circumstances of the time, enhanced American power with manageable costs.
The promotion of these ideas, by a select group of leaders, served American interests, as well as the interests of America's closest allies.
The foundational ideas behind American Cold War policies were well matched to the capabilities and desires of the American people.
The ideas were practical and they resonated with popular fears and demands after 1945.
More than anything, that is what made the Cold War a sustainable struggle for an American society notoriously fickle in its international commitments.
The match between circumstances and ideas allowed the United States to maintain a consistent and successful Cold War grand strategy.
Grand strategies are built on ideas that serve a purpose in a particular historical epoch.
They rarely endure for more than a few decades, as American leaders have learned in the early troublesome years of the twenty-first century.
Collective security Before the Second World War, Americans had never accepted the idea of collective security.
As C Vann Woodward famously explained, citizens of the United States presumed that they would benefit from ""free security""— separation from European great power politics, abundant land and resources, and national self-reliance without dependence on foreign assistance.
American foreign policy developed with precisely these assumptions during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
In the formulation of the Monroe Doctrine, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams rejected any coordination with Great Britain, choosing a strong and unilateral American statement instead.
In 1899 and 1900, Secretary of State John Hay's famous Open Door Notes rejected a collective imperial enterprise in Asia, demanding space for free and equal efforts by different nations seeking access to the China Market.
Even President Woodrow Wilson, the first major American advocate of collective security, refused to make the United States an official ally of Great Britain, France, and Italy in the First World War.
The United States Senate's rejection of the Paris Peace Treaty, and the League of Nations in particular, reaffirmed the American aversion to serious collective security efforts.
Fighting fascist powers on two fronts in the wake of a debilitating economic depression, Americans realized that they could no longer go it alone.
They even needed to compromise with communist figures, like Soviet dictator Josef Stalin.
The Grand Alliance in the Second World War was the first serious American experience with collective security.
The entire ethos of the New Deal was about building collective capacities— at home and abroad—where they had not existed before.
They transformed a free market society with a very small federal government into a much more regulated and purposely interconnected community of peoples, working together as they had not done before.
In 1945, unlike in 1919, Americans were more comfortable with collective security than ever before.
Collective action and cooperative deliberation had, over the course of the previous decade, become part of ""normal"" politics.
Franklin Roosevelt's enduring popularity was, above all, his embodiment of this perspective.
The American commitment to collective security at the end of the Second World War endured throughout the Cold War.
If anything, historians have underestimated this attitudinal continuity, and overemphasized a break in the origins of the Cold War.
American policies were much more expansive after 1945, and they addressed many new challenges , but they grew from an ideological seedbed planted a decade before.
Melvyn Leffler and others have pointed to the fears of a postwar depression that motivated policymakers in the Cold War.
Strategies of preponderant power, designed to insure economic sustenance, were also strategies of collective action to insure against the isolation of American society and the growth of external challengers.
For the generation that lived through the 1930s and the 1940s, it was obvious that ""saving capitalism” meant building cooperative institutions that enhanced, but also committed, American power.
The United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank were international expressions of this New Deal attitude.
American support for the European Reconstruction Program , the European Coal and Steel Community, and similar reconstruction and integration efforts in Asia, were productive spillovers of the newfound emphasis on collective security.
Its support, often at great cost to a still precarious postwar economy, committed the country to the common advancement of its foreign allies as never before.
Cold War containment doctrine and its foremost practitioners embodied collective security as well.
In rejecting all-out warfare or traditional negotiations with adversaries, George Kennan's original ideas called for a unified ""Western"" anti-communist stand against Soviet expansion.
He sought to create a collective deterrence that would restrain and slowly demoralize the enemy.
He also expected that an impressive collective Western posture would attract adherents who initially showed communist leanings.
Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, and his 1948 break-up with Stalin, was Kennan's primary example of this phenomenon.
Kennan's successors—Paul Nitze, Dean Acheson, John Foster Dulles, Henry Kissinger, Zbigniew Brzezinski, and Brent Scowcroft—greatly expanded the global reach of containment, but they remained true to the reliance on collective deterrence in combating communist advances.
Containment gave the United States an international leadership role, but it demanded multilateral action.
By the middle of the Cold War, this motivated the United States to finance and defend a series of undemocratic regimes in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Although these regimes were often a clear affront to American values, they promised to support collective responses to Soviet, Chinese, and Cuban interventions.
Perversely, Washington's obsession with collective responses to communism motivated support for brutal authoritarians, including Syngman Rhee, Ngo Dinh Diem, the Shah of Iran, and Augusto Pinochet, among many others.
When Americans acted alone, they did not have to make deals with devilish figures, they did not have to compromise their values for the sake of security, and they did not have to defend faraway regimes.
Integrated into a world of collective institutions, Americans lost their independence, their moral clairvoyance, and their ethical exceptionalism.
The United States made the kinds of Realpolitik compromises familiar to other great powers in prior eras.
This phenomenon showed the dynamism of American foreign policy, but it never sat well with idealists at home and abroad.
Despite the criticisms of the United States, especially in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, collective security contributed to Washington's enduring strength throughout the Cold War.
The United States nurtured a series of alliance relationships, particularly in Europe and East Asia, that provided necessary resources, ingenuity, and popular support for containing communist advances.
A Critical Appraisal of American National Security Policy During the Cold War, revised edition , chapters 2-3.
Most important, collective security contributed to transnational and interpersonal familiarities that motivated many of America's harshest critics to see a common purpose in supporting United States programs.
The American commitment to collective security gave Washington a clear ""soft power"" advantage over Moscow.
Ironically, the individualistic sensibility of the United States in the Cold War supported more effective collective security measures than the communal ethic of the domineering Soviet leadership.
Free trade Along with collective security, the United States pursued global free trade after the Second World War on an unprecedented scale.
This did not mean a complete elimination of trade tariffs, even within the United States.
It did, however, mark a new commitment to the denationalization of economic production.
In combating an anti-capitalist enemy that sought central control over all means of production, Americans made the remarkable decision to spread production capabilities to the largest number of possible places around the globe.
Despite prior invocations of free trade, this was a radical idea in its time.
Until 1945, most Americans presumed that national strength required a centering of big industry within the United States.
Foreign markets for resource extraction and the sale of finished products were a traditional goal, but production remained largely homebound.
Profits accrued most directly to the domestic producers, not the foreign resource suppliers or consumers.
This was the model for the ""imperialism of free trade"" that, according to Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher, fueled the wealth of the Victorian British Empire.
Hobson and Vladimir Lenin had in mind when they penned their famous criticisms of capitalist exploitation.
For the first time, the United States invested heavily in factories and other industrial capacity in distant countries—first Western Europe and Japan, then South Korea, Taiwan, and other emerging economies.
Through the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the United States and its allies also created an international lending system to encourage local investments in production, and the associated laws of contract, property, and exchange that would fuel capitalist development.
Instead of rival empires, American-sponsored free trade created one common system of exchange.
According to the Bretton Woods System, and its successors, the dollar became the reserve currency of the world, the guarantor of value in production and exchange across diverse territories.
The spread of dollars through free trade had advantages and disadvantages for Washington.
It gave the United States an ability to generate liquidity for investment, especially after 1971, when President Richard Nixon ended convertibility to gold.
Since foreign countries held dollars in reserve, the United States could print more, and finance debt, at reduced cost.
In return, however, Washington was constrained by the need to exchange its dollars for valuable goods and specie, on demand from foreign holders.
As Americans spent more on bases and businesses in Europe and Asia during the 1960s, the country risked a shortage of its own money to cover its growing costs.
Policymakers feared the political consequences of pulling their money out of allied economies, but they also confronted ever-growing shortfalls that demanded deficit spending on a scale unprecedented, by the 1970s, for the United States in peacetime.
The dollarization of a global free trade economy opened the world, including the United States, to new dependencies.
Despite the obvious wealth creation, free trade required real sacrifices that Americans, among others, endured in the Cold War.
A History of the International Monetary System, 2nd edition , chapters 4-5.
The Politics of International Monetary Relations, 1958-1971 ; Eichengreen, Globalizing Capital, chapters 4-5. no Jeremi Suri subsidize domestic industry.
For more than a century, Washington had relied on very large tariffs to finance the federal budget and to support internal development.
For the sake of spreading production and wealth, and combating communism, Americans quickly reversed this equation.
With reduced industrial tariffs, United States companies faced more intensive foreign competition in their own markets, United States workers often lost their jobs to foreign counterparts, and the permanent burden for financing growing federal expenditures shifted decisively from tariffs to personal income taxes.
Yes, Americans agreed to pay more taxes for a high production-high consumption world of free trade in the Cold War.
Initially after the Second World War the United States imported inexpensive products, but by the 1960s free trade meant that cars, appliances, and high-end machinery arrived from abroad.
They contributed to a new capitalist trading system that greatly increased the circulation of goods, reduced prices through increased competition, and spread wealth across the globe.
The countries that opened themselves to new production possibilities after the Second World War, with American assistance, became much wealthier than before.
Those that resisted free trade remained poor until they eventually became free market producers themselves.
China and India are prime examples of free trade latecomers who have achieved new prosperity.
The striking exception that proves the rule is the agricultural sector of the American economy, where politically powerful farm states managed to maintain high tariffs to protect their crop values.
A similar process took shape in Western Europe, Japan, and other industrial democracies.
As a consequence, industrial trade and growth far exceeded agricultural trade and innovation during the Cold War.
American-sponsored free trade brought computer chip factories to Japan and software production centers to India, but it kept agriculture more rooted in traditional territories.
The gross inefficiencies in food production and distribution in the twenty-first century are a result of this exception to the free trade trend of the Cold War.
Global free trade did not necessarily remove the harsh edges from capitalism.
Free trade was a dynamic system of ""creative destruction,"" in Joseph Schumpeter's terms, that undermined efforts at central control by various political elites.
Although free trade often hurt American workers who lost jobs to overseas factories, it increased consumption and encouraged innovation.
Free trade economies were not more fair, but they were more dynamic than their counterparts.
The United States did not ""win"" the Cold War because, as Schumpeter predicted, the development of free trade capitalism was mixed, contradictory, and ever changing.
With global competition, the United States economy became more efficient and innovative, but also more susceptible to foreign ""shocks"" and the comparative advantages of other societies Free trade assured that basic American assumptions about economic growth, market exchanges, and private property would spread.
It was an idea, however, that continued to elicit mixed opinions among Americans.
In this controversial context, Washington's consistent and unprecedented support for free trade throughout the Cold War is quite remarkable—and deserving of more attention from historians.
Solvency The United States came out of the Second World War with more resources and capabilities than any other society.
In a reversal of its position at the start of the twentieth century, the United States was now the largest creditor to the world, controlling the flow of capital to favorable investors.
The possibilities for American economic dominance were truly unprecedented.
It left America's chief rival, the Soviet Union, in an especially weak economic position.
The challenge for the United States was not asserting global predominance, but instead managing the multiplication of foreign obligations and commitments.
As never before, Washington found itself occupying and rebuilding societies in Europe and Asia.
America's economic dominance was still insufficient for the demands of postwar global reconstruction.
Doing so much in so many places, Americans struggled to cover the costs.
As John Lewis Gaddis has shown in his seminal work on the history of containment doctrine, the tension between the ever-growing demands on the United States and the consistent constraints on available resources drove debates about strategy.
In a recurring cycle, one presidential administration sought to expand available resources with additional flexibilities; its successor tried to correct for overspending and overcommitment through retrenchment policies that limited expenses.
The next administration then reverted to more costly efforts, and the cycle alternating between expansion and retrenchment continued.
Budgets cycles in the Cold War drove strategy as much as foreign threat perceptions.
Scholars have argued that President Dwight Eisenhower was somewhat successful in the 1950s, holding the line on what he described as a creeping ""garrison state"" if the United States continued to spend too much on foreign aid and defense.
The president feared that excessive foreign commitments would undermine domestic growth.
Despite his own military background, he believed that a ""free society"" had to limit the peacetime presence of the American military, and its associated institutions.
High military spending was inefficient, wasteful, and unsustainable in Eisenhower's view.
The ""New Look"" strategy of the 1950s sought to reduce the global American footprint and rely on technology, especially nuclear weapons, to project power on the cheap.
Even this disciplined strategy, however, fell prey to continued pressures for increased American spending to combat communism and assure stability in places as distant as South Korea, Vietnam, Lebanon, and the Congo.
The United States found that maintaining the technological edge in nuclear weapons and other technologies was very expensive—much more so than Eisenhower expected.
Cold War expenditures continued to grow, and the United States could not return to the more restrained and economical strategic posture that fiscal conservatives, like Eisenhower, demanded.
Budget cycles bounced between periods of plenty and moments of austerity, but overall spending on foreign and defense activities increased.
American leaders never mastered this dynamic, but they learned to live with it.
The big spenders—John F Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, and Ronald Reagan—remained attentive to certain limits.
They tried to cut costs where they could, and they continued to rely upon the domestic tax base for financing foreign policy expenditures.
The budget cutters who feared the smothering effect of a ""garrison state""—Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower, in particular—continued to spend unprecedented resources on expansive military, economic, and political commitments abroad.
As they pinched pennies, Truman and Eisenhower built the nuclear arsenal, with ""overkill"" capabilities, that became the foundation for American Cold War strategy.
The big spenders and the budget cutters similarly balanced growing commitments with vigilance about long-term resource capabilities.
They were attentive to maintaining American solvency—the ability of the United States to assure its foreign security without undermining its domestic dynamism.
They each found a way to pursue ""guns and butter"" with reasonable success.
This balance between expanding commitments and continued solvency was the greatest source of American strength in the Cold War.
It gave Washington the opportunity to recover from mistakes, to adjust to external changes, and to outlast adversaries.
This was not a necessary outcome, as anyone who has studied the history of great powers knows.
Managing resources to meet foreign commitments without short-changing necessary domestic investments—that is the most difficult challenge confronting any internationally active country.
It was a challenge multiplied many times over by America's superpower status in the Cold War.
Some observers, like historian Paul Kennedy, believed 31 See Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, chapter 6.
Of course, Kennedy's forecast underestimated the dynamism and discipline that kept American society solvent.
Even Ronald Reagan, in the early hawkish years of his presidency, spent far less on the military (as a proportion of gross domestic product) than his predecessors in the 1950s.
Examining the history of the Cold War one must say that the nation's leaders preserved American solvency, despite many pressures.
They did it because it remained an idea they never forgot, a guidepost they returned to in every moment of strategic re-evaluation.
Election cycles also helped, bringing budgetary issues to public attention and forcing leaders to explain how their strategies preserved national solvency.
Every Cold War president had to sell his strategy, at home and abroad, as affordable and sustainable.
American solvency was driven by a powerful belief that it mattered, that a vibrant democracy could not leverage its future to fight present-day enemies.
Major investments in infrastructure, education, and social welfare programs served short-term needs, but they also reflected a remarkable American commitment to prepare for the future.
Drawing on the limited legacy of the New Deal, Cold War policies helped to build the roads, the universities, and the basic programs for human needs in the United States.
That was a key part of solvency— expanding capital along multiple dimensions.
The power of solvency as an idea is illustrated best by its striking absence in the early twenty-first century.
Reaction to threats and opportunities replaced attention to long-term elements of financial and social health.
The United States took on enormous new commitments—including two major wars—without any public discussion of costs, resources, and alternative needs.
Inattention to solvency contributed to an intellectual shallowness that was not present before.
Democracy Americans have always thought about their foreign policy as an extension of their democracy.
The earliest statement of United States foreign policy doctrine, George Washington's Farewell Address of 1796, made precisely this point.
From Washington through the Cold War, Americans believed that the ultimate purpose of their actions was to expand the virtues of a free society.
Until the Cold War, the United States generally pursued the spread of democracy overseas by non-military means—especially commerce, culture, and diplomacy.
After 1945, however, American leaders married much more military power to this long-standing process.
During the Cold War the United States pursued a very muscular form of democratization, with an emphasis on intervention as much as local development.
The faith that distant and diverse societies would want to embrace the ""American way of life"" undermined isolationist impulses.
In addition, the feared expansion of communism raised the stakes for those who believed the United States had to support and promote an alternative model.
Even for a leader skeptical of foreign interventions, like President Dwight Eisenhower, the risk of Soviet infiltration in Asia, Africa, and Latin America drove a desire to build strong democracies as a necessary bulwark.
Democratization in the Cold War was not idealistic; it was a form of communist containment.
For Western Europe and Japan, Cold War democracy provided a foundation for peace, prosperity, and reintegration into the global economy, with extensive American support.
South Korea and Taiwan evaded similar democratizing efforts for the first years of the Cold War, largely because of American dependence on dictatorial figures.
By the late 1950s, however, the United States pushed for democratization in these countries as well.
For all its tragedies, American policies in the Cold War seeded an impressive string of new democracies that prospered, cooperated, and ultimately defined the last decades of the twentieth century.
The American record was, of course, much less favorable in other parts of Asia, as well as most of Africa and Latin America.
In these regions the United States failed to follow through on its democratic aspirations.
In countries like Vietnam, Indonesia, Iran, and Chile, Washington invested enormous resources in the transformation of politics and economy.
The United States presumed that democracy had to follow the American model and that it had to exclude those voices deemed traitorous and threatening, especially if they included communist influences.
The mix of American-style institutions and anti-communist injunctions in poor, fragmented, and conflict-ridden societies produced outcomes that contradicted democratic purposes.
The real problem was that many societies were ready for democratization after decades of empire, but American ideas of democracy were not ready for the complexities of these societies.
American ideas of democracy transformed the world in the Cold War, setting a standard for political legitimacy that most societies would accept, at least in rhetoric, by the end of the twentieth century.
These ideas contributed to remarkable peace and prosperity in Western Europe and East Asia.
These same ideas, however, undermined peace and prosperity—often with very deadly results—in other regions.
Americans were serious about democracy in the Cold War, but they were often naive and self-defeating in their understanding of what it required beyond their borders.
For a start, see Latham, The Right Kind of Revolution; Westad, The Global Cold War, especially chapters 5-9.
Based on the nation's history, one would have expected fewer international commitments and more of an inward focus.
Many factors— including the very real threats posed by the Soviet Union—explain America's unprecedented Cold War path.
The point of this chapter is not to privilege ideas above other influences, but to show that four particular ideas contributed to remarkably consistent policies that served American interests quite well.
There were, of course, many other ideas that floated around Cold War policy discussions.
Many of these other ideas were superficial, self-serving, and even stupid.
The bad ideas, however, should not dominate the study of a much richer Cold War strategic landscape.
The four ideas that gained the most traction across the period, and provided continual value for policymakers, were not superficial, self-serving, or stupid.
The ideas were concise and enduring, as well as radical and relevant for the problems at hand.
American leaders had many choices, and these ideas helped them to choose.
Collective security, free trade, solvency, and democracy became guideposts for American policy.
They helped to create public confidence in security and prosperity after more than a decade of depression and war.
These ideas also served the interests of many non-Americans who embraced them as never before.
The ideas did not ""win"" the Cold War, but they gave great advantage to one side.
As Americans quite naturally drifted from these ideas after the Cold War— rejecting, at least temporarily, collective security and solvency—they faced new questions about meaning and effectiveness.
Answering these questions does not require a return to the old canonical Cold War concepts.
The task is to articulate ideas that are relevant for the challenges of the time.
As was the case more than sixty years ago, grand strategies are built on ideas that serve a purpose in a particular historical epoch.
New ideas will set the strategies that ultimately define the twentyfirst-century world.
With the opening of archives, historians naturally plunged into empirical studies, putting generalizations aside.
The search for new documents and details will no doubt continue, but there is already enough evidence and empirical research accumulated to put our microscopes aside and go back to a broader picture of Cold War origins, development, and legacies.
Another vantage point for a broader view is the simple fact that enough time has elapsed since the end of the Cold War to discern what has changed in East-West relations, and what has not, and thus come to a better understanding of what the Cold War was about.
There have been already some attempts at a new synthesis, most famously John Gaddis's book about what we know now.
But—as seen by the very mixed reaction to it—the argument is far from over.
Its focus is on the origins, some consequences, and legacies of the Cold War.
The Cold War and Its Legacy War was about all of the above—a messy mixture of ideology, geopolitics, and culture which mutually reinforced each other.
In general, most of the complex phenomena in history are messy multi-factor developments that cannot be reduced to a single explanation.
Nor can we provide an exact measurement of each of those factors, or their hierarchy, since in each specific case it may have been different depending on the complex interplay of external and indigenous factors.
Stalin's strategy was heavily geopolitical, while Khrushchev was more of a revolutionary romantic, and Brezhnev a cautious pragmatist.
On the United States side, ideology was correlated with the ups and downs of the American empire—each retrenchment being accompanied by a lack of messianic pretensions.
Realpolitik and geopolitics were essential, especially in the wake of the Second World War, which left only two great powers and many power vacuums between them in strategically important areas of Central and Eastern Europe, the Far East, Northern Asia, and the Near and Middle East.
As soon as the cementing threat from the common enemy disappeared, the competition for influence over those areas began in earnest, destroying the Big Three alliance from within.
For American and British planners, the Soviet Union, with its hostile ideology and huge military capability, became the next logical candidate after Nazi Germany for the role of Eurasian hegemonic power—an emergence of which the United States and its allies tried to prevent in two world wars.
For the Soviet Union, the American-led Western bloc aimed at depriving it of the well-deserved fruits of great victory and, ultimately, its destruction.
The Soviet geopolitical aims in the wake of the Second World War included a buffer zone of pro-Soviet states on the western borders (as they were in 1941), an enfeebled Germany and Japan, regaining Tsarist possessions in the Far East, and acquiring a controlling influence over the Black Sea straits and strongholds in the Mediterranean via trusteeship over former Italian colonies.
Stalin also planned to create a Soviet enclave in Northern Iran to cover the USSR's vulnerable southern flank, where most Soviet oil deposits were located.
The Soviet efforts of 1945-6 to implement most parts of this program met with stubborn Western resistance, and that led to the serious tension between former allies.
But without the ideological factor, this geopolitical rivalry would have assumed more traditional and restrained forms.
More global—because both sides believed in the universal nature of their principles and wanted to spread them to the whole world.
More intense—because each side believed it had a monopoly on tmth and was determined to win.
More dangerous—because ideological hostility led to exaggerated suspicions and fears, which in turn pushed both sides to overkill in providing for their security.
In culturalcivilization terms, Russia has always been a lonely country, torn between East and West, and never truly belonging to either.
Ever since the thirteenth century its relationship with the West had been particularly difficult.
For Russia, a more prosperous, modern, and technologically advanced West was a cultural and security challenge, a source of many invasions through indefensible western frontiers.
For the West, the heart of ""the Russian problem""—especially from the nineteenth century—was a combination of huge natural and manpower resources, with an alien authoritarian regime capable of using those resources freely against Western interests.
Even the founders of Marxism—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels—shared this view.
Bolshevism served to widen this gap between Russia and the West, to increase Russia's isolation, and to make its traditional task of defending its vulnerable Eurasian landmass against real and potential enemies even more difficult.
The Soviet system aggravated the brutality of Russian culture (in which human life was worth only a kopeck, according to the Russian proverb), while democracy's advance in the West enhanced human rights and individual dignity.
Thus, the cultural gap between Russia and the West widened even further.
Bolshevism was also a daring attempt to ""catch up with and overtake"" the capitalist West in technological development by means of central planning, a nationalized economy, and a one-party state.
To sum up, the Cold War was a confrontation between the two social systems which had geopolitical, ideological, and cultural dimensions, was global in scale, and was conducted by all means short of a major hot war between the two main antagonists.
Many other countries were increasingly drawn into it, either by association or by becoming a battleground for that conflict.
Some of the Soviet and American allies—like Great Britain, Cuba, and the German Democratic Republic—became important players, sometimes pushing the superpowers further than they would have liked to go themselves.
Given all these serious reasons, my own view is that the Cold War was largely inevitable—to the extent there is an inevitability in history.
But this seemingly inescapable conflict could have taken different forms.
It might have been less confrontational, if both sides had been ready to negotiate and compromise.
The rather surprising absence of a major hot war during that conflict was made possible, in part, by the lethal nature of nuclear weapons.
They made the arms race more costly, but at the same time, because of their ultimate destructive power, a full-scale war became too suicidal to resort to.
Fortunately, leaders on both sides were responsible enough to realize this early on—with a little help provided by several crises, especially the one over Cuba in 1962.
And this is understandable, because very few things in life are entirely bad or entirely good.
This rivalry forced each side to mobilize resources to enhance its attractiveness and competitiveness in order to overtake the main rival and gain new allies.
This challenge reached its peak in late 1950s and early 1960s, when the post-Stalinist Soviet Union was going through its most dynamic phase of development.
For the highly competitive American nation, this challenge became an additional and powerful incentive to invoke domestic reforms.
The emergence of modern federal support for higher education and sciences, creation of NASA and space exploration programs, and even some social reforms of 1960s, were all connected with Cold War competition.
It was no accident that the Keynesian policy of stimulating economic growth reached its height in the early 1960s during the JFK presidency.
The administration experts closely monitored Soviet economic growth for the president.
Analyzing Khrushchev's program of communism construction over twenty years, they stressed that, although the ultimate Soviet goal of surpassing the United States in per capita consumption was unrealistic, America had to speed up its economic growth so as not to let the Soviets catch up with United States GNP by the end of the twentieth century.
But the Cold War rivalry was not confined to purely economic competition.
Soviet and United States Economic Growth in the Light of the New Soviet Program.
Special mention should be made of a historical breakthrough of the 1960s in terms of black America.
Racial segregation was probably the most damning side of America's image, as USIA experts constantly reminded the White House.
In the context of the Soviet-American struggle for the Third World, and the rise of anti-colonial national liberation movements, the elimination of racial segregation became a problem of United States global standing.
The Cold War forced Americans to see their country through other peoples' eyes, raising the price that had to be paid to maintain the non-liberal status quo.
At the same time, Cold War imperatives provided political cover for those who would otherwise be unlikely to question that status quo.
Indeed, even conservatives would often tolerate liberal innovations as necessary for national security, while liberals eagerly exploited the ""Soviet threat"" to legitimize their pet reform projects.
In general, the rise of the American welfare state and government intervention were closely related to this external challenge, which helped to overcome individualistic and laissez-faire traditions inherent in American political culture.
Thus, the Soviet Union—to use Arnold Toynbee's metaphor—became a functional equivalent of the devil that forced the West into doing what it should have done anyway.
A big difference here was that its impact was mostly confined to military technology, but it also involved science and education.
It was to the Cold War that the Soviet Union owed its greatest technological achievements of those years— 14 Daniel Deudney and G John Ikenberry, ""After the Long War,"" Foreign Policy, 94 , 27.
The Short Twentieth Century, 1914-1991 (London: Michael Joseph, 1994), 7-8.
But when Khrushchev shifted this competition into consumption, the Soviet system revealed its basic flaw, since it could not provide both guns and butter.
All in all, on the social improvement level, the Cold War delivered more fruits for the United States than for the Soviet Union.
On the other hand, the disappearance of this competition, and the resultant triumph of the American liberal democratic model contributed to American complacency and arrogance which created a fitting context for the current financial and economic crisis.
This is not surprising since competition stimulates, while monopoly leads to complacency and stagnation.
The impact of Soviet-American rivalry on the foreign policies of both countries was even more pronounced.
Here, the impact of competition intermingled with that of deterrence—though the latter was a function of competition in the military-strategic sphere in the context of a rough parity.
Deterrence based on the danger of escalation of local conflicts into global nuclear war worked both ways, playing a checks and balances role on a global scale.
It forced both sides to act with greater restraint and responsibility, keeping emotions and ideological instincts on a leash.
In the course of mutual adjustment and extended arms control negotiations a culture of deterrence emerged, based in part on the mutual recognition of a common responsibility for global security.
This factor of ""existential deterrence,"" well documented in the studies of United States foreign policy, 19 is beginning to be confirmed by the new Russian literature (especially covering Khrushchev's period), 20 though many documents on Soviet foreign policy decisionmaking remain closed.
It is not hard to imagine how far the adventurous Khrushchev might have gone during the Berlin and Cuban crises (or even the more cautious Stalin in Iran and Turkey of 1946-7) without United States deterrence.
On the other hand, in the absence of the Soviet countervailing power, the United States might have resorted to the use of nuclear weapons in Korea or Vietnam, or to the escalation of other regional conflicts.
The US's traumatic experience in Iraq is another example of the risks with which unchecked American supremacy is fraught.
It was this transatlantic cooperation that helped to produce a historic rapprochement between Germany and the rest of Europe, the European economic miracle, and the knitting together of the fabric of the Atlantic community.
During the postwar planning deliberations of 1943-45, a predominant attitude toward the prospect of European integration was mostly negative, since most experts were concerned with a probable emergence of a new competitive power center in Europe.
Leading liberal institutionalists, like John Ikenberry, accuse George W Bush of betraying the best part of America's postwar strategy, based upon multilateralism, mutual obligations, respect for international law, and allies' interests.
On the other hand, such prominent historians of United States foreign policy and strategy as Melvin Leffler and John Gaddis emphasize that Bush was deeply rooted in American strategic culture, with its unilateralism, hegemony, and reliance on military force.
Of course, sooner or later America would have done this anyway, due to its huge economic and military potential.
But, in the absence of the Soviet threat, this process might have lasted much longer, and might have taken different, less drastic forms.
One of the most interesting debates on this subject took place behind the closed doors of the Policy Planning Staff in late 1950.
George Kennan presided over the meeting, and Reinhold Niebuhr was an active participant.
Niebuhr also expressed his doubts about America's maturity—a factor necessary for true world leadership.
I am not at all certain that American people would handle this challenge if we are not surrounded by a broader community making decisions.
It was the Soviet challenge itself that would serve as a mobilizing and educational stimulus for America which, in the process of responding to it, would evolve into a true world leader.
The end of the Cold War has deprived the United States not only of the main enemy and strategic compass of containment, 30 but also of a former sense of a national mission.
These questions are being raised more and more often in public and academic debates.
The ruling nomenklatura was deeply pleased to run a superpower competing with the mighty United States in military power and global influence.
For the ordinary Soviet people, the United States was also a worthy rival, enhancing their self-respect—after all, we were in the same superleague with Americans, and could look down at ordinary players on the world scene.
The loss of this great power status had painful consequences, which are still with us.
First of all, Russian policymakers now operate from a much narrower resource base than during the Cold War.
But this change is not entirely negative because it has forced our leadership and the public at large to realize that we have to be more modest and realistic in our ambitions, and that our foreign policy should help to modernize our country instead of ruining its economy through the arms race and foreign assistance.
Second, there has been a radical de-ideologization of Russian foreign policy.
Gone are the messianic pretensions and global aspirations of Soviet times; also 29 See Deudney and Ikenberry, ""After the Long War,"" 27-8.
The Cold War value gap has greatly diminished , and Russia now subscribes to Western ideals of free markets and democracy.
Russia has rejected confrontation with the West, destroyed the Iron Curtain, and taken the course of integration into the world economy.
Our political and diplomatic leaders are proud to call themselves pragmatists; economy, trade, and finance are sitting firmly in the saddle of Russian foreign policy.
Third, Russia has radically downscaled its military and security requirements.
It no longer aspires to have a military capability equal to all of its real and potential enemies.
To avoid militarization of the economy and confrontation with the West, it does not get involved in full-scale arms races, and it has given away most of its military installations overseas.
The current agenda of Russian foreign and security policies is rather modest and limited.
Its primary task is to secure the new borders and to have stable, friendly, or neutral governments in the neighboring countries.
Russia pursues a so-called multi-vector foreign policy, developing mutually beneficial ties with all major power centers without regard to the nature of their political systems.
Yet, on a deeper geopolitical and cultural level, there are also some continuities with the past.
Great power mentality, a vulnerability complex, a zealous defense of Russian sovereignty and identity, and a mixed attitude toward the West—all these elements of the national foreign policy tradition are reemerging.
And this is happening not simply because of historical inertia, but as a reaction to Western policies.
NATO expansion to the East, and the advance of its infrastructure all the way to the Russian borders, a forceful regime-change policy in the former Yugoslavia, active resistance to Russian-led integration of the post-Soviet space (and cultivation of anti-Russian forces there), are all developments which have caused growing Russian concern.
They have demonstrated that, for the United States and its allies, Russia's legitimate security interests are less important than expanding their own influence and locking in the Cold War geopolitical gains.
For Russian policymakers, it has become clear that the end of the Cold War and of the ideological divide has not done away with interstate rivalry and with old Western syndromes—an apprehension about a strong Russia and its image as a country alien and even hostile to Western culture and values.
The country's new borders have become even more porous and difficult to defend.
This pushes the Russian leadership to new attempts to create a defensive belt of friendly states around Russian borders.
The first time around it was done by the brutal means of Sovietization, which became one of the main causes of the Cold War.
Now the means are restrained, and mostly economic, but even so, in a modern world, this task becomes more difficult than ever before, and faces greater internal and external constraints.
No wonder the competition for influence over post-Soviet space has become an important source of tension between Russia and the West.
Another difference with the Cold War period is that this time the issue is more sensitive for Russia; in the 1940s it was about Eastern Europe, but now it is about Ukraine, the Caucasus, and Central Asia, which are much closer to the Russian heartland.
The economic development gap between Russia and a highly developed West has widened again after the modernizing thrust of Soviet times.
Russia's civilizational loneliness remains, despite its openness to a world facing new challenges from the East and South.
The issue of nationalism continues to produce instability in the Northern Caucasus and some other regions.
And the attempt to overcome these stubborn realities of Russia's position by Soviet means has failed.
It remains to be seen whether the new post-Soviet Russia will find more effective solutions.
First of all, while in Russia we are witnessing the end of ideology, in America and the West there is a real renaissance of a liberal-democratic crusade—a strong reaffirmation of Western values and a new surge to expand them to the new virgin lands in the East.
That is why they are now called ""thugs,"" ""rogues,"" ""last dictators in Europe,"" etc.
There is nothing wrong with expanding markets and democracy provided it is not accompanied by expanding the world's most powerful military-political alliance, to which Russia has never belonged, is highly unlikely to ever belong, and which is still seen by many of its members as a means of containing Russia.
Of course, the official NATO line is that this expansion is not directed against Russia, now that we are partners, not enemies, etc.
Again, this sounds quite prudent; but if you mostly prepare for the worst, and do little but hope for the best, you—according to the logic of self-fulfilling prophesy—may end up with the worst—that is, an isolated, hostile and dangerous Russia.
In short, United States basic strategy has changed much less since the Cold War than Russia's.
Perhaps this is reading too much into current American policy and overestimating its consistency and purposefulness, 34 but that is how it looks to our policy planners used to worst-case scenarios.
And if their American counterparts were in their shoes, they would surely be even more worried.
There is a new leadership in Washington which has learned from America's bitter experience in Iraq and from other foreign policy mistakes of their predecessors.
There is more consideration of other countries' interests and a stronger emphasis on soft power rather than military might.
The current financial/economic crisis also helps to save on expensive military toys (like 33 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, volume 2 , 312.
It is very encouraging that both the White House and the Kremlin are now once again engaged in serious arms control negotiations.
The combination of lean budgets and internal preoccupation may serve as a healthy check on imperial ambitions and far-fetched schemes for remaking the outside world.
The loss of former confidence in the superiority of the American economic model, in the wake of the current crisis, may bring some much needed humility and openness to new ideas of how to improve the political climate.
In short, there is a chance to really break away from the Cold War and its legacy; but it will take a long and sustained effort from both sides.
How the End of the Third World and the End of the Cold War Are Linked Odd Arne Westad One of the key elements in the recent historiography of the Cold War deals with the destructive change created by the extension of that conflict into Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
The debate that this historiography has fashioned points to the two final decades of the Cold War as decisive in how the nonWestern world looks today.
In a global situation in which developments outside Europe and North America are drawing ever closer to the center of international affairs , it is vitally important to test some of the propositions that underlie this generalization.
These are the two questions that will be explored in this chapter, along with some suggestions for more general approaches to the study of links between the late Cold War era and our own time.
I write this in the peace and quiet of my central London apartment because the Cold War did not end in a Third World War.
But while cataclysm was avoided, destruction was widespread outside the industrialized West.
I am grateful to Mel for his friendship and for all the good discussions.
Across Asia, Africa, and Central America devastating wars destroyed states in quick succession and on a massive scale.
In all of these wars the Soviet-American confrontation played a major role.
The Cold War wars framed the states that these post-colonial societies created, and molded mindsets—especially with regard to governance—that would prove to be long lasting.
This policy adjustment ended the Brett on Woods system (a convenient shorthand for how the global economy worked between 1944 and 1972), and set the stage for an internationalization of the United States economy that was unprecedented in its history.
At the same time, the tremendous expansion in the supply of world money and credit, provoked by the combination of extremely lax United States monetary policies and the explosive growth of privately controlled liquidity in offshore money markets, fueled the integration of the capitalist world economy in the first stage of what we have come to know as globalization.
By the 1980s these (mostly unplanned and generally unintended) global processes of change were putting increasing pressure on any country that was attempting to follow a non-capitalist model of development.
Their room for maneuver—as we will see later—was much reduced in economic terms well before the Soviet state started its time of troubles in the 1980s.
The collapse of the Third World as a political project is, in my view, intimately connected to these developments.
Just when many Third World leaders were hoping for increased South-South economic cooperation and a greater hearing in the UN and elsewhere for their economic demands, the curtain fell on the systems of planning which their economies had been built on.
The instability in the prices of raw materials contributed to the end of the show.
But so did the political framework within which these global demands were put.
A number of Thirdworldists—especially new recruits to the cause from Latin America—seemed entirely oblivious to the fact that embryonic globalization actually favored and promoted the economic growth of some states with whom they had earlier been closely aligned, for instance in Southeast Asia.
The Cold War, therefore, ended not only with the collapse of the Soviet Union—it also ended with the collapse of the Third World.
In the 1980s, as China defected from the planned economy model and began its journey toward what some call ""market-Leninism,"" and its region surged ahead in economic rejuvenation, other parts of the Third World were left further and further behind.
The economic ruin of Africa, much of Latin America, and parts of South Asia happened at the same time as the East Asian surge simply because these other parts could not, or would not, or sometimes were not allowed to, benefit from the changes that took place in the global economy.
One of the main effects of the macro-changes that took place in the 1970s has been the increased centrality of Eastern Asia in world affairs.
As I have explained elsewhere, this rise to prominence could not have happened (or at least not happened as quickly as it did) without the collaborative framework for trade that the United States constructed—mainly for Cold War reasons— with former Third World Eastern Asia in the 1970s and 1980s.
The Third World In order to understand the collapse of the Third World, it is essential first to define what it was.
Many, who never bothered to explore its origins, today see the Third World as an outdated term for non-Western countries—these are often the same people who deem the concept to be deeply politically incorrect.
This devaluation of the term would have come as a great surprise to those who began using it after the Bandung conference in 1955.
It was powerful, plentiful, and proud, and it confronted, self-consciously, the First World—the aristocrats of the United States, Britain, or France, who wanted to own it— and the Second World—the high priests of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe —who wanted to save it for their own benefit.
Out of the post-colonial position would come ideas that would unite the oppressed, destroy all forms of subservience, and free humankind from the threat of obliteration through nuclear war.
Fanon's Third World encompassed Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean (including, inconveniently for the Soviets, the Caucasus and Central Asia), but not South America, China, or, for that matter, Japan.
For Indonesian leader Sukarno, who probably promoted the expression more than anyone, the Third World was an idea waiting to become a geographical reality , and it would include all peoples who had been colonized by European powers.
In Africa, after the early 1960s, the liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies and in the white supremacist states of South Africa, Southwest Africa, and Rhodesia were those who came closest to seeing the Third World as existing geographical space, since for them it created a zone in which they could operate freely and openly.
Maybe it is right to conclude that the Third World was a place as long as it fitted someone's political framework, or—if you like—satisfied their mental maps.
Whatever definition you want to give it, the Third World no longer exists today, neither as political project nor as geographical space.
The placing in time is very important here; the Third World concept is ""outmoded"" because its heyday belongs to the period, roughly, from 1955 to 1975; not because of any denigrating intent or origin with the concept itself.
But in spite of the historian's need to ""bound"" the concept in time, it can be studied by social scientists as well as historians, thereby creating debates that are of some interest today in terms of how we understand change at the end of the twentieth century and beyond.
Positions The debate about whether the Third World, as a political project, belonged within the Cold War, is an old one, laden with tangled political baggage.
The position from the political Right in the United States and Britain was that the Third World was simply another name for left-wing subversion of Western interests, de facto allied to Soviet expansionist urges in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Some radical Third World states—Algeria, Ethiopia, Vietnam, and Cuba, for instance—moved ever closer to Soviet-style domestic politics and economics in the 1960s and 1970s, and away from the idea of non-Cold War independent socialist positions.
But the bigger story is that almost no Third World country broke with the capitalist world economy as they sought new internal development plans.
Except for Cuba and Vietnam, which, for political reasons, were denied access to world trade and finance by the United States, all post-colonial states sought more, not fewer, international market openings in spite of their domestic radicalism.
There were many reasons why Cold War was such a laden term among anticolonial leaders.
Many defined the term, following Soviet parlance, as an aspect of United States foreign policy, not as description of a bipolar system.
Others saw it as postulating a dichotomous world, in which no position was possible except those of the superpowers.
Whatever way it was seen, the Cold War, as a term, seemed to get in the way of what the Third World promised to be.
In reality, however, there was little escape from the Cold War, whichever way you defined it.
Not only did the United States intervene in various forms—as we shall see below—against those who tried to assert their independence from United States control, but the Soviet Union was, and remained, the only alternative power with a global reach.
It did not matter whether you defined the world between the end of the Second World War and 1989 as unipolar or bipolar.
As soon as you acted internationally, then those concerns that drove the Cold War impinged on your freedom and, in the end, constrained your options.
Many Third World countries tried to break out of the Cold War stranglehold.
For many Western Thirdworldists—intellectuals who believed that the Third World project would defeat the Cold War and build a new global future—the claim of association with the Soviet Union was a particularly galling one.
Not only did they oppose the Soviet-linked communist parties in their own countries; they also often attempted countermanding Soviet influence in their Third World country of choice.
In Algeria, French ""tiersmondistes"" warned Ben Bella of Soviet perfidy and parsimony.
In spite of the terror (well known, but often denied) and the waste , the Soviet experience for many Third World leaders offered a way out of the dilemmas of state-building under conditions of poverty and international market pressures.
While the Soviet Union's main advantage was being a Western country that was not a colonial power, it was also seen as economically successful and—very importantly—a pioneer of state planning.
At a time when economic development models were considered pre-packed products, the Soviet planning experience counted, not only for states that viewed themselves as socialist, but for those—such as India or Nigeria—who wanted to move away from markets to centralized, state-led development.
But in addition to the rather obvious fact that there was much that did not endear post-colonial elites to capitalist forms of development (generations of repression under overseas bourgeois regimes, for one), there were also the links between concepts of national liberation and Bolshevism that went back to the origins of the Russian revolution.
Different from Marx, who had generally viewed colonial rule as progress, Lenin had seen a link between what he called self-determination and socialism; ""objectively"" the national bourgeoisie were allies of the working class while their country broke free from colonial domination, the Soviet leader taught.
Soviet and other communists helped organize the anti-colonial resistance across the globe, and, deservedly, made themselves popular among those who were to become post-colonial leaders in the process.
As United States historian Carol Anderson has reminded us, the emergence of a non-communist opposition to racial discrimination and colonial oppression abroad was a watershed, which helped set the stage for a rapid decline in Soviet fortunes in the Third World.
Another key link to the Cold War was the category of state formation chosen by the post-colonial elites.
Instead of building on broad identities or narrow ones , they invariably chose the concept of the nation state to form the core of their political projects.
It was—as Jeffrey Byrne has noted—outwards from these more or less imagined entities that Third World solidarity was intended to flow.
The result was governments lacking in legitimacy, peoples who did not see themselves as one people, and cross-cutting conflicts drawn from both of these deficits stirring hatred and often violence.
It is quite possible that one of the main roles of the Cold War was to exacerbate conflicts that already existed.
But the form that the state itself got—cheered on equally by the United States and the Soviet sides in the Cold War—was a key reason for the transmundaneity of the Third World project, as well as an origin for some of the disasters that befell postcolonial states as the first generation of leaders passed from the scene.
A further link worth contemplating—although the literature, especially the comparative literature, so far is weak—is between Cold War strategies and religiously exclusive states.
The two main experiments in setting up new states based on religion—Israel and Pakistan—both benefited massively from United States Cold War concerns, but at the cost of destabilizing their neighborhoods.
United States support for Israel and Pakistan brought the Cold War into play in the Middle East and South Asia, and helped link other states in these regions to the Soviet Union.
But the most important consequence of these United States alliances was probably to push local populations—both in the countries the United States supported and elsewhere—toward forms of identitarianist politics among Muslims, Hindus, and Jews that fuelled long-term conflict.
In the case of Pakistan, and throughout the Muslim world, it also linked Washington to authoritarian dictatorships that may have served short-term United States security interests, but that became less and less legitimate in the eyes of their own populations.
The issue of state and elite legitimacy is the core of the debate on the effects of the Third World project itself.
Across the post-colonial regions—including most of those who saw themselves as part of the Third World—governments waged war against their own peasant populations in an attempt to force them into the version of modernity that the regime subscribed to.
In these brutal efforts they were helped by the Cold War superpowers, which both saw the abolition of the peasantry as a key yardstick for progress.
The problem with these campaigns was not only that a lot of people died (although that, at least to some of us, is bad enough), but that hatreds were sown of a kind that would explode in the face of modern political projects—from Algeria to Iraq, Burma, and Cambodia.
Nick Cullather is right to argue that the United States ""battle against poverty"" was an intimate accomplice of its Cold War strategies.
The historiography of the Cold War in Latin America is among the most extensive and most complex in recent literature.
Greg Grandin has explained both how United States interventionism and dominance in the region predated the Cold War and how there was a Latin American Cold War that more or less coincided with the global version.
This is important because, as we have seen, both Third World leaders in Asia and Africa, and Latin American radicals, were uncertain as to how the struggle in the Americas fitted in with the Third World project.
Moreover, the elites were mostly of European origin, something other radicals—especially those of a nativist bent—found problematic.
In spite of the focus on United States interventions—recently explored in the case of Chile by Tanya Harmer and Brazil by Rodrigo Patto Sa Motta 18 —what came to link Latin America with broader Third World developments were concepts of dependency and ""structural imperialism""; terms that gave the United States control of its southern neighbors a similar valeur as the suffering of those that had been directly colonized elsewhere.
Americanism and Anti-Americanism in the Americas,"" The American Historical Review, 111:4 , 1042-66.
There were questions of definition and of inclusion that were hard to resolve, but not more than for the superpower blocs themselves.
In spite of its contradictions and its occasional cruelties, the Third World project seemed set for survival and gradual institutionalization.
Its original emphasis on social justice may have been blunted, but its emphasis on sovereignty and equality among states remained.
So did the regime-led modernization model and the emphasis on planning, which seemed to be spreading outward from the Third World core during the 1960s.
In the UN, Thirdworldist claims and proposals were adopted with increasing frequency.
There are, as far as I can tell, four main reasons, three of which are dealt with below, and the fourth in the final part of the chapter.
The first is changes in global capitalism, which sent the economic situation for Third World countries into freefall.
The second is the massive breakdown in legitimacy within many Third World regimes.
The third is the anti-revolutionary offensive of the Reagan administration, which armed rebels in order to overthrow the last hold outs among Third World regimes.
And the fourth is the counterrevolution in China and the unprecedented economic growth in East Asia.
It was a kind of perfect storm, which very few international movements could have stood against.
The fundamental changes in the global economy that took place at the beginning of the 1970s came, eventually, to privilege an internationalization of United States capitalism into what we today call globalization.
Ironically, measures that the Nixon administration took in order to deal with rising public indebtedness and inflation—such as floating exchange rates and abolishing capital controls—helped create interactive and international financial markets that strengthened global capitalism and expanded world trade.
By the end of the decade the United States had begun, on a massive scale, to buy into economic change that happened elsewhere, thereby at least temporarily slowing its own weakening relative position in the international economy.
Even those who participated to a very high extent in the global economy through raw material exports did not benefit much, because of the instability of prices.
Since all the key countries in the Third World project—and a very large number of countries in the post-colonial world— fell into the two last categories, their economic development plans suffered and slowed down, especially since many of them were getting increasingly indebted to international financial institutions.
And since plans for socalled South-South economic cooperation had mostly failed, loans were the only way in which many states could make up for their economic shortfall.
The Third World project also collapsed because many of the states that represented it became less and less legitimate in the eyes of their own populations.
The first generation of leaders—Sukarno, Nasser, Nkrumah—came to base their rule on fiat rather than popular participation in government, and thereby destroyed much of the support they had had when their governments were formed.
The message that the Third World concept had contained—a political and sometimes moral superiority based on the struggle against oppression in the past— became overshadowed by the practices its representatives engaged in.
Although some claim that it was the military regimes that replaced the initial leaders who were the worst sinners in this respect, it was clearly the first generation that set the low standards that others lived down to.
Some historians claim that the Third World project was shattered in the 1970s because of the enormous economic divergence that developed between three groups of post-colonial countries at exactly the moment when the Third World agenda itself was becoming centered on international economic demands.
The main problem for those who wanted to develop their industrial sectors was unstable energy prices.
The third part of the Third World's collapse was the interventionist offensive that the United States administration of Ronald Reagan conducted exactly at the point when many Third World regimes were at their weakest.
In Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua the United States supplied materiel and weapons to the opposition, in order to defeat radical regimes.
In Cambodia they supported the Khmer Rouge and its allies in their war against Vietnam.
Elsewhere debt ridden, politically weakened regimes sought their peace with the Americans as a condition for loans and market access.
Overall, this probably had more to do with markets than with threats of armed intervention.
From a contemporary perspective the pace and multiple directions of the change seemed confusing; Japan was fast becoming the world's most dynamic economy; South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore were surging ahead as the ""little dragons” of Eastern Asian economic development.
But Vietnam and the rest of Indochina opted for Soviet-style communism, while the second-largest country in the region, Indonesia, seemed mired in an authoritarian statist development model with low growth.
Eastern Asia embraced the market, embraced globalization, and had little time for those who still wanted to defend anti-capitalist Third World principles.
Much of this divergence in terms of principles of political economy had, of course, started in the previous decade.
In the early 1960s there was little basic difference in terms of levels of output between countries in Southeast Asia and the newly independent states in Africa.
But a decade later the difference between, say, Zambia and Singapore, both members of the Group of 77, which supported the NIEO, had become enormous in terms of their basic economies.
Singapore's prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew, had been to Lusaka the first time for a very Thirdworldist non-aligned summit in 1964.
Imported toiletries were absent and there was little by way of local substitutes.
The only souvenir she could buy was a malachite egg, to remind us that Zambia was a single-commodity economy, copper, and its price had not kept up with the prices of oil and other imports.
They had no foreign exchange, and their currency was rapidly depreciating.
That Deng Xiaoping—communist China's powerful new boss— lectured Kaunda the following year on the need for rapid, market-induced development was a shock not just to the Zambian leader, but to other Thirdworldists of the same generation.
It cannot be called socialism while people's living standards remain very low,"" Deng told Kaunda.
As Chen Jian has pointed out, China's defection—both in political and economic terms—helped split the Third World apart and contributed significantly to the United States offensive against radical regimes during the 1980s.
But the sensational growth in Eastern Asia—and especially in China— would not have been possible if it were not for their easy access to American and—later—Western European markets.
The point is that successive United States administrations, from Truman to Reagan, provided market access for their Cold War allies in order to stimulate economies and, eventually, defensive capabilities overseas.
Of course there was also the hope that such links—for instance to China after 1972—would benefit the United States economy.
But the main effect was to give Eastern Asia a trade advantage that these countries were now in a position to use to their benefit.
In 1972, when Mao Zedong was still in control, the only thing Beijing feared more than a Soviet attack was the subterfugeous reintroduction of capitalism.
It wanted United States military hardware, not United States management models.
But after Mao's death and the military coup in 1976, Deng Xiaoping saw its strategic links with the United States as the basis for a turnaround of China's economy.
During Ronald Reagan's hard-line administration, from 1981, the Chinese message was even more welcome than before, in spite of Reagan's early concerns about not betraying old friends on Taiwan.
Throughout the 1980s the United States treated China as a de facto ally, sharing sensitive intelligence information with it and giving it access to much needed technology that was sometimes unavailable to others outside the United States itself.
Reagan's purpose was to build China into a real threat to the Soviet Union, thereby 25 Renmin ribao , August 23, 2004.
Reagan's friend, the United States film producer Douglas Morrow—a savvy man, who could distinguish between stars and flops— toured China in 1981, and told the president that the Beijing leaders were ""absolutely obsessed about Taiwan"" and that any focus on the island's position would effectively prevent the United States from working with Deng and the Chinese leaders.
It would be advisable not to be too paranoid, at this stage, about their being a communist state.
I think they will bend, twist, and adjust to whatever seems to abet their progress.
Reagan also declared himself willing to sell sophisticated weapons directly to Beijing.
As the Cold War again grew substantially colder in the early 1980s, Sino-American security cooperation expanded.
United States anticommunist campaigns in Afghanistan, Angola, and Cambodia were closely coordinated with the Chinese, and intelligence-sharing increased.
And China's access to America's markets were secure, thereby setting the stage for the first phase of the country's remarkable economic boom.
As they had done for Japan three decades earlier, the Americans even put pressure on their European allies to open up their markets to Chinese products.
Cold War influences The story of the interaction between the Third World and the Cold War is a complex one.
It should be studied, I think, as part of the broader patterns of international and transnational history in the twentieth century, not simply as the rise and fall of anti-systemic Thirdworldist ideas.
In many cases it would make sense to see the Third World as a specific project of solidarity among elites who had been oppressed by colonial powers and as an emerging program for undoing the injustices this oppression had created.
It was a project bounded in time and geographical space, with some key states as its representatives.
The Third World's involvement with the Cold War—in the form of the conflict between communism and its enemies—existed throughout this period.
It is therefore right to reintroduce the contested concept of Cold War into key developments in the history of Africa, Asia, and Latin America over the past four generations.
But in order for it to succeed, historians will have to give up the idea that the Cold War was a narrowly defined battle between the United States and the Soviet Union, often portrayed as the determinant of events elsewhere.
We may dislike the Cold War, both as a concept and a system, and we may want to de-center it, but we cannot dissolve it.
By the mid-1980s there were about 70,000 nuclear warheads in the world, and over 95 per cent of them were owned by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Each side worked out elaborate doctrines for using these weapons in war, and each side sought ways of using nuclear threats for political purposes.
Both sides were conscious of the devastating consequences that nuclear war would have for the human race, and they developed theories of deterrence and strategic stability to help them conduct their rivalry without precipitating nuclear war.
Mutual understanding of the consequences of nuclear war, of the dangers of crises, and of the relationship between offensive strategic systems and missile defenses provided the basis for the Cold War nuclear order.
There were several crises in which the danger of nuclear war seemed very close, but the Cold War ended without such a war.
Nor did nuclear weapons give rise to our current international order, however we might characterize it—in terms of globalization, for example, or the clash of civilizations, the rise of China, the decline of the West.
Nevertheless, nuclear weapons continue to play an important role in today's world.
A new nuclear order has been emerging, though whether it will prove to be stable is not yet clear.
This chapter will trace the emergence of that order and try to analyze how it will develop in the future.
Nuclear Weapons and International Relations Since the End of the Cold War The Cold War legacy Although widely regarded at the time as a failure, the Reykjavik summit meeting between Gorbachev and Reagan in October 1986 was a turning point on the path to ending the Cold War.
The nuclear arms race had entered a phase of great intensity in the previous decade, with the deployment by the United States and the Soviet Union of new, more accurate intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles armed with multiple warheads.
Arms control negotiations had resumed in 1985, after a hiatus of almost two years, following NATO's deployment of ground-launched cruise missiles and Pershing II missiles in Europe.
Gorbachev was impatient with the progress being made and requested the meeting in Reykjavik in order to give a new impetus to the negotiations.
He brought with him proposals that contained significant concessions by the Soviet side.
He and Reagan discussed deep cuts in their nuclear forces, even going so far as to talk about the elimination of nuclear weapons.
The negotiations were intense, but the meeting ended in frustration and disappointment.
That made it possible to incorporate proposals discussed at Reykjavik into arms control treaties.
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty Treaty, which eliminated the two countries' shorterand intermediate-range missiles, was signed in December 1987.
The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty , which capped the number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads on each side at 6,000, was signed in July 1991.
Bush took the imaginative step of announcing the destruction of all United States ground-launched short-range nuclear weapons, as well as the withdrawal to the United States of tactical nuclear weapons deployed on surface ships, attack submarines, and land-based naval aircraft.
Eight days later Gorbachev reciprocated by announcing similar unilateral measures by the Soviet Union.
Thus, in the final years of the Cold War , the two sides made significant moves to bring the nuclear arms race to an end and to reduce their nuclear stockpiles.
It was not immediately obvious that the three new countries would hand these missiles and their nuclear warheads over to Russia; active and creative diplomacy was required on the part of Washington and Moscow, as well as the governments of the three new states, to ensure that those three countries signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states in 1993 and 1994.
A second, more lasting consequence of the collapse of the Soviet Union was the threat that this posed to the security of the Soviet nuclear weapons complex.
That complex had been embedded in the internal security structure of the Soviet state, and as the Soviet state collapsed, the fear arose that nuclear scientists, nuclear materials, or even nuclear weapons might find their way from Russia to other states, or into the hands of terrorist groups.
This danger was a matter of great concern to the international community, as well as to the new Russian government.
The United States, in cooperation with Russia, came up with creative approaches that enabled Washington (as well as the European Union and Japan) to fund programs—known as the Cooperative Threat Reduction programs—that would dispose of surplus nuclear materials, enhance the security of the Russian nuclear complex, and provide alternative research opportunities for scientists who had been involved in weapons development.
The third element in the Cold War legacy consists of the large nuclear forces still held by the United States and Russia.
Progress in reducing these forces has been disappointing when set against the political transformations of the last twenty-five years.
In January 1993, the two countries signed the START II Treaty, which would have capped strategic nuclear forces at 3,000-3,500 deployed strategic nuclear warheads apiece.
This treaty did not enter into force, however, because of disagreements over missile defense.
In 1997, Clinton and Yeltsin agreed on the parameters for a START III Treaty with a limit of 2,000-2,500 deployed strategic warheads on each side, but no agreement was ever reached.
The 2002 Moscow Treaty limited deployed strategic warheads to 1,700-2,200 on each side.
The New START Treaty, which entered into force in 2011, commits the two sides to reduce the number of deployed strategic warheads to 1,550 over a period of seven years.
In 2011, the total number of nuclear warheads in the world (including non-strategic and non-deployed warheads) was about 20,000, over 90 per cent of which belonged to the United States and Russia.
The removal of strategic weapons from Belarus, Kazakstan, and Ukraine was an unequivocal success from the point of view of nonproliferation.
The Cooperative Threat Reduction programs appear to have been successful too, though assessment is more difficult because it is not easy to judge exactly how serious the danger was in the first place, and how significantly foreign aid helped in dealing with it.
Nevertheless, the goals of the overall effort appear to have been achieved, in the sense that there is no persuasive public evidence that nuclear scientists, nuclear weapons, or significant quantities of fissile material have passed from the Russian nuclear weapons complex into the hands of undesirable states or terrorist groups.
Redefining the nuclear danger The danger of a general nuclear war receded with the ending of the Cold War.
It became even harder than during the Cold War to imagine the circumstances under which the United States or Russia would intentionally launch a nuclear attack on the other.
The military confrontation in Central Europe disappeared in the early 1990s when Russia withdrew its armed forces and nuclear weapons from Eastern Europe and the newly independent states.
The United States too, greatly reduced—but did not eliminate—its forces and nuclear weapons in Europe.
Perceptions of the nuclear danger have changed since the end of the Cold War, though not in the same way in every country.
Washington quickly shifted its attention from its rivalry with the Soviet Union to the potential threat from rogue states and terrorists.
This shift was already implicit in the Cooperative Threat Reduction programs, which defined the threat from the Soviet Union/Russia not in terms of the number of nuclear warheads it possessed, but of the potential for leakage of knowledge, materials, and people.
The new nuclear danger we face is perhaps a handful of nuclear devices in the hands of rogue states or even terrorist groups.
The top priority was keeping the nuclear weapons complex secure and intact in conditions of economic and political collapse.
The second priority was maintaining strategic stability with the United States through arms control negotiations if possible, but by new weapons programs if necessary.
With the Russian army in disarray, nuclear weapons provided compensation for the weakness of its conventional forces.
The government felt it was vital for political as well as military reasons not to lose the strategic parity the Soviet Union had struggled so hard to attain.
Nuclear nonproliferation remained an important priority, but a lower one for Russia than for the United States.
For the other nuclear weapon states the end of the Cold War was less important, in part because their nuclear forces were so much smaller than those of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Britain and France have reduced their nuclear forces, treating them largely as insurance in an unpredictable world.
China has retained its policy of minimum nuclear deterrence and is now modernizing its small nuclear force.
The threat that Israeli nuclear weapons are designed to meet has not disappeared.
The nuclear dimension of the confrontation between India and Pakistan emerged into the open only in the 1990s.
The main exception was South Africa, which decided to destroy its small nuclear stockpile at least partly in response to the decisive change in its strategic environment caused by the end of the Cold War.
The United States had sought from the beginning of the nuclear age to prevent other states, especially hostile ones, from acquiring nuclear weapons.
It developed a common interest with the Soviet Union in stopping the spread of nuclear weapons, and this led to the signing of the NPT in 1968, and to the strengthening and creation of institutions to support the nonproliferation regime.
The Gulf War of 1990-1 added greatly to the concern about proliferation.
IAEA inspectors soon discovered that Iraq had organized extensive clandestine programs for uranium enrichment and nuclear weapons design.
This was especially troubling because Iraq was a party to the NPT and had been subject to IAEA safeguards.
The nuclear nonproliferation regime In 1986 the five recognized nuclear weapon states (the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France, and China) had nuclear weapons; so too did Israel and South Africa.
India had tested a nuclear device in 1974, but the decision to develop a nuclear arsenal came later, perhaps in 1988-90.
Pakistan appears to have had a workable device at some point in the mid-1980s.
In 1986 there were seven nuclear weapon states, plus two on the brink of possessing nuclear weapons.
Over the last twenty-five years three states have ended their nuclear weapon programs or have had them ended by others.
South Africa destroyed its nuclear weapons at the end of the Cold War; Iraq's nuclear weapons program was dismantled by the IAEA in the early 1990s; and Libya gave up its nuclear weapon program in 2003.
The treaty entered into force in 1970, once 40 states, in addition to the three depository states, had signed it.
China and France signed in 1992, helping to move the norm of nuclear nonproliferation closer to universal acceptance.
The prospects for strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime appeared to be good in the early 1990s.
After vigorous diplomacy by a number of governments, including the Clinton administration, the NPT was extended indefinitely at the Extension and Review conference in 1995.
The third is between the states that have nuclear 7 UNSC 687, April 3, 1991.
The first and second of these bargains were crucial in inducing non-nuclear weapon states to sign the Treaty, but the significance of the third bargain has increased over time.
In 1968, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the treaty, strategic arms control talks were only about to begin, and disarmament seemed a very distant prospect.
In 1995 the Cold War was over, and the non-nuclear weapon states were less willing to look charitably on the failure of the nuclear weapon states to disarm.
Alongside the decision to extend the NPT indefinitely, the 1995 Extension and Review Conference adopted a set of principles and objectives that emphasized the importance of disarmament.
It stressed early completion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty , an early agreement on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty , and strenuous efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of disarmament.
The CTBT was signed in 1996, but it has not yet entered into force; the United States Senate voted against ratification in 1999.
Since 1996, however, the only nuclear tests have been the five conducted by India in May 1998, and the six Pakistani tests in the same month, as well as the two North Korean tests in 2006 and 2009.
The Conference on Disarmament, where this treaty is supposed to be negotiated, works by consensus, and so far no consensus has been found to start negotiations.
One consequence is that the bargain between the non-nuclear weapon states and the nuclear weapon states has become both more contentious and more salient.
One hundred and ninety states have signed the NPT, giving it almost universal adherence.
The second is that some states that have signed the NPT have organized clandestine nuclear weapon programs.
India and Pakistan by conducting nuclear tests; the others by renouncing nuclear weapons.
Israel, however, still maintains its policy of opacity, though nobody doubts that it has the bomb.
The policy of opacity is intended to be less provocative than a declared policy of nuclear deterrence.
For four decades there has been no nuclear response to Israel from other Middle Eastern countries, but Israel now finds itself in an increasingly exposed position.
The Iranian nuclear program has not only raised fears in Israel, but also stimulated interest in nuclear research in other countries in the region.
The 1995 Extension and Review conference called for a nuclear weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
The 2010 Review Conference reiterated that call and backed the convening of a conference in 2012, to be attended by all states of the Middle East, on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
For many years India and Pakistan pursued a policy akin to that of opacity; but in May 1998 they each conducted nuclear weapon tests.
India consistently resisted signing the NPT, denouncing it as discriminatory; Pakistan took the position that it would sign only if India did.
India planned a test in 1995, but called it off under American pressure, after the United States had obtained satellite photographs of preparations for the test.
In 1998 the Indians made their final preparations at night to avoid surveillance by satellite.
India's decision to test was not just a technical one; it was a political decision to ""come out"" as a nuclear power, in defiance of United States policy.
The government in Islamabad was under intense domestic pressure to match India; it resisted Washington's strenuous efforts to persuade it not to do so.
For a discussion of what the phrase may mean, see the exchange between Ambassador Yitzhak Rabin and Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Warnke on November 12, 1968.
But the American interest in nonproliferation was not always consistent.
Washington turned a blind eye to Pakistani nuclear activities in the 1980s when Pakistan was a crucial ally in supporting the Mujahideen against Soviet forces in Afghanistan.
When Pakistan once again became a crucial American ally in a war in Afghanistan, the United States dropped the sanctions it had imposed after the 1998 tests.
Washington's effort to persuade New Delhi to change its policy on nuclear weapons after the nuclear tests failed completely.
The Bush administration decided that it was much more important to enlist India as a friend and ally than to continue to impose futile sanctions on it.
This showed, once again, that nonproliferation policy does not (and perhaps cannot) trump all other political goals.
The Indo-Pakistani nuclear relationship mimics the Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union, but there are several crucial differences.
First, India regards its nuclear weapons as a deterrent against China as well as Pakistan, and China has helped Pakistan develop its nuclear industry including, according to some reports, providing it with the design of a nuclear warhead and testing a Pakistani warhead in China.
Second, direct conflict can take place at the level of low-intensity warfare, as well as conventional and nuclear warfare, and that has affected the calculation of risk on both sides.
Third, the two main protagonists can appeal to outside powers—the United States as well as China—to tilt the bilateral balance, and that affects their rhetoric and their behavior.
Pakistan as the weaker power has been more prone than India to do this.
Two crises since 1998 have raised the prospect of nuclear war between India and Pakistan.
In 1999, Pakistan launched an attack across the Line of Control in Kashmir to seize the Kargil Heights.
It did so apparently in the belief that Pakistani nuclear weapons would neutralize Indian conventional superiority, allowing Pakistan scope for guerrilla operations.
The Clinton administration put severe pressure on Pakistan to withdraw behind the Line of Control, which it did.
India blamed the attack on Kashmiri groups supported by Pakistan and undertook a huge build-up of its forces along the Line of Control.
The United States and Britain put pressure on Pakistan to stop terrorist incursions into India, but a further terrorist attack in May 2002 led India to put its forces on high alert, ready to go to war within a few hours.
In the first crisis nuclear weapons appear to have emboldened Pakistan; in the second they seem to have acted as a restraint on both sides.
Clandestine nuclear programs Clandestine nuclear programs pose an even greater danger to the nonproliferation regime.
The most egregious case is that of North Korea, which built up its nuclear industry in the 1980s and 1990s.
It signed the NPT in 1985 as a non-nuclear weapon state, and withdrew in 2003, before conducting its nuclear tests.
In June 1994 the United States and North Korea nearly went to war over the latter's nuclear plans.
Kim II Sung defused the crisis by agreeing to negotiations, which resulted in the Agreed Framework of October 1994, setting certain limits on the North Korean nuclear program in return for help with oil supplies and the construction of two light-water reactors in place of the more proliferation-prone graphite-moderated reactors North Korea was building.
The Agreed Framework proved difficult to implement; there were constant complaints from each side about the willingness of the other to put it into practice.
For North Korea the agreement was fundamentally about the normalization of relations with the United States; for the United States it was primarily about preventing North Korea from acquiring nuclear weapons.
An agreement seemed tantalizingly close at the end of the Clinton administration, but the Agreed Framework finally broke down in 2002-2003.
There were moments of hope in 2005 and 2007 when joint documents were produced, but ultimately the talks proved unsuccessful.
An even more vexing issue for the international community has been the Iranian nuclear program.
In the late 1980s, the Islamic regime began to buy centrifuge components for uranium enrichment.
It claims it is creating the basis for a civilian energy program and has consistently denied that it plans to make nuclear weapons.
Iran has refused to do this, in spite of the offer of guaranteed supplies of low-enriched uranium for Iranian reactors.
The current crisis came into focus in 2003, when the IAEA discovered that Iran had violated its commitments under the NPT by running a covert enrichment program and failing to disclose imports of nuclear materials.
The IAEA Board of Governors found, in September 2005, that Iran was not in compliance with its Safeguards Agreement and referred the case to the UN Security Council, which, since 2006, has imposed four rounds of sanctions on Iran.
These did not stop the Iranian nuclear program; nor did they remove concern about Iran's past activities.
Early in 2009 it was reported that Iran had accumulated sufficient LEU that, if converted to highly enriched uranium , would provide enough material for a bomb.
It may be content to put itself in the position of being able to produce nuclear weapons quickly if it wishes to do so.
Early in 2012, both the United States and the Europeans imposed significantly stronger sanctions on Iran, while Iran agreed to new talks about its nuclear program.
At the same time the Israeli government and some Republican politicians in the United States began to speak much more openly about the possibility of military strikes against Iran.
The United States has led the effort to halt the Iranian program, seeing it as a destabilizing factor in the Middle East and as a direct threat to the United States in the longer term.
The Iranian threat has served as a justification of United States Ballistic Missile Defense deployments in the United States and Europe, and these deployments have complicated relations with Russia and China.
Israel has felt particularly endangered by the prospect of an Iranian bomb, seeing it as an existential threat.
The provocative rhetoric of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad—Israel must be ""wiped off the map""—has stoked Israeli fears.
The possibility of military action by Israel or the United States against Iranian nuclear sites has been widely discussed.
See the footnote to the article with a link to a discussion of the correct translation of what Ahmadinejad said.
The North Korean and Iranian cases, different though they are in important respects, have exposed weaknesses in the nonproliferation regime.
First, the NPT supports the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes while seeking to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons, but it does not draw a clear line between civil and military programs, and this will become a more important issue if nuclear power spreads.
A plant that can enrich uranium to 3-5 per cent for use in nuclear power plants can also enrich it to 90 per cent for use in bombs.
A state can come very close to being able to produce nuclear warheads without breaching its obligations under the NPT, as long as it does not intend to produce nuclear weapons.
The safeguards regime has been strengthened since then, but not every country has adopted the IAEA's Additional Protocol, which allows for more rigorous inspections.
Besides, North Korea has at various times expelled IAEA inspectors, and Iran has restricted the access inspectors can gain to its facilities.
The IAEA does not have the power to impose inspections on unwilling governments.
Notwithstanding serious differences among its five permanent members, the UN Security Council (to which the IAEA can report on issues affecting international peace and security) has adopted resolutions imposing sanctions on North Korea and Iran, but so far these have not had the desired effect of bringing about a change in the policy of those two states.
Khan was a central figure in the most 17 Ulrike Putz, ""Israels morderische Sabotage-Strategie,"" Spiegel Online, August 1, 2011.
North Korea was apparently helping Syria to build an ""undeclared” nuclear reactor before an Israeli air attack destroyed it in September 2007.
The combination of great power and great vulnerability proved to be a volatile mixture.
This combination was reflected in the National Security Strategy produced by the Bush administration in September 2002.
It became the focus of an intense debate about the need for, and the legitimacy of, preventive force.
The Bush administration offered as the main justification for invading Iraq the need to prevent Saddam Hussein from reconstituting his biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons programs.
Notwithstanding the criticism elicited by the war in Iraq, the National Security Strategy's argument that preventive military action might be required in dealing with new nuclear threats has been widely accepted.
Nuclear deterrence is much less useful in dealing with the former threat than with the latter.
Second, he called for more resources and authority for the IAEA and international inspections, a new framework for civil nuclear cooperation (including an international fuel bank), and a structure that ensures that when any country breaks the rules, it will suffer consequences.
Obama's speech drew on a well-established agenda of unfinished items in the area of arms control and disarmament.
What was new was that he framed them in the vision of a world without nuclear weapons.
Report of the Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change , 24.
George P Shultz, William J Perry, Henry A Kissinger, and Sam Nunn, ""A World Free of Nuclear Weapons,"" Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2007.
This approach is based on the assumption that a discriminatory regime, in which some states possess nuclear weapons and others do not, will not be viable in the long run.
The steps outlined in the Prague speech have proved more difficult to implement than was expected in 2009.
The United States' 2010 Nuclear Posture Review did play down the role of nuclear weapons in United States national security policy, though it did not go as far as adopting a policy of no first use, as some critics had hoped.
In April 2010, the administration hosted an international summit conference on nuclear materials in Washington DC; the goal was to secure all vulnerable nuclear material around the world within four years—a probably unachievable goal, but one that is certainly worth pursuing.
Negotiations on a new START treaty proved complex, and ratification by the United States Senate contentious, but the treaty did enter into force in 2011.
The prospects of having the United States Senate ratify the CTBT in Obama's first term are, at best, uncertain.
Negotiations on a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty have not begun, because Pakistan, which is increasing its production of fissile materials, opposes negotiations.
On September 24, 2009 the UN Security Council held a summit meeting at which fourteen heads of state and government unanimously adopted Resolution 1887 reiterating the Security Council's support for nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation.
Even though all the nuclear powers are concerned about nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism, international cooperation will not necessarily be easy.
In the first place, not all of the nuclear weapon states place these concerns at the top of their list of priorities, as the United States does.
This has been evident in the response of the P5 states to the North Korean and Iranian nuclear programs.
Chinese policy on the North Korean nuclear program, for example, has been influenced by the prospect of instability on the Korean peninsula and by the fear that the collapse of the North Korean state would lead to a reunified Korea allied with the United States.
A third difficulty is that deep reductions will be needed in United States and Russian nuclear forces if progress is to be made toward disarmament.
Institutional interests—weapons laboratories and military services, for example—can also present obstacles to further reductions.
Besides, nuclear weapons policy in the United States and Russia is still framed in terms of Cold War notions of deterrence and strategic stability, and this too complicates the process of disarmament.
The tradition of non-use has continued since the end of the Cold War, though there have been dangerous moments.
The Indo-Pakistani conflict twice gave rise to fears that nuclear weapons might be used.
The launch was communicated to the Russian president, but it was quickly established that the rocket posed no threat, and no Russian forces were put on alert.
Some commentators have taken this as evidence of the danger of accidental nuclear war.
In the first place, a global nuclear war is no longer the main worry, given the changes that have taken place in relations between the United States and Russia, though their relationship is still characterized by mutual deterrence.
Second, nuclear weapons have become more tightly woven into regional politics, especially in South Asia, the Middle East, and on the Korean peninsula.
Those conflicts contain within themselves the danger that nuclear weapons will be used; the settlement of those conflicts is essential if there is to be movement on the path to a world free of nuclear weapons.
Third, nuclear proliferation has come to be seen by the United States in particular—and by many, but not all, governments—as the main nuclear danger.
Their chief fear is that terrorist groups will acquire nuclear weapons or the materials for building them, perhaps with the help of rogue states.
Khan 27 Pavel Podvig, ""If It's Broke, Don’t Fix It,"" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 61:4 (July/August 2005), 21-2.
As a result, nuclear deterrence no longer serves, as it did during the Cold War, as the organizing principle for the nuclear order.
It retains its place in relations among the nuclear powers, especially in the conflict between India and Pakistan, but its role in preventing proliferation and nuclear terrorism is at best limited.
Conventional deterrence and non-military forms of deterrence have begun to receive more attention in the United States in the effort to prevent terrorism, and it is likely that these explorations will continue.
These approaches to deterrence lack the brutal clarity of deterrence through the threat of nuclear retaliation, but they may prove to be more effective in dealing with the danger of nuclear terrorism.
In order to meet the threats of nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism, governments have taken steps to ensure that nuclear warheads and nuclear materials are tightly secured.
The Bush administration established the Proliferation Security Initiative in 2003 as a global effort to stop the trafficking of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery vehicles, and related materials.
Bush and Putin launched the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in 2006 to improve national and international efforts to prevent, detect, and respond to, a nuclear terrorist threat.
Nuclear weapons have not been used in war, but they have served as a casus belli, most notably in Iraq in 2003.
The Bush administration promulgated the idea of using preventive force to stop rogue states and terrorist groups from acquiring nuclear weapons, but the Iraq War pointed up the difficulties of such an approach.
Preventive force requires detailed and reliable intelligence, as well as clarity about the goals of the action.
The Israeli attack on the Iraqi Osirak reactor in 1981 destroyed the reactor, but may have speeded up the Iraqi nuclear program.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq found that there was no nuclear program to shut down, but initiated a long and destructive war.
Preventive force raises questions about the legality and legitimacy of such action.
He went to war with Iraq, which proved not to have a nuclear weapons program, but he was unable to stop the nuclear programs of the other two states.
In his Prague speech, Obama outlined a future in which movement by the nuclear powers toward a world free of nuclear weapons would make it possible to create a more effective nonproliferation regime.
Those are the central questions that the current nuclear state of the world raises.
Building International Order in an Era of Transnational Threats , chapter 1.
In the early 1980s, when United States arms spending rose rapidly after several years of stagnation, public concern about the arms race also increased rapidly.
The probability a run-away arms race would lead to nuclear war was seen as quite high.
At the end of the 1980s, the INF agreement and the rapprochement between the superpowers have led many to the opposite extreme of declaring the arms race dead.
Many of these arms races may lead to wars or extremely wasteful arms acquisitions.
Today, some twenty-plus years later, it makes sense to use this note as a point of departure for a brief examination of the arms race phenomenon, during and after the Cold War, and of how our understanding of it has evolved since the ending of US-Soviet rivalry.
The Development of the Arms Race and How We Think About It Arguably, there is less division about the nature and role of arms races among the experts of today than there was a few decades ago.
Next, I discuss what implications, if any, the emerging consensus might have for our understanding of the East-West arms race during the Cold War.
Here, my main conclusion is that the steady acquisition by the two superpowers of more powerful and effective conventional and nuclear armaments was indeed a major feature of the Cold War, but that it should be seen more as an asymmetrical, and partly unsynchronized, militarization of an ideologicalpolitical and geopolitical conflict than a spiraling action-reaction process heading for Armageddon.
As for impact, I argue that whereas the nuclear arms race did not cause the Cold War, it put its distinct mark on it, especially in the first and last decade of the East-West conflict.
So far, they have been remarkably few, and their impact on international peace and stability correspondingly small.
Arms races, it seems, are less of a threat to international peace than to the economic well-being of nations.
That being said, the moment we adjust our thinking about arms races to the multidimensional conflicts and security dilemmas of the twenty-first century, the picture may well change again.
The nature of the arms race phenomenon—its features, causes, and possible effects—has been a contested issue among historians, political scientists and statesmen for more than a century.
Indeed, by the end of the Cold War, numerous schools of thought had presented their perspectives on what arms races are, why they occur, and what implications they may have for international peace and stability.
As Matthew Evangelista put it, there seemed to be more arms race theories than weapon acquisition decisions to explain.
Over the last twenty-year period the explanatory field has both narrowed and widened up.
It has narrowed in the sense that some of the theories and propositions that were still highly influential back in the 1980s have lost relevance and support.
It has widened up in the sense that the walls and gaps that once separated the more important schools of thought, and prevented fruitful exchange between them, have indeed been lowered and partly 2 Matthew Evangelista, “Case Studies and Theories of the Arms Race,"" Bulletin of Peace Proposals, 17:2 , 197.
Thus, any comprehensive theory will have to offer more than just a single analytical perspective.
In and by itself a rapid increase in military spending by two neighboring countries does not constitute a military competition or an arms race.
To do so, the military build-up must be imbedded in some sort of rivalry between the two governments in which they seek to improve, or at least maintain, their relative power and influence, either toward each other or within the international system.
First of all, arms races cannot be caused and sustained by non-relational factors such as ""Eigendynamik” or ""technological momentum"" alone.
The claim of Dieter Senghaas and others that arms races are essentially ""autistic"" and ""inner-directed"" phenomena, is still in want of convincing empirical support.
This view can be traced back to the father of the English school of international relations, Hedley Bull.
Secondly, even if arms races are caused by interstate rivalry driven by perceptions of fear and insecurity, there is little or no evidence in support of Robert McNamara's notion of a ""mad momentum"" making arms races, once started, almost impossible to control.
Sure, the perception of threat by one actor may trigger an action-reaction process, with the opponent responding in kind.
At least for the Cold War period, the armament decisions of the big powers and their allies had rather been ""mainly inner-directed and less dictated by external forces.
Interestingly, by the end of the Cold War, Senghaas himself was calling for multilevel analyses of the arms race phenomenon.
Arms races, rivalry, and war,"" Journal of Peace Research, 48:1 , 93, 97.
To start and sustain arms races a number of rational decisions have to be made.
These may in turn be criticized, reconsidered, modified, or reversed, which is why there are many examples of aborted arms races as well as of arms races controlled or ended by mutual accord.
Finally, the finding that arms races are caused by interstate rivalry, not the other way around, and may be started and ended by the exercise of political will, has the important implication that arms races cannot be a sufficient or necessary cause of war.
Yet many experts still posit a direct or indirect causal relationship between the two.
In fact, there is strong reason to believe that there is no direct causal relationship whatsoever between arms races and war; only a spurious one.
Still, they could find no positive correlation between arms races and war when the arms race occurred early in the life of the rivalry.
Only when arms races occurred at a later stage, ""in the context of mature rivalry,"" did a significant positive correlation emerge.
Again, this may actually indicate a spurious, rather than a causal, relationship since escalation to war is more likely to happen later in rivalry, after repeated disputes, regardless of whether there is an arms race or not.
Indeed, to many laymen and experts alike, the nuclear arms race stood out as the very essence of superpower rivalry.
To some, the term ""arms race” almost became shorthand for Cold War rivalry itself.
In the following I will present four propositions about the role and nature of the military competition in the Cold War that address different aspects of this question.
In terms of relative military spending the Soviet-American military competition in the Cold War may not fully qualify as an arms race, at least not a permanent one.
That being said, military expenditure may not be the crucial criteria in this particular case.
Many students of arms races prefer applying a simple quantitative indicator, such as an increase in the annual military spending of the parties involved by 8 per cent or more for at least three successive years, 23 or, alternatively, that 21 Hammond, Plowshares into Swords, 227.
According to Western estimates, annual Soviet defense expenditure as a proportion of GNP was constantly, although with some fluctuations, well above 8 per cent.
Even if it rose and fell from the end of the Second World War to 1960, the annual growth rate still averaged some 9-11 per cent.
From then onwards, there was a continuous increase in Soviet defense spending for more than twenty years.
Since no reliable figures were ever offered by the Soviet government itself, exactly how to measure the level of Soviet military spending became an intensely debated, and extremely politicized, issue among Western experts, especially in the 1970s.
From what we now know, Soviet military expenditure rose sharply from 1959 till the end of the 1960s, and then consumed a steady 14 per cent of GNP throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, with an annual growth rate of 4-5 per cent in the first half of the 1970s and considerably less—perhaps down to 2 per cent—in the second half, reflecting the increasing economic inertia of the Brezhnev years.
From 1982-3 onwards, annual growth in military spending increased once again, leading to an extremely heavy defense burden as the Soviet economy first stopped growing and next started to contract.
The defense sector was by now consuming almost onethird of the total expenditure of the Soviet government.
In 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev halted the rise in military outlays as part of his new economic reforms program, Perestroika.
Consequently, in the years 1989-91, military spending dropped more than 17 per cent.
In short, from the early 1950s until the late 1980s the former Soviet Union was consistently spending 9 per cent or more of its GNP on national defense— thereby, by a good margin, fulfilling one of the main numerical criteria of taking part in an arms race.
Among the first to question the notion of the Cold War as an arms race was Albert Wohlstetter.
In a two-part article published by Foreign Policy in the summer and fall of 1974, Wohlstetter argued that, of the two superpowers, only the Soviet Union was actually racing.
Since the early 1960s, he claimed, 24 Hammond, Plowshares into Swords, 49.
Thus, even if there was political rivalry and military competition between the two, there was no race.
There is little doubt that Wohlstetter, together with neo-conservative pressure groups such as The Committee on the Present Danger, was instrumental in lifting the alleged Soviet military out-spending of the USA to the top of the United States political agenda.
This, in turn, paved the way for the notorious Team B report and the following ""window of opportunity"" scare among influential United States national security experts in the second half of the 1970s.
According to official figures, the annual defense expenditure of the USA as a percentage of GNP was in steady decline from 1954 until the late 1970s.
The above figures for the years of the Korean War and Vietnam War do include the United States war effort; without it, the level of United States military spending would have been below 8 per cent of GNP also in the 1960s.
This implies that since the end of the Second World War, there are only eight out of forty-four years—more specifically, the 1954-62 period—when United States outlays for defense per annum surpassed the 8 per cent of GNP criteria.
First of all, we may ask whether it really makes sense to apply any fixed numerical indicator, such as 8 per cent of GNP in annual military spending, when one of the rivals involved is economically superior to the other.
If the stronger part, in this case the USA, did spend only what it believed to be necessary to improve or maintain its military position vis-a-vis the weaker party, and the Soviet Union's military expenditure consumed more than 8 per cent of its GNP, then it would seem appropriate to speak of an arms race, even if the USA spent considerably less than 8 per cent of its GNP on armaments.
Grey's arms race definition allows for this possibility since the only thing it asks for is that the parties do increase or improve their military forces at a rapid rate, without further specification.
Secondly, the records show that in certain periods of the Cold War—namely the 1950s and the early and mid-1980s—the military competition between the superpowers was so intense that it fulfilled, or came very close to fulfilling, even the strict numerical criteria of an arms race.
By 1987, when the Reagan build-up started to level out, the annual national defense outlays of the USA had increased by 53. per cent, compared to what they were in 1980.
Thirdly, even in the periods when its military spending was considerably less than 8 per cent of GNP, the United States was still racing, only with less expensive means.
The 1960s and 1970s saw a big leap forward in United States technology and strategy with respect to nuclear weapons.
Accuracy and survivability became more important than numbers and yield.
The emerging multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicle technology made it possible to increase offensive capabilities without increasing the number of strategic missiles.
Other promising technologies—such as cruise missiles and stealth aircraft—also gave reason to believe that the steady quantitative build-up of Soviet strategic forces could be balanced by qualitative means.
In the Cold War, nuclear weapons served as symbolic measurements of destructive power, or—in Thomas Schelling's phrase—of ""power to hurt , //33 which helped the two superpowers apprehend the strategic military balance in roughly similar ways.
The main function of the Cold War nuclear arms race was to secure that balance.
It took time for the decision makers in Washington and Moscow to fully comprehend the implications of the nuclear revolution.
By the end of the 1950s, however, the essential workings of the new era had indeed dawned upon the national security experts in both East and West.
Apart from the Cuban missile crisis, the superpowers withstood the temptation to use their nuclear forces to intimidate the other, gain political or territorial concessions, or in some other way reorder the status quo.
But since the United States government essentially allowed this to happen—by slowing down its build-up of strategic nuclear forces exactly as the Soviets started its build-up in earnest—the emerging parity was a product of both competition and cooperation.
This is what really makes the nuclear arms race between the United States and the USSR, at least from the 1960s onwards, so special.
The purpose of the build-up was neither superiority nor intimidation, but parity and deterrence, and along their way to this new state of equilibrium the superpowers began to exchange information about their nuclear forces, installed the Hot Line, accepted strategic surveillance by national means, and decided, eventually, to negotiate arms control agreements that would codify and secure the strategic balance even more.
First of all, most Americans 33 Thomas C Schelling, Arms and Influence , 34 Tellingly, Richard K Betts, who seems to have been inspired by an ambition to prove the exact opposite, reached the conclusion that ""Attempts at nuclear coercion during the Cold War were ambiguous in execution and uncertain in effect Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance , 227.
President Eisenhower's farewell speech, warning about the ""military industrial complex,"" may have made American voters even more doubtful about the need for more and better weapons.
Also, the growing United States involvement in the Vietnam War called for a shift of priorities within the defense sector.
However, in and by themselves, none of these factors was a compelling reasons for such a fundamental change of nuclear policy.
Rather, what happened was that United States decision makers, heavily influenced by civilian defense experts and think-tank strategists had, by the late 1950s, come to realize that nuclear weapons could not be used for intimidation of other major nuclear powers—only for deterring them—and that, for the purpose of deterrence, rough parity, supported by an assured second-strike capability, would be good enough.
With an increasing number of its strategic missiles placed on nuclear-powered submarines, the United States government felt confident that it had, and would have in the foreseeable future, an assured massive retaliation capability that could not be offset by any likely increase in the offensive nuclear forces of the Soviet Union.
At the same time, they also realized that it would not add much in terms of security for the United States to sustain its build-up of land-based and airborne nuclear forces since the only thing that could possibly be achieved by this was to provoke fears in Moscow that the Soviet secondstrike capability might not be assured.
Since such fears could have a potentially destabilizing effect, it would seem rational, from an American perspective, to allow the Soviets to achieve a rough parity, or even a slight edge, in land-based strategic forces.
In this sense, the Soviet-American competition in strategic weapons was partly a cooperative game.
For nuclear deterrence to work in a non-destabilizing way, some sort of cooperation, communication, and mutual restraint was being called for.
It is hard to find examples of the same mechanism of restraint in the arms races of the pre-nuclear past.
Although the military competition between the Cold War superpowers was only a symptom of their underlying political-ideological and geopolitical conflict, the symptom, as in previous arms races, was widely perceived to be the main cause of the disease.
The first held that the nuclear arms race was indeed a main, if not the main, cause of the Cold War.
Allegedly, it was Hiroshima, and the preceding AngloAmerican decision to keep Stalin in the dark about the Manhattan Project, that triggered the fears, suspicions, and distrust in Moscow that destroyed the Second World War alliance in the first place, and paved the way for the hostile rivalry of the early Cold War.
Thereafter, the H-bomb decision, the thermonuclear atmospheric tests, the perceived bomber and missile gaps, and their subsequent United States responses, deepened the mistrust even further, and drove the superpowers toward the brink.
This tendency to blame the Cold War on the nuclear arms race was particularly articulated in the 1950s and 1980s; that is, the two periods of the Cold War when the military competition between the superpowers took the form of an intense nuclear arms race.
In the 1950s, arguments of this sort were often made by the organized peace movement as well as by many liberal and leftist politicians.
In the 1980s, the Nuclear Freeze movement, transnational elite networks, and epistemological communities— such as International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, and representatives of the New Left—were advocating similar views.
In contrast, the years of managed parity in the 1960s and 1970s saw a more optimistic corollary of the original fallacy.
It held that, since the nuclear arms race was driving the Cold War, nuclear arms control and disarmament would be the best means to dissolve the East-West conflict.
This thesis won wide acceptance among independent experts, political pressure groups, and governmental agencies and bureaucrats who were in favor of arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union, such as the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and its influential Director, Paul C Warnke.
Even hard-nosed Soviet leaders would occasionally pay lip service to this view.
These 37 Generally speaking, the fallacy of pro hoc, propter hoc consists in putting the effect before the cause.
Gromyko may not have believed in this himself, but he had strong reason to believe that the new United States president, Jimmy Carter, did.
Detente was arms control—and very little else, which is why the legitimacy of detente broke down when the SALT process lost momentum.
It then became unmistakably clear that arms control could not, in and by itself, reverse and resolve the competition in nuclear arms.
More important, the fall of detente also put into question the thesis, which Carter himself subscribed to, that strategic arms control would pave the way for more cooperation in other areas.
What many people saw instead was that, in spite of many successive years of United States restraint and almost a decade of arms control, the ideological-political and geopolitical competition between the superpowers was intensifying once again.
Whereas other factors were probably more decisive, the nuclear anus race nevertheless played a distinct and important role in both the formation and peaceful ending of the Cold War.
In my judgment, strategic nuclear weapons did add to deterrence, and still do.
At the same time, as John Mueller has rightly pointed out, the leaders in Moscow and Washington had plenty compelling reasons to avoid war with each other, even without the bomb.
Nuclear weapons also posed potential dangers of their own, so they were not simply great stabilizers.
At the end of the day, the main reason why the Cold War never turned into another world war had less to do with military hardware than with human software.
To begin with, nuclear weapons put their distinct mark on the initial stage of the East-West conflict.
As David Holloway spells out in Stalin and the Bomb, the Soviet leader was adamant that the United States should not be able to use its monopoly in nuclear weapons to intimidate the Soviet Union.
The new challenge that dawned upon the Soviet leader in the aftermath of Hiroshima and Nagasaki did not change his general outlook on world affairs; nor did the United States monopoly change the direction of Soviet foreign policy in a way that, in and by itself, can be said to have caused the Cold War.
The nuclear arms race had a graphic impact also on the transformation of US-Soviet relations in the 1980s.
It is well known, from political memoirs and primary sources, that the nuclear arms race and the risk of unintentional nuclear war had a profound influence on the thinking of both Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev.
They realized that the nuclear arms race was a waste of resources and talent; that nuclear war could produce no winners, only losers; and, that the continued build-up of nuclear arms would not make either the Soviet or American people more safe.
For all these reasons, Reagan and Gorbachev wanted to reverse the nuclear arms race and reduce the role of nuclear weapons in Soviet-American relations.
The INF Treaty in particular helped pave the way for the improved international climate that Gorbachev badly needed in order to pull out other, perhaps even more important, political concessions to the West, and to speed up domestic reform.
A far more controversial question is whether the United States military build-up in the 1980s, especially in nuclear weapons, was in fact the main cause of the peaceful ending of the Cold War.
This claim is an essential part of the 44 David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb , 368.
Gorbachev therefore decided to opt for a peaceful settlement of the Cold War.
At that stage, the argument goes, the Soviet economy had already been strained beyond repair, exactly as Reagan and his advisors had been expecting.
The endgame started when Gorbachev's reform program proved ineffective and the domestic political and economic crisis accelerated.
This self-congratulating narrative has been effectively rejected by Beth Fischer and others.
As Fischer points out, the Reagan victory school vastly exaggerates the concern in Moscow about the United States military build-up and the SDI program.
Moreover, Reagan started changing his Soviet policy in favor of dialogue, cooperation, and mutual restraint in early 1984, more than a year before Gorbachev came to power.
Thus, the new Soviet leader never had to face, or give in to, a confrontationist Reagan.
Alan P Dobson adds to this that the aim of the Reagan military build-up was never—as claimed by Norman A Bailey and others—to make the Soviet economy collapse and bring down communism.
Instead, Reagan wanted to increase United States military power in order to start negotiating with Moscow from a position of strength.
Thus, there was no United States master plan at work as the Cold War confrontation faded away in the late 1980s.
This being said, the nuclear arms race may still have had a more profound impact on the process that brought the Cold War to its peaceful ending than is commonly acknowledged.
Secondly, as Fischer points out, Reagan and Gorbachev were brought together in the first place by a shared desire to reduce the risk of nuclear war and help eliminate nuclear weapons.
Finally, even if Reagan moderated his assertive Soviet policies in early 1984, the United States military build-up continued at full speed for another two or three years.
Whether this had any impact on Soviet decision-making is still unclear; it is, however, a fact that Soviet military expenditure did increase again in the early and mid-1980s, after some years of reduced growth.
Since this happened at the same time as the Soviet economy went into stagnation and decline, it must have contributed to the economic crisis and helped convince the new leadership of the necessity of improving Soviet-American relations.
Fet me start with a few observations suggesting that arms races may be a diminishing concern in international politics.
First of all, arms races seem almost to have disappeared from the contemporary political and scholarly discourse.
To a considerably degree, this fact reflects the dissolution of the East-West conflict and subsequent collapse of the former Soviet Union, which removed the main political and ideological incentives for military competition in many parts of the world.
Thus, in the early post-Cold War years there was a general decline in world military spending.
The decline reflected both the dramatic fall in the annual military outlays of Russia in the early 1990s, and the international financial crisis in the latter half of the decade.
By the turn of the century, many of the world's major purchasers of military equipment had embarked upon costly programs in order to modernize their armed forces.
Given the parallel growth of the world economy during the first three-quarters of the decade, world military expenditure increased by almost 50 per cent in real terms, reaching United States $1,531 billion in 2009.
Because of the new, ongoing financial crisis, and the subsequent temporary dip in global GNP, world military expenditure's share of global GNP jumped to 2. per cent as the first decade of the twentyfirst century came to a close.
Even in this decade of increased military spending worldwide, examples of interstate arms races driven by mutual fear and hostility are rare.
To start with the biggest spenders, the United States alone stood for half of the real-terms increase.
The very substantial increase in United States military expenditure since 2001 has been caused primarily by war, including ""war on terrorism,"" and protection of hegemonic interests, not interstate rivalry.
Other major spenders, such as China, Russia, India, and Brazil also made large increases in their military outlays in the 2000-9 period, but the increase reflected their continued economic growth, and aspirations for regional or even global influence, rather than any intense interstate rivalry typical of an arms race.
Both Pakistan-India and North Korea-South Korea are examples of rivalry dyads with abundant arms race characteristics, even though there is a striking asymmetry between the parties of both dyads in terms of military and economic capabilities.
Starting with Pakistan and India, the former is spending far less on conventional arms, both in real and relative terms, but is competing ambitiously with respect to nuclear weapons.
Most likely, Pakistani leaders realize that their country can never get into stride with India on conventional military strength.
Instead, they put their stake in a rapid increase in Pakistani nuclear forces—especially in the number of warheads and mobile missiles—hoping this will help offset the Indian conventional lead.
The interstate rivalry between the two Korean neighbor republics is characterized by even more asymmetry.
Since the armistice of 1953, capitalist South Korea has thrived economically and become a dynamic and highly competitive society, even in an Asian perspective.
On the other hand, communist North Korea—plagued by poverty, stagnation, and occasional starvation—has fallen increasingly backward in almost every category of progress and power apart from military forces and nuclear energy.
Sometime between 2003 and 2006, North Korea crossed the nuclear threshold to become a rogue nuclear weapons state outside the international nuclear order.
Until then, the economically superior South Koreans had been able to hold their own in the fierce military rivalry with their communist neighbors without having to overburden their economy—not least thanks to generous financial support from the United States and the reassuring presence of American troops.
Compared to the military spending of 2000, the Pakistani defense expenditure of 2009 represented a 20. per cent growth, which is less than onethird of the Indian growth rate in the same period.
Pakistan is reported to have made a rapid increase in its military spending in 2010; however, the increase was less dramatic than it might seem as the country was experiencing a two-digit high inflation.
Although South Korea was spending only 0. per cent more on defense in 2009 than the world average of 2. per cent of GNP, its military budget thereafter started to grow more rapidly, and is expected to grow by as much as 6-9 per cent a year in the decade ahead in order to fulfill the ambitions of the current $665 billion Defense Reform 2020 plan.
How Pyongyang will respond to the projected new South Korean capabilities remains to be seen.
Although deeply worrisome in many respects, it should be noted that the arms races between India and Pakistan, and between the two Korean states, both have a very long history.
The Korean peninsula is, in many ways, the last remaining outpost of the Cold War, and the interstate rivalry between the two dominant powers of South Asia was born together with the end of British colonial rule.
To the extent that it makes sense to talk about the military competition within this pair of states as arms races—and I believe it does— we should keep in mind that they are not really examples of new arms races; that is, arms races of the post-Cold War era.
However, before signing up to the optimistic conclusion that arms races are about to become obsolete, and that the few real arms races we see today are in fact leftovers from the eras of colonialism and the Cold War, two important reservations must be put on the table.
The first is that dyads of interstate rivalry may no longer be the crucial factor to look for as far as arms races are concerned.
It may well be that we have to start focusing on arms races from a perspective more adjusted to the dynamics of a globalized and increasingly interdependent world.
The first has to do with China and what is often referred to as the Southeast Asian arms race.
Countries like Indonesia, Singapore, and Malaysia have, in recent years, been increasing their annual military expenditures by doubledigit percentages.
Together, their import of conventional weapons almost doubled in the five-year period 2005-9, compared to the previous five-year period.
There are many reasons for this very substantial build-up; for instance, it was preceded by a period of artificially low military expenditure because of the financial crisis in the late 1990s.
To a considerable extent, however, the recent increases seem to reflect a cluster of interwoven security dilemmas related to the rise of China as a regional economic and military power.
Like India and South Korea, the countries of Southeast Asia are deeply concerned about China's increasing military presence in waters perceived to be vital to their access to key natural resources, and are about to take countermeasures.
No one should be surprised, however, if the ongoing military build-up adds considerably to the underlying economic and strategic tensions.
The Middle East offers an even more complex situation as far as regional arms competition is concerned.
In recent years, countries like Syria, Bahrain, Jordan, and Lebanon have increased their annual military expenditures by more than 8 per cent, whereas Israel, Oman, and Saudi Arabia have steadily been spending some 7 per cent or more of their GNP on defense.
The picture is further complicated by the fact that some countries, such as Israel and Egypt, have received vast amounts of United States military aid or heavily subsidized weaponry.
Moreover, no one really knows what amount Iran is spending on its conventional and non-conventional military programs.
Still, it is difficult to see these developments as simply being results of interstate rivalry.
Its rapid increase in military expenditure cannot be fully explained in terms of an interstate rivalry with any particular state, such as Israel or Iran.
Rather, the build-up is reflecting the Saudi leadership's concerns about the stability of the Persian Gulf-Middle East region in general.
Moreover, it reflects the financial wealth of the Saudi government, due to rising oil prices, as well as its increasing domestic security concerns.
These two factors—generous oil revenues and fears of domestic unrest—are at work also in other Middle East and African countries with high and/or steadily increasing military expenditure.
The rapid build-up of military capabilities in the Middle East is particularly worrisome because of the uncertainty about Iran's aspirations in the nuclear field.
Here, too, the record of the post-Cold War era is an ambiguous one so far, marked by a mix of impressive achievements and serious setbacks.
Starting with the good news, the proliferation of WMD has been so limited it has led some observers to claim that we may even be witnessing the beginning of a WMD disarmament race—or a negative WMD arms race, as some prefer calling it.
This is not to say that the NPT and the non-proliferation regime is free from pressure from various directions, or that the risk of WMD falling in the hands of rogue states, rebel groups, or terrorist networks can be ruled out.
There is certainly a lot to worry about in this respect; for instance, the internal stability of nuclear-armed Pakistan.
Also, since the end of the Cold War, countries like Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Argentina, and Brazil have joined the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states, whereas China and France have joined as nuclear states.
Moreover, the nuclear weapons left over from the former Soviet Union outside the territory of Russia have been removed or dismantled as part of an international effort, whereas the small and unrecognized nuclear arsenal of South Africa was discreetly done away with by the outgoing apartheid government.
Other attempted efforts—by Iraq, Libya, and Syria—to develop a nuclear weapons capability, were successfully stopped, either by force or coercive diplomacy.
Only three states have never signed the NPT—Israel, India, and Pakistan— while North Korea withdrew from the treaty in 2003.
The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe and John Mueller, Atomic Obsession.
It is not evident, therefore, that the Indian and Pakistani nuclear weapons tests, and growing nuclear arsenals, should be seen as posing a radically new threat to the non-proliferation regime.
In other words, the main proliferation threats of today are represented by two extremely unattractive role models; namely, the failed autocracy of North Korea, and the repressive theocracy of Iran.
North Korea is such a bizarre and isolated entity in international politics that one would dismiss the possibility that it could serve as a source of inspiration and support to other potential proliferators.
But the chances of success are probably diminishing for every failed attempt, especially since China is now believed to be fully in line with Russia and the Western powers about the necessity of stopping any undertaking of this sort.
Iran may or may not be on the course of developing a nuclear weapons capability.
Moreover, no one can tell whether the issue eventually will be settled by political developments in Iran itself, or by an Israeli attack on Iran's nuclear installations.
Besides the increasing international support of the NPT, another promising development is the amazing rollback of chemical weapons.
At least some of these countries are assumed to have stockpiles of chemical weapons.
Nevertheless, the tide seems to be definitely moving against any further proliferation of chemical weapons, and the prospects for a world free of such weapons seem increasingly good, at least in a ten to twenty year perspective.
Even if the ambitious goal of nuclear abolition—the highly advertised Global Zero— should prove unrealistic, or even undesirable, for reasons of stability, Washington and Moscow may well agree to seek strategic parity at increasingly reduced levels.
Eventually, this process may result in such deep cuts that it will be hard for China, France, and India to maintain their current position that there is no need for them to contemplate reductions of their own as long as the big two maintain their excessive forces.
Should it ever come to that, interesting things may begin to happen in terms of global nuclear arms control.
He asked a friend to help him identify some cutting issues that would help him to victory in November 1988.
Instead, the friend suggested that Bush go alone to Camp David for a few days and try to figure out where he wanted to take the country.
The 41st president was keen to define a ""vision thing"" that would give continuity to America's primacy in the post-Cold War era.
In a time-honored fashion befitting United States leaders, he called for policies that—even in the absence of a mortal foe in the shape of the Soviet Union—emphasized what his successor would refer to as America's indispensable role in international affairs.
In his best-selling Rise and Fall of Great Powers, the historian Paul Kennedy had ruminated—rather briefly, considering the massive scale of the book—about the ""relative decline"" of the United States.
According to Kennedy, the United States could not maintain its dominant position due to the overextension of its resources, and the mismatch between the nation's economic performance and global responsibilities.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World military commitments to allies, and other factors, had plunged the United States into a position where it was experiencing a situation seemingly similar to other former great powers in decline.
It was, he implied, only a question of time before the United States would lose its ""number one"" position.
These questions have characterized—and continue to characterize—the ongoing debate about America's role in the post-Cold War world.
They are at the heart of this chapter, which explores the evolution of United States foreign policy in the post-Cold War era.
First, the debates about decline have been cyclical and have, logically, evolved in tandem with the fluctuations of the American economy and military engagements.
They are, by nature, speculative, and have, up to the present, been proven wrong.
But this is in part because these debates have had—and continue to have—strong policy relevance.
In maintaining its central position the United States used its global power to promote a liberal international order underlined by interconnectedness; a world that is increasingly linked together via growing trade links, technological innovations, and international institutions.
Over the course of the past two decades the United States has become more ""ordinary"" than before.
As the remit of what used to be called the ""free world” has grown, as democracy and free markets have spread, the United States has become less special than before.
The United States emerged from the Cold War victorious, prosperous, and confident.
The collapse of the Soviet Union was interpreted as proof of the superiority of liberal capitalism over totalitarian socialism.
Meanwhile, the broad-based international support for the US-led military operation to oust Iraq from Kuwait was evidence of the fact that most of the world looked up to the United States as a protector of the principles of collective security.
This was America's ""unipolar moment,"" Charles Krauthammer announced in a famous Foreign Affairs article in 1990.
While the former Soviet Union disintegrated and faced economic collapse, the United States economy remained robust and entered, during the 1990s, a period of seemingly endless growth.
Indeed, as the American economy surged ahead, and the United States leadership in global affairs remained virtually unchallenged, the declinists were increasingly on the defensive during the 1990s.
According to him, a unipolar world was systemically more stable than the possible alternatives.
Wohlforth saw no American decline around the horizon, predicting the continuance of American primacy for decades to come due to the significant lead that the United States enjoyed in terms of its economy, military power, and technological development.
Thrown into the discussion about primacy and decline in the early twentyfirst century was the revival of another, even older, debate.
Indeed, in the aftermath of 9/11, and the subsequent American-led military campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq, the term ""empire"" returned to scholarly discussions with a vengeance.
It was given some additional gravitas due to the economic and financial crisis that rocked the world in 2007-2008.
Most scholars acknowledged that United States resources—economic, military, and otherwise— remained substantial.
Nevertheless, Washington's ability to shape outcomes in the world seemed highly questionable.
While serious questions about the limits of America's ""hard power"" resources were one part of the story, the socalled ""rise of the rest""—and more broadly globalization—was seen as bringing about increasingly fundamental changes into the international system.
After all, the Bush administration's actions had prompted as much resistance as they had compliance and cooperation.
In fact, a few years earlier, Michael Mandelbaum had argued that a strong case for the American ""Goliath"" remained.
Debates about American power—whether it was in decline or not; what the nature of this power was, is and will become; and, perhaps most heatedly, to what end such power should be used—has been continuous since the end of the Cold War.
Indeed, it is impossible to consider many of the contributions without taking into account the specific context in which they were written; a pervasive sense of ""presentism"" and a need to ""make a policy contribution"" does lay an opportunistic cloud over the entire exercise.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World Two years later, after his approval ratings had gone through the roof due the successes of the Gulf War, Bush would famously predict: Now, we can see a new world coming into view.
In fact, as he started preparing for the 1992 presidential elections even Bush himself dropped the use of the term ""new world order,"" because it seemed to offend large segments of the American population, including members of the president's own party.
In subsequent years, the United Nations, in part due to the Clinton administration's policies, would, yet again, fall short of fulfilling its global mission.
But the degree of optimism and confidence—at least when displayed in public speeches—was not one of them.
While in office, Clinton came under much criticism for what many judged a directionless conduct of America's external affairs.
He was variously described as the president who considered ""foreign policy as social work"" and, despite his rhetoric, presided over the ""end of idealism"" in American foreign policy.
Yet, even those who worked in the Clinton administration have not been particularly overflowing with praise regarding the substance of the 42nd president's foreign policy record.
To be sure, Clinton's reputation in Europe was helped immensely by the general dislike of his successor.
But to count Clinton's ability ""to sell American power to others"" as one of his greatest 18 ""Excerpts from the State of the Union Address,"" January 27, 2000, in Auersweld and Garofano, Clinton's Foreign Policy, 84.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World accomplishments is not exactly a ringing endorsement.
Or to point out that ""Clinton was a pluralist who believed the United States in most instances was better served exercising influence by persuasion and by acting in a community of nations"" is unlikely to set Bill Clinton in a class of his own among postSecond World War American presidents.
The Clinton years were ultimately distinguished by the fact that, while crises demanding a response appeared on a regular basis—in the former Yugoslavia, in Somalia, in Haiti, and elsewhere—they had no easily discernible pattern that would have pointed to a reasonably structured response.
America, after some hesitation, pursued the enlargement of NATO to the former Soviet bloc, hence confirming the continuance of transatlantic ties beyond the Cold War era.
Clinton engaged China—even winning Congressional support for China's entry into the World Trade Organization —and, in a well-tested manner of recent American presidents, tried (and in an equally well-tested manner failed) to use his influence to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
And, in the midst of it all, a certain Clinton style of foreign policy emerged that seemed quite well fitted to the demands of the 1990s.
Clinton, like most of his predecessors and both of his successors, recognized that American foreign policy was, by necessity, guided by a combination of values and interests, desired goals and available means.
The trouble for Clinton and his foreign policy record was not that he failed to appreciate the complexity of the post-Cold War environment.
Nevertheless, when one reviews the position of the United States at the beginning of the new millennium, it seems difficult to argue that something had gone seriously astray.
Although Clinton had cut down defense spending, 21 Michael Cox, “Empire, Imperialism and the Bush Doctrine,"" Review of International Studies, 30:4 , 604; John F Harris, The Survivor.
This was more than three times the amount of China; eight times that of Russia; in fact, more than the next six countries combined.
As Michael O'Hanlon pointed out, the notion that Clinton had somehow left the United States militarily vulnerable was a myth.
When Clinton left office, the longest sustained boom in American history was still intact.
This was a remarkable contrast to the Cold War era when the United States ran budget deficits on a consistent basis, as it has also done in the last ten years.
The alarming amount of national debt did not shrink, but at least it stopped growing.
And the United States remained by far the largest single economy in the world (40 per cent larger than the second-largest economy at the time, Japan), responsible for 23. per cent of global domestic product (in purchasing power parity terms) in 2000.
At the dawn of the new millennium the United States remained ahead of the rest.
In terms of foreign policy it will, though, be difficult to argue that Clinton had an overwhelming purpose, a vision thing.
But it will be equally difficult—although attempts have been made—to argue that Clinton mismanaged American foreign policy.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World there were problems and critics.
But, overall, Clinton left his successor a nation that was without a rival.
George W Bush, American primacy, and the War on Terror The transition from Clinton to Bush took place in an environment of near omnipotency that bred a coinciding sense inside the United States that the nation was secure from any significant threats to its security.
Interest in foreign policy was low, and seemingly echoed in the persona of the new president.
The shock of the 9/11 terrorist attacks naturally demanded an aggressive response, and it seemed that the United States was capable of using its massive power to execute policies that had rapid and spectacular results.
Even more so, it appeared to consider any possibility of restraint dangerous.
The most obvious example of this was the American refusal to take seriously the invocation of Article 5 by its NATO allies, viewing such shows of solidarity ""less as a boon than as a booby trap,"" as Robert Kagan put it.
America was not going to be tied down when its security was menaced; not even by well meaning but poorly armed friends.
As the Afghan and, in particular, Iraq wars unfolded, many analysts—even while they may have disagreed on the specific rationale for attacking and removing Saddam Hussein—brushed aside the possibility that the United States was engaged in a self-defeating exercise of power.
Answers varied and were hotly debated, with pronouncements about the negative side effects of the Bush administration's foreign policy—such as the increase in anti-Americanism around the globe—gradually increasing.
Some suggested that there was a ""Bush revolution"" in American foreign policy with neo-conservative ""vulcans"" taking advantage of the situation and pushing an aggressive democratization agenda forward.
Critics were soon handed plenty of ammunition as American transgressions of international law and disrespect for basic human rights (Guantanamo, Abu Ghraib, etc.) scandalized audiences around the world.
Bush's defenders fired back with scenarios of terrorist plots that demanded strengthening America's national security apparatus and acting pre-emptively; the terrorists did not fight fair, neither should the Americans.
The fact that no WMD were discovered in post-intervention Iraq scandalized many.
Indeed, many were quick to equate the so-called Bush Doctrine with American unilateralism.
By ""abandoning post-Cold War diplomatic practices after September 11, the United States is taking a new tack,"" Charles-Philippe David wrote in 2006.
Some saw the unilateralism of the Bush administration with regard to Iraq as the ultimate folly, ill-suited to an interdependent post-Cold War world.
America was a rogue nation attacking the world order with its aggressive diplomacy and unilateral use of force.
For the benefit of the historically less conscious, John Gaddis and Mel Leffler demonstrated that American unilateral military actions had plenty of historical precedents.
When reading through the 2002 National Security Strategy, however, one may be struck by the fact that the document that defined the so-called Bush Doctrine did not represent a dramatic break with the past.
George W Bush's presidency ended in diametrically opposite circumstances to that of his predecessor.
To be sure, if measured in military spending the United States of 2009 outstripped its closest rivals by a massive margin.
With a defense budget of $700 billion, the United States was responsible for 43 per cent of global military spending.
This was six times that of China, twelve times that of Russia and, to put things in perspective, ninety-eight times that of Iran.
All told, the United States had increased its spending dramatically, both in absolute and relative terms, and now allocated more money on defense than the next seventeen countries in the world.
If military spending was a measure of security, the United States was very safe indeed.
Budget surpluses had become consistent deficits after 2001, hiking up America's national debt.
In late 2008 unemployment was just over 6. per cent; perhaps not too dramatic, but set to rise steadily toward the 10 per cent mark in the 31 Lieber, The American Era, 148.
Still, the United States retained its position as the world's largest single economy, with 20. per cent of global domestic product (in purchasing power parity terms) in 2008.
More disturbingly, United States growth rates had not only stalled but also turned negative in Bush's last year in office (negative 6 per cent in the last quarter of 2008), while China and India boasted growth rates approaching double digits.
If Clinton had left office amid the longest postwar economic boom, Bush gave his farewell address to an America struggling badly.
With the publication of his unapologetic memoirs in 2010, the former president himself has made sure the ""last word"" will be a long time coming.
America now had a new leader who would not be driven by simple-minded ideological excesses.
The 44th president would reverse course, bring back thousands of Americans from a mishandled war, and dazzle the world with his winning diplomacy.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World prowess, but by using the irresistible appeal of the American dream, of which he was such a shining example.
Obama's inauguration was one of the highest rated media events throughout the globe in early 2009.
Almost overnight, the negative view of the United States that had become commonplace during the Bush presidency was gone.
In fact, one of the striking things about the first years of the Obama administration was the amount of continuity from Bush to Obama.
The current administration has wound down much of America's involvement in Iraq.
In essence, the administration continued the gradual withdrawal that the Bush administration had agreed upon in the fall 2008; and in August 2010, the last American combat troops left Iraq.
However, while Obama was winding down the Iraq ""war of choice,"" he escalated United States commitment to the Afghan ""war of necessity"" by deploying additional troops to Afghanistan, and ordering a series of deadly strikes against targets in Pakistani territory.
Of course, the May 2, 2011 spectacular killing of Osama Bin Laden brought some closure to many Americans who had been touched by the attacks of September 11, 2001.
But the war on terror—even if no longer officially called that—goes on, and in Afghanistan there is no end in sight.
The announcement, in February 2012, that United States and NATO forces would end their combat role in 2013 sounded—to the skeptical observer—somewhat opportunistic (and lacking in detail) at the start of a presidential election year.
Of course, not all of Obama's foreign policy has been related to fighting wars; otherwise he would probably not have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
He has, most certainly, raised America's standing with its European allies.
Obama has made an effort to repair America's difficult relations with much of the Muslim world—a task made more complicated by the Arab Spring of 2011.
All such efforts can, though, be seen as part of a long-term continuum of United States foreign policy.
For example, when it comes down to American primacy—the United States' special providence—there are ultimately only minor differences between Obama's rhetoric and those of his predecessors.
And, if anyone doubted the new president's resolve, Obama used some Kennedy-like rhetoric to remind any terrorist network ""that our spirit is stronger and cannot be broken.
Yet, there was little to suggest that either Bush or Obama—or indeed Clinton before them—ever faced such a binary choice.
That Obama vowed to uphold American ideals hardly contradicted what Bush had repeatedly promised.
The 44th president ruminated about the concepts of ""just war"" and ""just peace,"" as well as about the existence of ""evil"" in the world.
Waxing philosophical, Obama concluded that ""a just peace includes not only civil and political rights—it must encompass economic security and opportunity.
Ideally such interventions would be blessed by the international community but a moment might arrive when this would not be the case.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World effort to distinguish the Obama doctrine from the caricature-like Bush doctrine of unilateralism and reliance on United States military power.
The NSS also emphasized the need for maintaining strong international alliances, the promotion of universal values like democracy and human rights, and the crucial role of a strong economy and an innovative society at home.
Perhaps the main difference was the shift of emphasis away from military to economic threats— understandable, given the context in which the document was conceived.
For example, Obama may have stopped using the term ""war on terror,"" yet he still identified defeating A1 Qaeda as a central mission for United States national security policy.
The importance of alliances was hardly an innovation; it was simply phrased in a somewhat different manner than the 2002 Bush NSSs.
Nor had the significance of economic development been absent from the policy statements of the Bush administration.
Rather than a radical departure, Obama's foreign policy in his first term can be regarded as a mixture of the Clinton administration's emphasis on engagement and enlargement, and the Bush doctrine's assertions about the American need to reserve the right for unilateral military action.
Most notably, the central goal— the maintenance of American primacy—was an undiluted part of Obama's agenda.
Ferguson and others, including Gideon Rachman, cite projections indicating that China is likely to overtake the United States as the world's largest economy, perhaps as soon as 2017.
India, they note, will not be far behind in pushing the United States into third place in those particular league tables.
He does not dispute the fact that the United States is not, in relative terms, the unrivaled economic superpower it used to be.
However, Nye likes to remind his readers that America is not experiencing an absolute economic decline and retains an unparalleled amount of global influence because of great reservoirs of so-called soft power.
Meanwhile, John Ikenberry argues that the ""pronouncements of American decline miss the real transformation under way today.
Anyone who has studied American history in the twentieth-century (whether the long one or the short one) would recall several moments in which the United States has been in a period of decline and self-doubt followed by an unexpected revival.
Japan never quite made it to ""number"" 45 Equally, there have been moments and periods when hubris has reigned; when the United States has been in a seemingly unassailable position, only to be brought back to reality following an economic crisis or a costly foreign policy venture orchestrated either by the ""Best and the Brightest"" in the 1960s, or the ""Vulcans"" in the early 2000s.
America's Role in the Post-Cold War World gradual and relative decline have prompted the United States to scale back some of its commitments.
The evident reluctance of the Obama administration to use military power in Libya in 2011—or to accept a clear leadership role in that venture—fit into a pattern.
Such issues as America's burgeoning long-term debt are serious and problematic.
But it is not necessarily insoluble for a country that, a decade ago, was concerned over a government surplus.
In the end, there are two major challenges that will determine America's place in the world in the first half of the twenty-first century.
Nor is the battle to defeat al Qaeda or the success or failure in Afghanistan likely to be central to the United States' future as a major player in the international arena.
What will matter more, I would maintain, is whether the United States can continue wielding influence and leadership with fewer resources.
For there is no doubt that the current economic and financial situation demands belt-tightening.
Given changing circumstances there is no point in expecting that the United States will ever re-emerge as the ""colossus"" of the late twentieth century.
It can still lead, but it should not even attempt to dominate; American primacy can only be maintained if other nations see it as a positive influence in international affairs.
This seems to be a lesson that the current United States administration has not failed to grasp.
Obama and those who come after him may find it increasingly difficult to explain America's ongoing global role to domestic audiences disillusioned by an economic downturn that is too easily blamed on unfair competition from countries like China.
Whether one calls it parochialism or patriotism, the fact remains that the American public, even in this global age, remains a relatively insulated group.
After all, openness of all kinds—migration, flow of goods and ideas, etc.—has been the essential backbone of America's remarkable success.
It has been the ultimate ""vision thing"" that has survived plenty of crises and drawn others to accept, even invite, American leadership.
But failing to promote openness is the surest way of turning the specter of decline into hard reality.
Twenty years have passed since the implosion of the Soviet Union, and the historians should cautiously step in to map and explore this period.
For anyone who leaps mentally from 1991 to 2011, several things are particularly unexpected and striking.
First, the West, after enjoying a spectacular and unexpected ""victory"" in the Cold War, began to lose its relative positions of power and influence in the world.
Second, the period of enlargement of the ""pre-fabricated"" Western institutions eastward seems to have ended.
One part of the post-Soviet area became integrated into the West, and another, including Russia, did not.
Russia, against all expectations, has regained its regional strength and financial solvency, and learned to benefit from the system of free trade the West had created.
A curious ""hybrid"" system emerged, presided over by Vladimir Putin, with a vast and corrupt bureaucracy, state capitalism, and the imitation of democratic institutions.
Many critics of the Putin regime explain its emergence by ""path dependency”—Russia's development determined by its authoritarian past.
Without them, one cannot understand the phenomenon of Putin's Russia, Russian-Western tensions, and the continuing division of Europe.
Soviet collapse and anti-liberal backlash In 1989-91, the ideas of reformist communism contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union and disintegration of the state.
Western liberal ideas of the free market, open society, and ""nation state"" gained surprising support in 1991 among educated professional groups of Soviet society.
Yeltsin and his supporters regarded the United States in particular as a teacher and partner.
A group of technocratic young economists led by Yegor Gaidar, with Yeltsin's support, rushed Russia through a ""shock therapy"" based on neo-liberal recipes.
The goals were to privatize the state economy, create a ""free market,"" and prevent a communist comeback.
Those reforms were as improvised as the policies of Lenin after 1917—with similar far-reaching consequences.
Market reformers treated Russia's population as a patient under surgery.
They did not even explain to the patient the details of the surgery, deeming it to be too technical.
From the viewpoint of the majority, however, the liberal reforms wiped out people's savings and plunged Russia into seven years of severe economic depression, disastrous deindustrialization and demodernization, destruction of most institutions of social care and welfare, social anarchy and crime.
The groups that benefited quickly from the liberal market reforms were, above all, ""violent entrepreneurs,""e. bandits, gangs, and violent crooks.
In Russia, communist egalitarianism-in-misery was rapidly replaced by the yawning gap between the enormous wealth of a few and abiding misery of the majority.
The spike in mortality rate and plunge in birth rate reflected the social collapse.
Historians would argue forever whether there were missed opportunities in 1991-2.
A slower tempo might well, as he argued, merely have protracted the distress.
For the vast majority of Russians the principles of ""liberalism"" and ""democracy"" came to be associated with the technocratic plots, misery, and extreme uncertainty.
The collapse of all ideological beliefs fatally undermined the very possibility for regularized mass politics.
And it was arguably not even the worst outcome, compared to Europe in the 1920s and 1930s, where similar trauma had undermined liberalism and produced fascist, semi-fascist, and Nazi regimes.
In Eastern Europe, liberal market reformers could at least appeal to a national consensus to escape from Moscow's influence, and join Western community, economic, and security institutions.
In order to continue with marketization and pro-Western orientation, the Kremlin had to increasingly resort to political manipulations and authoritarian means.
In October 1993, Yeltsin used force against ""redbrown"" radicals at the Congress of People's Deputies and imposed on the country a new constitution that gave the president exorbitant power.
The role of security and paramilitary structures began to increase, especially when the war in Chechnya began in December 1994.
The biggest case of political manipulation was the presidential elections of 1996.
Yeltsin decided against ceding power to the communist opposition under any circumstances.
Twenty Difficult Years astute Western observers began to acknowledge what was happening.
Even in Eastern Europe, as the recent political developments in Hungary reveal, sudden reversals and setbacks of democratic transition are possible.
In 1996, the only true alternative to Yeltsin would have been Russian communists in coalition with Russian nationalists.
The dangers of the ""red-brown revenge"" were grossly exaggerated by Russian liberals and those who feared losing their newly gained property and wealth.
For Furman, the most likely political option for post-Soviet Russia was an authoritarian regime of a personalized nature, supported by the corrupt oligarchy—similar to many regimes in Latin America and the Arab Middle East.
Russia and the West part ways The circumstances of Soviet collapse left Russia in a highly ambiguous position in the international system.
The Russian Federation inherited the Soviet nuclear arsenal and became a legal successor to the Soviet Union—with the Soviet seat on the UN Security Council and Soviet assets abroad, including embassies and consulates.
Retrospectively, Yeltsin seemed to regret that he did not start ""from scratch"" or declare Russia to be a successor of the pre-Soviet Russia.
The West, especially the Bush administration, encouraged ""the Soviet succession"" by insisting that Moscow should be responsible for the Soviet debts and nukes.
The United States even had to pick up the tab for supervising and dismantling the Soviet nuclear-strategic arsenal.
Yeltsin and the Russian elites felt entitled both to the special status of a world power and to massive Western assistance—a contradictory set of demands that the West could not satisfy.
Bill Clinton and Helmut Kohl appeared to be treating Russia as a special partner and brought Russia into a number of Western international institutions.
Yet the Americans and Western Europeans never showed the generosity that the Russians expected.
Instead of another ""Marshall Plan,"" the Kremlin received $1 billion credit from the IMF, and a $0. billion loan from the World Bank— on strict monetarist conditions that applied to poor developing countries.
Many criticized even that assistance—citing Russian corruption and the massive flight of capital from Russia.
Russia was treated neither as a preferred liberal-democratic partner, nor as a great power.
It is, however, possible to prove that the NATO expansion was colored by the continuation of Cold War fears in the West.
Russia had often performed the role of ""negative other"" for Western collective identity, and many used ""Soviet"" and ""Russian"" as synonyms.
When the war in Chechnya started, the Russophobes in the West and Eastern Europe felt their fears of Russia as ""genetically"" expansionist and violent were vindicated.
Yeltsin and his liberal supporters treated the anti-Russian bias in the West as a residue of the Cold War and sought to dispel it by ingratiating themselves with the groups that propagated this bias.
At the same time, Yeltsin's entourage could not completely ignore the ""flight"" of all post-communist states away from Russia and their attempts to gain political capital in the West at Russia's expense.
Even market liberals began to say that Russia had to preserve its greater economic space and take care of the Russians in the ""near abroad,"" meaning the post-Soviet area.
The fateful security dilemma between Russia and its neighbors was gaining momentum.
The Kremlin increasingly felt it should do something to prevent further disintegration of the post-Soviet space, and even of Russia itself.
And the nationalist Balts, Ukrainians, and Georgians looked toward the United States as a protector against Russia's ambitions.
The new Russophobia was expressed not by governments, but in the statements of out-of-office politicians, the publications of academic experts, the sensational writings of journalists, and the products of the entertainment industry.
It was fuelled by those who argued that the Russian Orthodox civilization was doomed to remain apart from the civilization for the West.
Liberal Russians increasingly began to see the anti-Russian ""lobby"" in the United States, as well as in other Western countries, as a problem, while denying Russia's historic responsibility.
George F Kennan, in 1951, advised the West to be patient toward the postcommunist Russia.
Few commentators acknowledged that the abrupt market transition was bound to doom Russia to anarchy and lawlessness— and from there toward oligarchy and authoritarianism.
Increasingly, Western experts began to declare that Russia was not ""fit"" for democracy, and inherently expansionist.
The best strategy for the West, argued Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinsky, was to deny Russia any future ability to restore its control over the post-Soviet space, especially Ukraine.
Simultaneously, alienation from the West and anti-Americanism began to grow in Russia.
Resentment spread against market liberalism associated with the United States, and the old images of generous and opulent ""America"" became replaced by the negative images.
Nationalist groups in Russia claimed that the West was interested in Russia's break-up, permanent misery, and weakness.
Reactionary, fundamentalist, and nationalist groups in the Russian Orthodox Church joined the anti-Western chorus.
At some point the Russian-Western alienation developed a mutually reinforcing dynamic.
These exaggerated fears contributed to the vicious circle of alienation—validating worst-case scenarios in the minds of Eastern Europeans and Western experts.
The NATO 1991 military attack in Yugoslavia, ignoring the Russian veto at the UN, and the talk in Washington about suspending the principles of national sovereignty in the name of liberal internationalism drove the last nails into the coffin of Russia's pro-Western orientation.
Western politicians ignored Russian objections, referring to Gorbachev's behavior during the German reunification talks.
Some Eastern European states joined NATO and lobbied for a containment of Russia.
Twenty Difficult Years enlargement continued to delegitimize pro-Western liberals and favor ""hardliners"" in domestic politics.
Centrist politicians, like Evgeny Primakov, Yuri Luzhkov, and security officials around Yeltsin, urged to defend Russian national interests in defiance of the West.
Even sport events, such as a Russian-American dispute over gold medals for figure skating at the Winter Olympics in 2000, showed the depth of Russians' new mistrust of the United States.
Putin's Russia Yeltsin was still enormously respected in the West as an anti-communist revolutionary.
Putin's KGB past, by contrast, defined his negative publicity in the West from the very start.
And Putin's rhetoric and policies helped to mark the mistaken contrast between the ""democratic"" Yeltsin years and the ""authoritarian retreat"" of the 2000s.
Putin's war in Chechnya (as brutal as Yeltsin's war in Chechnya), and the travesty of the 2004 and 2007 elections (similar to Yeltsin's re-election in 1996) pointed to continuity.
But the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the destmction of his oil corporation, Yukos; clumsy pressures on Ukraine, Georgia, and the Baltic states; and the series of assassinations of journalists and ex-KGB figures became the hallmarks of Putin's rule.
The Kremlin's attempt to control the pipelines bringing gas and oil from Asia to Europe—and to build ""North Stream"" and ""South Stream"" to bypass Poland and Ukraine—exacerbated old fears of renewed Russian predominance in the post-Soviet space and even in Eastern Europe.
Inside Russia, Putin initially appeared to be a successful reformer and consolidator.
He gained huge popular support, promising to check corruption, end the separatism of Chechnya, defeat organized crime, and relaunch Russia's modernization.
Putin ""nationalized"" these resources by subduing the tycoons and creating giant state monopolies.
As a result, he was able to achieve financial stability and transformed Russia from a debtor nation into a creditor.
The Russian state began to pay pensions on time and increased salaries for the first time in ten 27 See Shiraev and Zubok, Anti-Americanism in Russia, chapter 6.
Once stabilized, however, the system created under Yeltsin produced an unexpected hybrid regime.
Putin kept Yeltsin's constitution and its formal institutions intact, including the rotation in the president's seat.
But political levers and enormous wealth became concentrated in the hands of the Kremlin's ruler.
Putin's course was a mixture of mercantilism and economic neoliberalism, with the goal of winning a better position for Russian oil and other state monopoly businesses in the global market.
The largest net winner was not Russian business, however, but the sprawling state bureaucracies.
Property and wealth conditional on political connections is a common phenomenon in world history.
But in China the state fights corruption, and the Chinese state-controlled economy demonstrates huge momentum for development.
Russia's economic progress, aside from the energy sector, is very modest; no substitutes emerged for the degrading Soviet-era infrastructure, technological-scientific potential, and education.
Also, modern norms of social transactions and civic society could hardly take root in Putin's Russia.
Instead, criminalized mafia-like rules and customs, chaotic in the 1990s, became regularized.
The ""violent entrepreneurs"" of the early 1990s became integrated or supplanted by the corrupt state structures.
By the end of the 2000s, Russian bureaucracy began to resemble such structures.
Some characterize today's Russian system of power and wealth as ""patrimonialism"" with ""neo-feudal"" hierarchies and clienteles.
Others speak of ""neo-patrimonialism,"" admitting a potential for future change.
The majority favors the logic of path dependence, linking today's Russia to the centuries of backwardness and authoritarianism.
A leading Russian sociologist defined ""Putinism"" as ""genealogically"" linked with the “totalitarian structures"" of the Soviet era.
From his viewpoint, the Putin state and society represent the last stage of the totalitarian 30 On Putin and his policies, see in particular the works by Richard Sakwa and Lilya Shevtsova.
Twenty Difficult Years decomposition in the environment of market economy, informational openness, and globalization.
The stabilization of Putin's regime can also be attributed to the workings of the global market system.
Initially, Russia found itself on the periphery of this system, together with Paraguay, Upper Volta, and Sri Lanka.
Russia, however, was not ""Upper Volta with missiles,"" as many in the West dismissively called it during the 1990s.
It was a country with an industrial infrastructure, developed social programs, masses of highly educated and skilled people, and enormous energy resources.
While Russia could not emulate China, it eventually found for itself a lucrative place as energy supplier, next to the Persian Gulf countries.
This also ""oiled"" an authoritarian distributive system, with political and social institutions that matched it.
The ""Dutch disease” of windfall oil profits created problems even for stable democracies.
Russia's elites emerged as antidemocratic, cynically selfish, and absolutely opposed to any notion of public interests and social development.
Compared to these elites, even the Soviet technocratic elites, not to mention the pre-Soviet intelligentsia, appear as imbued with a sense of public good.
Of course, the realities of the late Soviet period encouraged cynical individualism, lack of social responsibility, and a ""beggar-thy-neighbor"" mentality.
Still, the Soviet society also produced minorities committed to reforms , whose transformational energy nourished Gorbachev's perestroika and Yeltsin's initial thrust.
The social elites of the younger educated cohort that came of age in the 1970s-80s took the full brunt of the Soviet collapse.
Many of the ""best and brightest"" of this age group emigrated; those who stayed suffered professional, social, and moral collapse.
Only a small proportion of this cohort regained the middle-class status of their parents and predecessors.
Young people aged 25 to 30 became the career reserve, bypassing the older cohorts.
The oil boom and bureaucratic expansion allowed many of them, particularly in big cities, to score economic and social gains that surpassed the achievements of their parents.
The Putin government seemed to be interested in promoting the young cadres that could become conformist participants in the system—just like the young protagonist in John Grisham's novel The Finn.
The young educated Russians became the ultimate individualists, but not in the liberal-democratic sense.
They honed their survival skills in the Hobbesian world and rejected the idealistic notions of ""common good"" of the Russian intelligentsia.
In contrast to the old Soviet system, the Putinist system provided virtually unlimited individual opportunity and freedom, in exchange for non-involvement in public politics.
They no longer wanted to westernize Russia; they wanted to make money in Russia and move to the West.
The years of Putin's consolidation and oil boom provided many of them with a chance to realize their dreams.
In contrast to political stagnation, the Russian leadership, state bureaucracies, and the entrepreneurial young Russians moved quickly in adapting to the global market economy.
The winners in the ""survival of the fittest"" games, they became ruthless ""users"" of the international economic system created by Western liberal policies during the previous century.
Many Western scholars quoted Liah Greenfeld, who wrote about ""ressentiment nationalism” as a reactionary phenomenon in pre-Soviet Russia and Eastern Europe.
Twenty Difficult Years that any Russian identity could only be authoritarian, anti-Semitic, and antiWestern.
Meanwhile, Russian liberalism and nationalism had not always been at odds.
From the Decembrists to 1917, Russian Europeanized and liberal elites were very patriotic.
They rejected aggressive ethno-nationalism, as well as the religious-conservative nationalism, and sought to articulate an idea of ""Russian patriotism"" as a multi-ethnic, civil, and liberal notion.
Under the Bolshevik regime, however, this national-liberal identity became weakened, although not extinct.
Stalinism used most reactionary forms of Russian identity as material for empire-building.
Stalinist ""Russian patriots,"" and their liberal opponents who regarded any form of Russian identity with intense suspicion.
Of course, Russian history provided much rich material for the anti-Western identity of Russians.
Some pre-1917 thinkers believed that Russia was an heir to the Byzantine empire—going back to the origins of Orthodox Christianity, with traditions and customs opposed to the Catholic and Protestant West.
Ivan Ilyin, an influential emigre thinker, wrote in 1948 that all the countries of Europe, except for ""the little Serbia,"" were Russophobic.
Perhaps we should recognize that the evolutionary development of our country from one authoritarian form to another will be more organic, smooth, and less painful.
Russian historian Lev Gumilev, immensely influential in the 1980s-90s, adapted the Eurasionist ideas to post-Soviet times.
Yeltsin's market liberals regarded any form of Russian nationalism as a threat.
As a result, they allowed the opposition to gain a virtual monopoly on the nationalist discourse.
The anti-liberal, anti-Western forces blamed Yeltsin and market liberals for ""economic genocide"" of the Russian people and for creating a comprador bourgeoisie dependent on Western markets and bank accounts.
These arguments underlined most convincing images, schemes, and concepts for a new Russian identity during the 1990s.
Several groups served as the main vehicles in propagating anti-Western concepts and images.
First, exSoviet ""Russian patriots,"" venerating Stalin's empire and the victory in the Great Patriotic War, borrowed heavily from Russian conservative nationalists, Solzhenitsyn and Gumilev.
One of them, Alexander Dugin, combined Eurasianism with crude and almost racist versions of the early twentieth century geopolitics.
Second, the Russian communists were eager to put a patriotic sheen on the country's facade.
Third, the Russian Orthodox Church was eager to become a state church and to ""protect Russia"" from the rival religious groups, especially Western missionaries.
The fourth direction was the positive reassessment of the Stalinist period, particularly the Great Patriotic War.
James Billington was one of the first Western authors to take a panoramic assessment of anti-liberal concepts in Russia.
He believed (writing in the early 2000s) that all of them would remain marginal.
And in 1998-9, Evgeny Primakov already used some neo-Eurasian ideas in his foreign policy, as justification of multivector diplomacy and the need to balance off the unilateral power of the United States.
Under Putin, the Kremlin began to act as the main architect of the antiliberal, anti-Western Russian identity.
Surkov's campaign, in contrast to Soviet campaigns, did not aim at promoting one ideology.
Instead, it promoted, almost in postmodernist fashion, pseudopluralism.
Surkov's postmodernist agitprop sponsored a ""pantheon"" of great Russians, from Ivan the Terrible to Solzhenitsyn, and a ""bazaar"" of identity, Billington, Russia in Search of Itself, 88.
Twenty Difficult Years where the clash between ""Soviet"" and ""Russian"" did not exist, and loyalty to Stalin could be reconciled with anti-Soviet dissent.
In other words, the Kremlin did not try to build an ideological consensus, but rather sought to bring all ideological-political alternatives under one ""Russian"" umbrella.
Putin restored the Soviet anthem, but with Orthodox religious lyrics; he regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union, but publicly praised Solzhenitsyn.
Officials of Russian foreign ministry and security agencies began to quote from Ilyin and Solzhenitsyn, while reading Dugin's geopolitics.
Various ""foundations” set up with Kremlin money began to promote a unity of ""Orthodox peoples,"" and even of ""the Russian world"" including emigre diasporas.
The most scandalous development, which attracted attention in the West, was Stalin's popularity in the Russian polls, especially among the young.
In the media and numerous books on sale in Russian bookstores Stalin was a hit, and the Stalinist years were presented as a grandiose and heroic—if tragic—period of Russian history.
The eclectic engineering of this new identity from Stalinist and anti-communist parts had, of course, nothing to do with the real views of the Kremlin masters and their bureaucratic supporters.
Putin, his entourage, bureaucracy, and other parts of the service classes used selectively anti-liberal, traditionalist concepts and nostalgic images from the Stalin era to serve political goals.
First, they wanted to advertise that authoritarianism was ""organic"" for Russia and stability could only be undermined by the ""imported"" ideologies of Marxism or liberalism.
Second, they effectively neutralized and pre-empted the communists and the Russian nationalists by intercepting their concepts and images.
Third, they marginalized ""external enemies"" and their ""fifth column at home"" as non-Russian or anti-Russian.
Large segments of the Russian population readily agreed that anything is better than another revolution or a radical change.
The theme of the Great Patriotic War and victory of 1945 never failed to evoke sympathy.
Putin and his ideologists seemed to stand above bickering groups and factions.
Putin's liberal critics unwittingly played into the Kremlin's hands by defending Yeltsin's policies—without acknowledging their deeply traumatic effects for millions.
The polls by independent sociologists showed time and again that the stable majority of Russia's citizens, both sophisticated elites and the rest of the public, regarded the Putin regime as essentially the only possible option for the Russian statehood—without alternative.
The growing tensions with the West became another factor helping the Kremlin.
In 2003-4, the Bush administration, and Western NGOs, became heavily involved in supporting the ""colored revolutions” in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kirgyzstan.
A bit later, the United States reached agreements with Poland and the Czech Republic to create a strategic missile defense—aimed at Iran, but also facing Russia.
All these developments seemed to ""prove"" to the Russian elite and general public that the West was waging a new Cold War—this time against post-Soviet Russia.
All the Kremlin and its propagandists had to do was to orchestrate the world news in the controlled television channels to confirm this impression.
The Russian-Georgian war in August 2008 brought Russia and the West to the brink of conflict.
Not only because Russia was still a nuclear power, but also many European Union members were too dependent on Russian oil to risk a major conflict with the Kremlin.
Danilov, Istoriia Rossii, 1945-2008 ; Arkady Ostrovsky, ""Flirting with Stalin,"" Prospect , 30.
The future of Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova is in the focus of this proposal.
Instead, this proposal suggests forms of financial, economic, and consultative assistance, supporting westward orientation of these countries.
Some Western advocates of this proposal continue to use the arguments from the ""democratic peace"" theory—as they did during the NATO expansion.
They argue that the integration of ""in between Europe"" by the West would promote peace and stability, and also exert pressure on Russia to reform and democratize.
A number of Putin's liberal critics wax enthusiastic about this proposal.
Yet, too many in the West and Russia, as well as Ukraine, continue to see any changes in ""in between Europe"" through realist lenses, as containment of Russian ambitions or a threat to Russian security.
Another proposal comes from those Russian experts who believe that the best scenario for Russia would be to modernize itself in alliance with the West.
The long-time Western leader, the US, became bogged down in Afghanistan and Iraq; the center of industrial and financial power shifted from the West to Asia, above all to China.
This second proposal reflects, in my opinion, the preferred scenario for the Kremlin and the elites that emerged in Russia under Putin's rule.
Astute analysts noticed that, for all the talk about a ""special Russian way"" and antiWestern rhetoric, the Putin-Medvedev Russia does not present a clear alternative to the West in institutional and ideational terms.
The Russian leaders do not even reject democratic forms of legitimacy (although some Russian politicians spoke vaguely about ""people's authoritarianism""), but instead adopt selectively the simulacra of democratic procedures and legal norms in legitimizing their control of Russia's politics and resources.
The integrationist pragmatism of the Russian leaders and elites does not include Russia's evolution toward Western liberal-democratic models, norms, and regulations.
Hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of Russians now also have foreign passports, mostly from Western countries and Israel.
In 2006, the number of well-to-do Russian homeowners in London was 300,000; now it is said to have reached 450,000.
The worst-case scenario for Russia-West relations would be a next round of struggle between the West and Russia for the remaining post-Soviet space.
Despite the oil bonanza, Russia is a country of rapidly falling population, with only 25 per cent living above the standards of Soviet times, and many of these planning eventually to transfer their wealth abroad.
Our analysis of the development of Russian nationalism reveals its cynical, instrumental, Kremlin-engineered nature—exploiting the remaining patriotic feelings of the Russian people.
This is an issue of historical memories, but also of a huge discrepancy in size and power.
Even authoritarian leaders, like Belorus's Lukashenko, do not want to become satellites of Moscow.
Ukrainian elites decided not to join NATO or the EU, but for their own reasons and interests.
Any Ukrainian leadership would be likely to give a balance between Moscow, Brussels, and Washington.
There are many signs that the Kremlin realized this, and seeks, in a realpolitik way, to dismantle the ""security dilemma"" between Russia and the Eastern Europeans.
Symbolic and other gestures of reconciliation with Poland and Latvia, countries that the Kremlin had previously considered almost as adversaries, are the strongest indications of this trend.
Also, after years of competing over strategic pipelines from Asia to Europe, Russia seems to no longer regard this through zero-sum lenses.
The optimistic scenario would be Russia's turn toward Western-style modernization.
True, in September 2009 President Medvedev issued vocal, even desperate, calls for Russia's modernization.
Medvedev's message pointed to a greater cooperation with Western countries, as well as with China and other centers of development.
For all the media noise about the ""Russian silicone valley” in Skolkovo, as well as the money allegedly allocated to return the best Russian scientists back home from the West, we see the same kinds of imitational policies, today's Potemkin villages.
The rotation in the highest offices between Medvedev and Putin means additional political stagnation, not change.
In fact, quite a few processes and unforeseen options remain outside the proposals and scenarios we have discussed.
Millions of people meet, talk, overcome stereotypes, have a myriad of relationships that transcend the limitations of the preexisting experiences.
The results of this development within the next twenty years are hard to fathom, but they will be huge.
In the Russian system, high-cost visas for Westerners provide income for private companies related to Russian bureaucrats.
Many in the West argue— illogically in my opinion—that the repeal of the visa barriers would remunerate the ""authoritarian regime"" in Russia; there is even pressure to punish a few corrupt Russian bureaucrats by tightening visa restrictions for all Russians.
The contradiction between these motives and the agenda of free movement of people across borders in Europe is glaring.
By keeping European space divided by the ""visa curtain,"" the West follows the Cold War logic of carrots and sticks—the same logic the United States practiced for decades against Castro's Cuba, with negative results.
Experts expect that in 2014 eighty million citizens of Russia (71 per cent of the total population) will use the Internet.
In 2009-10, the newly founded ""Livejournal.ru"" became a true alternative to the state-controlled television and radio, a venue of debates and information-sharing among millions of Russians.
Still, the Internet has become a place where problems and views can be candidly discussed and ruthlessly exposed— for all who want to read and think.
The information revolution also affects Western public views of Russia.
More Western users, even if they do not know anything about Russia's tragic and traumatic history, are learning to listen to the Russians and respect their views and experience through blogs and other Internet media.
Especially useful for both sides is direct confrontation of views, prejudices, and stereotypes between young Westerners and young Russians.
This ""confrontation on the web"" is often as important as travel and tourism in affecting mutual stereotypes and expectations.
And the last greatest factor is time—the most important dimension for a historian.
Kennan's advice of patience about Russia's evolution has not lost its meaning.
Twenty years after 1991 we see that only part of the job is done, but many of the past divides have been recycled and reinvented, albeit in less drastic ways.
Politically, the status quo between Russia and the West may last for twenty more years, particularly if Putin and his elites stay in power.
Frederic Bozo Since its inception six decades ago, obituaries have regularly been pronounced on the coming death of the European project.
Since such pronouncements, more often than not, have been made by europhobes or euroskeptics, they could readily be dismissed.
True, the history of European unification has long been one of recurrent crises.
Twenty years after the creation of the European Union , the glass is either half full or half empty—depending on the optimistic or pessimistic nature of one's judgment.
Yet there is little denying that ""Europe is currently at a turning point of its history,"" as recently affirmed by a group of prominent policymakers and academics.
To be sure, only future developments will tell which of these descriptions— a glass half full or half empty—was closer to the truth.
The present chapter was completed in the fall of 2011, in the midst of an umpteenth episode of the Greek debt crisis—thus making any prediction hazardous at best.
The first section of this chapter, therefore, focuses on the Maastricht ""moment"" and its aftermath.
Against the backdrop of the end of the Cold War, the Maastricht Treaty was an ambivalent achievement.
The second section, by contrast, tries to explain the failures of the period that followed.
Irrespective of the unpredictable evolution of the current EU crisis, it argues that the time has come to move beyond the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment.
The ambivalence of the Maastricht moment In order to assess the evolution of the European Union since the end of the Cold War and to understand its current state, it is important to keep in mind the complex set of factors that led to the relaunch of European construction in the early 1990s.
The Maastricht Treaty was indeed a forward-looking event that aimed to shape European construction over the long term, but at the same time it was also the balancing act that ended a long historical period.
Maastricht was forward-looking because of the dialectic that connected it with overcoming the Cold War.
On the other hand, and more vitally for our purpose here, European construction was decisively relaunched as a result of the end of the Cold War.
The promoters of the Maastricht Treaty—not least French president Francois Mitterrand and West German chancellor Helmut Kohl, who in 1989-90 had jointly decided to accelerate the process of European integration as a response to German unification—believed it was the key response to the challenges that resulted from the demise of Yalta.
The future European Union, they believed, would offer a mode of stability to the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe; it would help to anchor the Soviet Union to the West; and, last but not least, it would make it possible to embed a reunified Germany in a revitalized European construction.
In short, the architects of Maastricht were determined to make the soon-to-be European Union the cornerstone of post-Cold War Europe.
Meanwhile, the treaty's most symbolic aspect, the creation of the European Union itself, marked the conclusion of a process launched by the then Nine at the Paris Summit in 1972.
The Maastricht Treaty, in other words, was not only the expression of a grand design for post-Cold War Europe.
It was, just as importantly, the result of a complicated and often frustrating negotiating process, not least between its two key promoters, France and Germany.
Each of its three main ambitions was indeed mitigated by limits inherited from the past.
The foremost ambition of Maastricht was, of course, to trigger a new phase of European integration through the creation of a single currency.
The EMU, its promoters believed, would both deepen Europe's economic integration in the wake of the completion of the single market (to be achieved by 1993) and, as a result, hasten its political unification.
The result was the creation of a currency union that left undecided, for the time being, the issue of an economic—let alone a political—union.
In the functionalist tradition launched by the Schuman Plan, the EMU, in other words, was in many ways a wager on the anticipated spillover effects of the creation of the euro.
Maastricht's parallel ambition was to move beyond what for four decades had been predominantly an economics-centered process of integration.
The European Community —heir to the old European Economic Community —would, accordingly, amalgamate into a fully fledged European Union , reflecting the more encompassing character of European unification that would prevail from now on.
Here again, however, there were limits to this grand design, whose promoters could not ignore the legacies and controversies of the past.
The political entity created by the Maastricht Treaty was thus the result of complex quid pro quos between advocates of a supranational approach and those of an intergovernmental approach, and between those of a federation and those of a confederation.
Maastricht's final ambition—at least for the most convinced among Europeanists—was to establish the EU as the cornerstone of European stability and security after the Cold War and, beyond, as a global politico-strategic actor in its own right.
The main vehicle here was the creation of CFSP and the long-term perspective for a common defense.
The result was a potential gap between the EU's proclaimed ambition and its ability effectively to deliver security and act strategically.
Like many previous turning points in European construction, the decisions of 1990-2 were thus defined by a combination of idealism and realism, of vision and negotiation.
Over the following decade, they nevertheless yielded three major achievements.
First, Maastricht effectively inaugurated a new phase of European unification.
The treaty's key project, the EMU, was successfully brought to completion.
Not only, as seen above, was the blueprint uncertain, but the currency crisis of 1992-3 and lingering disagreements over the contours and modalities of EMU could well have derailed it.
Yet by 1997 agreement had been reached, as reflected in the Stability and Growth Pact signed in May of that year, and on January 1, 1999 the euro was launched.
Against the backdrop of the current crisis, it is of course easy to discard this achievement.
This was, to be sure, a long, painful and frustrating process—one that absorbed most of Europe's energies for nearly two decades.
Yet the outcome—from the 1997 Amsterdam Treaty to the 2001 Nice Treaty, and from the ill-fated 2004 Rome Constitutional Treaty to the ""simplified"" 2007 Lisbon Treaty—has been a significant one.
This third achievement was perhaps the least assured, given the EU's initial dismal performance.
While in 1991, against the backdrop of the break-up of Yugoslavia, the foreign minister of Luxemburg had famously declared that this was ""the hour of Europe,"" the EU soon proved incapable of coping with the return of war on the continent.
The NATO intervention in the summer and the US-brokered peace in Dayton in the fall of 1995 illustrated the Europeans' Balkans fiasco.
Yet by the time of the 1999 Kosovo crisis, the Europeans had learned their lesson.
True, the role of NATO—and of the United States—in the military operation against Serbia was once again overwhelming; but the crisis convinced the Europeans that the EU needed to be able to cope with similar challenges in the future, leading to the creation of the ESDP in its immediate aftermath.
The EU, in addition, from then on was carrying the bulk of reconstruction efforts in the Balkans.
For an enlarged EU, the continent's stability had de facto become an internal affair.
The enlargement process was, in fact, the clearest expression of the persistent vitality of European unification in the post-Maastricht period.
To be sure, anchoring the new Central and Eastern European democracies to the EU— perhaps the foremost post-Cold War European challenge—could have been done without actually making them members, as Mitterrand's ill-fated plan for a European confederation in 1989-91 had envisaged.
Yet by the time of the December 1993 European Council in Copenhagen, the ineluctability of plain enlargement had been confirmed, opening the way to the EU's increase from twelve to twenty-seven members in less than fifteen years.
Throughout the 1990s and well into the following decade, the enlargement process thus confirmed the huge power of attraction of the EU and, by the same token, the 8 Meeting between Chirac and several members of the United States Supreme Court, July 11, 1998, 5AG5 BE11.
By the turn of the new century, the European project was therefore widely recognized as an ongoing success story.
Given the original ambivalence of the Maastricht moment, this was by no means preordained.
Explaining the EU's lost decade Over the past few years, the picture has changed dramatically.
Whereas the last decade of the twentieth century had been a beneficial period for European construction, the first decade of the twenty-first century in many ways has been a lost decade.
Compounding all these difficulties, the EU has become a highly dysfunctional organization, seemingly unable to make quick and relevant decisions to meet the huge challenges it faces—not least against the backdrop of the lingering economic and financial crisis.
As a result, major uncertainties prevail today as to the future sustainability of the European project.
The most daunting challenge confronting the EU today has to do with no less than its ability to remain a closely-knit economic entity—the foremost accomplishment of six decades of European integration—and, down the road, a viable political entity.
Although the issue of economic governance had been left undecided, it was hoped it would resolve itself—at a minimum thanks to the implementation of the Maastricht criteria and, at best, through the emergence of some kind of economic government of the eurozone.
The ineluctable result, many assumed, would be a great leap forward in the direction of an ever closer political, not just economic, union.
Over the past decade, the EU has not done particularly well compared with other developed economies.
Much more critically, by translating into a major upheaval of the eurozone, the global financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008 has exposed the major design flaws of the Maastricht construct.
Once again the dividing line—reflecting the Maastricht and post-Maastricht debates—was between Germany, initially reluctant to adopt a collective and mutual European response to the debt crises, and France , who strongly advocated such a response.
Throughout most of 2010 and 2011, the fate of the euro—and that of the European project as a whole—seemed to hang in the balance.
As of completing this chapter in the fall of 2011, the still unresolved Greek debt crisis in fact remains a huge question mark.
True, the Europeans, after a painful process, were able to find some common ground.
They have been able to avert a crisis of considerable magnitude—as would likely have resulted from a default by a member of the eurozone—thanks in particular to the creation in 2010 of a European financial stability facility , to be replaced by a permanent European stability mechanism in 2013.
More crucially, the euro crisis has uncovered a three-fold structural reality which had been concealed during the euro's first decade—even if many had sounded the alarm early on.
First, on the economic level, the very existence of a common currency has led over the years to increased divergences, not convergences, among the national economies.
With devaluation no longer an option to address growth and competitiveness discrepancies within the eurozone, the availability of low interest rates—a positive effect of EMU—has made it tempting for the weaker economies to tackle their problems simply by borrowing money, thus aggravating their deficits and debts.
Second, on the economic policy level, the crisis has exposed the inadequacy of the economic governance of the eurozone.
For more than a decade after the launch of the single European currency, mechanisms to prevent or deal with such divergences—whether through effective monitoring of individual economies or by means of intra-EU economic and fiscal solidarity—have remained almost non-existent, thus allowing the problem to grow to dangerous proportions.
Third, and even more fundamentally, on the political level, the crisis has made clear the inconsistency that prevails between the existence of a monetary union and the lack of a strong and pervasive political union— without which an effective system of economic governance is, in fact, impossible.
Much more than a sovereign debt crisis (the eurozone's global debt, “EU moves to avoid future crises,"" Financial Times, December 18, 2010.
Externally, the EU has fared no better than internally over the past decade.
One of the key ambitions of the promoters of Maastricht was to make the EU an actor on the world scene.
The completion of EMU and the creation of the ESDP at the turn of the century seemed bound to achieve just that.
With a common currency and a nascent defense, Europe was now equipped with the key attributes of power.
In spite of crises—not least that over Iraq in 2003—the Europeans seemed to share a vision of the kind of international system they wanted to promote, and of their own role in it.
Hence, hopes that the EU would become America's foremost strategic partner after the divisive administration of George W Bush were quickly shattered by the little disguised lack of interest shown by the incoming administration of Barack Obama.
Europe was further dismissed by a rising China, even less inclined to conceal its scorn, as shown by Beijing's cancellation of an EU-China summit in the fall of 2008.
And at the December 2009 Copenhagen conference, the United States and China in effect converged at the EU's expense, ignoring Europe and its ambitious agenda for dealing with climate change.
The bottom line is that today's global players—old or new—simply do not recognize the EU as one of them.
While it remains uniquely capable of diffusing norms and standards, the EU's capacity to produce the kind of power (military, but also, increasingly, economic or environmental) that will shape the emerging multipolar world seems bound to remain desperately limited.
Libya—regularly show, the Europeans still lack both a common vision of their role on the world scene and the means to defend it.
The external and internal challenges Europe is facing today are compounded by the dysfunctional character of the EU institutions.
To be sure, the treaty work that has been done since the 1997 Amsterdam Treaty has given way to a more robust institutional system.
The Lisbon Treaty has achieved significant progress in the direction of more efficient decisionmaking, in particular externally.
Yet the situation clearly remains unsatisfactory, given the nature and magnitude of the challenges the Europeans are confronting.
It's no wonder, then, that the major players of this world—the markets and the big powers—have a hard time taking the EU seriously and that the United States president was left ""incredulous” after his first encounter with the twenty-seven in Prague in 2008.
While the troubled economic and geopolitical context of the past few years has no doubt played an aggravating role, the current situation is, first and foremost, the consequence of the Europeans' own choices—or non-choices.
It is decisions made or not made at Maastricht and since then regarding key aspects of European construction—whether in terms of deepening, enlargement, or integration in the true sense of the word—that explain the currently precarious and unfinished state of the unification process.
While these decisions may have served the European project well in the relatively tranquil post-Cold War situation that characterized the aftermath of the Maastricht relaunch, they have fallen short of meeting the tremendous challenges of a far more unpredictable and troubled era of globalization, thereby exposing the project's design flaws.
Perhaps the most consequential of the choices that explain the current disarray of the European Union has been that of massive enlargement.
Because bringing the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe into the EU turned out to be the Europeans' most consistent effort in the fifteen years after Maastricht, it has been pursued at the expense of other considerations, not least effectiveness and cohesion.
Although it has increased the European Union's economic and demographic weight, this situation has, by the same token, deepened its internal fault lines.
As a result, it seems clear today that such an economically diverse bloc is less likely eventually to develop into a coherent whole (or at least that this will take a very long time), thus making it a fragile and vulnerable entity.
In the same vein, there is little doubt that a union of twenty-seven has more difficulties reaching a unified purpose on the international scene than would a smaller entity, thereby hampering the bloc's ambition to become a global player.
Enlargement may have been ineluctable and beneficial, but it has turned into a liability for the long-term future of the European project.
A second consequential choice has been that of a limited, if not minimal, deepening process.
As already underlined, the everlasting quarrels over the desirable end state of European unification—a federation or a confederation— have been all but buried under the treaty work from Amsterdam to Lisbon.
But here too there was a price to be paid in that the EU has failed to grow into a more potent and cohesive entity.
The Maastricht Treaty in many ways created the pretense, not the reality, of increased unification.
This situation goes a long way in explaining the present trials of the union.
A more encompassing and robust entity, involving a more substantial degree of cohesion and solidarity, would obviously have fared better in the current crisis.
It would have been more capable of dealing with intra-EU economic divergences upstream, and of limiting the impact of the sovereign debt problem downstream.
The same kind of argument applies to the EU's failed ambitions as a global power.
An EU representing little more than the sum of its own member states on the world scene can hardly be expected to become a geopolitical heavyweight—especially as these same members have continued to diverge internationally.
Finally, there is the core issue of integration in the functionalist sense (as distinct from the institutional or organic approach),e. creating de facto solidarities in specific sectors with a view to advancing a genuinely European community over the long term.
But here again, the present uncertainties affecting the union reflect decisions or non-decisions made since Maastricht.
While it was believed that the achievement of a single European market and the creation of a single currency would trigger a new phase of genuine integration in various sectors, thereby serving as a powerful driver of the European unification process, this calculation also proved wrong.
Although new common European policies were launched over the past two decades—such as ESDP—none of them was truly integrationist a la Jean Monnet.
For this to have happened, the Europeans would have had to embark on new, supranational projects, which has not been the case.
The exception was the euro itself, but, as seen above, the common currency has not led to the emergence of a significantly more integrated economic community.
What the crisis reveals, in other words, is the incompleteness of the European project.
Once again, under the facade of the newborn union, Maastricht was an ambivalent moment.
Of course, it was an important contribution to the peaceful ending of the Cold War, and it provided a robust framework for the management of post-Cold War Europe.
What recent developments have exposed, then, is that such advances have not taken place, or that they have been limited in spite of the EU's institutional transformation.
In a nutshell, the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment has not been superseded.
True, the current economic and financial crisis—not least the seemingly unending Greek debt crisis—constitutes a dangerous circumstance for the European project, and the ongoing surge of populism in many EU countries is of course an aggravating factor in that regard.
To blame one's hardships on the European Union is all the more tempting in those countries hit by the euro debt crisis and subject, as a result, to draconian austerity measures.
The current crisis, in other words, can only foster the trend toward a renationalization of economics and politics that has occurred over the past few years throughout the European Union, thus weakening European integration and undermining the Europeans' already elusive sense of commonality.
And yet a deliberate splintering of the eurozone—which no doubt would be a devastating blow to the European project as a whole—to this day appears quite improbable.
The economic cost of an individual country's abandoning the euro would be prohibitive as a result of the nominal increase in that country's national debt and of the kind of disruption that the move would no doubt provoke.
As to the political price, it would also be enormous, both for individual countries and for Europe as a whole.
That the German chancellor and the French president, against the backdrop of the euro crisis, should both have felt compelled in their 2011 New Year's greetings to reaffirm their commitment to the European currency in no uncertain terms, and to solemnly remind their citizens that European construction had brought sixty years of peace to the European continent speaks volumes in that regard.
To relate the existence of the euro to the prevalence of peace in Europe may sound historically far-fetched, but it does give a measure of the sense of political responsibility that European leaders—happily—continue to share.
As often in the history of European construction, muddling through seems to be a far more likely option at this juncture.
As already emphasized, since 2009 European leaders—not 19 See, for instance, Charles Kupchan, ""As nationalism rises, will the European Union fall?,"" Washington Post, August 29, 2010.
In spite of their initial differences, Berlin and Paris have managed to reach a compromise between the former's insistence on the fiscal responsibility of individual states and respecting the letter of European treaties on the one hand, and the latter's call for a collective management of the debt crises and a strengthening of the economic governance of the eurozone on the other hand.
Not least of these were allowing the EFSF/ESM to intervene on the secondary markets and thus offer precautionary credit lines—a measure that moves the fund closer to a European international monetary fund of sorts—and agreeing to consider effective steps toward a reinforced economic governance of the eurozone.
Still, decisions made over the past two years have—at least as of this writing in fall 2011—prevented the European debt crisis from getting out of control.
Much, of course, will depend on economic developments and the Europeans' ability to overcome the current conundrum and to weather future crises.
As said above, the sovereign debt crisis, for one, is probably not over.
Based on the decisions made so far, markets may not be convinced that member states are seriously committed to doing what it takes to stem the crisis; as a result, more dominos may well fall, this time with potentially devastating consequences.
It is 21 See ""EU leaders agree €109 billion Greek bail-out,"" Financial Times, July 22, 2011.
Merkel and Sarkozy subsequently made specific proposals for a reinforced governance of the eurozone, including convening heads of states and governments periodically and appointing a stable president for the eurozone.
The time may well have come to move beyond Maastricht—and not just in monetary matters.
To begin with, the EMU must finally be equipped with a fully fledged economic governance, involving a higher degree of solidarity—in other words, a transfers union, arguably the only way to address economic divergences and competitiveness problems under a single currency.
This, in turn, would call for a major step toward a genuine political union, without which such economic governance would be not only technically dysfunctional but politically unsustainable, since only the consciousness of a true ""Schicksalsgemeinshaft"" can allow for enhanced fiscal and economic solidarity.
Such a move toward a closer union would, of course, also be a prerequisite if the EU is ever to be in a position to gain the geopolitical weight it has been lacking so far on the international scene and to move beyond its present status as an economic giant with feet of clay.
A new, decisive phase of European unification and integration is arguably the only way to pull the European project out of its present quagmire and to equip the EU with the degree of internal cohesion and external relevance, as well as functional efficiency, which it has been lacking over the past decade or so.
The first has to do with the political and institutional model of European unification.
Since Maastricht and the creation of the European Union—and, in fact, since the early years of the European process in the late 1940s and early 1950s, when ""unionists"" and ""federalists"" were competing—the Europeans have been fudging this issue.
The result has been the promotion of a hybrid model of unification, with, under the facade of a fully fledged union, elements of supranationalism or federalism combined with elements of intergovernmentalism or confederalism.
Yet what the current crisis has revealed is precisely the inadequacy of this hybrid model.
Of course, it has always been clear that a ""federation of nation states"" is, at least in theory, an oxymoron.
The crisis has shown that such a complex set-up cannot deliver the degree of political integration and solidarity that a functional economic governance requires.
The same applies to the role of the European Union as a international actor.
It has thus become doubtful that a thriving European Union will ever result from the perpetuation of the hybrid model as consecrated at Maastricht, and since then.
Ever since the creation of the European communities in the 1950s, integration has served as the crucible of European unification, making it more than an intergovernmental project.
Yet, if anything, the current economic and financial crisis has in fact revealed the resilience of the national logics and realities, be they economic or political.
Many of the weaknesses of the European Union as a would-be player on the global scene may also be related to the deficiencies of integration.
There is little doubt that Europe's strength and cohesion in dealing with neighboring Russia, for example, are considerably hampered by the continued prevalence of national logics in the realm of energy, allowing external actors to divide and rule.
The conclusion is that a relaunch of the process of integration in key areas—such as energy—is a prerequisite if the Europeans want the European Union to be able to overcome its current internal and external challenges.
No community of destiny will ever emerge without a genuine revival of the original European integrationist inspiration.
It is increasingly hard to see how an ever-enlarging union will be able to develop the kind of common identity that would allow it to move in the direction of a closely knit, federal entity.
Of course, the European project never had indisputable, let alone ""natural,"" frontiers.
Yet developments over recent years have exposed the conflict between widening the EU and strengthening it, both internally and externally.
Yet, while there is tactical agreement that further significant steps with regard to enlargement should be at least postponed until the union regains its ""absorption capacity"" (a concept that has never really been clarified), there is so far no strategic consensus as to what the desirable end state should be.
In fact, one of Europe's next crises could well be provoked by the issue of further enlargement, particularly to Turkey, whose membership is increasingly opposed among current members, not least in Germany and France.
Yet such a crisis could well be a salutary one, at least in the eyes of advocates of a strong, cohesive Europe, for whom only an EU with clear and definitive boundaries—and which can demonstrate its ability to say ""no""— will ever be able to evolve into a viable entity, let alone a global power.
While its backdrop has been the global financial and economic crisis of the past few years, the current crisis is fundamentally a crisis of European integration.
The choices made at and since Maastricht were an important step on the road toward European unification, but the current crisis shows that the time has come to move beyond the ambivalence of the Maastricht moment.
For the European project to be able to survive, the glass of European unification has to be made at least half full.
Whether the Europeans will be able to live up to the challenge is too early to say.
Indeed, nothing dramatic happened—no destructive earthquake, no sudden outbreak of war, no major terrorist attack, and no breakdown of any country's stock market.
Quietly, however, something significant, though long anticipated, occurred.
In Tokyo, the figures released by the Japanese government indicated that China had passed Japan in the second quarter of 2010 to become the world's second-largest economy, next only to the United States.
Some have also predicted that China's economy may surpass that of the United States to become the largest in the world by 2030, if not earlier.
This should have been a moment of celebration and national pride in China—after all, Liu was the first citizen of the People's Republic of China to become a Nobel prize laureate.
However, Liu was unable to attend the Nobel Prize award ceremony in Oslo.
He was in prison, serving eleven years' imprisonment plus two years' 1 In the second quarter of 2010, while Japan's economy was valued at about $1.28 trillion, China's economy was valued at $1.33 trillion.
They vividly depict, among other things, the profound paradoxes sitting deeply within China's phenomenal economic growth in the past thirty years.
China in the age of ""reform and opening up"" has witnessed mixed and highly uneven developments.
In the meantime, China's military buildup, accelerated in recent years, has caused worries that Beijing means not only to modernize China's defense capacity but also to expand its offensive capability beyond its borders.
In this chapter, I adopt a historical approach by treating China's rise—or, more accurately speaking, China's prolonged rise—not only as a phenomenon generated by the reform 2 Remain ribao , December 10, 2010.
Despite the extraordinary magnitude of Mao's revolution and ""continuous revolution,"" these revolutions were unable to produce ultimate answers to such fundamental questions as how to define the meanings and essence of the ""new China"" and how best to identify China's role and position in the world, bequeathing them to China and the Chinese people in the post-Mao and post-Cold War era.
Indeed, it was the successes and failures, progresses and setbacks, achievements and sufferings, and bright times and dark moments of China's revolutions that prepared some of the fundamental conditions for the coming of the reform and opening-up era.
All of this has also burdened the reform and opening-up process with all kinds of hurdles, making it impossible for China's rise not to become a course paradoxical and prolonged.
Binding the chapter together is the analysis of the evolving legitimacy challenge that the Chinese ""communist"" state has been facing, both in Mao's times and during the periods that Deng Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao served as China's top leaders.
However, the legitimacy narrative that Mao established for the People's Republic and, related to it, some of the fundamental principles underlying his definition of China's role and position in the world, have remained in position.
Among other things, it consolidated ""China"" as a modern state of multiple nationalities; it eliminated, sociologically and physically, China's age-old landlord class and the traditional gentry-scholar structure; it changed the ""old"" China's gender inequality phenomenon; it upgraded the Chinese people's level of education; and it laid the foundation of China's industrialization and tortuous path toward modernity.
In the meantime, the PRC under Mao's reign constantly challenged the legitimacy of the existing international order, which Mao and his comrades believed to be the result of Western domination and thus inimical to revolutionary China.
Mao and the CCP also challenged Moscow's position as the headquarters of the world revolution, leading to the Sino-Soviet split as well as the disintegration of the international communist movement.
Like any design of communist modernity, Mao's was directed by a utopian vision ; but his extraordinary aspiration of transforming China's backwardness into modernity in the shortest possible time was unable to stand the test of the Chinese people's lived experience.
This was especially true after the failure of the disastrous ""Great Leap Forward,"" which caused the deaths of tens of millions of ordinary Chinese people, and the legitimacy of Mao's ""continuous revolution"" was called into serious question.
In search of means to meet the legitimacy challenge to his revolution, Mao found that adopting and adhering to a revolutionary foreign policy was of great relevance.
Indeed, in the early years of the PRC, such a foreign policy helped make Mao's various state and societal transformation programs powerful unifying and national themes, supplanting many local, regional, or factional concerns.
When Mao's revolution was losing the Chinese people's support, it served as a useful and effective way through which Mao might maintain both his authority and his revolutionary programs.
Consequently, Mao and his colleagues seem to have been unafraid of using force in dealing with foreign policy crises.
This should be understood in relation to the unique and highly influential Chinese ""victim mentality"" and Mao's reading of it.
During modern times, the Chinese perception of China's position in the world was always informed by the conviction that it was the political incursion, economic exploitation, and military aggression by foreign imperialist countries that had undermined the glory of the Chinese civilization and humiliated China.
The foundation of the legitimacy narrative of the PRC also gradually shifted from a utopian vision of communism to nationalism and, more accurately, patriotism.
In Mao's times, indeed, it was patriotism, which created one's sense of attachment to the state, that had formed the core of China's official ideology.
This would be carried into the reform and opening-up era to support the post-Mao Chinese leadership's efforts to justify the one-party-dominated political institution.
In spite of its aggressive international behavior, Mao's China was not an expansionist power as the term is typically defined in Western strategic discourse.
While using force, largely because of their domestic-centered and legitimacy-related concerns, what the Chinese leaders hoped to achieve was not the PRC's direct control of foreign territory or resources, but the spread of the Chinese revolution's influence to ""hearts and minds"" around the world.
It was aspiration for ""centrality,"" rather than pursuit of ""dominance,"" that characterized the external policy of Mao's China.
This has important implications for understanding China's external behavior today and in the future.
Toward the last stage of Mao's life, he made a dramatic turn in Chinese foreign policy by achieving a rapprochement with the United States, the PRC's arch-enemy ever since its establishment.
I have pointed out elsewhere that Mao's motivations for embracing the Chinese-American rapprochement were both strategic and domestic.
However, his decisions to improve relations with the United States made it politically more feasible for his successors to pursue a course of opening up to the world.
This is a crucial point for understanding not only why ""communist"" China survived the end of the Cold War, but also why and how China's drive for modernity in the post-Cold War era has been of great complexity.
In less than two years, Deng, who had been purged twice during the Cultural Revolution (which had probably helped him understand the dark side of Mao's revolution), emerged as China's paramount leader.
Deng's reform and opening-up project was first of all a de-revolutionization process, launched, on one level, to cope with the profound legitimacy crisis in the post-Mao era.
The specific ways in which Deng and the CCP leadership envisioned and carried out the project, however, while easing some of the old legitimacy pressure, created new legitimacy challenges for the Chinese state—while, at the same time, dooming the international communist movement.
Thus Deng and the CCP leadership introduced a series of reform measures in China's countryside and cities, aiming at modernizing the country's industry, agriculture, science and technology, and national defense.
Internationally, Beijing significantly broadened China's external connections through such steps as dispatching Chinese students to study abroad, promoting China's trade with Western countries, welcoming foreign investments, and adopting a more positive approach toward the world market.
In the meantime, Beijing gradually reduced and finally stopped supporting foreign communist insurgences.
Another important area of continuity between Mao and Deng existed in China's strategies vis-a-vis the two superpowers.
The ""tacit alliance"" between China and the United States that emerged in Mao's later years continued to develop when Deng became China's paramount leader.
Deng regarded the Soviet Union as more dangerous than the United States, as he believed that the Soviet Union was on the offensive whereas the United States was on the defensive.
But there were also important changes in Deng's perception of ChineseAmerican relations.
For Mao, Beijing's new relationship with Washington helped enhance China's security position while at the same time allowing him to claim that indeed ""the Chinese people have stood up,"" in spite of the failure of his revolution.
Meanwhile, Deng's vision of Sino-American relations was closely related to a new approach toward the capitalist-dominated world market.
Throughout the Maoist era, the market and the pursuit of profits were treated as values and practices inimical to genuine socialism.
Beijing's tacit alliance with Washington was highly compatible with Deng's new vision of looking to the West for ways to modernize China.
In the meantime, China's confrontation with the Soviet Union continued, especially after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979.
He announced that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had created a new barrier for Beijing to improve relations with Moscow.
Beijing's relations with Hanoi deteriorated rapidly after the Vietnamese communists unified the whole country in 1975.
Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in December 1978 further damaged Chinese-Vietnamese relations.
Beijing's leaders believed that Hanoi served as an agent of Soviet expansionism in the region neighboring China.
Throughout the 1980s, the borders between the two countries were turned into a front of protracted warfare.
In retrospect, the years 1982-3 represented a turning point in China's external relations.
The difficulties that Beijing encountered with the Ronald Reagan administration made Deng and his fellow Chinese leaders rethink how best to define the scope of Sino-American relations.
Meanwhile, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev openly stated that Moscow was willing to improve relations with China.
Beijing announced in September 1982 that Chinese foreign policy would accord the principle of ""independence and self-determination""—that is, keep a distance from both superpowers.
The main barriers were the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and, more importantly, the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia.
Underpinning Beijing's attitudes toward Vietnam were both international and domestic considerations.
Deng's decision to ""teach Vietnam a lesson"" provided him with a valuable opportunity to consolidate his military and political power.
The prolonged confrontation with Vietnam created a sustained source—one that appealed to the Chinese people's patriotism—of domestic mobilization.
At a time when the reform policies were creating ever-deepening economic inequality in Chinese society and, as a result, the legitimacy of the Chinese communist state was seriously called into question, the confrontation with Vietnam, and Beijing's representation of it to the Chinese people, served to retain the support of ordinary Chinese for the state.
The uneven development of the reform and opening-up process finally brought China's state and society to the verge of a serious crisis.
In March 1989, Lhasa, the capital of the Tibetan Autonomous Region, was placed under martial law.
The students defied the authorities angrily, leading to a stand-off at Tiananmen Square.
On June 3-4, People's Liberation Army soldiers fought their way into the Square, ending the protest in bloodshed.
In a sense, it also triggered the chain of historic events that made 1989 a landmark year in world history.
In two short years the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc in Eastern Europe collapsed.
The Chinese communist state survived the Tiananmen tragedy of 1989 and the end of the Cold War.
One main reason was that China had already virtually left the Cold War in the late 1970s.
Another reason lay in Deng's management of the crisis situation associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
So the statement could also be read as his political testament, which demonstrated that Deng sensed the ever-deepening legitimacy challenge that the Chinese communist state was facing.
He thus recognized that China's rise would be a difficult and prolonged process, and that China should not strive for a global leadership role— certainly not in the foreseeable future.
A guideline of utmost importance thus was set up for China's international relations in the next two decades.
Few at that time could have expected that he would become more than a transitional figure.
After all, two of Jiang's predecessors, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, had been promoted to the position and then lost it in disgrace in a few short years.
Among the possible candidates after Zhao Ziyao's downfall, Jiang was by no means a front-runner.
A more likely choice should have been Li Peng, China's premier, who had been known as a hardliner largely due to his hostile attitude toward the Tiananmen pro-democracy movement.
Given China's political atmosphere in the wake of the Tiananmen suppression, Li seemed a logical choice as the new general secretary.
Given Li's performance during the Tiananmen crisis, he was unlikely to be a wholehearted supporter of Deng's reformist ideas.
By comparison, Jiang was a better choice as he had had the experience of promoting the reform and opening-up project in Shanghai with great success, and he had also stood firm in the face of the ""bourgeoisie liberalization"" challenge in managing the student protest in late 1986 and also during the 1989 crisis.
In the first two years of his tenure as general secretary, Jiang was extremely cautious.
His main attention was given to stabilizing China's domestic situation after Tiananmen.
So he followed Deng's advice to ""do several practical things” that the Chinese people could see for themselves, so that their basic confidence in the government would be restored.
Jiang and the CCP leadership took a series of measures to fight against corruption, especially the profiteering behavior prevailing among officials.
The Chinese government exerted stricter control over the money supply, quickly placing the high inflation rate under control.
In Chinese foreign policy, the challenges facing Jiang were also serious and complex.
As a person who cared about his own position in history, he knew well—as himself a student activist in his youth—that the Tiananmen tragedy had given him a very bad image among the Chinese as well as in the world.
The only way to regain his positive image was to regenerate the reform project.
He also knew that only by successfully carrying out the project would the Chinese communist state be able to deal with the profound legitimacy challenges that it had been facing.
In early 1991, Deng issued a series of pro-reform statements during a vacation tour in Shanghai.
As Shanghai was Jiang's sphere of influence, the commentaries would not have been published without his endorsement.
When the coup occurred, the initial responses by many leaders in Beijing, and Jiang probably included, were of sympathy and hope.
The coup failed, but its impact on Jiang and his colleagues was significant.
The first public sign of the change appeared in early September 1991, when Renmin Ribao (People's Daily) published a commentary stating that ""we should never allow reforms to go along the bourgeois liberalization or capitalist line""; the Xinhua News Agency followed Jiang's order to recall it and publish a different version, in which the above reference was deleted.
This was an indication that the momentum for reforms was gathering again.
During this tour he delivered a series of statements emphasizing that reforms should be carried out in deeper ways.
The essence of socialism, stressed Deng, should be ""the development of 23 Yang Jisheng, Zhongguo gaige niandai de zhengzhi douzheng (Political Struggles in China's Reform Era) , 483.
In September 1992, the CCP's fourteenth congress formally adopted building a ""socialist market economy"" as the goal of China's regenerated reform and opening-up project.
This development also consolidated Jiang's position as China's top leader.
From 1992 to 2004, when Jiang finally resigned from his last official post, with 1998 as the turning point, Jiang's reign can be divided into two periods.
In the first period, during which Jiang enhanced his leadership role, Jiang and the CCP leadership's main attention was domestic-oriented, concentrating on turning the reform programs into the vehicles that would significantly promote China's economic growth.
In the 1980s, China had maintained an annual growth rate nearing or surpassing two percentage digits.
The crisis of 1989 and its consequences caused stagnation in China's economic development in 1990-1.
For Jiang and his fellow CCP leaders, this was a trend that had to be turned around.
In addition to its significance for the Chinese economy and society, this was also a critical legitimacy challenge for Jiang and his colleagues.
They knew well that if they could not bring higher economic growth rates back to China, the foundation of the PRC's legitimacy narrative—epitomized in Mao's ""we the Chinese people have stood up"" statement—would be seriously jeopardized.
Emerging here was a consciousness on the part of the CCP leaders of the utmost importance of building a ""performance-based legitimacy"" for the Chinese ""communist"" state.
Yet, it soon became clear that China's existing system on financial resource disposition and taxes, which had been adopted in the early reform years, was causing disorder and tension between the central and local governments, thus blocking faster and more sustainable economic growth.
Against this background, Zhu Rongji, then China's vice premier, initiated a far-reaching tax-sharing reform in 1994.
By categorizing tax revenues into central, regional, and central/regional shared taxes, the reform put a larger share of taxes into the central government, while at the same time making the local share of tax revenues more transparent and accountable.
Throughout the rest of the 1990s and in the first years of the twenty-first century, the new system seemed to have played a good role in serving China's continuous economic development.
Given that the United States had emerged as the sole superpower in the post-Cold War era, Jiang and the Chinese leadership defined China's relations with the United States as ""the most important subject"" in China's external policies.
Jiang repeatedly reminded his colleagues that if Beijing was able to maintain a good relationship with Washington, China would enjoy a much better international environment overall.
Instead, Beijing made a series of efforts to demonstrate that China was continuously changing into an ""insider"" of the American and Western capitalist-dominated international system.
This was also Beijing's ""statement by action"" that China was willing to accept international norms and regulations.
Instead of quietly ""swallowing the bitter pill,"" Jiang and his fellow Beijing leaders decided to make tough responses, which they had not done toward Washington since 1989.
In March 1996, on the eve of Taiwan's presidential election, Beijing staged armed missile tests aimed at areas off two of Taiwan's main seaports.
Washington responded by dispatching two aircraft carrier battle groups to the Taiwan Strait.
All of this caused the most serious crisis in US-China relations in the 1990s.
More importantly, underlying Jiang's decision were deep domestic considerations linked to the CCP leadership's legitimacy concerns.
For Jiang and his colleagues, the Taiwan case presented a serious challenge to the CCP's legitimacy narrative that ""we the Chinese people have stood up,"" and that the CCP was always ready and able to defend China's sovereignty and national integrity.
In the wake of the 1995-6 Taiwan Strait crisis, the Clinton administration adjusted United States policies toward Taiwan, as well as toward China.
When Clinton visited China in June 1998, he announced that Washington did not support Taiwan's independence, did not support ""one China, one Taiwan” or ""two Chinas,"" and did not support Taiwan's membership of any international bodies whose members are sovereign states.
Clinton made these statements also in the wake of Beijing's ""cooperative and responsible responses"" to Asia's severe financial crisis in 1997.
For policymakers in Washington, these were signs of China's continuous rise, not only in its economic strength and political influence, but also in its willingness to become a more responsible and rules-abiding member of the international community.
With Deng's passing away in February 1997, Jiang now felt that he was in a more powerful position to make history as China's top leader.
Zhu Rongji, who had won a reputation as the most reform-minded among all the CCP leaders, replaced Li Peng to assume the premiership.
The establishment of the Jiang-Zhu regime, in retrospect, probably made the year 1998 an important potential turning point for China.
When he began what I identify as the second period of his leadership tenure in 1998, there was evidence that he was thinking about ""making history"" by dealing with some ""very big issues"" related to the legitimacy challenges that the CCP regime had been facing.
His thinking, it seemed, concentrated on two matters—Taiwan and China's political reform—both of which had close connections with the PRC's legitimacy narrative.
This thought must have been greatly enhanced when Jiang attended the ceremony of the PRC restoring its sovereignty over Hong Kong.
The book's main theme was the necessity and possibility of carrying out ""genuine political reforms"" in China.
Surprisingly, the government neither responded to the requests nor took any suppression action.
Not until six months later did the government begin to arrest the dissidents and sentence them to long imprisonment.
An answer probably will need to wait until the declassification of China's official documents.
In April, Zhu Rongji visited the United States, taking with him an ""excellent package"" for winning United States support for China's WTO membership drive.
Out of domestic political considerations (mainly worrying about responses from the labor unions), President Clinton turned Zhu down.
In May, NATO planes mistakenly bombarded the PRC embassy in Belgrade, leading to the outbreak of the worst anti-American protests in China in recent history.
In July, Jiang and the CCP leadership made the decision to suppress Falungong, a cult organization that, Jiang and his colleagues believed, was presenting serious threats to the state and society.
These events mobilized the hardliners in the CCP elite, effectively blocking any possibility for Jiang to move toward a more flexible political stand.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 changed the larger environment for Sino-American relations again.
Jiang was among the first group of world leaders to call Bush, providing China's support to the war on terror.
Rather, he believed that America's need to concentrate on dealing with the serious and lingering threats of terrorism provided China with a ""twentyyear period of strategic opportunities,"" during which China might concentrate on further developing itself.
At this time Jiang was approaching the end of his term as China's top leader, and he had made a last effort to define his own position in history by introducing the ""Three Represents"" thesis in February 2000.
Millions and millions of everyday Chinese people paid little attention to it, which, by itself, was an indication of the legitimacy crisis entangling China.
When Hu Jintao, who had for a decade been designated as the CCP's next leader, took over the post of general secretary, Jiang stayed as chairman of the Central Military Commission.
But Jiang actually should have felt quite satisfied with his own accomplishments.
In the years that he served as CCP general secretary, China not only survived the Tiananmen tragedy of 1989 and the end of the global Cold War, but also registered an impressive record of economic growth.
Fifteen years after the Tiananmen tragedy, it seemed that the majority of the Chinese population was gradually forgetting it.
It seems that Hu occupied a better position than Jiang to deal with the challenges that China was facing.
After he was designated as China's next top leader in the early 1990s, his primary concern seemed to have been avoiding any mistakes.
An error-free record in those years was the best guarantor for him to assume China's leadership role.
A quarter century after the launch of the reform and opening-up project and, especially, a decade after Deng regenerated it, not only had the Chinese economy been rapidly growing but also Chinese society had become more dynamic, diverse, and difficult to control.
For Hu, who had been the person in charge of the Central Secretariat's routine working meetings for almost a decade, one of his big headaches had been that increasing numbers of ""incidents of unrest"" throughout China had often been top of the meetings' agendas.
He probably would not feel that Chinese society was approaching a major crisis, certainly not in the near future.
Still, he could see that under the surface of China's booming economy and prosperous society were hidden dangers.
Now, as China's top leader, Hu needed to make choices, including how to deal with Deng's and Jiang's legacies.
Like other CCP leaders, Hu never failed 40 According to the figures issued by China's State Statistics Bureau, China's average annual GDP growth rate from 1989-2004 was 9. per cent.
But this does not necessarily mean that he genuinely embraced Deng's and Jiang's ideas.
Unlike Deng, who never brought about a ""theory"" associated with his name, 41 or Jiang, who did not introduce a theory of his own until the very last stage of his leadership career, Hu composed his own brand-name ""grand theory"" shortly after he became CCP general secretary.
Its polished version, which the CCP leadership adopted in October 2003, reads as follows.
Also, although he never made these ideas in any way conflict with Jiang's ""Three Represents"" thesis, he had virtually changed the focus of Jiang's thesis on promoting all-out economic growth, placing solving worsening social tensions at the top of his agenda.
By itself, this shifting emphasis in China's development strategy was not wrong.
It soon turned out that Hu's answer was to enhance state intervention in and control over society.
In one of his internal speeches, Hu stated that although Cuba and North Korea had not done well in pursuing economic development, they were correct in 41 The term ""Deng Xiaoping Theory"" was never used by Deng himself; it was imposed on him and by his fellow CCP leaders and successors.
Not surprisingly, the CCP leadership put ""maintaining stability and social order” as the absolute priority goal of its domestic policies.
In the hope of ""eliminating any element of instability in its first appearance,"" the state set up increasingly more restrictive, or even suppressive, terms on public expression.
Hu's ""China's peaceful rise"" notion both followed Deng's ""maintaining a low profile"" advice and also attempted to surpass it.
The notion actually was not Hu's invention; it was introduced by Zheng Bijian, a high-ranking official who had also been regarded as one of China's leading thinkers on strategic and ideological issues.
Such a shift not only made other actors in the world share the responsibility of making China's rise peaceful, but also sent a message to the Chinese people that China's rise was already an established fact.
The next year, the World Expo was held in Shanghai and became another great showcase of China's influence and achievements.
Hu and the CCP leadership endeavored to take full advantage of these events to mobilize the Chinese people's patriotism, thus generating support for the legitimacy of the Chinese state.
The year 2008 also witnessed the eruption of the global financial crisis.
This was for Hu and his fellow Chinese leaders a serious challenge and, potentially, an opportunity.
To deal with the crisis, the Chinese government quickly introduced a comprehensive and aggressive stimulus program of four trillion Renminbi, the working of which made China seemingly the most successful country among all the major powers in coping with the impact of the crisis and the recession that followed.
In 2009-10, China kept a gross domestic product growth rate of close to 10 per cent.
Against this background, an important and ongoing debate began in 2009 among China's policymakers, military planners, and academic elite concerning whether or not China should continue to take Deng's 24-character advice—especially ""maintaining a low profile""—as the fundamental guideline 44 The speech has never been formally published.
In 2009-10, Chinese foreign policy appeared more assertive than before toward such issues as the disputes over the South China Sea.
However, China's stimulus package, while working at keeping China's economic growth, failed to transform its expert-oriented structure.
It also led to the advance of the state sector of the economy at the cost of the retreat of the private sector.
Furthermore, beneath China's new appearance of strength remain deep-rooted accumulated tensions.
Ironically, in March 2008, a few months before the Beijing Olympics, the worst protests and riots since 1989, involving a large number of Buddhist monks, occurred in Tibet.
The Olympic torch relay was then turned into protests against China's human rights record in different parts of the world.
In July 2009, a series of violent riots erupted in Xinjiang, leading to widespread ethnic conflicts between the Uyghur and Han populations there.
Throughout China, the number of incidents of ""mass unrest,"" often caused by popular anger over rampant corruption and deteriorating economic disparities, repeatedly broke previous records.
Even under the government's tight censorship, cases of mining disasters, public health crises, and environmental destruction are from time to time reported in the media.
Behind China's continuous economic growth, indeed, tensions within Chinese society and between Chinese society and the state actually were mounting and worsening.
Beijing's leaders decided to arrest him and, as described in the opening paragraph of the chapter, sentence him to eleven years' imprisonment.
This was ""killing a chicken to scare the monkeys,"" a strategy that had long been used by Chinese rulers during imperial times to suppress dissident voices and actions.
During his time, China's growth has continued, even when the whole world has been in recession, and this is no small achievement.
With an understanding of China's own problems, Hu and his fellow Chinese leaders have also decided that China should continue to follow Deng's ""maintaining a low profile"" strategy in foreign affairs.
China at the crossroads Three decades after the launch of the reform and opening-up project, China is now at a crossroads.
China's economic growth is extraordinary and real, yet China's rise has its own dilemmas and hurdles, raising such basic questions as whether it is sustainable and where it will lead to.
In the past three decades, the Chinese ""communist'' state has taken full advantage of China's rapid economic growth, linking it with Mao's ""we the Chinese people have stood up” rhetoric and changing it into a key justification of the PRC's legitimacy narrative.
However, the ""legitimacy"" so defined is no more than a ""performance-based"" one, and has to count on China's rapid economic growth lasting forever.
Furthermore, China's phenomenal economic expansion has been accompanied by profound and continuous transformation in Chinese society, releasing new and powerful social forces the country has never seen in its age-old history.
The convergence of a reduced economic growth rate and increasing social and political diversity will inevitably challenge the CCP's one-party reign structure.
In the meantime, the legacy of China's age of revolutions has been reflected in the breakdown of the moral norms of Chinese society, a phenomenon that has deepened as a result of the rampant materialism in the reform and opening-up era.
Indeed, the challenges facing China concern how to define the essence of ""The People's Republic of China"" (including both ""People's Republic” and ""China""), and how to reconstruct its legitimacy narrative.
Responses to the challenges will comprise many dimensions, yet two of them seem to be of fundamental importance.
First, envisioning and pursuing reforms that aim at not only maintaining and enhancing the functioning and capacity of the state, but also introducing a structure characterized by power checking and balancing; second, building or rebuilding the moral foundation of China's society in its ongoing pursuit of modernity and postmodernity, so that its continuous rise will satisfy not only the people's improved material needs but also their search for meanings of life.
An awareness of such profound challenges facing China has caused a sustained sense of legitimacy crisis on the part of its leaders.
Rather than coming up with basic solutions to the challenges, this makes China's problems more accumulative, creating an increasingly dangerous scenario in 2 67 China's Prolonged Rise which a profound general crisis involving China's economy, politics, and society may eventually break out.
All of this not only reflects the uncertainty of the course of China's continuous changes, but also increases the difficulty of predicting China's role in Asia and the whole world in the coming decades.
After all, true wisdom arises from genuine political and intellectual pluralism.
Ten years after the end of the Cold War, the United States and its main Western allies in Europe could look back on the last decade of the twentieth century with a rare degree of satisfaction.
Their core values seemed to have triumphed and then spread around the world; they continued to dominate or play host to the most successful and influential international organizations; together, they still dominated the global economy; and it was they, rather than any other actors, to whom the world turned if they were looking for answers.
The United States in particular seemed to be in an especially enviable position.
Some no doubt wondered whether the ""unipolar moment"" could last for ever.
One or two analysts even speculated about the possible limits of its power.
And the occasional maverick still repeated the old Paul Kennedy line that the United States was in decline.
But few but the most pessimistic envisaged that any other peer rival would likely rise to balance its vast power in the future.
Japan, followed by an eight-year economic boom of its own, America and Americans could reasonably look forward to yet another American century.
Ten years later and this apparently durable and enduring order had seemingly changed beyond recognition.
Rather it had occurred because of what many regarded as a basic shift in the underlying tectonics of world order.
In the simplest headline terms, this change was the result of three interconnected developments.
Having abandoned Maoism—an ideology that had weakened rather than enhanced Chinese power—this sleeping giant had at last been aroused from its slumbers.
See his ""When China Becomes number one,"" Financial Times, June 7, 2011.
He has argued that ""as late as 1980, North America and Western Europe produced more than two thirds of this planet's income.
By 2008, however, because of the continuing rise of India, China and the rest of East Asia, that center of gravity had shifted to a point just outside Izmir, Turkey, east of Helsinki and Bucharest—a drift of 3000 miles, or about three quarters of the Earth's radius.
In part this was the price America was being forced to pay for Bush's adventuristic foreign policy; in part the result of the economic crisis; and in part the inevitable consequence of evolutionary change in the international system itself that was leading to an erosion in the influence of even this very special great power.
Of course, not everybody subscribed to each and every part of this complex narrative; and even when they did, they articulated it in sometimes more, sometimes less, subtle ways.
Still, overall, there were very few experts by the end of the ""noughties"" who did not adhere in part, or in full, to the view that the international system had changed beyond recognition between the turn of the millennium and the second decade of the twenty-first century.
Economic power, he believed, was now shifting, and shifting fast, from the West to the East.
Indeed, only a few years after having called upon the United States to behave like the empire it most obviously was, he was now talking in the most pessimistic terms about it going the way of all other empires in the past.
Nemesis came first in the backstreets of Sadr City and the valleys of Helmand, which revealed not only the limits of American military might but also, more importantly, the naivety of neoconservative visions of a democratic wave in the greater Middle East.
And it struck a second time with the escalation of the subprime crisis of 2007 into the credit crunch of 2008 and finally the 'great recession’ of 2009.
He simply points out—as any natural scientist observing a run of data would—that if the record shows one country's productivity and economy growing faster than others, then there will be a steady shift in the balances of power towards it.
But it was impossible not to be aware that something serious was up when that most esteemed of journals, Foreign Affairs, fired a warning shot across Western bows in 2004.
No less a person than its editor, James Hoge, wrote tellingly—and from the West's point of view rather worryingly—of a ""global power shift in the making,"" which if not handled properly by the West could very easily lead to major conflict.
This somewhat alarming view— alarming at least for the West—was then reiterated in different forms by a number of other observers in the years which followed.
Consequently the international order was changing, and the sooner the United States adjusted to the fact, the better.
In the same year, the influential Asian writer Kishore Mahbubani made the case for a power shift even more strongly.
However, there was still resistance to this ""irresistible shift"" in the old centers of Western power.
Indeed, according to Mahbubani, the West still insisted on holding on to the top positions in the major international institutions like the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank, and the United Nations , when it was clear that this no longer reflected international realities.
How disturbing became only too clear as the dust began to settle following the great American ""crash"" of 2008.
Like most major events, this one was neither anticipated nor even thought possible by the bulk of economists.
But within a very short space of time the wider implications of something that had earlier been deemed impossible soon began to be debated in earnest.
To this extent, the crisis would not just have economic consequences; it would also have major geopolitical consequences.
It was also likely to increase China's leverage in relation to the West.
However, unlike the West—but like its near neighbors in Asia, like India—it had managed to bounce back with ease.
In a popular book, China, he predicted, would one day ""rule the world,"" forcing or persuading others to dance to its new tune rather than the old one composed in Washington.
But even they were compelled to admit that the world was in the midst of one of the biggest economic shifts since the dawn of the industrial era, one that was already reshaping Asia and likely to bring about a major change in world affairs that did not necessarily augur well for the West and the United States.
A number of other major economic power centers were beginning to emerge as well, including among them India, Brazil, and Indonesia.
Desperately poor though many of its inhabitants might have been, and less advanced along the economic road than China, by 2010 it had still become an increasingly major player in certain key areas of high technology, steel production, and software engineering.
Indonesia, too, was undergoing massive economic change; as indeed were other nontraditional centers of growing economic power such as Brazil, Turkey, and South Africa.
Here the situation seemed to move from being problematic to critical, and by 2010 downright disastrous.
Indeed, one very obvious measure of a deeper Western malaise was the increasingly pessimistic tone of the debate in Europe itself about its own less than rosy future.
It also consumed more imported coal and raw materials than any other state; it had already become the key economic player in its own region, and was fast becoming a major one in Australia, Latin America, and Africa.
What few if any could then have anticipated was the speed with which this crisis became more and more entangled with a more existential debate about the future of Europe itself and its symbolically important currency.
The evidence that we are in the middle of a major rearrangement in the distribution of global power looks overwhelming—certainly convincing enough to persuade the bulk of the commentariat and most policymakers that we are indeed moving into what Serfaty has termed a post-Western world.
Some clearly fear what is happening on the grounds that it will undermine Western values, lead to greater instability, or even increase the possibility of war—most obviously between the United States and China.
Most, though, seem to welcome, or at least accept, what is taking place, either because it is delivering a more even distribution of economic power, creating a larger middle class worldwide, alleviating poverty, helping keep inflation in check, preventing the international economy from collapsing altogether, or leading to a more balanced, and therefore more stable, international system.
In any case, both those fearing this change and those welcoming it do not seem to question that such a shift is now happening.
Indeed, after a period of extended angst, it now looks as if many in the West more generally accept that there is very little that can or should be done to stop it from going any further.
It is at this juncture that I would like to call time, or at least ask a few awkward questions that few seem prepared to ask about what many now think has already happened to the international system.
I do so not because I am opposed to change as such, or believe the West has a right to stay on top for ever, or because I am suffering from some deep Spenglerian angst about the decline of Western civilization in general or the United States in particular.
Rather it is because, in the headlong rush to prove one thesis about the emerging world order, a good number of analysts appear to have taken leave of their empirical senses.
The first, quite simply, is that too many analysts are failing to distinguish between the emerging economies' growing material resources and power.
Cataloging how much has changed in terms of trade or market share might tell us a lot about economics.
Over the last few years it has become fashionable to write off the transatlantic relationship.
But rather because in terms of the balance of power in the modern international system its position still remains critically important.
I then look at China and how we should view its rise, peaceful or otherwise.
Here I make the less than original argument that China is still in many ways a ""poor"" country facing all sorts of specific problems—duly recognized by the Chinese leadership—which means that it is still light years behind the United States and many other Western countries.
But I also make what I think is the more interesting observation that, even if China were to ""rise"" higher than it has already, far from increasing its power it could just as easily diminish it badly.
I will seek to explain why. 1 then move on to look at the more general argument concerning the ""irresistible"" shift of power that is now apparently taking place toward Asia and away from the West.
As I point out, this idea begs as many questions as it answers, first about whether Asia as a single entity really exists, 29 and second about the impact of its ""rise"" on relations between the Asian countries themselves. 1 then move on to a brief conclusion.
Here I suggest that while we may not yet be witnessing some larger power shift in the world, there is no point denying the fact that some important changes are taking place.
These, when taken together, mean that the future world system will be looking significantly different to that we have grown up with over the last twenty-five years.
However, these changes, I argue, should not be viewed as constituting a shift from the West but rather a generalization of it.
We should not be thinking in terms of one part of the world rising and the other falling, but instead of new actors in the world increasingly playing by rules drawn up in the West itself.
To this degree, we may not be witnessing the end of the Western era, as many now argue, but instead its final triumph.
However, he argues that as they emerge, this is more likely to create more intense competition within Asia itself than between the West and Asia.
Let us deal with some of these issues in turn, beginning with the wider question as to whether or not the United States and the West are as ""down and out"" economically as some now seem to be suggesting.
Here I think we have to distinguish between recent headlines—all of which look like supporting the notion that the last ten years have been ""hell"" for the West 31 —and some basic economic facts.
Some of these undoubtedly point, as Danny Quah has argued, to a certain tilt eastwards.
But one should not confuse this ""tilt"" with an irreversible economic decline of the West itself.
China may well be consuming twice as much crude steel as the US, the EU, and Japan combined.
India may have a modern IT sector, a strong entrepreneurial culture, and the richest cricket league in the world.
And Brazil may have large and growing agricultural, mining, manufacturing, and service sectors, making it the dominant economy in Latin America.
But the Western economies overall still retain some big structural advantages, none more so than the West's supposedly beleaguered leader, the United States of America.
Over the very long term, probably; and naturally enough under conditions of globalization, others are beginning to make giant strides forward.
But they still have a very long way to go to match the United States, a country that we need reminding still remains remarkably stable and secure, which has the rare privilege of printing the allpowerful dollar (still representing over 60 per cent of foreign exchange reserves), and which, because of its sheer dynamism, has been the destination of choice for over twenty million emigrants since 1989.
The United States, moreover, sits at the very heart of the wider world economy.
Thus it is far and away the world's biggest source of foreign direct investment and the largest recipient of overseas capital.
Certainly, without the United States importing as much as it does—as much as 8 per cent of China's GDP is exported to the United States each year—not only would the American consumer have a lower standard of living, the world economy simply could not function.
But, as has recently been suggested, the United States still possesses critical features that give it what one writer has called ""positional advantages"" over all other states.
Norloff even challenges the now fashionable view that America's hegemonic burdens are outweighing the benefits.
Indeed, by maintaining an open market , the United States is able to bargain for better commercial deals for American firms by the simple measure of threatening closure.
In terms of GDP, in fact, it is over eight times larger than either Russia or India, over six times bigger than Brazil, and still nearly three times bigger than China.
Indeed, the only other part of the world economy which comes anywhere close to matching it is the European Union, an organization comprising twenty-seven members, including some of the most advanced economies in the world, like Germany.
Furthermore, if you were to combine the economic power of the United States with that of its closest Western partner, the European Union, and then set this alongside the BRICs, one discovers that whereas the BRICs account for just over 15 per cent of world GDP, the ""West"" accounts for nearly 50 per cent—over three times as much, in other words.
Other economic indicators point to an even greater gap between the US, the West, and the rest.
In China, life is definitely getting better for the ordinary citizen, but in 2010 average income was still only onetenth of that found in the West.
In India and Brazil, where income is far more unequally distributed, the gap is even greater.
The United States is also massively ahead of the emerging economies and the ""rest"" in terms of global competitiveness.
It is certainly true, as the last Davos report pointed out, that the United States has slipped from second to fourth in the world's competitive league table.
But it is only fractionally behind the top three (Switzerland, Sweden, and Singapore); its main problems are less structural than connected to macroeconomic stability ; and it is still a long way ahead of emerging countries such as Indonesia, India, Turkey, and Brazil.
China, meanwhile, is ranked twenty-fourth, India fifty-first, Brazil fifty-eighth, and Russia sixty-third—just one ahead of Uruguay.
Another way of measuring United States economic power is to look at its fifty states and then compare these to various foreign countries.
The Economist did such a survey by matching the GDP equivalent of each American state with that of a sovereign nation.
Thus Taiwan, with a population of about twenty-three million, had an economy only 15 per cent bigger than Michigan, even though Michigan only had a population of ten million.
One, obviously, is wealth measured by the number of very rich people living in any particular country.
Here the statistics show that the United States has more millionaires than the rest of the world put together.
Here we discover that not only are its core numbers all pointing in the right direction—namely upwards—but that the balance in the American population is under modern conditions about as good as it can be.
Furthermore, though its cities might feel crowded, America is in fact underpopulated, with enormous room for further population growth.
Certainly, when compared with either its peer rivals, its closest allies, and its main competitors, its demographic position looks remarkably secure.
Indeed, one of the more stunning indicators of United States productivity is the simple but telling fact that with only around 4 per cent of the world's population it still manages to produce something close to around one-quarter of all the world's goods and services.
Through innovation, tinkering, and steady improvement, China and others have certainly managed to narrow the gap somewhat.
But while they have done well enough , the United States continues to lead the field.
The claims were examined and were found to be almost entirely spurious.
Indeed, far from falling behind and losing its top ranking, the United States continued to lead the world.
In fact, it had not just kept pace with its nearest competitors (again mainly to be found in Europe); it had actually grown faster than all other nations on several measurements.
Significantly, but not coincidentally, of the ten Nobel prizes awarded in the broad sciences in 2008, eight went to those working in the United States.
Finally, though much can be said about the quality of American economic leadership, it is still only the United States and its closest Western allies that really think in leadership terms when it comes to the larger international economy.
No doubt their capacity to lead has been badly dented by the economic crisis, and the rise of the ""rest,"" as others have pointed out, means they are bound to consult more.
However, unlike the ""rest,"" it is still only the West—and the United States in particular—that appears to have some sort of positive vision for the world economic order.
This was first formed in the period after 1945 and has remained remarkably consistent ever since.
After all, it was not the United States which joined a Chinese-created system and 42 Don Durfee and James Pomfret, “China struggles to find a formula for innovation,"" International Herald Triubune, May 6, 2011.
This excellent piece goes on to show that even though China has invested more and more in advanced science and technology, innovation is seriously held back by several structural factors, including the important role still played by the state in the economy, poor enforcement of intellectual property rules, an educational system that emphasizes rote learning, and a shortage of independent organizations that can evaluate scientific projects.
Rather it has been China that has chosen to join a world economic order originally created, and in many ways still governed, by rules written in the United States.
The transatlantic relationship If the United States remains a far more dominant economic player in the world than some have been suggesting of late, so too is that much underrated entity known as the transatlantic economic region.
That Asia in general and China in particular are becoming more significant is obvious.
But it is one thing to suggest that Asia is growing in economic importance; it is quite another to speak of the transatlantic area as if it were slipping rapidly into geo-economic obscurity.
Indeed, in the rush to prove the existence of an irresistible power shift away from the United States and Europe, these have been in very short supply indeed.
Thus little attention now seems to be paid to the fact that the EU and the United States constitute the biggest economic bloc in the world; and that even though trade across the Pacific has been rising fast—largely because of China—trade across the Atlantic still remains huge.
Services and foreign investment tell an even more interesting story, however.
Services now make up the bulk of any modern economy, and not surprisingly trade in services has risen rapidly under conditions of globalization; but it has risen especially quickly across the Atlantic.
Indeed, by 2008 it amounted to around $350 billion, an increase of well over three times since 1995.
It has climbed steeply since the 1990s, and by 2007 totaled $15. trillion.
It has also been the driver of the world economy since the end of the Second World War.
Possessing, as it still does, the largest market on earth, the greatest store of wealth, and the bulk of the world's corporations, it is hardly surprising that it exerts the extraordinary pull it does.
Indeed, even following the financial crisis, United States and EU financial markets continue to account for well over two-thirds of global banking assets; three-quarters of global financial services; 77 per cent of equity-linked derivatives; more than 70 per cent of all private and public debt securities; almost 80 per cent of all interest rate derivatives; almost 75 per cent of all new international debt securities; and 70 per cent of all foreign exchange derivatives transactions.
They are, for example, home to the overwhelming majority of the world's leading universities.
Of the top five, in fact, three are American and two British; within the top twenty-five, only one is Asian ; and within the top fifty only a handful are to be found outside the United States, Europe, or the English-speaking world more generally.
It comes as no great surprise of course to find out that the bulk of international students choose to study in either North America, Western Europe, or some other OECD ""Western"" country, notably English-speaking Australia.
Indeed, between them the United States, Canada, the UK, Australia, France, and Germany account for something close to two-thirds of students studying abroad at any one time.
The same very unequal pattern is found in terms of the most prestigious business schools.
Americans might complain at great length about how little their European allies are doing in terms of adding to the net surplus of global security.
They worry too about Europe's sluggish recovery from the economic crisis.
Thus, while the Pentagon might be upset that its NATO allies across the Atlantic are not doing as much they should, they are at least contributing something.
Furthermore, they are doing so within a collective alliance that has stood the test of time, that is in its own way more than just a coalition of the willing, and which has no equivalent anywhere else in the world—and certainly not in Asia.
Indeed, having allies one can trust is of huge significance for the United States.
If nothing else, they give the United States a set of usable friends in another, very important, part of the world.
In purely logistical terms they also provide a most important forward base.
And at crucial times, it adds significantly to what the United States can do.
As even the skeptical Atlanticist Robert Kagan once pointed out, while the two continents may look at the world through rather different lenses, they still share a set of ideas that are, broadly speaking, compatible with one another.
In fact, it may well be that they are so alike in so many ways that they sometimes feel a need to stress their differences when, in fact, according to one writer, many of these differences are less an expression of how divided the two are (compared say to the differences between China and the United States) but rather of how similar they happen to be.
Finally, if we are thinking in terms of relative power, it is important to determine the extent to which the United States and the EU together are still able to shape events, ideas, and values in other parts of the world.
These two traditional centers of power might now be less able to determine what is happening globally.
It would, however, be absurd to suggest that some other state or combination of states will be replacing them any time soon.
For one thing, the United States and EU as the largest plural market democracies together continue to exercise a great deal of soft power in the international system, proven by the fact that the two still set the standards by which others measure themselves.
They also deploy an enormous amount of hard power too—first because of their economic weight, and secondly because of their military capabilities.
Even those European Kantians have more than their fair share of fighter planes, tanks, aircraft carriers, and the like.
Indeed, so wedded have analysts become to the idea that Europe has every other kind of power, other than military, that it is very easy to forget that it spends nearly $400 billion per annum on security.
China's spending on defense might be on the rise; and countries like Brazil and Russia have sizeable defense sectors.
When this is then combined with United States spending, this adds up to well over 70 per cent of the world's total.
Indeed, in 2010 alone the United States spent close to $700 billion on national security—ten times more than its nearest allies, fourteen times more than China.
In fact, all future projections show that the United States will be the only major actor in the world capable of global projection for several decades to come.
The United States may have lost much standing because of the Iraq War, and the Western economic model might have suffered a blow because of the economic crisis.
However, the first seems to have proved temporary—except in the ever hostile Arab world—and the second appears to have been short-lived.
Indeed, one of the more remarkable aspects of the last few years, during which the ""West"" seems to have been under such stress, is how little difference this has made in the end to its legitimacy.
Nearly 10 per cent of Americans are now unemployed; the figures in some European countries go even higher; millions are now experiencing great insecurity; and the ""rest"" look like they are doing so much better.
But the West, and what English has called the ""idea of the West,"" appears to have remained intact with its institutions still in place, democratic practices as secure as ever, and with hardly anybody calling for or suggesting some kind of systemic alternative.
However, based on what we already know as opposed to that which we do not—namely what is likely to happen over the next ten or twenty years—we can make some reasonable projections.
And not all of them suggest a future quite as rosy as many now seem to believe.
Materially more powerful than ever, and playing an ever more influential role around the world, it still faces the international system without a very clear idea of what it is doing.
Some have talked of China's increasing soft power, and the more alarmist of its growing military prowess.
Still, one aircraft carrier and a handful of Confucius Institutes do not add up to a forward strategy or a world view.
Moreover, the position that it does espouse—the Westphalian notion that states should not interfere in the internal affairs of other states—seems to be particularly ill-suited to dealing with most of the major security challenges facing the world community today.
Furthermore, though China has won more than its fair share of grateful friends on continents like Africa because of its economic largesse, there is little indication that it is winning hearts and minds as well.
But it has proven rather inept when it comes to acquiring true friends.
But if various reports from around the continent are to be believed, the Chinese are not only regarded as being aloof and distant; among many African small business people they are also seen as being ruthless competitors whose only ambition seems to be to create a monopoly after they have wiped out most of the local competition.
The very real problems that China is facing on continents like Africa raise a much bigger question concerning its fragility as a would-be superpower in the international system.
This, it is clear, not only poses a series of longterm problems to which Chinese leaders do not seem to have an easy answer— hence their ongoing insecurity in spite of their record growth figures.
It would also suggest that its own very unique model combining Stalinist political rule and dynamic state capitalism might work under Chinese conditions for the time being.
China might attract admiration, it may also command respect, but there is not much evidence that it is attracting many imitators.
In part, this is because there is, as the Chinese leaders point out, something distinctly ""Chinese"" about what is happening in China.
But it is also because what is happening there is occurring under the direction of a party whose formal ideology at least has been abandoned in most other parts of the world.
Much has been said of late about ""the crisis of democracy"" and the rise of the authoritarian alternative.
But no serious states in the world today—excluding the deeply unattractive North Korea, the fast evolving Cuba and Vietnam—are any longer ruled by communist parties.
China of course might be run in ways that make it economically dynamic for the time being; it might even be the kind of system that most ordinary Chinese prefer to what they had before.
Finally, there is no guarantee that the model it now has will remain in its current form for ever.
Liberals are certainly wrong to argue that capitalism always requires democracy to flourish.
But one does not have to be a liberal to suggest that over time the present Chinese model could easily confront some very serious problems indeed.
Divisions between its increasingly unequal regions, the growing gap between rich and poor, inflation and corruption, and the very obvious tension between its dynamic open economy and its highly restrictive polity, all suggest that China is still very much a work in progress, with more than a passing chance of deep tensions and conflicts emerging in the future.
As we have seen, it has only very limited amounts of soft power; it has few major allies worth the name; and even its hard power capabilities are light years behind those of the West in general and the United States in particular.
Furthermore, for a supposed emerging great power with what some claim are hegemonic ambitions, the Chinese themselves appear to be exceedingly modest about what it is they are seeking to achieve internationally and how far they actually want to go in challenging the existing international order.
No doubt there may be those in China who want China to confront the West and the United States more forcefully, and there is some evidence to suggest that these voices might be becoming much louder.
If this indeed remains the line, then China, it would seem, appears to have a much better grasp of international realities than many Western commentators, who seem unable to mention the country without talking in hyperbolic terms about its rise.
Such moves, they realize, would not only damage China's prospects at home, and naturally enough unite a still very powerful West against it; they would also frighten a number of other very powerful states in the region.
India, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan might be thousands of miles away from the United States or Europe, but as functioning market democracies whose security needs are intimately tied up with—indeed, dependent upon—the United States, they would soon run for cover if Beijing were to pose a serious challenge to the status quo.
For them at least geography is not fate, any more than their global relationships are predetermined by where they happen to be located on a map of the world.
As I have tried to show, the United States still has much residual power; the transatlantic relationship is not quite so unimportant as many now seem to be claiming; and the idea that power is moving toward Asia not only overstates the degree of unity within Asia but underestimates the many fears that China's rise has engendered in the region more generally.
However, in making the case for greater structural continuity than is normally suggested by many writers, 1 am not implying that the world is an entirely static place.
Indeed, as those I have criticized above have correctly suggested, there are major trends in the world today that are raising important questions about where we are likely to be in the future.
My main critique of them is not that they are wrong to talk of change; it is instead the significance they have attached to these changes.
Thus far at least three scenarios have been suggested about the new international order in the making.
A second suggests that globalization has gone so far that even if new tensions do arise these will take place in a world where the economic incentives for peace are bound, by definition, to reduce any serious conflict to a minimum.
Lastly, there is a view—recently articulated by Barry Buzan—that we are in effect moving toward a new set of regional orders in which there will in fact be no superpowers at all.
Indeed, even those who are now ""rising"" in China, India, and elsewhere are doing so largely because they have joined the West rather than as they did in the past, rejecting it.
Of course, this does not mean that there is a single version of the West, any more than the idea of the West presupposes that all states operating increasingly by Western rules will look and act identically.
Nor, to continue, does it mean that the spread of the West will automatically resolve all differences or create a ""world society"" without contradiction.
That would be plainly absurd, as new tensions in Asia and between China and the United States attest.
Still, we have to look at the bigger canvas and not the various brushstrokes on it; and what this suggests is that there is now only one club worth belonging to.
Rather, it is to work out where precisely in the club's pecking order one is likely to find oneself and how high up the table one is likely to be sitting.
The Future Geir Lundestad Making predictions about the future is a risky business.
Statements about the permanent nature of the Berlin Wall, the Cold War, and the Soviet Union come to mind.
Even more recently, we have discovered that there is no permanent economic boom.
That the self-immolation of the fruit seller Mohamed Bouazizi in Tunis in December 2010 would have the consequences it did was apparently foreseen by nobody.
So academics, or other people for that matter, have time and again fallen rather short in predicting concrete events.
The great weakness of historians and historically inclined political scientists may well be that, while we are not good at making predictions, we are very quick to pronounce something historically inevitable once it has happened.
We may have fared slightly better in outlining broad historical processes than in predicting specific events.
Thus, many came to understand that the Soviet communist system was facing increasing difficulties.
It was just beyond our imagination that the outcome of these difficulties would be the total collapse of a system, an ideology, and a country.
The Arab Human Development Report of 2002 had outlined all the shortcomings of these countries in great detail.
In our Nobel symposiums we always try to say something about the future.
The contributors to this book have dealt with the past and the present; it then falls upon the editor to deal with the future.
The hope is that, while we may not necessarily be right in our most concrete predictions, we may still stimulate discussion that may tell us something about where we stand today, and where we may possibly be moving.
Old and new superpowers Again, predictions about the transfer of power have often proved to be wrong.
We not only missed out on foreseeing the collapse of the Soviet Union, but the fall of the United States as the leading power has been predicted time and again.
Nikita Khrushchev was not in any way alone in his belief that the Soviet Union would come to surpass the United States.
If you extended Japan's and America's economic curves into the future, at some point Japan would have the biggest economy.
And once you had the biggest economy, the rest would presumably follow.
The unification process was moving briskly ahead; EU membership was constantly being enlarged; the scope of the integration was forever being deepened.
The fact that something has not happened in the past does not mean that it will not happen in the future.
In the present collection, Chen Jian and Michael Cox disagree on the future role of China, with Cox stressing the continued domination of the United States and the West.
Since the reform policy was launched in 1978, the economic results have been spectacular.
No major power in history has grown as rapidly over such a long period.
The Future after that, China coughed briefly at 6 per cent growth, and then nearly resumed its normal 10 per cent.
Although there may be questions about Chinese statistics, there is no doubt about the overall direction.
In recent years, China's production first surpassed that of Germany, then that of Japan.
If China continues to grow at the rate it has grown over the last ten years and the United States does the same, China will surpass the United States some time between 2019 and 2022, if not even earlier.
It is investing more and more in ever new regions and countries of the world.
Its ability to project power is increasing, particularly in the East Asian region, and its policy in the South China Sea and in other waters near its coast is becoming increasingly ambitious.
In other words, China will revert to the leading position it had for centuries.
Not only are there the many past predictions of the Soviet Union, Japan, and the EU surpassing the United States.
Time and again we have seen that growth curves could not be extended indefinitely into the future.
The United States share of world production declined steadily from almost 50 per cent in 1945 to 40 per cent in 1950, 30 per cent in 1960, and 25 per cent in 1975.
The United States percentage of world production has held at close to 25 per cent ever since.
China and East Asia have clearly risen, but primarily at the expense of Western Europe, less the United States.
Although rising rapidly, China still produces only 40 per cent of what the United States does.
If China's production were to surpass that of the United States in 2019— which could well happen—this would be a historic event, since the United States has had the largest production in the world since around 1870.
China would still be a relatively poor country on a per capita basis, since it has a population four times larger than that of the United States.
Nobody sees Oman, Luxembourg, 3 One economist, Arvind Subramanian of the Peterson Institute of International Economics, has in fact argued that in terms of purchasing power parity China actually already surpassed the United States in 2010.
Still, the estimates about China's economic success are bound to be influenced by the personal wealth of its citizens.
While it is true that America's many military problems in Iraq and Afghanistan have shown the limits of its military power and the force of asymmetrical warfare, in terms of alliance politics and so much else military power is still important.
Again, although the rate of growth is higher in China than the US, with the long-term consequences that might have, the United States still spends six times more on defense than does China.
While the United States has eleven aircraft carrier groups, China is still working to master the intricacies of its first carrier, bought from Ukraine in 1998 and being renovated until now.
Contrary to the expectations of political science realists, NATO has not disappeared with the end of the Cold War.
It now has twenty-eight members and the United States is still the definite leader, although its role is much more complicated than during the Cold War.
The rise of China has created renewed interest throughout much of East Asia and the Pacific in maintaining the United States as a counterweight—far away, but still projecting its power even here.
Yet, even more important in this context, his standing as a world leader is still in a league of its own compared to that of the rather faceless Chinese leadership.
In China the supply of labor is beginning to be limited, wages are rising, and competition from new entry-level countries is becoming a challenge.
The state sector is still huge and has many problems; many banks are shaky; bubbles are beginning to develop.
The question is not if, but when, the high growth rates will begin to decline.
There are, moreover, two even deeper reasons for doubt about the future pre-eminence of China.
First, although China has also made tremendous progress in innovation and research and has become a leader even in modern sectors such as solar energy and high-speed trains, the question remains of whether it will have the ingenuity to become the leading power scientifically.
Science is the basis of much modern economic growth, and so far China has definitely been lagging far behind the United States in this area.
The extensive Chinese copying of Western innovation and science can only take the country so far.
It is no coincidence that, at least until now, China has not won a single Nobel Prize in the sciences.
The Dalai Lama and dissident Liu Xiaobo have both received the Nobel Peace Prize, but for this they have received absolutely no compliments from the Chinese authorities.
Instead, they have both been severely criticized and punished in different ways by the Chinese government.
The Future The second and ultimate question relates to China's political system.
The rise of China has frequently been predicted, but something has always happened in the past that blocked the process, whether under the Nationalists after 1911 or under the Communists after 1949.
The twists and turns under the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution were disastrous.
In the last few decades, the political system has been remarkably stable, with transfers of power from one generation to the next.
In history, huge changes at the economic level are normally sooner or later accompanied by political changes.
As long as the economy continues to improve at a rapid pace, political loyalties may well be maintained.
Pride in China's achievements has also strengthened a nationalism that benefits the party.
Yet, as Chen Jian reminds us, from a longer-term perspective the party has a mixed record indeed.
As many as forty million people may have lost their lives during the recklessness of the Great Leap Forward.
Tens of thousands of ""mass incidents"" are taking place in China every year; the number is apparently increasing rapidly.
Human rights and various forms of democracy have been spreading throughout the world.
Now democracy has made great strides in Turkey, in Indonesia, and even in Malaysia.
In some way, the Chinese people will probably insist that their voice be heard more strongly than today.
As Jeremi Suri emphasizes, America stood for, and still stands for, important economic and political values.
The United States has a growing population with a better balance between young and old than almost any other major power.
Through immigration, it is still able to draw in many of the most talented people from virtually the entire world.
Unemployment is higher than the 8 per cent reported in official statistics, since many have more or less given up looking for jobs.
Inequality has risen sharply, with the top few per cent earning extraordinary amounts of money and paying limited taxes.
As Melvyn Leffler reminds us, most Americans appear to have forgotten how important the government in Washington is for America's growth and welfare.
For decades the United States lectured the world on the importance of balancing its budgets—yet it did not do so itself.
Under George W Bush, taxes were substantially cut while expenses increased dramatically.
Costly social programs were added, also under Bush, in the form of the drug prescription program.
On top of all this came the huge expenses of fighting the economic recession in 2008-10.
Second, while most Americans are incredibly proud of their political system as such, the politicians have been performing at a disappointingly low level in recent years.
Many hurdles have to be overcome before anything really significant can actually be accomplished.
Traditionally, reform has come only in brief spurts, when the political powers were properly aligned.
Gridlock exists in the form of a center-liberal president facing Republicans who try to do everything they can to oppose the president, and this in the most difficult of economic times.
The outcome is clearly detrimental to the position of the United States in the world.
When the president is unable to lead the United States, he definitely cannot lead the world.
It is far from obvious that the presidential election in 2012 will resolve this situation.
This would definitely appear to be against the laws of history, so far as such laws exist.
The United States may still be the world's only fully global power, but its influence is being checked by a whole series of regional powers.
In Europe, the United States is doing less than it did during the Cold War.
As Frederic Bozo makes clear, no one should write off a union that has a much larger population than that of the United States, and a somewhat larger total production.
The military resources of Britain and France are still the third and fourth largest in the world.
In the Asian balance of power, Japan should definitely not be overlooked.
With Japan on America's side, China will not be able to dominate even in East Asia.
Russia has been facing great problems, but as Vladislav Zubok suggests, its lingering military base, its great natural resources, and in part still the education of its peoples provide some basis for its international role.
Both Zubok and Vladimir Pechatnov agree that the United States has not shown the necessary sensitivity to Russia's difficult situation.
There are those who argue that, with its democracy and creativity, India may in the long run come to rival China.
Its production is still only between one-third and one-quarter of China's; its infrastructure is far inferior to that of China.
Brazil has clearly emerged as a regional leader and is eager to play a larger role, not only in the western hemisphere but also in other parts of the world.
In Africa, particularly in the southern part, South Africa is the crucial actor.
In short, it is becoming increasingly difficult for anyone, much less for a struggling United States, to be the world's predominant power in the way it used to be for decades.
Stewart Patrick underlines how many dimensions there are to the international situation today.
Following Charles Kindleberger, some observers have argued that the international system requires a hegemon.
Britain no longer had the resources to lead, and the United States did not have the will.
Today, while the United States is still the pre-eminent power, it is not able to lead in the way it did in earlier decades.
Its position has been relatively weakened; the American president also faces greater leadership challenges at home.
Still, the wider international system that was established after the Second World War has in many ways remained remarkably stable.
Robert Keohane's question in 1984 of what would happen to the international system with the decline of the United States may have been premature, since the United States was not then really in serious decline.
His answer—that the system would most likely be maintained anyway—may still be of interest today.
On the political side, the United Nations remains a key instrument for coordination and legitimation.
On the economic side, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, despite periods of drift and uncertainty, have taken on new life with the West's economic problems, particularly the international debt situation.
The current Doha Round has not been completed, at least in part a reflection of America's reduced role, but the WTO dispute mechanism has proved of great consequence.
This is one reason protectionism proved as limited as it did during the recent recession.
A similar lack of leadership, and of conflict between the United States and China, is seen in the international environmental field.
Traditional regional organizations such as NATO, the EU, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have been replicated in weaker form in many different regions of the world, such as in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations from 1967, the African Union that in 2002 replaced the Organization of African Unity, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation from 1989, and many others.
In the present volume Michael Cox, and in other contexts prominent scholars such as John Ikenberry, have suggested that even China will be incorporated into this wider Western-dominated international system.
China's emphasis on rapid economic growth is bound to make it interested in rules and regulations that facilitate continued growth.
On the whole, Beijing insists on the importance of national sovereignty.
No one should interfere in the internal affairs of China, or any other state for that matter.
Yet, in sensitive matters such as the situation in Burma, Sudan, Libya, etc., China has occasionally refrained from using its veto in the United Nations to stop further action.
China has even shown some interest in Responsibility to Protect , although primarily by stressing the responsibility of the various states to handle matters in such a way that genocide, crimes against humanity, etc. are avoided.
It should be added that several of the BRIC states have similarly insisted on the priority of national sovereignty, although not quite as unwaveringly as China.
The Future international agreements, such as the Kyoto Protocol and the International Criminal Court.
And this was the case even under the internationally oriented Clinton administration.
The alternative scenario is that the rise of China is bound to create conflict and possibly even war.
Since Thucydides, political science realists have insisted that the rise of one state and the fall of another are bound to produce such an outcome.
The story seems to have been repeated over and over again in European history.
China's rise implies that it should be the pre-eminent power, at least in its own East Asian region.
When this role is not favored either by most of the regional countries or by the United States, conflict is likely to follow, although this may not necessarily be in the form of war.
Even political science liberals, who tend to favor more optimistic scenarios, have to admit that the differences between China and the West in their approaches to democracy and human rights are bound to produce tension.
The rise of one state and the fall of another do not have to lead to war, as seen by the rise of the United States and the fall of the United Kingdom since the late nineteenth century.
China does have an obvious interest in peace as a precondition for its continued economic rise.
China has given up its revolutionary political ideology and has adjusted to the international regime in many economic ways.
The United States and China are also much further apart geographically than were the various European powers whose wars provide so much of the basis for realism.
China should be given stronger influence; human rights should not be part of the international regime, etc.
The outcome seems to be that while there is broad support for the basic principles of international economic exchange, anything that more politically transcends the sovereignty of the nation state is much more difficult to agree on.
Yet, as long as Taiwan does not openly secede from China, war would seem to be a very unlikely outcome, although the situation particularly in the South China Sea is increasingly worrisome.
Through the huge American market for Chinese goods and China's investments in the United States, the two countries—one the leading creditor, the other the biggest debtor—are bound together in a state of mutual dependence.
The technological side of the process has been moving on more or less continuously for several centuries.
One can only think of all the forms of communication that have developed in recent years.
In the interwar years, when fascism and communism were so strongly on the offensive, and protectionism made such inroads even in the leading democracies, globalization slowed down a great deal.
Today, some groups support continued globalization while others try to fight it as best they can.
There appears to be a dialectical relationship between globalization and fragmentation.
To some extent they grow stronger and weaker at the same time, although it has to be admitted that in recent decades the former has held the upper hand.
Globalization is primarily, but not exclusively, economic while fragmentation is primarily, but not exclusively, political.
Globalization dominates in the economy and in communications; politically, we see more and more states achieving political independence.
We travel more and more, but as we travel it seems that most travelers strengthen their attachment to their respective nation states.
Many different ideologies spread all around the world, but one of the strongest is nationalism, or even forms of political and religious extremism.
There are dialogues between religions, but on the whole fundamentalism seems to be on the rise in most regions and religions, with the exception of Western Europe.
The smallest and most extreme groups may exploit the modern means of communication for their purposes.
In the modern interdependent economy there no longer appear to be limits to how small a country may be and still survive economically.
Even the most isolated terrorists exploit the most modern means of communication whenever possible.
Certain symbols of globalization are found in the tiniest and most distant villages of the world.
Poverty in the world has been declining both relatively and in absolute numbers in recent years, particularly due to the immense progress made in China, and somewhat less in India, although there are still more poor people in India than in all of Africa added together.
The Future many of the rich countries are now struggling to maintain their standards of living and so many of the poorer ones are making huge economic progress indicates that we are all becoming a little more alike.
A rudimentary form of global consciousness is arising, in that we all not only know much more than before about each other, but that we also care more about each other.
The network of intergovernmental and international organizations is proliferating.
Amnesty, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Campaign to Ban Landmines, and an array of others work very actively to influence the governments of the world.
Their success varies, but there can be little doubt about their growing influence.
Yet, there are many different kinds of outliers in the international system.
The impotence of the center over the alleged periphery is demonstrated time and again.
These lists were passed on from one administration to the next virtually unchanged, illustrating Washington's inability to do much about these governments.
North Korea has been violating all kinds of norms for international and national behavior for decades, without anyone—largely including even China—being able to bring about much change.
Cuba is in a different class altogether compared to North Korea, but again it illustrates the point that although the colossus to the North, the United States, disliked what happened on the island from very soon after the revolution in 1959, it had very little influence indeed on what was happening there.
Zimbabwe ran its economy into the ground as Robert Mugabe was determined to hang on to power, decade after decade.
Again, there was little the world was able to do to bring about change.
He tried to develop nuclear weapons; he succeeded in blowing up a large passenger plane, and committed other atrocities.
In 2011 much of the Libyan population, with the assistance of the Western world and some Arab countries, finally got rid of him.
In fact, fourteen of the twenty most failed states in the Failed States Index are African, and many of them, including Congo, Guinea, and even Nigeria, consisted from the first days of independence of tribes and groups with little sense of common identity or modern government.
Since its collapse in 1991 Somalia has become the very symbol of a failed state, although pockets of stability could be found even here, as in Somaliland and in Puntland.
In Rwanda and Cambodia the governments killed hundreds of thousands of their own populations without the international community doing anything of substance to stop them, although the problem here was not that the governments did too little—they did too much.
Afghanistan is a special case in that here foreign intervention, in so many different forms, has been an important part of its sad history.
East Timor has been struggling since the days of independence in 2002, despite its rapidly increasing oil wealth.
The whole definition of a rogue state, even in the academic literature, has been strongly influenced by what regimes in the world Washington disliked the most strongly.
Most of the failed states are, however, primarily a threat to their own inhabitants, not to the wider world.
Congo is a case in point, although the drawn-out war there brought in several of its neighbors, particularly Rwanda and Uganda, before 2002-3.
The war that started in 1998 has killed thousands and thousands, although the estimates of as many as five million having been killed appear grossly exaggerated.
A ""failed"" state may well become a ""rogue"" state, as the growing piracy in Somalia illustrates.
Terrorists have undoubtedly used Afghanistan, Somalia, and Yemen as base areas, but most forms of terrorism need some infrastructure as well to succeed.
A1 Qaeda is not a poor man's organization, dependent as it is on funding and expertise from richer citizens.
If Pakistan were to collapse into a truly failed state, that could have major international consequences because of its very sensitive geographical location and its nuclear weapons.
This may well be one of the true horror scenarios as far as the future is concerned.
For the director of the Norwegian Nobel Institute, it is natural to end on a more morally explicit note.
In the light of the Second World War and the mass slaughters by Hitler, Stalin, and Mao it is of course impossible to give an unreservedly positive answer to that question.
In a certain long-term historical perspective there would still seem to be reasons for optimism.
As Oneal and Mueller point out, war, which has played such a prominent role in the history of mankind, appears to have virtually ended between major powers.
International wars in general, involving two or more states, have become quite rare.
The number of civil wars has also declined, 13 although it is still so high that it is difficult to be entirely optimistic about the future.
Transitions from authoritarian to more democratic structures sometimes appear to stimulate conflict, as seen in the former Yugoslavia and in the Caucasus.
War has been banned almost entirely in a large ""zone of peace"" which has undergone no war since the end of the Second World War.
After three major wars between Germany and France in the course of seventy years, war between the two has simply become impossible.
The wars in the former Yugoslavia illustrate that peace, even in Europe, is still a new experience.
The very recent end to the ""troubles"" in Northern Ireland show that even in Western Europe continuities with the past are found.
If we go back to the years between the First and the Second World Wars, democracy was a rare bird indeed outside North America and Northern Europe.
The Second World War ended in the defeat of fascism and, we see now, also contributed mightily to the end of colonialism.
With India joining the democratic ranks immediately upon independence, the notion that democracy was an exclusively Western institution was undermined.
In the G20, only China and Saudi Arabia have clearly authoritarian governments.
Still, talk about human rights representing Western values in opposition to Asian or other regional values lingers.
Asia is a huge and complex continent and its many countries actually have few things in common.
It was, however, difficult to imagine anything as Asian that did not include India.
While representative government may well be a Western invention, notions about various rights for the people existed in many cultures.
The growth of democracy in Taiwan, in South Korea, in Indonesia, in part in Thailand and Malaysia further weakened the Asian values argument.
Even some of those who argued in principle against such rights sometimes included them in their constitutions.
This was the case even in China as well, although this certainly did not mean that the rights were respected in practice.
The United Nations and other international institutions have been strengthened.
Of course the members of these institutions remained independent states.
The old Great Powers had their vetoes; the new ones wanted similar rights.
Many were the rogue states that continued their evil practices, protected by one or more of the Great Powers.
Yet, slowly, norms and standards were developing that ever so incrementally strengthened peace, favored human rights, and promoted economic growth.
In this respect the debate about Responsibility to Protect was revealing.
States had a responsibility to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity.
The principles were invoked with surprising success in some situations, such as Ivory Coast and Libya, much less so in Syria.
Yet, major differences remained about the application of these principles.
The BRIC countries, supported by others, feared that Western-led interventions were just an excuse for regime change.
The UN might accept the principle, but what it actually meant had to be defined in each separate case.
The European miracle in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was that growth became more or less selfgenerating.
Despite continued downturns, the long-term trend was now firmly upward.
Countries and individuals were finally able to make their ways out of poverty.
Again, these developments were most clearly seen in Western Europe and North America.
The climax of growth was reached in the thirty years after the Second World War.
Growth was strong over a long period of time; recessions were very limited indeed; the growth affected most of the people in very positive ways indeed, and virtually no one was left out entirely.
There were those on the left who argued that the rich countries were getting rich at the expense of the poor ones.
This argument assumed that there was a limited amount of wealth to distribute.
History tells us how the total amount has increased dramatically in the last few centuries.
With the rise of, first, the Asian tigers of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea, and then of Southeast Asia in general, and finally China, and even India, this argument was definitely put to rest.
South Korea went from poverty to Southern European standards in no more than a long generation.
Poverty in the world is being reduced, both in relative and in absolute numbers.
In recent years the number of poor people has actually been declining on all continents, probably for the first time in history—somewhat surprisingly in view of the economic difficulties in the most developed countries.
Still, about 1. billion people survive on 1.25 dollars per day or less, most of them in South Asia and Africa.
In much of Africa there had for a long time been little or no growth, and even cases of dramatic decline were found because of war and incompetent government.
Botswana represented the clearest example of strong growth over many decades, but after the turn of the millennium many others also experienced robust growth, not only the new oil countries.
Pessimism about Africa, which had been so prevalent for so long, is on the wane, despite the recurrence of drought and famine, particularly on the Horn of Africa, where climate (in the form of lack of rain) and local politics again and again resulted in the deaths of thousands.
In more general terms, life expectancy has increased quite rapidly, child mortality has fallen, literacy has increased sharply, particularly among males, etc.
Similarly, although there was much that seemed permanent, it was far from permanent who belonged to the center and who to the periphery in the world economy.
As we have just seen, countries moved up, but they could also move down the economic scale.
The clearest examples were found in Latin America, with Argentina in the lead.
Into the interwar years, Argentina had been among the richest countries in the world, then the long downward slide started.
Zimbabwe told the story of how a relatively prosperous country in Africa could fall into abject poverty in the course of a few decades.
Again, the different countries had more room to maneuver than the international framework would seem to suggest.
In all cases the temptation was to blame some sinister outside force for the tragic outcome.
The international system was important, but the primary explanations were almost always found inside the various countries.
As many of the countries of the South were making dramatic progress, growth in the North became more difficult to achieve.
The growth rates declined after the thirty good years; inflation picked up because of increases in the price of oil and a few other commodities; governments refused to fully finance the many tasks they were now undertaking, resulting in growing debt.
Public and private debt was one crucial dimension in the financial collapse in 2008.
As Melvyn Leffler spells out in his fascinating contribution, more and more people saw the government that had assisted them previously as the explanation for their problems, not as the solution.
In the new globalized and technologically so advanced economy, a minority experienced tremendous personal economic success.
Some were, however, losing their jobs, and suffering cuts in their public benefits.
It was no longer true that the children could always expect a higher standard of living than their parents had.
Recurrent bubbles led to serious recessions, first in technology in the early 1990s and then, much more seriously, in housing after 2008.
In fact, as so many times before, governments had to save the situation.
Thousands were losing their lives in these wars, relatively rare or not.
Nuclear weapons had not been used in war after Nagasaki, but using them only one more time would be a catastrophe.
Democracy was making progress, but the process was not irreversible, as several countries were showing.
Russia was only one example of a country moving in the wrong direction.
And the world had just barely started to address the basic environmental questions of human existence.
At the national level some progress was made, but at the international level little was achieved.
In 1850 the world's population had reached one billion, in 1930 it reached two billion, in 1974 four billion, and in 1999 six billion.
With the population increasing, and with millions eating better, the price of food is going up.
We are using more and more fossil fuels; slowly the temperature of the earth is rising—no one can be certain what the consequences will be.
Academics always try to fit the world into certain theoretical categories.
These categories are useful steps toward a deeper understanding, but the world is never as parsimonious as many academics, particularly political scientists, try to present it.
The world is, in fact, so incredibly rich and complex that it cannot be encompassed in simple formulas, if at all.
If it does, which is far from self-evident, it is almost impossible to find out what exactly it is that repeats itself.
Historians undoubtedly repeat themselves, but that is a different matter entirely.
The Uses of History for Decision Makers he argues how easy it is to learn from history.
The first book is very persuasive; the second became quite popular and won several awards.
