JFK’S Secret Decisions on Vietnam, Cuba and Civil Rights, is to rehabilitate Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev.
History recalls Khrushchev as a dangerous buffoon who underestimated President John F Kennedy in 1962 and was sent reeling in the international arena when he was forced to withdraw nuclear-tipped Soviet rockets from Fidel Castro’s Cuba.
Time to forget that image of the untutored oaf pounding his shoe on the Soviet delegation desk during a debate at the United Nations.
Think of the Cold War Russian leader at the chess table and thinking eight moves ahead of Kennedy.
It is Khrushchev who shows the young American leader the path away from nuclear warfare and engineers the first nuclear disarmament agreement in world history.
Kennedy, it turns out, was the one who underestimated the Russian in a miscalculation that raised the specter of fiery death for millions.
Khrushchev threatened Kennedy with war unless the United States gave up its share of Berlin—within six months.
Khrushchev also made clear that he was fed up with American rockets based in European countries that could drop hydrogen warheads on Moscow.
At the time, Kennedy’s predecessor, Dwight D Eisenhower, had given 30 Jupiter rockets to Italy and 60 Thor missiles to the United Kingdom.
Khrushchev knew of American plans to deploy 15 more Jupiters in Turkey.
The Turkish base would be closest to Moscow, just a quick flight over the Black Sea.
The following year, Kennedy overrode objections from Congress and the Pentagon and ordered the Jupiters deployed in Turkey.
In secret, he ordered 30 nuclear warheads shipped to Cuba along with intermediate range rockets.
They would become the leverage for forcing Kennedy’s retreat from Turkey.
On October 27, 1962, Kennedy was being urged to order the very next day a massive assault on Cuba.
More than 140,000 American soldiers would be landed there after five days of aerial bombardment.
Castro’s Havana would have been turned into a smoking ruin in the Caribbean.
Russian rockets in Cuba would be removed if Kennedy pulled the Jupiters out of Turkey.
Almost all of Kennedy’s advisers—including his brother Robert—urged a dramatic rejection.
The swap was accepted providing Khrushchev never reveals the agreement.
The Soviet leader went to his grave without a hint of his triumphal reduction of American and Russian nuclear warheads.
He was the only modern Russian leader not honored by burial in the Kremlin wall.
Almost a non-person until reformer Mikhail Gorbachev set the record straight.
Another figure I aim to rehabilitate with my book is Lyndon Baines Johnson who—according to Bobby Kennedy—contributed nothing to the Cuban missile crisis.
Later that day, Johnson lobbied the Joint Chiefs of Staff to accept the missile swap.
After Kennedy’s assassination, Bobby and other senior administration officials, in gossip and books, treated Johnson as a political urinal.
But at crucial moments, Johnson was clearly the president’s best adviser.
Martin Luther King Jr., it was Johnson who counseled Kennedy to embrace the movement as its moral leader.
At the time, Kennedy wanted to hang on to southern electoral votes that helped win him the White House in 1960.
In his last month in office, Kennedy ordered the certain overthrow and likely assassination of the president of South Vietnam.
The death of President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963 resulted in the collapse of the Saigon government and its American-trained army.
Kennedy was killed three weeks after he devised the coup that killed Diem.
As president, Johnson was confronted with withdrawal or using American combat troops in the Indochina jungle.
Both Johnson and Khrushchev were ridiculed and rejected in their day, but in my writing I may burnish their reputations.
PATRICK J SLOYAN is a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who has covered national and international affairs since 1960.
He has been awarded journalism’s most distinguished prizes for domestic and foreign reporting, including the Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting and Spot News Reporting, the George Polk Award for War Reporting, and the Deadline Writing prize.
Sloyan has written for Rolling Stone, The New Republic, The Nation, and The London Guardian.
