The paper reflects on the elements currently available for the interpretation of this piece of evidence and, with regard to the relationship between the two leaders, it argues that the way Kennedy handled the Cuban crisis may well have played a role in Dr.
King’s reassessment of Kennedy’s evolving qualities of leadership a view that King will further develop over the course of 1963 and will express after Dallas.
Martin Luther King, John Kennedy, Cuban missile crisis, Cuba, nuclear, Cold war, non-violence, peace, letter, African Americans, US, Clarence B Jones, Khrushchev, reaction, 1962, SixtiesTop of page Outline 1.
THE RELATIONSHIP WITH KENNEDYTop of page Full text PDF Send by e-mail 1 The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age.
Litera 1This research article will focus on the reaction of Martin Luther King Jr. to the Cuban missile crisis of October 19621, including the presentation of a previously unknown document of particular relevance on such a topic –e. a private letter from King to President Kennedy regarding his handling of the situation and reflecting on some of the aspects raised by the evidence, with particular regard to the relationship between the two leaders.
A memoir of the Cuban missile crisi 2As is well-known, the Cuban missile crisis occurred after the Soviet Union – under the leadership of Nikita S Khrushchev – secretly deployed medium and intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The crisis was later defined by historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr as “the most dangerous moment in human history”4.
African Americans’ reactions to the Cuban missile crisis 6 On the crisis perceptions in the United States and the reactions of the press and among the intellectuals, see 3Martin Luther King’s reaction to the Cuban crisis was initially dealt with in the context of an article by this author that first investigated the African Americans’ responses to said nuclear crisis5.
While we refer to that paper for a picture on that general context, here it must be recalled that the overall reaction among African Americans was one of solid and widespread support – consistent with that of general American public opinion6, but in measures and tones that may appear remarkable considering the unprecedented dangers that the crisis implicated and the harsh struggle for civil rights that was then ongoing on the domestic front.
This however was not due to any tendency to court the administration, as confirmed by both his previous public condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion 11 and his later protest of the United States war in Vietnam 12.
Said triumph 16 The Limited Test Ban Treaty was signed in Moscow on August 5, 1963.
Before the Cuban crisis, it had 10As lucid and sensible as these words may seem, they went against the prevailing trend of triumphant lessons being drawn from the outcome of the crisis.
VII 21 With the partial exception of the letter dated March 17, 1961, in which King also congratulated Ken 14King had written Kennedy at least six times since his term began 20.
Beschloss, Crisis, 506; Robert Kennedy, Thirteen days 15During the course of the crisis Kennedy surely took various steps to allow Khrushchev a way to retreat honorably, though most of them were not publicly known at the time22, so here the letter probably referred to the choice of a blockade rather than of a direct air strike, and to the tone of the public messages exchanged with Khrushchev during the crisis.
Besides, King usually valued Jones’ advices, defining him “a man of sound judgment, deep insights, and great dedication”.27 This seems confirmed also by the various important tasks he performed in the years in which he worked for dr.
King’s papers edition passingly referred to the item as a “draft statement”,30 rather than as a letter, may suggest prudence in considering the text as surely sent, or sent in this form31.
As he had written at the time of the Bay of Pigs, “I am as concerned about International affairs as I am about the civil rights struggle in the United States”.38 39 Clayborne Carson , The Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr., 40 Vincent J Intondi, African Americans against the Bomb.
Nuclear Weapons, Colonialism and Black Freed 24King had first discovered Gandhian non-violent methods as a student of theology in the spring of 1950, successfully practiced them in the Montgomery bus-boycott in 1955-1956 and further absorbed and embraced them after his trip to India in 1959.39 In foreign affairs, he had consistently favored nuclear disarmament and opposed nuclear tests at least since December 1957.
The artic 48 Of course this last remark must be understood as referring to the situation of mounting tension rel 28Incidentally, regarding the interconnections between issues of colonialism, foreign affairs and race relations, it should be added that in mid-October King had a long and warm meeting with Ben Bella, the leader of the newly decolonized country of Algeria.
Aldo Capitini, 29Last, the Cuban missile crisis spurred theoretical reflections on nonviolence and on the moral dilemmas of political ethics in the nuclear era also among several other clergy members and theologians of different confessions, both in the United States and abroad.
Jones’ forthcoming autobiography or the next volume of The papers of Martin Luthe 59 Our search in the archives of the Kennedy Library and in the online document databases of the Howar 33Future publications58 might be in a position to add new elements clarifying the letter’s practical context, or to locate the presidential reply claimed by Levison59.
They stand out in particular for their initial laconic prudence and their absence of criticism of Kennedy during the crisis , and later for their political lucidity in warning against any indulgence in national arrogance or self-complacency while pointing toward the post-crisis new opportunities of fruitful negotiations for nuclear disarmament and détente.
Top of page Notes 1 The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age.
The ‘Missile’ Crisis as seen from Cuba, ; Michael Dobbs, One minute to Midnight.
A special survey carried out nationally by Gallup just hours after the President’s TV speech recorded that, among those who listened to it, 84% approved of his decision, 12% refused to express an opinion, while only 4% disapproved.
Todd Gitlin, The Sixties – Years of hope, days of rage , 99 10 Jet, 8 November 1962, 17.
A Cold War Watershed, in Allen Hunter, ed., Rethinking the Cold War: Essays on Its Dynamics, Meaning, and Morality , 147; Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising Wind.
See also, for instance, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times 530.
Beschloss, Crisis, 506; Robert Kennedy, Thirteen days , 98; Sheldon Stern, The week the world stood still , 112.
However this is not of direct relevance here, as King’s frequent use of speechwriters and ghostwriters as a civil rights activist simply followed a common practice among public orators and prominent leaders in general.
Race and the Image of American Democracy , 155; Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days.
