It was a peak time in the cold war era where the United States and the Soviet Union were juggling for world dominance.
During the crisis, the United States and the USSR stood face to face with thousands of Nuclear missiles in their arsenal.
After the news, everyone was scared because a full scale nuclear war was about to happen, and which could potentially wipe off the human race from the face of Earth.
A nuclear missile was nearly launched due to some miss understanding and one man named Vasily Arkhipov saved us from nuclear armageddon.
At first we need to know that Cuba and The Soviet Union both were Communist Country and they had many things in common.
One was headed by the United States with its European allies and their main agenda was democracy and capitalism.
Whereas another bloc was headed by then Soviet Union or USSR with its small allies compared to the United States and their main agenda was Communism and Socialism.
In picture Jupiter MissileDuring that time United States also formed intergovernmental military alliance called NATO to counter the Soviet Union.
United States had installed military base and Nuclear missile in Western Europe and Turkey, which raise insecurity in the minds of Soviets.
Which Infected One Third Of Worlds Population Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev saw an opportunity to level the playing ground with the United States in Cuba.
By installing missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union would be minutes away from hitting United States targets which would give Soviets an edge over the United States.
The United States learned about Soviets’ arms supply to Cuba in July 1962.
Same day Fidel Castro Cuban leader write a letter to the Soviet leader Khrushchev to take decisive nuclear action against the United States if Cuba was attacked.
Which had orders that allowed it to use the torpedo if it was damaged by depth charges or surface fire on the submarine.
Captain Valentin Grigorievich Savitsky of the B-59 thought that the war may have already started on the ground and tried to launch a nuclear torpedo.
The decision to launch the torpedo required consent from all three officers on board, but one of them, Vasily Arkhipov, objected, thus narrowly averting the nuclear launch.
In the following days during the standoff, diplomacy took the front seat and a catastrophic disaster was avoided.
The United States president Kennedy and Soviet leader Khrushchev started talks and negotiations.
On 28th October 1962, Khrushchev Said USSR will stop military military constructions and leave Cuba but they have some conditions which the United States agreed.
And that was how one of the greatest military or nuclear standoff ended.
Removal of nuclear missiles from Cuba by the Soviet Union.The United States would never attack Cuba without prior provocation as a retaliatory measure to the missile crisis.
We are committed to give you every question, term, definition, latest news, current affairs related to Physics, Chemistry, Space, Life Science, Geography, Technology, History, Sports, Politics, Economics, etc. in most simplest and easiest way.
Click to comment Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published.
Which Infected One Third Of Worlds Population By TWI AuthorApril 21, 2020 Right now our world is fighting coronavirus pandemic.
