Our task is t interests of both the over, Baker and his S mertnykh, now speak b to work out common schedules to permit as Department official.
Secretary Baker and thenForeign Minister Shevardnadze, fishing together in the U.S.S.R., immediately condemned the invasion in a tough joint statement.
There followed in the United Nations Security Council a degree of cooperation between the United States and U.S.S.R. previously not possible.
Underlying the argument here is our conviction that the U.S.-Soviet conversion to bilateral mutual security does not necessarily herald the onset of what President Bush has chosen to call a new world order.
Other Third World states, es Soviet Union, already find themse candidates for the kind of desper of Kuwait-that seem foolhardy, e who, like the United States and U. mutual security.
Many methodological response because they fail to provide acces aspects of this ""unipolar mom powers; on a third point in a rea one may find evidence of super concerns that boomeranged ba direct policy consequences that which it is logical to focus-is at of 1962.
That was the moment, odological requirements we have and eventually desperation in a consequences for both the Unite relevance.
Our approach is counte is generally regarded as the puris of the Cold War, a 13-day super irrelevant to a world moved beyo But such a view is itself a pro to which scholars have focused o their withdrawal-and ignored were emplaced and removed, Cu before about Cuban origins, deci of the crisis of October 1962.
FROM United States AND SOVIET SOURCES The story of the origins of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba to students of postwar U.S.-Soviet relations.
It appears that Khrushc the nuclear imbalance, as well as his wish to protect the Cuban revol American attack, were primary motives for the deployment.
On October 22, Presiden announced his decision to quarantine Cuba with a naval blockade, pre delivery of additional missiles on ships which had already set sail fro Union.
During the next few days, the leaders in both the Unite U.S.S.R. began to feel they were losing control of events.
Amer ships, for example, may have tried to force Soviet nuclear submarin without permission from the president.
On October 26, Khrushche remove the missiles in exchange for an American commitment not Cuba.
By November 19, Castr The resolution of the missile cris triangular relationship between Wa 28 years.
When they mutually ably close to annihilating each oth greater degree than at any time s World War II, the American presi terests into account, as Kennedy w saving way to back down.
Instead of a z options that would let both sides ""w after the crisis as the two sides teletype machine for direct commu al secretary-and signed the 1963 prohibits above-ground and unde initiated negotiations which led to the Seabed Treaty , and th The Cubans, on the other hand, w tion.
Although clear, the administration did, in fa attack even before the discovery the preparations.
In that p price of their conveyan Then we received a telegr have reliable information t hours to strike Cuba.
Our probably be unavoidable u Castro suggested that to p launch a pre-emptive strik My comrades in the leade understand our purpose.
FROM CUBAN SOURCES2 Recently, Fidel Castro and other Cuban officials have begun to speak in detail about their experience of the missile crisis, particularly the threat they fe from the United States, and their fear of abandonment by the Soviets.
Yet the secret, deceptive deployment had hardly begun, when the Cubans began to suspect that the Soviet gambit was not well-thought-out.
Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones, two members of the ruling six-man secretariat, were sent to Moscow in late August to urge the Soviets to go public with the deployment, lest the United States discover the missiles in mid-course, and use their presence on the island as an excuse to attack and invade Cuba.
The deal seemed to Castro to have placed Cuba in imminent danger, and he was furious in any case at the Soviet for having struck such a deal without consulting Cuba.
As has recently been revealed by the declassification of his crisis correspondence with Khrushchev Castro became sufficiently desperate to make a contingent request to the Sovie that they launch their nuclear missiles at the United States should an invasio take place.
Khrushchev horrified by what he took to be a request for nuclear pre-emption, together wi other information indicating that the United States was indeed preparing to invade the island, immediately agreed to Kennedy's terms and thereby ended t intense phase of the superpower crisis.
Soviet abandonment of Cuba during the missile crisis, and the Soviet refusa to consult with Cuba over the terms of the resolution, still rankle Cuban officia nearly 30 years later.
If Nikita's message to Kennedy said, 'We are willing to withdraw the missiles from Cuba, provided that Cuba's security is guaranteed, in Cuba's view' . . . and there would be no negotiations about Cuba without Cuba . . . that problem . . would have been resolved.
S . we always told our Soviet friends that we disagreed with Cuba's exclusion from the negotiations.
Castro's reaction, as recorded by Alekseev, shows the depth and th object of Cuban concern.
All this wa been used by the counter-revolution to for the situation that has been create destroyed.
Castro told Lee Lockwood several would ever remove the missiles him, that is, that superpowers-e a Cold War-might act to preserve a small ally.
Consider the minimum States removal of Soviet missil States not to invade Cuba.
In the and Khrushchev found themselv the Cuban minimum goal was not of the objective sources of the t tanamo Naval Base to Cuba; dra Florida; cessation of covert activi sance overflights of the island (C not only between United States and Cuban interests, at precisely the mome achievement of the Soviet pledge perspective, likely annihilation si missiles' departure.
First, when Washington and Moscow push around third parties, there ma be consequences.
For Cuba, w the specter of annihilation was so changes in their situation caused b Castro was able to think only in w security guarantees issued in good The third lesson is that leaders i grasp their adversaries' priorities, exception of Kennedy's appreciatio honor, the three leaders seem to ha perceived reality.
Khrushchev d weak in the face of communism, to anticipate stiff American resist into account Castro's dependence invasion.
And neither he nor powerlessness and fury which foll that, in this case, the priorities of Kennedy and Khrushchev came to objectives in order to avoid war mained constant.
THEORETICAL OBSERVATIONS While our purpose is not primarily theoretical, it may be usef clearly as possible what we take to be the most important gener follows from our case study of the Cuban missile crisis.
Yet it takes little imagination added to what we now know about the Soviet-Cuban side of the story to see how superpower security was linked to Cuba's sense of imminent annihilation.
TOWARD ""REALISTIC EMPATHY"" IN TRIANGULAR RELATIONS When Kennedy decided to give Khrushchev a face-saving way o crisis, he was thinking in positive sum terms despite a political co stressed unilateral gain.
He was able to do so because nuclear dange When large states develop policies toward small ones, however, threat may be quite low.
In other words, policy-makers in large co find it difficult to believe or even to imagine that their security is wir with the security of smaller countries.
One lesson from the missile ever, is that in certain cases the security of the superpowers m together with the security of Third-World nations, even though thi apparent despite or until the outbreak of crisis.
In 1962, the Unite Soviet Union did not realize that they were in a triangular security their own fates were connected with the fate of Cuba.
But the crisi Castro's anxiety, anger, and, because of heavy U.S.-Soviet invol ability to provoke superpower war.
As a result, the security of all t became intertwined during the height of the crisis to an extent we beginning to appreciate.
Although Moscow and Washington may act deliberately in som back desperate leaders into corners in order to force a showdown, perspective on mutual security suggests great powers may uninten crease their own security by decreasing the security of smaller Th states.
Therefore, the superpowers should try to develop sophisticat sensibilities before crises unfold.
And when troubles do develop, E need to be aware that joint resolutions which exclude third parties the danger for all.
Several countries in the Middle East would destro sources of oil in minutes; the Cubans could, if pressed sufficiently, on the United States from Texas to Florida; even the Lithuanians o could assassinate leaders and withhold goods.
I onical rational scenario, a leader calculates that the cost/benefit payo pre-emption outweighs the payoff ratio of other courses of action.
The missile crisis is as proof that leaders will never choose nuclear war.
We contend t arriving out of the unacknowledg neither rationality nor irrationalit secure superpowers of Cuba's se desperation.
We need to move beyond the rational/irrational psychology in order to understand the Cuban frame of mind and to take steps to prevent other leaders from arriving at desperation caused by great power entrapment.
Such a psychology would be both phenomenological-its goal would be putting oneself vicariously in the other's shoes -and triangular-its practitioners would be on the lookout for situations in which leaders of small, militarily threatened nations feel backed into a comer, optionless, abandoned by allies, and threatened by adversaries.
What looks outwardly like suicide may feel like a last chance at honor or survival.
The great powers are thus well advised to avoid the triangular ignorance of yesteryear if, sorting though the ruins of some present or future triangular crisis, they are not to find themselves pining away pitifully for the good old days of the Cold War.
