As had been suggested in that paper, there are obvious limitations to drawing conclusions about deterrence policies based purely on theories of deterrence.
It is equally important to examine the validity of these theories on the basis of actual experience.
Thus, the paper focuses on operation of deterrence, taking nuclear crises as examples of such an operation.
It is notoriously difficult to show that deterrence has worked successfully in most cases, especially over a long course of time.
For example, it is often stated that the nuclear deterrence prevented the cold war from turning hot during the half-century after the end of the Second World War.
It might indeed have, but proving it would be an extremely difficult undertaking because it would involve demonstrating that one or the other superpower was intent on an aggressive war, which the presence of nuclear weapons alone prevented.
A familiar example was the American attempt to 'deter' an Indian attack on West Pakistan in December 1971 by dispatching the 'Enterprise' carrier battlegroup to the Bay of Bengal.
Henry Kissinger, then American National Security Advisor, would characterise the mission as a success because it deterred Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi from refocusing Indian military forces against West Pakistan after the completion of operations in the eastern sector.
The problem, of course, is that there is little indication that there was any Indian plan to attack West Pakistan.
India's non-attack on West Pakistan could have been the consequence of a successful American deterrent threat, if, as Kissinger appeared convinced, India had planned to strike towards the West.
But if there had been no such Indian plan, as all available evidence appears to suggest, then deterrence could not have worked because there was nothing to deter.
These were chosen because they were the only Cold War cases where there was direct confrontation between two nuclear powers in which nuclear weapons appear to have played a significant role.
There have been numerous other instances when nuclear threats were made or implied, but where either only one nuclear power was involved, or if both were involved, the threats themselves were ambiguous, which makes it difficult to come to any judgements about the operation of nuclear deterrence.
In the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, even more historical material has become available for scholars to examine.
Though this now allows us to re-examine the crisis, most, scholarly nnd popular accounts have only stressed how dose the two superpowers came to a nuclear war.
A more surprising outcome was that the nuclear deterrence worked, and that it worked in spite of considerable disparities in the nudear arsenals of the two powers.
What deterred the United States was the certainty that some Soviet retaliation would take place.
The decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba was taken in late May 1962.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's primary motivation appears to have been to defend Cuba against continuing American-sponsored attacks by anti-Castro forces and the very real possibility of an American invasion.
Hoping to present the United States with a fait accompli, Khrushchev ordered that the mission be carried out in complete secrecy.
The extraordinary measures that the Soviet military took to conceal the operation, as well as some favourable weather, allowed the Soviet military to successfully conduct much of the operation in secret.
Nevertheless, by the middle of October, American intelligence had begun to suspect that Soviet missiles might have been shipped to Cuba.
On October 16, President Kennedy was informed that there was conclusive photo-reconnaissance evidence of Soviet medium-range missiles in Cuba.
Though originally contemplating an air strike, Kennedy eventually decided on a 'quarantine' of Cuba to prevent any more missiles going into that country, along with resolute demands that Moscow remove the missiles already in Cuba or face war.
The crisis ended short of war, when Khrushchev decided to pull the missiles out of Cuba in exchange for an American undertaking to not invade Cuba, and to eventually remove American 7upiter' missiles from Turkey.
There is now little doubt about the lopsided nature of the nuclear balance at the time of the missile crisis.
Through the late 1950s, a section of the American strategic elite had worried continuously about advances in Soviet missile and bomber strength.
But much of this concern was exaggerated, primarily because of lack of intelligence about the true strength of the Soviet strategic forces.
The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had deliberately exaggerated Soviet accomplishments, announcing repeatedly to Western journalists and leaders that the Soviet Union had built large numbers of strategic weapons.
By 1960, the existence of a 'missile gap' was an article of faith among both the American public and leadership and it was used to great effect by John F Kennedy in his presidential campaign.
As importantly, this was a superiority that the United States as well as the Soviet Union were aware of and both knew the other knew.
But this overwhelming advantage played little part in the confrontation.
Then and subsequently, many participants believed that it was the threat of a nuclear war itself that deterred the United States from acting on its superiority.
Despite the American advantage, both superpowers were vulnerable to nuclear war.
In Bundy's words, We had to assume that in any nuclear exchange, no matter who started it, some of ther."" missiles and bombers would get through with megaton bombs.
The fact that our own strategic forces were very much larger gave us no comfort.
But it is clear that for the critical participants, including President Kennedy, the more relevant issue was avoiding war itself.
Nevertheless, even for those who argue that the strategic balance was a critical factor, what was important was the impact of the strategic superiority on Kremlin decision-makers.
Khrushchev, according to this argument, backed down only because the United States had both local conventional superiority and strategic nuclear superiority.
But 'the dog that didn't bark' in the Cuban missile crisis was not Soviet restraint, but American restraint.
Soviet restraint was understandable, considering their relative weakness.
The American restraint, despite their overwhelming advantage, is counter-intuitive and difficult to explain, except as the consequence of the fear of nuclear war itself.
The American restraint becomes even more remarkable when considered in the light of new evidence that suggests that President Kennedy was willing to even make a public bargain of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, if that was what it would take to resolve the crisis short of war.
In short, the new history of the missile crisis suggests even greater American restraint than was realised earlier, strengthening the proposition that the United States was as deterred by the threat of war as the Soviet Union was, and was willing to go to extraordinary lengths to prevent the outbreak of such a war.
This is a lesson that has implications for SNFs such as the Indian deterrent force.
A good part of the debate about the Indian nuclear deterrent has been focussed on the issue of numbers—what kind of weapons, and what quality of weapons, are necessary to ensure deterrence.
What the experience of the Cuban missile crisis suggests is that the numbers might not be a critical factor in achieving deterrence.
If superiority and inferiority does not matter when dealing with nuclear weapons, then numbers and balances do not either.
The presence of the TNWs was first revealed in 1992 by General Anatoli Gribkov, the man who oversaw the planning and deployment of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The presence of the Soviet TNWs had been completely missed by the extensive American intelligence effort, which was primarily based on low-flying U-2 missions.
A U-2 mission on October 25 had spotted the dual-capable FROG missiles, and this information was passed on to the White House by the CIA in its daily estimate of the progress of the Soviet missile deployments in Cuba.
But this report reached the White House only on October 27, and even then there was no mention of the possibility that these missiles might be carrying nuclear warheads.
Moreover, US intelligence remained completely unaware that there were more than 80 other TNWs on Cuba.
TNWs were included from the beginning in the package of forces sent to Cuba, mainly because it was believed that if the United States did attack, the Soviet forces in Cuba would be cut-off, and that they would therefore be required to carry with them as much fire-power as possible.
But in September, after President Kennedy made a speech warning Moscow that the United States would not tolerate Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba, Premier Khrushchev personally expanded the TNW component of the force being sent to Cuba and speeded up their delivery.
The 12 'Luna'/FROG missiles and the 6 bombs for the IL-28s were added by Khrushchev to the original contingent which only included nuclear-tipped cruise missiles.
The most dramatic revelation made by General Gribkov, however, was that local commanders in Cuba had the authority to use these missiles, if the situation so warranted.
Soviet military doctrine made clear distinctions between TNWs and strategic weapons, the TNWs were considered simply to be a more effective version of conventional battlefield warheads.
Thus, in the early 1960s, standard Soviet procedure gave local commanders predelegated authority to use TNWs in the event of war.
Little thought appears to have been given to the impact that this would have on the nuclear escalation process.
Indeed, as the crisis began, Moscow further limited the authority of local commanders to employ the TNWs.
Two new orders, the first given on October 22, and a reiteration of the same order on October 27, explicitly forbade the local commanders from employing the TNWs authorisation from Moscow.
In the event, the procedural limitations imposed by Moscow—the requirement of direct authorisation from Moscow for the release of all the nuclear weapons, including the TNWs—was a sufficient barrier to the misuse of these weapons.
There are useful lessons to be gleaned from the Soviet experience with TNWs in Cuba, lessons that are as applicable to SNFs as they were to the other nuclear powers.
Indeed, the Soviet leadership itself learned important lessons from the crisis.
Fear of the threat of loss of control over the TNWs in Cuba was a significant factor both in further tightening up Moscow's control over the employment of nuclear weapons and in Moscow's refusal to permit its Warsaw Pact allies to have anything similar to the NATO 'dual-key' command structure for the use of nuclear weapons, despite great pressure from allied countries such as Romania.
The difficulties over command and control over TNWs are applicable also to SNFs.
As was shown by the Cuban missile crisis, TNWs present different command and control difficulties as compared to strategic weapons.
Unlike strategic weapons, which are normally deployed deep in the interior.
TNWs, given their short range, have to be deployed close to the probable battle area.
Moreover, such deployment will be meaningless unless accompanied by predelegation of launch authority, as the Soviets had considered providing their local commanders in Cuba.
But predelegation raises the probability that these weapons will be used, because military commanders will face a strong 'use-them-or-lose-them' dilemma.
Such pressures will be particularly acute when local commanders are operationally on the defensive, as the Soviet commanders in Cuba were.
As in the case of the other nuclear powers, there have been calls in India for the development of TNWs.
In October 1962, the only way that Moscow could prevent the threat of escalation was by reassuring control over its TNWs in Cuba.
But such central control also meant that the TNWs were essentially useless, since it was widely recognised, both in Moscow and among Soviet commanders in Cuba, that communications with Moscow would not survive the beginning of any American assault.
The Other Lessons of the Missile Crisis Two more lessons can be derived from the Cuban crisis.
First, it is dear that nuclear deterrence is far more than many scholars have assumed.
If any crisis should have resulted in war, it was the Cuban crisis, because of the enormous complexities of the crisis, the trouble that both sides had in controlling their respective military forces, the difficulties that both leaders faced in convincing their colleagues that a less than honourable peace was better than war, and the communication problems that bedeviled proper negotiations between the respective leadership.
That deterrence worked despite all these hurdles should be a cause for comfprt, and suggest a different way to look at the crisis that the constant reiteration of how close the world had come to a nuclear holocaust.
Another lesson from the Cuban missile crisis is that aggressive nuclear declaratory policies should be treated with greater circumspection.
In 1962, both sides had declaratory policies which, if they had been faithfully followed, would have resulted in a nuclear war.
The changes in Soviet TNW release procedures have already been discussed.
American TNW procedures had similarly been liberalised a decade earlier.
Moreover, as suggested earlier, much of the military, and the SAC in particular, was intent on carrying out the existing nuclear war plans.
Declaratory 'first-use' policies were too unrealistic to meet the challenge of crisis reality.
The Sino-Soviet Border Conflict The end of the Cold War and the opening of the Soviet and East European archives have increased the understanding of the history of the Sino-Soviet rift.
Even the few new documents that have emerged, though interesting in themselves, only support previously available information.
Given our overall scant knowledge of many of the details of the border crisis, some of the conclusions drawn must necessarily be tentative.
Despite the fact that the Soviet Union was an early contributor to the Chinese nuclear programme, the Kremlin had become increasingly worried about the stability of China and the Chinese willingness to use its nuclear might responsibly.
Though a comprehensive and satisfactory history of the Sino-Soviet nuclear relations has yet to be written, it is clear that Mao expected the Soviet advances in strategic nuclear forces, and in particular the perceived Soviet advantage in inter-continental range ballistic missiles would be used for the general benefit of the socialist fraternity.
But Moscow worried that Chinese recklessness might lead to a direct nuclear confrontation between the Soviet Union and the US, a confrontation in which Moscow had little interest.
If Beijing was disappointed by Soviet pusillanimity, Khrushchev was alarmed by Mao's refusal to understand the implications of a nuclear war.
Soviet unwillingness to back Mao in his conflicts with the US, which confirmed Mao's long-held suspicion about the undependability of its ally, appears to have been at the root of the emerging Sino-Soviet rift.
Despite the existence of the dispute, China 'acquiesced' in maintaining the status quo on the border for the decade after 1949, but began challenging Moscow after 1959.45 Between 1959 and 1966, China undertook an active and aggressive, but nevertheless non-violent, policy which included sending soldiers and civilians into the disputed areas.
The policy changed in 1966, as Mao ordered that groups challenging Soviet presence in the disputed territories can, under certain circumstances, fight back.
Moscow, on the other hand, alleged that Chinese ""systematic provocations"" began in June 1962, and reached crisis situation by 1967.46 Through all these confrontations, both the Soviets and the Chinese imposed strict control on their soldiers and border troops, and limited the level of violence, which mostly included stick-fights or pushing and shoving each others troops from the disputed areas.
On the other hand, negotiations, to solve the dispute were suspended in 1964, and contacts between the two countries on the border issue were limited to whatever exchanges took place between the troops on the border.
In addition, the Soviet deployment now also included some forces deployed in Mongolia.
The border skirmishes, and larger scale clashes, appear to have begun in early March 1969.
Most of the information that is available is only on two major clashes on March 2 and 15, both on the Zhen Bao/Amansky Island on the Ussuri river, mainly because both sides publicised the incidents.
To all appearance, China appears to have provoked the first fight on March 2, ambushing a Soviet patrol from tactically superior positions, killing a large number of Soviet soldiers.
The March 15 fighting appears to have been a Soviet retaliation though (because of the Chinese tactical advantages in the area) the Soviets also suffered considerable losses.
In the aftermath of these skirmishes, Beijing repeatedly rebuffed Soviet efforts to initiate a dialogue on the continuing clashes.
The Soviets responded by increasing the military pressure on the border, apparently initiating skirmishes at many points on the border, including clashes as far away as in Central Asia.
In these engagements, the Soviets ensured that they always had superior forces, including some armoured forces.
They also suggested the possibility of further escalation, including that of nuclear attack.
Moscow sent letters to several communist parties in the West, warning of the possibility of an attack on Chinese nuclear facilities,52 an article in the London Evening News by a Soviet ""free-lance"" journalist, considered to be spokesman for the Soviet government, which repeated the same warning of an attack on Chinese nuclear facilities; and a Soviet diplomat posted in Washington enquired of a State Department official what the United States reaction would be to a Soviet attack on Chinese nuclear facilities.
The last mentioned was considered so serious that Henry Kissinger the United States National Security Advisor, convened a meeting of the Washington Special Group, a group that dealt with contingency planning and crisis management, to prepare contingency plans for American policy in the event of Sino-Soviet war.
Whether or not Moscow seriously contemplated an attack on Chinese nuclear facilities, the primary purpose of these repeated warnings appear to have been to threaten China with a nuclear escalation.
By the end of July, Chinese military leaders were claiming that they had no interest in a war, a remarkable turn-around from the aggressive stance they had adopted in March.
In September, China reluctantly agreed to talks, bringing to an end the series of violent clashes that began on March 2.
Though there have been unconfirmed reports of further clashes on the border, these do not appear to have been extensive, serious or related to the March 1969 clashes.
On the face of it, it is difficult to disagree with the predominant scholarly opinion that the Soviet Union succeeded in its policy of careful but determined coercion of China, a policy that included the implicit and explicit threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Richard Betts, in particular, has argued that it was the Soviet nuclear superiority that gave the Soviets success in their confrontation against China, even if its was only for a short time.
It is difficult to judge whether this is a valid conclusion in the absence of any evidence from the Chinese archives about Chinese deliberations during this time.
One way for China to have responded to these would have been to accelerate its nuclear and missile programmes to deal with the Soviet threat.
Though the Soviet Union had clearly replaced the United States as the primary focus of Chinese nuclear developments since the late 1960s, it is difficult to separate this change in focus from the overall realignment of Chinese foreign policy.
On the other hand, if the Soviet Union did contemplate a nuclear strike against China, or a strike against nuclear sites, the fact that it eventually decided not to undertake them might suggest that even the rudimentary deterrent capabilities of the Chinese strategic forces were a sufficient deterrent to the Soviet Union.
The evidence available on these questions is too limited yet to make any final judgements on this score.
Though some reports suggest that there were serious discussions at the highest levels in the Kremlim on such a strike, no documentary evidence has come to light to back it up.
But the relatively relaxed Chinese approach to the problem of deterring Moscow suggests that Beijing has not been particularly impressed by the nuclear threats.
Conclusion The caveats stated at the beginning of this essay need to be reiterated when trying to draw conclusions from this review of the two crises and what they might mean for nuclear deterrence with SNFs.
Knowing the important role that President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev played in the Cuban crisis, it is difficult not to wonder about the role that personalities played in the successful resolution of these crises.
Several have been suggested in the course of the essay, and they bear repetition.
Both the Cuban missile crisis and the Sino-Soviet border conflict illustrated the uselessness of nuclear superiority or the implications of nuclear inferiority.
In the end, what mattered was the threat of nuclear war itself, and this was a sufficiently serious threat as to encourage caution from all the parties to the disputes.
Nuclear numbers, in other words, are not very relevant to nuclear deterrence, which should be comforting for those depending on the deterrent capabilities of SNFs.
The Cuban crisis also demonstrated the importance of central political control over nuclear weapons and the danger to such control that results from building TNWs.
This also has implications for SNFs, who would not be able to afford the elaborate command and control infrastructure that the superpowers developed, and for whom the command and control issues would be even more serious.
The crises also demonstrated the need for greater skepticism in examining nuclear doctrines—muscular nuclear doctrines might have some impact on domestic politics and military acquisitions, but are of little use in actual confrontations.
American strategy was implicitly an NFU strategy in October 1962—as was the Soviet strategy.
Finally, deterrence was shown to be far more robust than most scholars and political leaders have assumed—it is not poised on any Tcnife's edge' nor was there any 'delicate balance' that the slightest tremor would upset.
All this should induce . greater confidence in SNFs than has hitherto been the case.
However, most American participants and scholars were, till recently, convinced that correcting the strategic imbalance was the primary Soviet motivation.
Even as late as in 1992, Ray Cline, the CIA's Deputy Director for Research and Analysis in 1962, would insist that correcting the strategic imbalance was the primary Soviet objective in putting the missiles in Cuba.
Anatoli I Gribkov, ""The View from Moscow and Havana"" in Gribkov and Smith, Operation ANADYR, especially chps.
This early work has been largely substantiated by new research based on material released from American and Soviet archives about the events surrounding the 1962 crisis.
Excerpts from an Interview with Generals Curtis E LeMay, Leon W Johnson, David A Burchinal, and Jack J Catton,"" International Security 12:4 (Spring 1988), 94.
Much of the early history of the Cuban crisis suggested that Kennedy had refused to make any such trade-off; even implicitly.
The UN initiative, which was known only to the President, his brother Robert Kennedy and Secretary of State Dean Rusk, was to have been activated if Khrushchev rejected the secret deal on the Jupiter trade-off.
But Khrushchev accepted the secret deal, thus obviating the need for this initiative.
A series of conferences were held, beginning in 1987, that brought together scholars and the participants in the crisis.
Gribkov in ""The View from Moscow and Havana"" in Gribkov and Smith, Operation ANADRY, 27.
Gribkov, ""The View from Moscow and Havana"" in Gribkov and Smith, Operation ANADYR, 27.
The TNW controversy has taken several twists and turns over the last decade, ever since the original revelations about the presence of the TNWs were made in 1992.
Because the United States had not detected the presence of TNWs in Cuba, no TNW operations were planned in OP PLAN 312, the United States plan for the invasion of Cuba.
However, the United States did have some contingency plans for responding to Soviet TNWs.
Brahma Chellaney, ""Tactical Nukes,"" The Hindustan Times, January 27, 1999.
The Soviet Union had publicised its version, and recently declassified documents from East European archives reveal that there was little difference between what Moscow was claiming publicly and what it was telling its allies in confidence.
Additional, though circumstantial, evidence that China was the initiator of the March 2 clash comes from the account of the Soviet defector Arkady Shevchenko, who recounts the shock that the clash caused among the highest levels in the Kremlin.
