His death may have saved the lives of millions.On October 27, 1962, Rudolf Anderson Jr. streaked through the stratosphere, 14 miles above a planet tied up in knots.
Thirteen days before, the Air Force major had flown one of the first top-secret reconnaissance missions over Cuba that confirmed the existence of Soviet missile sites just 90 miles from the American mainland.
Anderson was not originally scheduled to fly on this day, but he lobbied hard for the assignment when the mission was added to the schedule.
Mission 3127, Anderson’s sixth foray over Cuba as part of “Operation Brass Knob,” would be his most dangerous yet, with Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles now operational and war seemingly imminent.Shortly after Anderson entered Cuban air space, his unarmed, high-altitude U-2 spy plane appeared as a blip on Soviet radar.
As the Soviet military tracked the intruding aircraft, their concern mounted that the pilot was photographing secret locations of tactical nuclear weapons positioned near America’s Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.
Two surface-to-air missiles rocketed into the sky near the eastern port city of Banes.
Shrapnel pierced the cockpit along with Anderson’s pressurized flight suit and helmet, likely killing him instantly.
Target number 33 was destroyed.Within hours, word of the shootdown reached the White House Cabinet Room, which all day long had crackled with tension amid news that the Soviet nuclear missile sites were nearly operational and that another U-2 plane had accidentally flown over the Soviet Union, sending Soviet MiG fighters scrambling in pursuit.
Military leaders overwhelmingly urged Kennedy to launch airstrikes against Cuba’s air defenses the following morning.
The president, however, correctly suspected that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had not authorized the downings of unarmed reconnaissance planes, and he didn’t want to abandon diplomacy just yet.For Kennedy and Khrushchev, Anderson’s death crystallized their realization that the crisis was rapidly spiraling out of their control.
Kennedy worried that retaliatory airstrikes would inevitably result in all-out war.
The Soviets agreed to remove their nuclear missiles from Cuba, while the Americans pledged to withdraw intermediate nuclear missiles from Turkey and not invade Cuba.
Anderson posthumously became the first-ever recipient of the Air Force Cross, the service’s highest designation short of the Medal of Honor.President Kennedy and members of the press at the signing of the Cuba Quarantine, October 23, 1962Memories of Rudolf Anderson may have faded, but he’s not forgotten in his hometown of Greenville, South Carolina, where he built model airplanes as a young boy and chose “Good humor is the clear blue sky of the soul” as his high school yearbook quote.
Anderson’s death escalated the crisis significantly,” said Upcountry History Museum historian Courtney Tollison.
