National Archives On September 24, 1964, a copy of the official Warren Commission Report was delivered to President Lyndon Johnson in the Oval Office.
Its conclusions were, in hindsight, as accurate as possible, given the commission's impossibly short investigative calendar and its utter lack of foreign intelligence.
It named, correctly, Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone shooter, hypothesizing that in shooting John F Kennedy he had been lashing out for reasons only he knew.
A few weeks later, President Johnson's hidden tape recorder captured a phone conversation with Senator Richard Russell, the old Dixiecrat whom he had pressured to be on the Warren Commission.
Around the same time, Johnson was on the phone with his old friend Mike Mansfield, the majority leader of the Senate.
Johnson had handpicked the members of the Warren Commission and directed its focus.
The fact was, Lyndon Johnson never would believe the conclusions of the Warren Commission Report.
A year before his death, in 1972, Johnson finally started revealing his secret to people outside his close circle, telling George Weidenfeld, publisher of his autobiography, that one day he would prove the Oswald-Castro connection.
But there weren't enough days left at that point for Johnson to expose the truth.
A conspiracy of silence would keep the facts hidden until now, 45 years later, when evidence from a variety of different sources, many of them newly available, can be pieced together to tell the real story for the first time.
Two charismatic leaders prevailed over the Western Hemisphere in the early 1960s, both men having risen to power with two fundamentally different visions of freedom.
Initially, some saw a natural kinship between John E Kennedy and Fidel Castro, but they were each in the grip of the new cold war's paradigm, one of strictly defined opposites.
In many ways, the young Jack Kennedy was not much different from the young Fidel Castro.
Where Joe Sr. had acquired his millions as a scheming, streetwise Irish outsider, Angel Castro lived as a gentrified peasant, self-made and considered rich on his own turf but still a lowly Guajiro in the eyes of the Cuban aristocracy.
Their talented sons had leaped over decades, even centuries of class prejudice to become leaders by sheer force of personality.
They were intellectually curious, articulate, easy in the company of men, and attracted to the spotlight.
Both Jack and Fidel came from large Catholic families, and both of their fathers made a sport of bedding women out of wedlock.
Joe Sr. kept his mistresses out of sight in hotel rooms, at the penthouses of trusted friends, or on his private yacht.
Angel took his lovers wherever he desired them, including in his own home.
Fidel, Raul, and their siblings had been born to Angel's housekeeper while she worked for his wife, and Angel made no secret of the small shack full of his offspring, who lived just out of sight of the casa grande.
It was not until Fidel was seventeen years old that Angel recognized him as his legal offspring.
Still, Angel knew that Fidel was exceptional and would grant him special privileges, sending him to the country's best preparatory school, keeping him in natty clothes, and furnishing him with a car as he approached his college years.
Fidel's sister Juanita noted that he treated the peasants on the Castro plantation with the same cruelty as his father did.
He made no public declaration on behalf of the poor until he joined Cuba's leftward drift in his early twenties—right around the time that Jack Kennedy was first elected to Congress.
Fidel overcame his “rustic” upbringing to be reasonably well liked at El Colegio de Belen in Havana.
But the priests who taught there sensed a certain moral indifference in him.
He accepted leadership from no one, taking only the wise counsel of one brilliant priest named Llorente.
The unpretentious, honest, and egalitarian PT boat commander of World War II gave way to a cooler peer of the realm, a man whose charm became more calculating.
He was capable of kindness, and he understood, intellectually, that power could improve the lives of those less fortunate.
He seemed content to believe that “people who are different have different responses.
It was Jack and Fidel's younger brothers—the naturally empathetic ones, Bobby and Raul—who schooled the older ones in their humanity.
When Jack made his run for the presidency, it was Bobby who tutored him in the nuances of American poverty and injustice.
When Fidel made his first triumphal tour of the United States after he had vanquished the dictator Fulgencio Batista, it was Raul who waylaid him in a Houston hotel and berated him for not telling Americans that he was a Marxist.
The garrulous yet emotionally remote older boys gained depth in the presence of their kid brothers, but conversely, they were also pushed to positions of passionate intransigence, too.
By the early sixties, the brothers had reached their initial goals of winning the American presidency and leadership in Cuba.
In the years since, historians have debated whether Fidel ever actually murdered someone.
After the United States backed assassinations of Trujillo and Diem, Castro was certain he was next.
Under pressure from within and without, Kennedy and Castro began directing their newfound power to destroying each other.
When Jack came to power, he considered Fidel to be Cuba's liberator after the corrupt cruelties of Batista, but Eisenhower and Nixon had already been plotting a coup.
The secret war against the Castros was forced upon the Kennedys by the American Right, by Jack's early disdain for moderating “liberalism,” and by the Hard Left pressure exerted by Raul and Che Guevara.
Assassination was only one tool in the American kit, but given the nightmare cults that had so recently empowered Hitler and Stalin, political decapitation was seen as tactically concise and morally expedient.
This secret war, however, would leave deeply buried scars on the heart of America.
In November 1961 the CIAs Cuba desk officers Bill Harvey and Sam Halpern had a plan, the next phase in the ongoing attempt to remove Castro.
Operation Mongoose, named after a carnivorous predator that kills its prey after stealing its eggs.
It thus both dispatches its enemy and removes its progeny, thereby preventing any line of succession—exactly what the Kennedy White House and the CIA had in mind for the Castros and their political descendants.
The plans were to continue fomenting revolution, and, by most estimates, the operation had somewhere between $50 million and $150 million to spend on its endeavor.
The White House had taken the Cuban operation out of the purview of the CIAs Western Hemisphere Division and placed it directly under the control of Bobby Kennedy and the White House staff.
On March 16, 1962, a meeting convened in the Oval Office with the goal of setting presidential guidelines for Operation Mongoose.
The meeting was attended by the president; Bobby; the newly installed director of the CIA, John McCone, and all the rest of the innermost players in the secret war, including Ed Lansdale, Bobby's Mongoose coordinator.
It was Lansdale who wrote a memorandum of this meeting, which remains the only known documentary evidence that Jack and Bobby ever endorsed or authorized a hit on Fidel.
The meeting commenced with a briefing from Lansdale about the training of Cuban exile insurgents in the fine points of guerrilla warfare.
The president then reiterated that he was not yet ready to approve any direct American military involvement in such plans.
Lately he had made many speeches warning against the new insurrectionary forms of war, and calling for improved countermeasures.
Bobby then briefly described a possible opportunity in which members of the Cuban underground might stake out Fidel.
Lansdale's memo, written later that same afternoon, called ‘die plan’ “worth assessing firmly and pursuing vigorously.
In the words of a former CIA director, “The language of the memo speaks for itself.
The only thing that Robert Kennedy can be referring to is the assassination of Castro.
But once Fidel embraced the Red path, he did so with a vengeance, goading Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to fire the first nuke in the Missile Crisis in October 1962.
Given Cuba's rogue tendencies, Khrushchev had made it the KGB's business to stay on top of United States efforts, and the Soviets had learned of Operation Mongoose.
Later, when Castro embraced the Chinese Communists, the Soviet leader started taking steps to contain Castro's megalomania.
There is evidence that the Soviet premier and the American president colluded in this regard, secretly discussing the political neutralization of Fidel.
But in the last year of JFK's life, while those more circumspect means were in play, the United States plans to kill Castro continued.
With the U.S.-backed assassinations of other world leaders—Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic and Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam—Fidel became even more certain that he was the next hit on the Kennedys' list.
The CIA began to focus upon one Rolando Cubela, a military hero of the Cuban revolution who had secretly grown disillusioned with Fidel's Communist leanings.
He thus began flirting with CIA agents in order to form a possible alliance aimed at el presidente's removal.
According to the CIA, there was no contact with Cubela from August 29, 1962, until September 1963.
On September 7, officer Nestor Sanchez and his partner, Richard Maxwell Long, met with Cubela at a safe house in Porto Alegre, Brazil, to reassure him that the agency had decided to use him in the next phase of their plan to overthrow Castro.
They discussed ways of approaching other Cuban military officers; Cubela told Sanchez that he wanted assurances at the top who could ensure America's support for his actions, which included the decapitation of the Cuban regime.
But the plot hurtled forward in hopes of success before the 1964 elections in the United States.
Bobby had pushed for a secret base in Costa Rica, which was carrying out raids in Cuba with materials provided by the Defense Department.
They bombed Cuban infrastructure, such as railroads, bridges, and power plants, and smuggled in radio equipment, arms, and supplies to resistance forces.
On September 6, Fidel publicly charged the United States with responsibility for an air attack on Santa Clara, Cuba.
It was during that summer that a G2 officer known as ""Oscar Marino"" and others became aware that Cubela was a counterrevolutionary.
The same day that Cubela was having his meeting with the CIA in Brazil, Fidel was due at a reception at the Brazilian embassy in Havana.
There, el lider niciximo pulled aside Associated Press correspondent Daniel Harker, within earshot of other journalists.
Harker, a native of Colombia, spoke fluent Spanish and was preferred by Castro for American press interviews because of his accuracy in translating.
He started in about the recent attacks, the other reporters bending in to hear more.
With that, Fidel strode on into the reception and began shaking hands, resplendent in his olive fatigues.
Two days later, the story hit the Associated Press and the United States newspapers, including the New Orleans Times-Picayune, a paper read by a young Castro supporter named Lee Harvey Oswald.
The apartment at 4936 Collingwood was the nineteenth home this boy had known.
Raised without a father, in the clutches of a mentally unstable mother, Lee Harvey Oswald's future appeared to child psychologists who examined him as a disaster waiting to happen.
There is some evidence that Lee may have suffered brain damage at the age of five when a chest of drawers toppled over on his head during a move.
From then on, he would suffer occasional blackouts, doing things he couldn't remember, walking out in the middle of classes and wandering his school's hallways.
A year after his outreach to the YPSL, Oswald, desperate to leave his mother, enlisted in the Marines, where his pro-Communist rants rendered him something between a joke and a pariah.
After an early discharge in September 1959, he almost immediately boarded a ship as the first leg of a pilgrimage to Moscow, where he intended to defect.
When he was rejected by the Soviets, the youngster forced their hand by attempting suicide.
Faced with the cold war equivalent of a public relations nightmare, the Soviets decided to smile upon him, sending him off to Minsk, where the KGB would babysit him around the clock for the next two and a half years.
It was in Minsk that he married the tempestuous young Marina Prusakova, the niece of an elite Soviet intelligence officer.
As the Castros continued to co-opt the Cuban revolution and Rani flirted ever more heavily with the Soviet state, he was sending his youngest spies to Minsk for special training at the academy of the Russians' MVD , a subsidiary of the KGB that was responsible for civil law enforcement as well as more shadowy pursuits.
Among the students were Jose Abrantes, the personal assistant to the Cuban intelligence chief, Ramiro Valdes Menendez, and one Fabian Escalante Font, a young agent of increasingly dangerous reputation who would soon rise to the top of the G2.
They chronicled Oswald's moviegoing habits, every piece of cake and cup of coffee he consumed in public, his stinginess on dates with women he wasn't enthused about, his preference for blondes, his ignorance of Marxist-Leninist theory, the records and appliances he bought, the hardware stores he visited, and, of course, the friends with whom he consorted.
The “official” record of his life in Minsk omitted only what reflected badly on the Soviet intelligence apparatus.
Oswald spent so much time on Ulyanov Street that he soon became acquainted with a number of the junior Cuban spies.
Lee would brag to Marina that he had gotten tight with some of the young future Cuban ""ministers"" and expected that he might be such a minister there himself one day.
Recently released KGB files stated that “Lee Harvey Oswald is ideologically unsound and psychically unstable” in 1962, a year and a half before the assassination.
Recently, actors from the Cuban side—aging cold warriors still alive in the Americas—have corroborated the Cuban link to Oswald.
One of them, who went by the name “Oscar Marino” in our talks, had been a senior Cuban spy, a founder of G2, and a revolutionary companero of Fidel's.
It was his esteemed place in the national leadership that made him privy to the Oswald overtures.
It took over a year of negotiations for him to agree to sit for interviews with us.
He lived, and perhaps still lives, in a Latin American metropolis, and when asked about his politics in 2005, he sighed that he had “had enough” of ideology and bloody intrigue.
He felt “no love for Kennedy,” and still considered himself a revolutionary, but was demoralized by the “corruption” of Castro's original promise.
When he was asked when the Cuban secret service first made contact with Oswald, Oscar flinched and gave a long pause, gazing out a window at the tops of some mimosa trees.
He had also been present during high-level discussions on how to make contact with Oswald.
According to the KGB document, a Cuban operative met Oswald “repeatedly, several times,” with the first rendezvous at the end of 1962—exactly when Oscar Marino said it had been.
The Cubela liaison occurred during a period of exceptional marital discord for the Oswalds, a couple whose relationship existed on the emotional edge.
According to recent inter-views, some G2 money may have appeared at just the right time.
Given that Oswald's known expenses from October to January, based on a laborious reconstruction by the Warren Commission, were $537, and his earnings were $892, paying off the loan would have left him $101 in the red—making this a rather strange time to settle a major debt, unless he had a secret source of funds.
Where this money came from has been a source of speculation for nearly half a century.
According to Oscar Marino, the money was provided by the Cubans, who preferred to recruit “true believers,” not men who could be bought for big money.
The small payments gave Lee some fiscal breathing room, and he did not spend conspicuously—just enough, on specific needs.
Because he would not be able to receive a new, updated passport before that debt was cleared, and apparently he might soon be doing some traveling.
Oswald was more optimistic about his chances of becoming a Cuban spy than were his G2 contacts.
He became an aggressive “self-recruiter,” and his first attempt to impress had its genesis at a February 13, 1963, party in Fort Worth, thrown by Russian immigrants.
One of the other guests, a German intellectual, inadvertently inspired Oswald in his plans to impress the Cubans.
As the party guests grew increasingly concerned over Oswald's aggressive remarks about President Kennedy, the German attempted to divert Oswald's hatred toward a local race-baiter—and fervid anti-Castroite—the retired Gen.
One month later Oswald ordered a cheap pistol and an Italian rifle by mail.
After much reconnaissance of Walker's upscale home, Oswald took a shot at him from his fence line on April 10, 1963, as Walker sat inside by a window.
Oswald thought he had killed Walker, but in fact he had missed by inches, and he was never a suspect in the assault, which remained unsolved until Lee was arrested for killing Kennedy.
Even then, it was seen as just another example of his political derangement.
In the awful suspense that followed the Walker shooting, Marina suggested that Lee leave town for a while—maybe go back to New Orleans, where he had lived as a boy and still had some relatives.
Besides, there were a lot of Cuban exiles down there to talk with, so on April 24 he set out for the Big Easy.
Over the next four months, Oswald's attempts to infiltrate the local anti-Castro exiles apparently impressed no one in that city or in Havana, where he most desired to make an impact.
But he did learn some things on the streets, most notably that the Kennedys were planning another invasion of his beloved Cuba.
It was not only a place where all had embassies in close proximity, it was also the G2's staging point for Cuban terrorists and assassins.
It appears that Oswald's G2 contacts were cursory at this point, perhaps because he could not have been a reliable operative but more of a wild card useful only for ""disposable,"" one-off actions.
Oswald thus appears to have felt pressed to take more direct action to gain their trust.
So, in late September 1963, weeks before he murdered President Kennedy, Oswald spent five days amid the spy intrigue of Mexico City.
The CIA, which had peppered the opposition's embassies with hidden microphones, phone taps, and surveillance cameras, claimed after the assassination that no photos or tapes of Oswald in Mexico exist.
Four decades later, however, it has become clear that Oswald spent at least half of his time in the company of Cuban spies.
It is clear that Oswald spent at least half of his time in the company of Cuban spies during his trip to Mexico City.
His behavior was so erratic, so green and yet desperate, that they refused his request for a visa to Cuba.
That night, we now know, Oswald went to a university and tried to enlist the help of some Mexican radicals.
They took him out on the town, but when one of their leaders interceded on his behalf the next day at the Cuban Embassy, he was told to forget it.
It was not until Oswald went back to make a last stand at the embassies later that afternoon—not until he broke down, pulled a gun, wept, and finally claimed that he would prove his revolutionary loyalty by killing “that bastard, Kennedy”—that the doors to his Communist utopia suddenly opened to him.
The authors learned that one low level G2 agent saw him repeatedly in the Cuban Embassy garage, out of sight of CIA cameras, meeting with an elite G2 operative, a red-haired black man.
Others, including a Mexican insurance investigator there on business, would also see him.
An attractive Mexican receptionist would take him briefly as her lover, and the wife and daughter of a future Nobel laureate would party with him at an apartment full of Cuban diplomats and staffers, all within the span of his “lost week” in the Mexican capital.
Seven weeks later, while Oswald lay in wait for the president, the first Cuban who had recruited him would be meeting with CIA agents in Paris to receive the weapon with which he was meant to kill Fidel.
It was overcast in the City of Light, but, despite the chill, the sidewalk cafes were already aglow in the gathering dusk of a Friday night.
Two men arrived at the same luxury apartment building in which, just a few weeks earlier, one of them, Cubela, had met with a man who called himself James Clark.
In fact, ""Clark"" was the alias used by the CIA's Cuba desk chief, Desmond FitzGerald, when he was on covert operations.
Even without knowing the man's real identity, Cubela had been convinced that he was a senior American official; he wore his blueblood authority well.
The man known as Clark had given Cubela the assurances he had demanded— that the operation under discussion had been approved at the highest levels of the United States government.
And within days of that first meeting, Bobby Kennedy, the president's brother, had contacted Cubela directly.
Had it not been for those extraordinary guarantees, Cubela would not have returned.
On this evening, another CIA agent, known to Cubela as “Sanson,” placed a small, black leather case on a table before him.
In his other hand he held a tiny flashlight, and when he switched it on, a fluorescent beam revealed a micro-thin needle where the ballpoint would ordinarily be.
Sanson suggested Black Leaf 40, a slow-acting commercially available pesticide.
Cubela had a house at Veradero Beach, right next door to one of Fidel's many domiciles; this seemed like the place for an easy strike.
He explained that if Cubela needed to get in close, he would be frisked, and a dart gun would give him away.
The case officer promised once again that rifles and explosives would be forthcoming—all the weapons Cubela and his fellow insurrectionists would need for both a palace coup and the widespread revolt that would ensue.
These munitions were in fact already stockpiled at a secret location in rural Cuba that would be revealed at the last moment.
Sanson listened, briefly, and then returned the phone to its cradle, pausing for a long moment before he spoke.
The president of the United States had just been shot, he said, in Texas.
Marino, wanting to be clear, added, “That doesn't mean he was brainwashed—that wasn't necessary.
For all the weird, ongoing hope for proof that the Mafia or the CIA or the oil companies or even the Florida exiles killed Kennedy, the evidence is now overwhelming that a Cuban-style Communist who had learned of the planned United States reinvasion was the sole triggerman, and that he did it with the aid and comfort of Fidel and Raid Castro.
Because that small, proxy war had provoked a nuclear confrontation 13 months earlier, it could even be said that he reduced the chances of a big, hot war, simply by ending the little one.
On the other hand, the fears his crime raised in the minds of international leaders, who worried over Oswald's Cuban contacts, were so great that it nearly provoked a new nuclear showdown.
That duality was hiding in plain sight in the screed he wrote on the SS Maasdam during his return voyage to America.
His manifesto debated the relative merits and injustices of the world's two dominant systems and then ended with a prediction of an imminent nuclear war.
Internationally speaking, by averting nuclear war on one hand and increasing its likelihood on the other, Oswald's effect on the cold war was perhaps a wash.
Domestically, however, his effect has been, up until now, more definitive.
In the short run, his crime further polarized the United States in an already extreme moment.
In the longer term, it split the country open and made it susceptible to a form of political decay that was nearly as insidious as the recoil of the crime itself.
Sections of this essay appear in Brothers in Arms by Gus Russo and Stephen Molton © 2008.
Please support this 70-year tradition of trusted historical writing and the volunteers that sustain it with a donation to American Heritage.
A distinguished historian of Cuban affairs examines the critical years when the Castro revolution became a communist dictatorship.
The Time Of The Angelby Don Moser The U-2, Cuba, and the CIA I Fought For Fidelby Neill Macaulay In the twilight of Castro’s regime, one of the soldiers who put him in power recalls what it was like to be a fidelista up in the hills four decades ago when a whole new, just, democratic world was there for the building Cuba Libreby Richard Reinhardt Sexy and melancholy, festive and forlorn, the island has always heated the Yankee imagination.
The author visits there in the late afternoon of a straitened era and looks back on four centuries of passionate misunderstandings.
The Day Kennedy Was Shotby Richard B Trask A routine chore for JFK’s official photographer became the most important assignment of his career.
Read more >> The magazine was forced to suspend print publication in 2013, but a group of volunteers saved the archives and relaunched it in digital form in 2017.
Free subscription >> Please consider a donation to help us keep this American treasure alive.
