The largest misconception was the idea that America thought this crisis was about defending Cuba against possible invasion some broader implications* with relations to … infiltration* into South America … theories that have nothing to do with reality.
The reality is that after the Bay of Pigs Fidel Castro announced he officially joined the Soviet bloc.
Through that the obligation* of the Soviets was to defend all their clients, all their allies because otherwise they would lose face … and your allies would not trust you.
Cuba, after 1961, became for the Soviet Union the same as West Berlin to the United States—a small useless piece of land deep inside hostile* territory.
The Cuban situation had its origins in the nuclear arms race; an … expensive competition between the USA and USSR … However, it was the Americans who easily bested* the Soviets in terms of nuclear weapon technology and deployment.
Despite the ""peaceful co-existence"" … Khrushchev was determined to assert* his country as America's equal in military, diplomatic, economic and scientific strength.
Besides proving communism as being capitalism's ideological superior, Khrushchev believed that capitalism would ultimately destroy itself and communism would inevitably spread … In 1959, the Cuban Revolution resulted in Fidel Castro's revolutionaries overthrowing the corrupt and despotic American-supported Batista regime.
The planned clandestine* placement of Soviet in Cuba, just 90km from Florida, meant the warning time in America to prepare for a nuclear attack would be less than one minute.
Therefore, in the most extraordinarily dangerous gamble in history, Khrushchev with Castro's complete consent, ordered the secret shipping and installation of nuclear armed missiles on Cuba, … Khrushchev reasoned that the missiles would not only deter* any American attack on Cuba, but they could also be used as a bargaining chip to force the West out of Berlin … In consultation with his military Chiefs of Staff, Kennedy ordered preparations to begin for a full conventional military invasion of Cuba.
Kennedy on 22 October 1962 in which he responds to the USSR's build-up of nuclear weapons on the island of Cuba.
All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back … … We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities* of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948.
I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination and to join in an historic effort to end the perilous* arms race and transform the history of man.
It would mean for us to conduct our relations with other countries not by reason, but by yielding to tyranny … you want to intimidate* us.
