He explains how these programs tragically backfired when they were joined with political/criminal extremists and key government officials in the United States, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson and FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, resulting in the assassination of President Kennedy.
The evidence of the master conspiracy is developed step-by-step until the powerful people behind the plot are revealed.
Mathematical Proof of Missing Frames Eyewitnesses: Limousine Slows Almost to a Stop Chain of Possession of the Zapruder Film The Nix Film The Film Forgery Process A Meeting with Dr.
It gives me a chance to correct some errors or omissions in the original, and to report major new work that has buttressed my original conclusions.
Two are noted in the text as you come to them, one having to do witha controversy over the number and characteristics of empty shell casings found on the sixth floor of the Schoolbook Depository, and the second, a mistaken photo identity—the person in the photo is Roy Hargraves, not Frank Sturgis.
These items are discussed in new Appendix C and new Appendix D A new Appendix E discusses one of a category of critics who reacted against Bloody Treason because it undercut their long-held theory that the Z-Film is authentic.
A new Appendix F discusses startling new evidence of involvement of CIA’s National Photo Interpretation Center with President Lyndon Johnson in the alteration of the Zapruder film.
David Mantik about alterations of X-rays of President Kennedy’s skull and brain, and his important analysis of the autopsy, plus much more, reported in the book Murder in Dealey Plaza LL What I wrote in Bloody Treason about x-rays (assisted by Dr.
Mantik and edited by him) has held up and been expanded by his continued work.
Another example of great progress in supporting my work about the Zapruder film (and my conclusion that it is a forgery) is Dr.
In brief, Costella concludes that the Z-Film was drastically altered by optically cutting and pasting, frame-by-frame on a new background of Dealey Plaza filmed either just before or just after the assassination.
He essentially confirms all of my conclusions about frame removal, the impossible head turns of secret service agent Greer, the false spray of blood and eruption from the president’s head, and the strange lack of blur in frames in which blur should have been present.
Costella, with expertise in photographic blur analysis, also discusses other areas of the film showing forgery and much more.
Included in this is an analysis of the sprocket holes in the film and the area between them, which he convincingly demonstrates is further evidence of a forgery.
He concludes, as I did, that the hasty work of the conspirators was a desperately executed, botched job, done fast enough to keep up with the controlled releases in Life Magazine.
But, nonetheless, with the help of others in government and elsewhere, the conspirators succeeded long enough for them to live and get away with the greatest political crime in all USS. history.
And, when we extend this reasoning further, many officials in our government must have known about it.
We do know that Johnson browbeat Earl Warren into the cover-up by using false national security reasons.
Prominent in this is reported by William Matson Law in his book The Eye of History; notably his key interviews of FBI agents James W Sibert and Francis X O’Neill, both of whom witnessed the entire autopsy conducted at Bethesda Naval Hospital on the night of November 22, 1963.
Mr Law’s book has amplified what I wrote in Bloody Treason, and David Lifton’s truly heroic, pioneer work in his book, Best Evidence.
After I returned home from Florida, I sent Mr Sibert a copy of Noel Twyman’s book Bloody Treason as a token of thanks for granting us the opportunity to interview him.
Twyman’s book brings to the fore questions concerning the shipping casket versus the ornate display casket, body alteration, the forged X-ray and autopsy pictures, etc.
I have looked carefully at my conclusions in Chapter 32 written over twelve years ago about the JFK assassination.
I have nothing to change now except that my cases about Lyndon Johnson and forgery of the Zapruder film have only gotten stronger.
The assassination of President Kennedy was about survival, power, and dangerous secrets.
It was a backlash against the Kennedy brothers for what they were intent on accomplishing.
Noel Twyman, January, 2010 Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, Whilst bloody treason fourish’d over us.
Mark Antony in Julius Caesar, William Shakespeare PROLOGUE My viewpoint in writing this book is that of a prosecutor who is convinced of the guilt of the accused but must present a case to the jury and be challenged by an extremely powerful defense—I write as an advocate for the prosecution.
In other words, I state clearly up front where I am coming from and what I believe.
I look for good solid reasons from the start, which will instruct me in how to sustain their attack.
Michel de Montaigne A method of writing that I will employ is to start the book with a broad brush; that is, to give a picture as simplified as I can of the concept of the crime before plunging into the complexities that must follow.
This method will be used for the book as a whole, and for each chapter.
I believe the reader will appreciate that there is a constant struggle, in absorbing this vastly complicated material, to separate the forest from the trees.
An account describing the forest alone is insufficient; an account that is believable needs trees.
The truth of the Kennedy assassination cannot be explained just with broad concepts.
It needs hard, scientific-forensic evidence, authentic documents, and reliable testimonies to establish proof of the basic allegations.
The book has been designed so that the reader can go along with me as I try to untangle—and, yes, possibly so/ve—the crime of the century.
I found the writing to be an incredible adventure and a learning experience beyond my expectations.
I trust that the reader will, at least in part, share these rewards with me.
The book proceeds on many parallel tracks—sometimes maddening, sometimes confusing—but what I found to be necessary if I were to have any hope of achieving a complete picture.
The first part, Prelude, develops an hypothesis based on superficial evidence—looking at the obvious “big picture” plus what was widely available to the interested public within about ten months after the president was murdered The second part, Murder and Cover-Up, develops key forensic-scientific evidence, including the medical evidence and key testimonies that are related.
The third part, Gangsters, Cops, and Spies, develops evidence concerning organized crime, the Dallas police, the CIA, and military intelligence.
The fourth part, Right-Wing Extremists and Power Politics, develops evidence concerning the military-industrial complex, right-wing extremists in the United States and abroad, Eastern European immigrants, and anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
The fifth part, Conspiracy and Cover-Up in Washington, D.C., develops evidence concerning the Secret Service, J Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson.
The final chapter is a summing-up and presents a theory of the assassination based on what I learned and discovered.
PRELUDE 1 INTRODUCTION There is no longer significant historical controversy as to the question of whether or not John F Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiracy.
This was confirmed by the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1979 and is based on its simple conclusion that there were at least two gunmen.
The scientific evidence available to the committee indicated that it is probable that more than one person was involved in the President’s murder.
And it demands a reexamination of all that was thought to be true in the past.
Further, the committee’s investigation of Oswald and Ruby showed a variety of relationships that may have matured into an assassination conspiracy.
Neither Oswald nor Ruby turned out to be “loners,” as they had been painted in the 1964 investigation.
Nevertheless, the committee frankly acknowledged that it was unable firmly to identify the other gunman or the nature and extent of the conspiracy.
This conclusion was based, among other things, on the evidence that Jack Ruby stalked and killed Oswald and was connected to organized crime.
On the question of conspiracy—that is, the involvement of others with Oswald—the evidence was also compelling.
The Warren Commission and the FBI investigations of conspiracy were so seriously flawed that their conclusions of no evidence of conspiracy could not be given any weight.
But most important, there was scientific evidence, as well as human testimony, of two gunmen shooting at the President in Dealey Plaza.
The Committee was also aware that the most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby within forty-eight hours of the assassination was to silence him, and it took into account the evidence of significant associations of both Oswald and Ruby with groups and individuals with strong motivation to assassinate the President.
While it could not identify the other conspirators, the Committee voted to reverse the verdict of history.
Jt found that President John F Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy.
The Congress of the United States actually did officially declare that John Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy.
Another fact of history that I found strangely not widely known is that Abraham Lincoln was not killed just by the half-mad actor John Wilkes Booth acting alone.
Lincoln was killed as a result of a conspiracy that included Booth and other conspirators who, at the same time, came very close to killing Secretary of State William Seward.
An interesting question, considering that polls consistently show 80 to 90 percent of the American people do not believe the findings of the Warren Commission.
Whatever the answer to that question, a diligent search for the truth in Kennedy’s assassination does prevail among a relatively few inquisitive souls in the United States and throughout the world.
They want to know whether agencies or elected officials of the federal government were part of an assassination conspiracy.
In the case of the Kennedy assassination there was a complex web of motivations, human frailties, and sinister ambitions.
At that unique period in American history we had a vice president of extraordinary ambition and ruthlessness who loathed the president and his brother.
We had a fanatical, all-powerful director of the FBI who had held the position for thirty-five years and had allowed organized crime to grow to enormous power.
And both the vice president and the director of the FBI had been severely compromised by organized crime.
Added to this was right-wing extremism—anti-Communist paranoia and racial fears that had reached a peak of explosive intensity.
And in 1963 there was a radical clique of people within the military and the CIA who had come to believe that they were the sole possessors of the truth.
This group had become almost a cult, devoting their entire professional lives to fighting the evils of fascism and, later, communism.
They had slowly transformed from people like you and me into people who believed that the ends justified the means—no matter how abhorrent.
These people became partners and personal friends with the Mafia; they became partners with the worst Nazi war criminals; they became experts in bribery and deception; and they experimented in Manchurian Candidate techniques using LSD and other drugs, combined with hypnosis and psycho-electrical behavioral modification methods involving terminal experiments with unwitting subjects.
And they had essentially unlimited funds to conduct research on assassination methods and schemes —they had developed the art of assassination to what they called a pure science.
They had participated in or been instrumental in the assassination of foreign leaders, according to the Church Committee.
Congo , Patrice Lumumba; Dominican Republic, Rafael Trujillo; Chile, General Rene Schneider; South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem.
In short, the CIA and military intelligence became a world unto itself, answerable to no one.
For over twenty years they had been given a free hand, all the money they needed, with few questions asked or rules applied.
In their minds, they were the elite, and men of adventure and patriotism.
And then a young millionaire playboy president came along and threatened their very existence.
Finally, the curious fact makes itself felt that in general people experience their present naively, as it were, without being above to form an estimate of its contents; they have first to put themselves at a distance from it— the present, that is to say, must have become the past— before it can yield points of vantage from which to judge the future.
Sigmund Freud, The Future of an Illusion 2 POLITICAL CLIMATE IN 1963 It was not difficult for me to consider the possibility that John Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiratorial group.
But I soon found it very difficult to deal with what I discovered when looking at the depth and horror of the conspiracy.
It became apparent that it involved many people and was incredibly bizarre.
To gain perspective I went back to examine 1963 and compare what I thought was going on in the United States, at that time, with what we now know was going on.
In fact, the Office of Strategic Services , predecessor of the CIA, as it is now known, started a partnership as far back as World War II and had a long-term relationship with Mafia chieftains such as Lucky Luciano and Meyer Lansky to do the CIA’s dirty work.
This partnership had developed to a point where, in many respects, organized crime and the CIA were almost indistinguishable—criminals, drug traffickers, and murderers—partners in crime yielding enormous profit to many of those involved.
This alliance had grown to encompass a cult of retired military officers, all of whom had the common enemy—communism—as a facade to conceal what I will argue were their true motivations—greed and lust for power.
These were secrets unknown to the American public; this gave the Mafia a stranglehold on the CIA and key officials in government.
Even by today’s standards, it is shocking to realize that in 1963 the president of the United States was carrying on sexual affairs with women ranging from the famous, emotionally unstable movie actress Marilyn Monroe; to Ellen Rometsch, a lovely young refugee from East Germany whom the FBI suspected of being a spy; to Mary Pinchot Meyer, sister-in-law of his friend Ben Bradlee and wife of Cord Meyer in Washington, D.C.; to Judith Campbell Exner, who was at the same time seeing Mafia chieftain Sam Giancana in Chicago.
The JFK affair with Exner was documented in dozens of telephone calls to the White House and by the Senate Select Intelligence Committee in 1975.
While carrying on the affair with John Kennedy, Exner was acting as a courier between him and Giancana, allegedly delivering money for political payoffs in the 1960 presidential election.
The gravity of the affair was compounded when Robert Kennedy also had an affair with Marilyn Monroe, after she had been dropped by the president.
Mary Meyer kept a secret diary about her affair with John Kennedy; she would be mysteriously murdered a few months after his assassination.
President Kennedy’s affair with Marilyn Monroe culminated in what would certainly have been an unprecedented scandal had the truth become known.
It ended when Marilyn Monroe either committed suicide or was murdered 1 just hours after she was visited by the president’s brother, Robert.
I also did not know that the director of the FBI, J Edgar Hoover, was hiding behind a facade of moral integrity and patriotism when in reality he had been corrupted with financial favors from the Mafia, and was a closet homosexual, which the Mafia knew about.
And I did not know that Vice President Lyndon Johnson had also been corrupted, not only by organized crime, but also by involvement in large-scale criminal activities in Texas with master con man Billie Sol Estes, and in other criminal activities with his ; , 8 protégé and aide, Bobby Baker, in Washington, D.C. and sinew And while all this was going on, Robert Kennedy was on a vendetta to destroy organized crime.
Under fire were Jimmy Hoffa, president of the Teamsters Union and partner with the Mafia; Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans; and Sam Giancana, Mafia chieftain in Chicago.
If the Kennedys were to succeed in destroying the Mafia, they unwittingly would destroy a worldwide apparatus of criminals, interlocking spy agencies, and businessmen whose power and scope defy the imagination.
It helps me to keep a perspective if I reflect back to 1963 on the extreme hatred, jealousy, awe, and fear that John Kennedy instilled in the right wing of United States politics at that time.
He was an electric personality who incited the complete range of human instincts.
Kennedy appeared invincible with a 59 percent approval rating in the polls.
In the eyes of most Americans, Kennedy had just faced down Nikita Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis.
There appeared to be no doubt that he was going to be re-elected by a landslide.
With the exception of a rising animosity in the south, and a hate campaign by a few right-wing extremists, he was riding high with the American people and was a worldwide hero.
But it was little known that he was in deep conflict with the CIA and the military regarding the fight against communism, the Vietnam War, and arms procurement.
He had fired Allen Dulles and his top two men, General Charles Cabell (brother of the mayor of Dallas) and Richard Bissell; and he had stripped of power the head of CIA assassination operations, William Harvey.
Plans had also been formulated to remove Lyndon Johnson from the ticket in 1964 and, after the election, to retire J Edgar Hoover; both of these men would then become powerless to defend themselves when their personal secrets and collusion with organized crime were revealed.
From the point of view of John Kennedy’s enemies, they could easily rationalize him as a traitor, a political crook, a coward, a hypocrite, a hedonist, and a disgrace to the office.
Those who were threatened by the Kennedys feared that a Kennedy dynasty would pass the office on to the family for generations.
Nobody like John and Robert Kennedy had ever come along; they were seen as recklessly pursuing personal goals in the guise of righting all wrongs and correcting all evil, while intent on destroying their opponents— and likely to succeed if not stopped by whatever means necessary.
The Kennedy brothers, as a dual entity, were young, ruthless, cavalier, and naive in believing that they could accomplish anything they set out to do and have anything they wanted.
Tragically, they had gravely underestimated the strength and potential for the violent reaction of their enemies.
What they did not know was that all of the elements had fallen into place to bring together a realistic plan to assassinate the young president and cover up the crime.
A lethal backlash against the Kennedys was Set to occur on a sunny November afternoon in Dallas, Texas.
SS President Kennedy speaking to a crowd in Fort Worth in the early morning of November 22, 1963, a few hours before he was assassinated.
On his left is Lyndon Johnson, who would become president in a few hours.
She said, “I met him in Austin on New Year’s Eve and I was real concerned about it because everyone in Dallas was talking about he was responsible for the assassination.
And again, Jack Ruby had come out openly and said that Lyndon Johnson was the cause of it.
However, there is no doubt that he concealed evidence from the Warren Commission on CIA involvement in Mafia-CIA plots to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Judge Burt W Griffin, who was a counsel to the Warren Commission, wrote that Allen Dulles was the only member of the Commission who might possibly be suspected of deliberately participating in a coverBut it seems safe to say that Dulles had the knowledge to mastermind the assassination.
UPI/Corbis-Bettmann Marilyn Monroe with John and Robert Kennedy, a copy of the only known photograph of her with both Kennedy brothers.
J Edgar Hoover with Clyde Tolson, his second-in-command at the FBI and always at his side.
They shared vacations in exclusive resorts in Miami Beach, Florida, and La Jolla, California, paid for by others such as Clint Murchison of Dallas, Texas, friend of organized crime and recipient of loans from Hoffa’s Teamsters Union.
The gossip mills in Washington, D.C., and La Jolla accepted as established fact that they were homosexuals.
In her book and later in interviews and a national television appearance, Exner made sensational revelations about President Kennedy.
She revealed that she was Kennedy’s mistress for 2 2 years and also served as a liaison and courier between the president and mobster Sam Giancana.
She also has stated that she had a brief affair with Giancana after her relationship with Kennedy ended.
AP/Wide World Photos Mobster Sam Giancana helped Kennedy win elections in Chicago and West Virginia.
Giancana later felt betrayed when the Kennedys turned the full power of the Justice Department against him and organized crime.
He was murdered a few days before he was scheduled to appear before the United States Senate Church Committee.
French—An unexpected stroke of policy; a bold seizure of government, executed suddenly and often accompanied by violence; literally, stroke of state.
Britannica World Language Dictionary Conspiracy—the secret agreement among several people; joint activities against someone or something in order to obtain certain, definite political goals.
John Kennedy was shot when several shots rang out while he was riding in an open limousine on Elm Street at Dealey Plaza at 12:30m.
He was taken to Parkland Memorial Hospital and pronounced dead at 1:00m.
Many witnesses also observed and smelled gun smoke and heard gun shots coming from behind a wooden picket fence on a grassy knoll along Elm Street.
The entire sequence of the shooting was filmed in almost perfect fidelity by an amateur photographer, businessman Abraham Zapruder.
The Secret Service took possession of the film within a few hours after the assassination.
Riding in the same limousine, in front of John Kennedy, was Texas Governor John Connally.
The railroad signalman saw two men standing near the picket fence just before the shots were heard.
As the gunfire erupted he saw a flash of light or smoke at the spot where the two men were standing.
Only one and one-half minutes after the shooting, a Dallas police officer found Lee Harvey Oswald on the second floor of the building.
Oswald was immediately identified as an employee by the manager of the building and was let go.
Within fifteen minutes after the shooting, a description of a suspect was broadcast over police radio that roughly resembled Oswald.
The same station wagon circled the block and came back to the front of the building where it picked up another man running down from the grassy knoll.
Inside, on the sixth floor, they found a rifle and three spent shell cartridges.
But hard evidence would soon show that more than three shots had been fired.
At about 1:50m., Oswald was captured by the Dallas police in the Texas Movie Theater.
The police testified that there was a struggle with him and that he pulled out a revolver and attempted to shoot.
Oswald allegedly shot and killed Tippit at about 1:15m. and then proceeded on foot to the Texas Movie Theater.
Upon initial examination of the president, Parkland Hospital doctors announced that Kennedy had been hit by a bullet with an entry wound in the front of his throat.
The next day a photograph was published in a Dallas newspaper showing a man picking up a bullet slug found in the grass to the rear and left of where the presidential car was at the time of the shooting.
This bullet was given to a civilian, presumably an FBI agent, and has never been seen since.
This evidence of shots from the front or side was compelling proof that Oswald could not have acted alone and therefore that there was a conspiracy.
Sometime between 1:00m. and 2:00m., a bullet was found on a stretcher in the basement of Parkland Hospital.
It was in almost perfect condition, with no measurable loss of weight and only slightly deformed.
This bullet would later be alleged by the Warren Commission to have wounded Connally in three places and shattered his rib and wrist bone.
No notes taken at the time of the interrogation are known to be in evidence.
During the custody of Oswald on the first day, newsmen were given a brief access to him when he was taken before cameras and microphones after he was charged.
He appeared composed and managed an occasional smile as he insisted in a low voice that he was innocent in the death of Kennedy.
He acted surprised that he was being accused of being Kennedy’s assassin and muttered that there was a plot against him.
On November 24, Oswald was shot and killed by Jack Ruby, who was a Dallas nightclub owner and commonly known associate of organized criminals.
Oswald’s murder occurred while he was being transferred from the Dallas police station to the county jail, and while he was surrounded by dozens of policemen under tight security.
This occurred even though the Dallas police and the FBI had earlier received telephone calls warning that Oswald would be shot during the transfer.
Telephone records found in Ruby’s apartment revealed that he had Mafia connections and that an unusually large number of telephone calls had occurred between him and Mafia figures and hit-men throughout the United States in the weeks preceding the assassination.
Also, while Oswald was in the custody of the Dallas police, paraffin tests conducted on his cheek did not show he had fired a rifle on November 22.
There was, however, a semblance of a palm print lifted earlier by the Dallas police that was identified by them as belonging to Oswald.
Oswald was soon shown in a photograph found in his garage showing him holding the rifle.
This photograph was almost immediately branded to be a fake composite by photographic experts and later by Scotland Yard and Canadian experts.
Within hours after the assassination, information came pouring out from the FBI concerning Oswald.
He had defected to the Soviet Union in 1959 and then returned to the United States about two years later with a new bride he had married while in Russia.
Before going to the Soviet Union, he had been in the Marine Corps and had defected immediately after having received an early discharge, on the basis of his mother allegedly being ill.
Oswald spoke fluent Russian although he had not finished high school and had no known formal training in the language.
A few months after the assassination of Kennedy he was accused of having attempted in April 1963 to assassinate General Edwin Walker, a right-wing extremist.
He also had been a pro-Castro political agitator and had traveled to Mexico City in September 1963 to visit the Soviet and Cuban consulates there.
In addition, there was testimony by a woman in Dallas, Silvia Odio (whose story was confirmed by her sister, her father, and her psychiatrist), that Oswald and two other men (who appeared to be Cubans and claimed they were part of a left-wing, anti-Castro Cuban exile group) visited her apartment in Dallas two months before the assassination.
Odio, one of the Cubans made a comment about Oswald being a crazy ex-Marine talking about assassinating Kennedy.
The time that the three men were at her apartment appeared to conflict with a time when Oswald was believed to have been in Mexico and was two months before Kennedy was assassinated.
This created the suspicion that someone was impersonating Oswald, trying to set him up as a patsy connected to Cubans; if not that, he was in fact in a conspiracy with leftist anti-Castro Cubans.
Within a few hours after the assassination, the Dallas police and the FBI announced that the assassination was committed by a lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald, and that Oswald was a Communist.
About one week after the assassination, a presidential commission to investigate the crime (The Warren Commission) was created by the new president, Lyndon Johnson.
The instruction given to the Commission, in essence, was to put to bed any questions regarding the possibility of a conspiracy so that the country could get on with its business.
The FBI, under director J Edgar Hoover, was given the sole authority by Lyndon Johnson to conduct the investigations and to provide information to the Commission.
All other investigations throughout the nation were ordered by Johnson to cease.
The Commission included Allen Dulles, who had recently been fired as director of the CIA by John Kennedy.
Despite increasing evidence and doubts continuing to indicate the likelihood of a conspiracy, the Commission published a report ten months after the assassination stating that Jack Ruby had no substantial connection with organized crime and had acted out of grief in killing Oswald; that the Dallas police did not assist Ruby in the killing of Oswald; that Oswald was probably a lone assassin; and that Oswald had not been an agent of the United States government or of any foreign power.
The report also concluded that there was no evidence of a conspiracy from within or outside the United States One of those who gained the most from the crime, President Lyndon Johnson, ordered that the files concerning the assassination be sealed in the National Archives for seventy-five years.
The Commission was never able to explain the mysterious two Oswalds, and it was never able to come up with a motive for Oswald murdering Kennedy.
Not once in the Commission report was the possibility even suggested that the Mafia or any member of the United States government might be involved.
The news media and the American people took the bait that Oswald was the lone assassin, although the Commission had not specifically said so.
The Warren Commission Report was at first received with open approval by the media establishment and by the American public.
The media did not question the fact that the chief beneficiaries of the assassination—Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover— had taken control of the entire investigation.
But the Commission report was soon attacked by a few brave reporters, writers, and skeptics.
Then, in early 1992, Oliver Stone came out with his bombshell movie JFK in which he painted John Kennedy as a hero who was killed for standing up to the military industrial complex; and he portrayed Jim Garrison, a New Orleans district attorney who had attempted to prove a conspiracy, as a mild-mannered family man and hero taking on the CIA and the entrenched powers in Washington.
In the closing scenes of the movie, Stone had Kevin Costner speculate that Lyndon Johnson and the military industrial complex were behind the assassination conspiracy to escalate the Vietnam War.
The news media went into what seemed a strange frenzy of attacks on Stone.
They painted him as a conspiracy nut, a distorter of historical truth, and perhaps un-American or even mentally disturbed.
The result was more confusion and bewilderment, with few knowing what to believe.
Although I found myself disagreeing with the extremity of Stone’s message, it occurred to me that he had made a valiant and powerful attack on cherished illusions, thus triggering the inevitable reactions when illusions are threatened.
It was in late 1991 that I began a serious attempt to understand for myself what had happened in the Kennedy assassination.
I decided to write a short paper on the subject, but was soon involved in a quagmire that would take far more effort and willpower to work through than I possibly could have imagined.
To conceive, plan, and carry out a sophisticated conspiracy to assassinate the president of the United States requires a cold-blooded, deliberate decision of awesome proportions.
Only a group with enormous power, capability, and resources would even consider it.
Therefore, it seems most reasonable to assume that the assassination was conceived by powerful men who were not crazy but, on the contrary, were realists.
First, the group would have to believe that they could get away with it.
This means that the plotters knew that no matter what could go wrong they were in a position to suppress evidence, avoid prosecution, and keep the Kennedy family silent.
This indicates that the essential ingredients of their plan would be control of the presidency and Congress, and blackmail material on the Kennedys in the plotters’ possession.
A group as calculating as the plot has revealed itself to be indicates that the conspirators were very sophisticated.
The plan would have been aborted before it got started unless they felt absolutely certain that it would succeed.
Second, the plotters must have been very confident of their capability to carry out the mechanics of the plan.
This meant that within the group were professionals—skilled at planning and executing major assassinations.
This points to the CIA and the Mafia, or possibly others who had access to a top professional assassination planner and assassins.
Third, there must have been a powerful, overwhelming motivation in the prime leaders of the conspiratorial group.
For others it means the capacity to carry on in an all-consuming pursuit of power and money.
To be shorn of power and money to this type of man (with the added threat of imprisonment) would be symbolic castration and a psychological end to life.
This theory of human needs was developed by the great psychologist Abraham H Maslow.
Lay His theory is that normal people organize their lives by instinctively ranking their needs from most important to least important.
Since it is never possible to satisfy all their needs at one time, the most important ones are satisfied first.
Human needs are visualized as being in a five-tiered structure in which the needs at the base are the strongest.
I see in Maslow’s theory the theoretical underpinnings of what I hypothesize were the primary motives for assassinating John F Kennedy—that is, the basic need of the prime conspirators for survival.
As a caveat to Maslow’s theory, it seems apparent that the perception of a threat to one’s survival (or other needs) could be as important as the reality.
For example, ultra-right-wing extremists might feel that they were being direly threatened by John Kennedy when in fact they were not.
But, nevertheless, they might be motivated to join an assassination plot out of their paranoiac fears.
Now let us consider that jealousy and envy could have played a secondary part.
Maslow wrote that as much as we don’t want to admit it, there is a considerable portion of hostile envy in many of us when we view excellence, beauty, charisma, and superior intelligence in others.
Certainly we love and admire good men, saints—honest, virtuous, clean men.
Any reading of history will turn up plenty of examples, or perhaps even I could say that any such historical search might fail to turn up a single exception throughout the whole history of mankind.
We surely love and admire all the persons who have incarnated the true, the good, the beautiful, the just, the perfect, the ultimately successful.
And yet they also make us uneasy, anxious, confused, perhaps a little jealous or envious, a little inferior, clumsy.
They usually make us lose our aplomb, our self-possession and self-regard.
My impression so far is that the greatest people, simply by their presence and by being what they are, make us feel aware of our lesser worth, whether or not they intend to.
It is compelling to me that the Kennedy brothers, John and Robert—whether out of noble intentions or out of their own pursuit of power—were in the process of inflicting these injuries on a group of powerful men.
They had used some of these men to gain power and were now throwing them overboard.
The Kennedys were going to get rid of all the bad guys in a hurry by handing them their heads on a platter.
They had set out to dismantle the combined forces of the national security state and organized crime.
Spoiled by the enormous political and financial power at their command, they thought they were invulnerable.
The Kennedys believed they were destined to lead the free world for at least sixteen years.
The Kennedys, young and ambitious, lived and ruled at the edge of disaster.
On the one hand, they courted publicity as few presidential families had done in the past and, on the other, they took enormous risks in both their public and their personal lives.
Those risks were made even more chancy by the publicity they drew and the sort of enemies they had.
In reviewing their careers, we observe that the Kennedy brothers continually courted disaster.
Joe Kennedy, Jr., courted disaster when he volunteered for a virtually suicidal mission in World War II in a desperate effort to outdo his brother Jack’s alleged heroics in the Pacific.
John F Kennedy’s relationships with Judith Campbell and powerful Mafiosi Sam Giancana and Johnny Rosselli, who had been hired by the CIA to kill Castro and were, at the same time, being hounded by brother Bobby, were courting disaster.
In pursuing these relationships, Kennedy was laying himself open to potentially catastrophic blackmail.
Robert Kennedy’s involvement in the assassination plots against Castro and his affair with Marilyn Monroe were courting disaster and he must have known it.
The reckless, self-serving behavior of John Kennedy, and to a lesser extent that of his brother Robert, could have led the conspirators to lose all respect for John Kennedy and use his recklessness as part of a convenient rationale to enable them to reach the extreme decision that the only way to get rid of the threat of the Kennedy brothers was by assassination.
This is not to say that Kennedy was killed for his reckless and immoral behavior, but rather that it gave blackmail material and—for some of the conspirators who needed it—a rationale for recruiting lower-tier plotters, when the prime conspirators’ motive, in reality, was their own selfpreservation and lust for power;e., John Kennedy’s behavior conveniently added fuel to the fire that was building around him.
One of the most outrageous examples of the extreme recklessness of the Kennedys is the brothers’ affairs with Marilyn Monroe and the tragic ending.
It exploded so violently that if revealed (and believed by the American people—a question in itself) would very likely have ended both of the brothers’ political careers.
Some have speculated that it resulted in the murder of Marilyn Monroe, by orders of the Kennedy brothers themselves, after she threatened to expose their affairs and government secrets in a public announcement.
Another hypothesis is that the Mafia murdered her, perhaps under the orders of the CIA, to silence her from telling of CIA/Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro—or to bring media attention to the affair and create an implosion of scandal upon the Kennedys.
There is, with little question, circumstantial evidence that conceivably could implicate the Kennedy brothers in the murder of Marilyn Monroe if one is only slightly inclined to suspicion.
It does not stretch my imagination to suspect that a nod was given by the Kennedy brothers to the CIA or the FBI to handle the problem But the Kennedys had the motive to have Marilyn murdered, because she was threatening to tell all and thereby ruin them forever.
Evidence of foul play was in indications of violence—Noguchi observed a very fresh bruise in the lower back area and bruises on her arms.
More telling indications were that someone had administered an , , , injection of Nembutal into her rectum.
The cause of death was said by Los Angeles police chief William Parker to have been a massive overdose of sleeping pills which, experts said, would have 220] required oral ingestion of more than seventy capsules in less than ten minutes.
Biographer Anthony Summers in 1964 had one of the world’s foremost forensic scientists, Dr.
His conclusions were that the barbiturate levels in Monroe’s blood should have produced a moderate residue of capsules in her stomach, but none was found there.
Robert Litman, the UCLA psychiatrist who headed a suicide prevention team in Los Angeles, said that Marilyn would have had to gulp down those pills, all of them, within a matter of minutes, a very few minutes.
He said that if she had taken those pills a few at a time, she would have been unconscious before she could have ingested the amount needed to achieve the level of barbiturates found in her bloodstream.
Ralph Greenson, Marilyn’s psychiatrist who was present at her home shortly after her death (if not before she had succumbed from the drug overdose), was interviewed by Los Angeles deputy district attorney John Miner within days of her death.
Like many aspects of the Kennedy assassination, this story is so bizarre, so unbelievable, and so complicated that it defies explanation.
She had a short sexual affair with Robert Kennedy. from multiple sources 3.
The Kennedy brothers decided to end their affairs with her after it became apparent that it could bring down their administration, when it was first being manifested in news stories that were starting to leak the secret, and when the nation’s bedroom spy, J Edgar Hoover, let it be known to the Kennedys that he had the goods on them concerning the affair of John Kennedy with Judith Campbell Exner.
When Marilyn was told by the Kennedys that it was over she reacted with anger and threatened to call a press conference to expose all.
Robert Kennedy was persuaded to come down from a vacation in Northern California to Brentwood in Los Angeles, where Marilyn lived, to try to calm her down.
Robert Kennedy visited with Marilyn, left her unplacated, and within hours she either committed suicide or was murdered; the evidence as to which is inconclusive, but weighs toward murder.
After Marilyn died, there was a massive cover-up, probably conducted by the Los Angeles police and assisted by the FBI, in which all evidence in Marilyn’s home that could incriminate the Kennedy brothers or embarrass the CIA was removed.
This resulted in at least a three-hour delay after her death before the police were notified.
By simply going with the above well-documented items, we have a sensational and extremely disturbing series of events that implicated the Kennedy brothers in either the suicide or murder of a famous movie actress who was being dumped by them after their having had sexual affairs with her.
We must keep in mind that it was the president of the United States and his brother the attorney general who were having adulterous sexual affairs with a famous Hollywood movie actress, who was in a life-crisis and who died mysteriously, and that the details and evidence of the death were covered up.
The implications of this are horrendous and potentially far-reaching in understanding the mystery of the JFK assassination.
A perfect rationale thus presented itself for recruiting those who were needed in the conspiracy, but perhaps had not yet been approached.
In looking at John and Robert Kennedy’s fatal character flaws, I am not at all proposing that they did not have honorable intentions for the good of the nation.
I am suggesting, however, that their inclination to corruption and hardball politics, and John Kennedy’s deep psychological problems (womanizing to a pathological extreme), may have had, and probably did have, a significant part in the assassination.
Anthony Summers wrote that Professor Robert Blakey, former chief counsel of the HSCA, saw this flaw in Kennedy’s character—his womanizing—as one that may have been fatal.
We can also safely assume that the CIA knew; and of course the Secret Service knew.
Better yet, the Kennedy family would be placed in a position in which they would never be willing to press for an investigation of the crime for fear of their secrets being exposed.
Now imagine taking this one step further and assuming that the CIA or the FBI did in fact order the murder of Marilyn to clean up the mess created by John and Robert Kennedy, even if not instructed to do so by them.
Time was running out with the 1964 presidential election only one year away.
Once JFK was re-elected nothing short of impeachment would have legally removed him; and Lyndon Johnson was going to be dropped before the 1964 election and therefore would not become president if JFK were assassinated after the election; thus, Johnson would not be in a position to cover up the plot, or suppress the investigations of his own scandals.
Moreover, with Johnson in the plot, it had to be done by the end of 1963 to give him time to orchestrate a cover-up with a presidential commission, establish his administration, and demonstrate his capability to be president.
Even though J Edgar Hoover had an abundance of incriminating material regarding the Kennedys’ sexual exploits, probably including all the salient details of the Marilyn Monroe affairs, and would have been delighted to expose the Kennedys, he was not in a position to use it because Hoover himself was vulnerable to exposure of his homosexuality and his ties to organized crime—a classic case of check and check-mate in a deadly game.
Once JFK was re-elected, he might very well have called Hoover’s bluff and forced him to retire—and Hoover must have feared this.
It was absolutely necessary that Kennedy be eliminated before the 1964 election so that Hoover’s friend, Lyndon Johnson would become president and re-appoint Hoover.
Exposing the Kennedys would have ruined them, but at the same time it would have ruined Hoover and Johnson.
Both Hoover and Johnson must have known that the Kennedys would not be run out of office without a fight which would have ended in catastrophe for everyone involved.
It would be indispensable to the Mafia that their man Lyndon Johnson become president after an assassination of John Kennedy because they could depend on Johnson to cover up the crime and remove Robert Kennedy from power.
This could never happen if John Kennedy were to be reelected in 1964 after he had replaced Johnson as vice president.
In short, although not proof in itself, there are plenty of reasons—unique to the LBJ-Hoover-Mafia scenario—why a decision to assassinate John Kennedy in November 1963 would have been made rather than attempting to blackmail him or expose him to the public.
The timing of the assassination, as related to the singular requirements of LBJ, Hoover, and the Mafia, explains many things.
Jt was staying in power in order to survive that drove the prime conspirators to their act.
A key ingredient was the conspirator s conviction that they had the political power and resources to be certain that they would not be brought to justice for murdering the president of the United States.
The conspirators also knew that the Kennedy family would be forced to remain quiet because of the brothers’ involvement in a multiplicity of scandals, of which the conspirators had evidence.
An important insight in the foregoing analysis is that it could explain why John Kennedy was not removed from office by exposing his scandalous behavior.
Such revelations would inevitably have brought down both Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover along with the Kennedys.
Only by assassinating John Kennedy in 1963 would the problems be solved for Johnson and Hoover.
That will remain a mystery for others to unravel, but I feel it can be said with some certainty that the Kennedys did not have a realistic sense of limits.
Their father Joe had instilled in them an unbridled ambition and a belief that they could have anything they wanted—seize power, and, in the name of good, eliminate the opposition while at the same time live out every man’s fantasies.
In retrospect, I see the Kennedy brothers as young, misguided, reckless, and naive, albeit having the good of the nation in their hearts and intentions.
Given the circumstances and politics of the time, they had overstepped the practical limits of presidential power and privilege.
They were to be removed from power by the same forces they were intent on crushing.
First I listed the powerful enemies of John and Robert Kennedy who are known to have existed in 1963.
He had illegally deported him to Guatemala; later, after great ordeal and humiliation, Marcello surreptitiously returned to the United States.
At the time of the assassination, the young attorney general was in the process of deporting Marcello again in a trial being conducted in New Orleans.
Marcello hated Bobby Kennedy and had stated in 1962 that John Kennedy would be killed.
Marcello also had a connection to Oswald, whose uncle was a Marcello lieutenant.
Hoffa had threatened Bobby Kennedy’s life and had made inquiries and spoken repeatedly about having him assassinated.
Trafficante, a close associate of Carlos Marcello, declared in 1962 that “Kennedy would be hit” before the 1964 election.
Both Trafficante and Lansky had suffered severe losses in their gambling operations in Cuba when Castro took over and kicked them out.
They shared a common motive with anti-Castro Cubans who felt betrayed by Kennedy in the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
A suspect because he had been betrayed by the Kennedys who took his favors and then turned on him.
Giancana was a prime target in Robert Kennedy’s war against organized crime.
He was a major Mafia chieftain, covering all territory west of the Mississippi.
It was common talk that Hoover would be fired soon after John Kennedy was elected in 1964.
Hoover hated Bobby Kennedy; hated Martin Luther King, whom the Kennedys supported; and was very close and friendly with Lyndon Johnson.
Also, over the years Hoover had allowed himself to be compromised by the Mafia and Texas oil men in accepting free rent of a vacation bungalow in California, tips on fixed horse races, and sweetheart investments.
It must have been very disturbing to Hoover to witness the Kennedys’ unprecedented effort to bring down organized crime, which inevitably would have exposed Hoover.
The last discussion that John Kennedy had with his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, before leaving for Dallas was that Johnson would be dropped from the ticket for the 1964 presidential election.
This was because Johnson had become a political liability and was in deep trouble, with potentially a prison sentence if the full facts were uncovered concerning the Bobby Baker and Billie Sol Estes scandals.
His corrupt connections to the Mafia, Dallas political figures, and the Texas right wing, like Hoover’s, would be exposed if the Mafia were brought down.
Dulles, along with Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell, had been fired by Kennedy.
Also, Kennedy had vowed to “blow the CIA to smithereens” after the next election.
Dulles had many loyalists in the CIA, including the infamous E Howard Hunt , and Richard Helms.
Added to this complex brew was army intelligence, which was in competition with the CIA for covert operations and was under the control of generals with extreme right-wing ideologies and strong connections to the military-industrial complex.
And there was William Harvey, a legendary, pistol-packing, harddrinking master theorist and covert operator.
Harvey was in charge of the CIA-Mafia group to assassinate foreign leaders and had become personal friends with the Mafia’s Johnny Rosselli.
Harvey hated Robert Kennedy with a passion because Kennedy had stripped him of power after Harvey had sent unauthorized commando teams into Cuba at the height of the Cuban missile crisis.
There were many thousands of spies, agents, and operators in the CIA and military intelligence.
Many were in fragmented, competing rogue groups, perhaps containing even Soviet moles, operating essentially on their own agendas, and penetrated by other agencies of the United States government with their own unique capacities for betrayal.
Their liaison with the Defense Department was Major General Edward Lansdale.
Many of them hated Kennedy because they felt he let them down by not providing air cover in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
They also believed that he was going to make peace with Castro and betray them.
In fact, John Kennedy was in the process of doing just that at the time he was assassinated.
Involved in the anti-Castro effort was David Ferrie, who was first turned up by the FBI and later targeted by Jim Garrison in his investigation in New Orleans.
David Ferrie was also a close associate of Mafia chieftain Carlos Marcello and a contract agent for the CIA and an associate of Oswald and an associate of Clay Shaw who was, in turn, a CIA contract agent and right-wing radical associated with extremist groups in Europe.
Right-wing extremist groups such as the John Birch Society, the Minutemen, White Supremacists, and some Texas oil men.
This group of rabid anti-Communists and fanatics looked at Kennedy as being soft on communism and leading the country to socialism because of Kennedy’s refusal to go ahead with the Bay of Pigs invasion; their perception that he had sold out to Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis; and Kennedy’s pursuit of civil rights legislation and his support of Martin Luther King.
And the word was out that Kennedy would be withdrawing our troops from Vietnam as soon as he was re-elected.
Milteer was known, by a Miami police informant, to have outlined in advance the details of the assassination of President Kennedy.
Hunt, a strong financial supporter of Lyndon Johnson and right-wing fanatic and oil man, had sponsored black-border ads vilifying Kennedy during his trip to Dallas.
The Texas right wing would have been in an ideal position to bring Lyndon Johnson into the plot and control events in Dallas.
They knew Johnson well, and probably had him in their pockets, perhaps even more than did the Mafia.
Clint Murchison was also a financial supporter of Lyndon Johnson as well as George Lincoln Rockwell’s American Nazi party.
David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello were also rabid, active right-wingers.
The right wing had powerful allies within the CIA and military intelligence; and the military and military reserve.
They also were allies with ex-Nazi groups in Europe and allied with OAS terrorists, who in turn had their anti-Communist allies in extreme elements of European intelligence and Israel’s intelligence, the Mossad.
John and Robert Kennedy and the Mafia were involved in an all-out plan to destroy Castro.
This included assassination attempts using the Mafia and anti-Castro Cubans, and extensive CIA operations planned and being executed against Cuba out of Miami and New Orleans.
It also included an ultra-secret project to overthrow Castro from within Cuba.
In fact, on the very day of the Kennedy assassination, the CIA was in a meeting in Paris, France, passing an exotic weapon to an assassin to murder Castro.
Castro had warned that the attempts of the United States to assassinate him would not go unanswered.
Kennedy had humiliated Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis, which some historians now believe was the beginning of the end of Khrushchev’s career as head of the Soviet Union.
Kennedy had defeated Richard Nixon in 1960 for the presidential election and Nixon believed that Kennedy had bought the election in Chicago with his father’s money.
Also, few know that Nixon had an extensive history that went back into the early 1950s in connections with mobsters.
Nixon was reputed to have received $500,000 in cash from Carlos Marcello as campaign contributions.
Nixon’s organized crime contacts continued even after he resigned the presidency in disgrace; he played golf with mobsters such as Allen Dorfman at the La Costa Country Club in California.
Nixon’s experience in assassinations went back to the late 1950s when he was President Eisenhower’s man for coordinating CIA assassinations and covert political murders.
Nixon was the right-wing choice for president and was deeply involved with the CIA in anti-Castro activities when he was vice president.
But before doing that, I listed the means to carry out and cover up the crime, which would have been necessary for the conspiracy to be successful.
This could have been achieved only through the cooperation of J Edgar Hoover.
There had to be a way for the conspirators to be certain that Hoover would suppress or destroy critical evidence, and that there would not be a serious investigation of the crime.
As will be detailed later, Hoover was compromised by organized crime and was subject to blackmail.
If they did not know what Lyndon Johnson’s reaction would be, they would have had to rationally assume that he would react unpredictably or would have turned the full power of the federal government against the conspirators to uncover and convict them.
Therefore, the conspirators either had to include Lyndon Johnson in their group, or they had to know that they had him in their pocket, based on having compromising knowledge about him; at least they probably would have given him advance knowledge of the plot.
Without this, there would have been an outcry from Congress, the American people, and the news media that Johnson and Hoover would not have been able to contain.
Deception was mandatory; it was obtained by the creation of the illusion that the assassination was carried out by either a person, or a group, connected to communism, with a plan that a designated patsy would be shot while escaping the scene.
This would seem to have been necessary to handle the situation after the assassination to allow the real assassins to escape and Oswald to be killed attempting to leave the scene.
This control also would have been necessary for Jack Ruby to walk into the Dallas police station basement with exquisite timing and kill Oswald on national television while surrounded by dozens of policemen.
He was part of the mob’s operations in Dallas to control the police through bribes and favors.
Ruby was also connected to Carlos Marcello in New Orleans, had been active in Cuban gunrunning activities and drug trafficking, and had been an FBI informant. developed by the CIA and military intelligence.
A sophisticated conspiracy would not logically have used an inexperienced rifleman with whom the conspirators had no previous experience.
This implies that the group would have had access to known and trusted professional assassins.
The Mafia and CIA qualify; and the extreme right wing had close ties to the Mafia and the military.
A plan for the professional assassins to escape would also have been a necessary ingredient of the plot.
The Secret Service had control of Kennedy’s body from the time of the shooting until burial.
They were intimately involved with the initial investigation in Dallas.
With Lyndon Johnson, they had the means to control the motorcade route.
As a first priority, the plotters would have needed to know that they had control of the Secret Service.
Before the assassination, Lyndon Johnson had first-hand access to the Secret Service and, upon becoming president, had full control.
He also was involved in the planning of the Dallas trip along with his longtime friend and cohort John Connally, who, after much argumentation, established the parade route to pass through Dealey Plaza, an ideal spot for an assassination by crossfire.
The CIA and military intelligence are an obvious link to the Secret Service.
Also, one would expect that the assassination of the president by a suspected Communist would trigger a massive reaction by United States intelligence and that any conceivable plotters would feel the need to have control of United States intelligence.
In addition, I surmised it would have been very desirable, probably absolutely necessary, for the conspirators to know that they would have support from the industrial-military-media establishment in 1963.
The extremely reckless personal behavior of the Kennedy brothers and John Kennedy’s perceived inept handling of the Bay of Pigs crisis, as well as his perceived anti-business policies, could well explain the willingness of the established power structure not to demand a solution to the crime.
Also, the fact that the United States government, along with the Kennedys, was planning to assassinate Fidel Castro could serve as a basis for a cover-up for national honor and security purposes.
Further yet, the natural instinct of bureaucratic institutions, and both conservative and liberal establishments, to suppress and deny conspiracies of any kind, large or small (because it threatens the ally of entrenched power— the status quo), could be depended on by sophisticated conspirators to come into full force upon the assassination of a president in an internal or external plot.
In summary, I concluded that the plotters needed to know in advance that by assassinating the president they would gain effective control of the entire government of the United States before they would have rationally pursued to finality a sophisticated plan to assassinate a popular president.
Otherwise, I felt I must conclude that the assassination was by a small group of fanatics, similar to the Lincoln assassination.
The logic says that if a pattern of planning can be shown involving a variety of sophisticated people, then the plot inevitably must have reached all the way to the top of the government; otherwise it would not have been carried out.
Put another way, it would be pointless for a sophisticated conspiratorial group to assassinate the president of a country unless they planned to take over the government.
Otherwise, it would only be an act of spite or revenge which would be irrational, not the characteristic of a sophisticated group.
It follows that the sophisticated group would let the vice president know their plan in advance so that he would be fully prepared to act as required to seize power and contain the crime.
Therefore, I decided that as I examined the evidence I would look for signs of a comprehensive, broad-based plan involving professionals as opposed to a narrow conspiracy involving fanatics.
A sophisticated group would include and be controlled by key individuals drawn from, for example, such organizations as the CIA, the Mafia, the military, the FBI, high government officials, powerful businessmen, and extremely wealthy individuals, all of whom were threatened or felt threatened by the Kennedys.
A basic premise of this book is that entire organizations were not involved—only key individuals, and not necessarily those at the top of the hierarchy.
A fanatical group would include and be controlled by, for example, individual white supremacists, Minutemen, anti-Castro Cubans, rabid anti-Communists, and the like.
My hypothesis was that control of the plot would be by the sophisticates if they were involved at all.
One of my major goals now became to determine the nature and specific makeup of the conspiratorial group.
I would start with the assumption that not all of Kennedy’s enemies were part of the conspiracy; only a few select and key individuals who were in a position to mastermind the plot and cover up the crime.
The remainder of Kennedy’s enemies would be only too happy to watch from the sidelines.
Robert Payne, The Life and Death of Lenin 7 NARROWING THE LIST OF SUSPECTS Using the premises previously outlined, I eliminated Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro from the list because they did not have control of the FBI, the CIA, or Lyndon Johnson.
I rejected the idea that either of them masterminded and carried out the assassination of the president of the United States because their chances of getting caught would have been so great and the consequences would have been utter catastrophe for them.
With the worldwide security and police apparatus of the United States, they would have been flushed out in short order and they must have known it.
As to Richard Nixon having been a principal in a conspiracy, I saw little to indicate it, despite his involvement with the Mafia.
Obviously, a run at the presidency later against Lyndon Johnson, but that hardly seemed motivation to kill Kennedy.
Nixon, however, I cautioned myself, could have known about it beforehand and should be examined later, along with other possibilities.
Milteer’s statement before the assassination implied to me that some of the right-wing extremists were at least aware of the plan and some of its details.
The apparent inclination of some of the conspirators to brag about it in advance could explain this.
But Milteer’s statement did imply that right-wing extremists were somehow in a circle of knowledge about the details of the assassination, indicating that they were part of a larger plot.
I could see that Jimmy Hoffa had the survival motive but, by himself, did not have the capabilities to execute the plan and to cover it up.
But he could very well have known about it, even initiated it, and been a part of a Mafia conspiracy.
Unless Johnson was duped, he appeared to have been a major figure in the cover-up, having been in charge of the Secret Service that illegally seized all the evidence and took it to Washington; and Johnson, along with J Edgar Hoover, had carefully hand-picked the Warren Commission, and had manipulated Congress into dropping its investigation of the assassination.
I decided to keep LBJ on the list because of his strong motivation and the fact that he was in the best position to control the cover-up.
The military chiefs, although at odds with Kennedy, were not in a life-and-death struggle with him.
Their power certainly was being challenged, and there was a struggle with Kennedy over military procurement, but it seemed implausible that the top military chiefs as a group could have become involved in a plot to assassinate their president; this seemed possible but, I thought, improbable.
However, one or two of them, or a retired chief, could conceivably have been brought into the plot, and this I considered as a secondary possibility.
The CIA was subordinate to the National Security Agency which also included the Defense Intelligence Agency and Army and Navy intelligence.
It was difficult then, and still is, to distinguish operationally between the CIA and the military.
Therefore, I thought that any considerations of the CIA should include the military.
What minimal combination of the five categories of suspects could have met the seven means requirements of: 1.
Hunt and/or the Dallas police conceivably could have directly ordered Ruby to shoot Oswald, it seemed unlikely.
Second, The CIA/Military was indispensable in all scenarios because without their cooperation, a coup and cover-up would be impossible, and the plot had all of the characteristics of an elaborate CIA/Military intelligence covert operation; third, the Secret Service was indispensable in all scenarios if for no more than to let down their guard, cooperate in the selection of the parade route, and cooperate in the cover-up that would inevitably follow the coup.
Of course, there was always the possibility of blackmail of LBJ and Hoover to extort their cooperation, but it seemed that a sophisticated group of plotters would not depend on blackmail after the fact; perhaps blackmail before the fact, but then LBJ and Hoover would become an integral part of the conspiracy if they should yield to the blackmail.
From that reasoning, I concluded that Hoover and LBJ would likely have been brought into the plot before the fact to assure that all bases were covered.
CIA/Military—Secret Service—Mafia—LBJ—Hoover But with LBJ in the conspiratorial group, Hoover could possibly have been relied upon to fall in line because of the Mafia having compromised him.
Perhaps that risk would seem acceptable to the plotters once they had LBJ in their circle.
This represents the entire investigative and prosecuting capability of the United States government with the possible exception of congressional investigating committees.
CIA/Military—Secret Service—Mafia—LBJ 1) All the Mafia had to do was get the CIA involved and have the CIA recruit the Secret Service and LBJ, and it would have had a perfect conspiracy.
The foregoing is a working hypothesis that would have to be tested before conclusions could be reached.
Drawing on my past career as an engineer, I decided, for the most part, to follow the scientific . method in testing the hypothesis.
By this process I realized that it was likely that the hypothesis would have to be modified, or would fail, or other combinations emerge.
There were, of course, other possibilities 24 but based on my preliminary research, a conspiracy including the CIA/military, the Mafia, the Secret Service, and Lyndon Johnson, with Hoover coming in after the fact, seemed the minimal combination that would work.
I now paused to conceptualize a possible scenario that would fit the broad outline of the evidence and reasoning thus far.
In a sense, this is a way of testing a theory and is compatible with the scientific method.
It is also a way of attaining a broad perspective before becoming immersed in the minutiae.
Albert Einstein engaged in what he called “mind experiments” to conceive of his theory of relativity, later to be tested with his analyses and calculations.
And many years later dramatically demonstrated by scientists to be true in actual measurements.
I reasoned that in conspiratorial crimes, if one cannot conceive a plot that fits the evidence from the imagined point of view of the criminals, then perhaps the theory is not valid.
Moreover, that is exactly what trial lawyers do when presenting their case to a jury; the jury wants to see a theory of the crime to go along with the evidence, which must fit into the theory.
And, as mentioned, I thought it would serve the additional purpose of giving the reader a preview of the broad picture to come, so that the significance of details in subsequent chapters could be more readily grasped.
I found it helpful to list several key ingredients of the plan which appeared to be indicated simply by the evidence that was thus far available in my analysis.
The plan must have had a single individual who was designated to put it together and direct the operation.
It did not seem plausible that such a complex project would have been directed by a committee.
This did not preclude a group of individuals who gave their input, or some other B35] individual who helped conceive the basic concept.
The one individual who put the operational plan together I called the Mastermind.
However, it also seemed possible that the original plan was not to make it appear to be a single gunman; but rather an obvious conspiracy linked directly to Fidel Castro, in which case the singlegunman concept of the Warren Commission would have evolved after the fact.
The plan appeared to create the illusion that it was the work of Communists to divert suspicion away from right-wing extremists.
Any appearance that it was a coup by forces within the United States was out of the question.
The plan obviously did not seem to include silencing Oswald in public in the basement of the Dallas jail.
It seemed that the plan was to pin the crime on Oswald and kill him while he was leaving the scene of the crime, or to spirit htm away where he would later be eliminated without anyone knowing about it.
Above all else, the plan must succeed on the first try—there would be no turning back after it was put into motion; the plan must be perfect with all bases covered, with contingency plans on contingency plans.
I asked myself how these essential ingredients of the plot could have been conceived by the people on my list of suspects.
What follows is one of several possible scenarios that seemed plausible.
There will be plenty of time in the chapters that follow to retreat from this scenario if the evidence does not support it.
I imagined that the initial idea of assassinating the president was hatched by two chieftains of organized crime , and they approached a wealthy right-wing extremist who then approached an ex-senior officer of military intelligence to join them in the plot.
This group in turn approached a disgruntled officer in a rogue cult of military intelligence who hated the Kennedys with a passion.
He was designated to be the mastermind and to put together and execute a plan.
The mastermind would be given access to all of the money and technical resources that he needed.
The money would come from wealthy right-wing extremists and organized crime.
I pictured the plan being presented by the mastermind to the prime conspirators at a secret meeting.
THE PLAN Gentlemen: In accordance with your instructions, I will today outline a plan to remove John Kennedy from office and replace him with Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
We all know that we have tried to accommodate the Kennedys but, arrogantly, they have not listened.
If the Kennedys are left unchecked we can be assured that everything for which we have worked our whole lives will be destroyed and many of us will end up in the penitentiary.
The Kennedys are intent on changing the entire direction of the country.
They are caving in to the Communists and dismantling the military establishment.
We know, based on our source in the National Security Council, that we may have to make a decision soon for a preemptive nuclear strike against the Soviets.
We also know, beyond a doubt, that Kennedy will not have the spine to pull the trigger.
Our nation could well be annihilated by a Soviet first nuclear strike while our “profile-incourage” president bites his nails.
To begin, we should realize first and foremost that our action will be considered to be the crime of the century.
If Kennedy should live after an attempt to assassinate him, we must assume that the full power of the federal government would be unleashed and our plot would be uncovered.
Therefore, once we start there is no turning back, and we must be prepared to take whatever subsequent steps are necessary to cover up the crime and seize complete control of the nation.
We also must realize that a perfect assassination, although theoretically possible, is seldom achieved.
Thus we must have a plan in place to cover up unforeseen events that may occur.
Fortunately, Lyndon Johnson will become president and it can confidently be predicted that he will be disposed to join our group if approached with an ingenious and well-thought-out plan.
They have repeatedly humiliated him, made him the butt of jokes, and he knows that they are going to dump him from the ticket in the next election because of the criminal problems he has gotten himself into.
If his problems go on unchecked, he will quite probably be sent to the penitentiary.
Lyndon has been obsessed with becoming president since anyone can remember.
His entire life has been marked by his willingness to do anything or to commit any crime in order to get elected or cover up his indiscretions.
There is absolutely nothing he will not do to satisfy his insatiable lust for power.
Although he has recently shown liberal tendencies, we know that in reality he believes in nothing except power.
He will have no choice but to do our bidding because he has compromised himself with us so completely.
Our friends in the Outfit have given him enormous bribes, have carried out some very extreme operations for him, and we know every bit of dirt on him.
We know that Edgar hates Jack Kennedy and absolutely loathes Bobby, who has repeatedly humiliated the old faggot.
He has forced him to greatly increase his paltry activities against the Outfit.
In addition, we all know that the president is going to dump Edgar after the next election, and all of the old hypocrite’s secrets will be uncovered.
The president knows that regardless of the dirt that Edgar has on him, he has even worse dirt on Edgar.
For these reasons we can be assured that Hoover will not be a problem and will go along with our plan.
So, with Lyndon in our plan, and Edgar on board, and our own intelligence operations in charge, we will have complete control of the investigative and prosecutorial capabilities of the entire federal government.
Congress will not be a problem because, with Edgar’s secret files and our own incriminating information on key members of Congress, we will have them firmly in hand.
As we well know, the military-industrial establishment is very concerned about the Kennedys and will be happy to see them gone.
Not just because he failed to show the decisiveness and courage needed to make that program a success, but because he so eagerly jumped aboard thinking that it would provide him with a great political coup during his first few months in office.
He stuck his finger in the pie by agreeing with some of his advisers to change our plans at the last moment, but when the going got rough he chickened out.
Now I must confess that we went ahead anyway, knowing the operation against Castro would probably fail, with the intention of trapping Kennedy into a major military action against Cuba, rather than be seen as a coward by the American people.
Anyway, we know, as do all of our friends, that Kennedy’s supposed victory over Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis was a sham, and that in reality he agreed not only to remove our Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy, but also never to invade Cuba again.
Then, to make matters worse, he never insisted on finalizing a formal agreement with Khrushchev, never enforced on-site inspection to see that the missiles were ieinved and, in fact, we know the missiles were not removed and remain in Cuba.
There is only one alternative, and we may rest assured that the military-industrial establishment will look the other way after the assassination and will pressure the news media to get the assassination behind us.
As far as the Kennedy family is concerned, they can be expected to fold up and go away.
They will not want the world to see the full truth about Jack and Bobby’s peccadillos with their Hollywood movie star and their zealous participation in our partnership with the Outfit to assassinate Castro.
The Kennedy family has so many secrets they want to keep that they will do absolutely nothing now or forever to investigate the asbacswabon We will have the Kennedys by the balls once President Jack has been eliminated.
As to the American people, we know that they live in comfortable illusions, shielded from the reality of the real world.
We can be assured that they will accept an official story that will be presented to them shortly after we take over the government.
This story, in the form of a Presidential Commission’s report, will describe the assassination as the act of a lone nut, or with an accomplice, backed by Cuba or the Soviets.
We will design the cover so that we will have flexibility to use either the lone-nut scenario or, even better, an assassination conspiracy by Cuba as an excuse to invade it and, once and for all, get rid of Castro.
These flexible contingency aspects of the plan insure that Lyndon can use the threat of nuclear war with the Soviets as a ruse to intimidate government officials to cooperate in a cover-up, if the need should arise.
With our man Lyndon becoming president, armed with foreknowledge of the assassination, he will appear as a strong and steady hand to guide the people through their shock and grief.
The American people will be only too eager to deny the reality—on that we can depend.
I am handing out reprints of some essays by William James and Sigmund Freud that will refresh your memory on the subject of illusion and denial.
As you know, our behavioral research has fully confirmed these concepts.
This phenomenon of the masses, in which they need to live in a comfortable illusion, spoon-fed by pleasant information from the government, will form the foundation of our deception plan for the aftermath of the assassination.
Once our “official” story is accepted, it will forever be in the minds of the masses, incapable of being renounced by them unless led to do so by a future government.
Also, as you know, we intend to keep control of the key levels of government and the Department of Justice for the foreseeable future, so we can be assured that a serious investigation will never be made in our lifetime.
Future administrations will not have the motive or need to change i 38 Having said this, we must not fall into the trap of believing that we can get away with a sloppy plan because there are limits to how much we can cover up.
For this reason, we must create a plan that is so ingenious, so creative, and so cunning that there will be, in all probability, nothing to cover up.
This meticulously crafted plan will be very helpful in bringing aboard the top officials and the top professional assassins that are mandatory to make the plan absolutely foolproof.
For sure, we do not want the American public for one moment to think that it was a conspiracy originating in the United States For that reason, poisoning of the president is out; it would obviously be branded as an inside job and therefore a domestic conspiracy.
Or having him attacked by one crazed assassin with a pistol is also out of the question.
These methods would be too easily traced and have too much possibility of going wrong.
For example, poisoning attempts have been made on Fidel Castro and Patrice Lumumba and they have failed miserably.
Other attempts by lone assassins on heads of states have worked only if the lone assassin was truly a lone nut and not part of a conspiracy.
It is obvious that we cannot depend on an untrained or unstable recruit to do the job.
Also, from my experience, we will not be able to recruit the world-class professionals we need if we do not have a plan that they believe will allow them to escape.
I have thought about this long and carefully, and have produced a plan that at first may appear complicated but I am sure you will see is quite workable.
Media and Government Cover-up Project Manager Cover-up Disinformation These three phases will be compartmentalized.
Only the project manager will know who is in charge of each phase and the ultimate details of the operation, but he will not know the identity of anyone on the committee except me.
This will have the desirable benefit of you gentlemen being entirely divorced from the operation except for your specific roles in the committee.
In particular, Hoover and Johnson will not know the details of the plan or the identity of members of the committee.
They will know only that it is going to happen and that their primary roles will be to contain the ensuing investigation.
The patsy will be fingered immediately by fabricated evidence that will be irrefutable.
We have recruitment procedures to insure that Lyndon and Edgar can be brought into the plot and inextricably linked without their knowing more than they need to know.
Once he is eliminated, no one except those present here today will know who we are or know the master plan of our operation.
And none of you will know who did the actual shooting or the people involved in the operations; and none who carried out the mechanics of the plot will know who was behind it, or who financed it, or who were in the other compartments.
In our plan Kennedy will be shot with a rifle, apparently from a tall building, while he is riding in an open limousine.
With Lyndon in a position to arrange political trips and parade routes, we can reasonably be assured that a suitable opportunity can be found sometime within the next six to eight months.
Perhaps Miami will be a good location, or Chicago, or Los Angeles, but if necessary, Texas, at the beginning of the political campaign this fall.
Of no small importance, we must have this over with before the end of the year to give Lyndon time to consolidate his position before the 1964 election.
In order for our professional assassins to believe they will escape, we need to have it appear that two shots are coming from one direction when the real shot by the professional is coming from another, using one of our state-of-the-art silenced weapons.
This means that we must recruit a patsy; we will locate him near the fake assassin’s post, and he must be someone who can be linked to the shooting.
A few years ago the CIA set him up with a legend as a Communist defector.
He is young and gullible enough to be duped into becoming our fall guy.
The advantages of Oswald being both CIA and FBI are obvious; it gives us an insurance policy for these agencies whose first impulse is to cover up their embarrassments.
They will see immediately that the truth of the plot would destroy their organizations and themselves.
Our plan will include a disinformation scheme in the months preceding the assassination to make it appear that Oswald is a fanatic who is connected to Fidel Castro.
Most of the people who will conduct this disinformation scheme will not know its real purpose.
They will think they are creating bona fides for our patsy to be a double agent in Cuba.
The details of this will be worked out later but will include making it appear that he attempted to assassinate a prominent right-wing figure; that he talked of killing Kennedy on several occasions; that he tried to make contact with the Soviet and the Cuban consulates in Mexico City before the assassination; that he was seen around the locale in the days preceding the assassination practicing with his rifle and making himself obvious.
This will be done with Oswald actively participating but not knowing that he is being set up.
These disinformation methods, of course, are commonplace; we have used them several times before.
By using Oswald, who is a CIA agent and who has been a subject in mind-control experiments, we have a double advantage.
First (as I said), the CIA will be forced to participate in the cover-up; and, second, using the anti-Castro Cubans to set him up will provide us with an extra layer of deniability.
We will further set up Oswald by inducing him to purchase a rifle through the mail that can easily be traced to him.
We will plant this rifle in a “sniper’s nest” in a tall building overlooking the motorcade route.
The first two shots will be diversionary shots and will come from the rear.
The Secret Service agents and witnesses, upon hearing the first diversionary shot, will turn around and momentarily see a rifle sticking out of the window, diverting their attention from the front where the professional assassin will be located.
The professional assassin in the front will shoot to kill with his first shot.
If for some unforeseen reason he should miss, we will have a third assassin as a contingency back-up who will be located in the rear of the motorcade, but in a different building from the fake assassin.
As an even further contingency, in case the third rifleman misses, we will have a fourth rifleman but again in the front, probably at the same location as the second rifleman.
It is extremely unlikely that the first shot from the front will not do the job.
In fact, we plan to set up a secret training camp to simulate exactly the conditions of vehicle speed, angles, and distance; and we will insist on our sharpshooters passing the test with perfect precision for at least one hundred times in succession before we proceed with the plan.
For recruitment of the professional assassins, I plan to bring in trusted people from overseas, from our terrorist connections there.
They are without doubt the best in the business and have a system of disinformation methods that make them virtually untraceable.
I anticipate that our United States associates in the Outfit will furnish local personnel for handling the police and other minor assignments as needed.
We will use our own trusted intelligence professionals as field coordinators and will have them in a central location that we control, with the necessary electronic communications.
To be discussed later, I will develop an entire back-up plan— with equal care and thought—to be carried out on the same day, in the same city, in case our base plan should have to be aborted before it starts.
I think we all realize that once our plan goes into operation—and we assemble all of our professional assassins, spotters, and coordinators in one city—there is no turning back.
We must kill Kennedy that day and have Lyndon become president, for we cannot take the chance of a leak, considering all of the people necessary to make our plan work and the clues and signs of the operation that we believe must occur, no matter how carefully we try to plan otherwise.
We absolutely must be in a position to suppress and control all evidence once Kennedy is gone.
Only with Lyndon as president and Hoover as head of the FBI will that be possible.
Since control of the evidence is crucial to our plan, a prime factor will be selecting the city where the assassination will take place.
Some city in Texas might end up being our best possibility because, as we well know by experience, Texas has a long history of coroners for hire and it’s Lyndon’s territory.
Also, by law in the state of Texas the autopsy and evidence must stay in Texas, even if it is the murder of the president.
In that same vein, it will be necessary for us to have some minimum level of control of the local police in the city that is selected.
This, you realize, is no problem because our partners, once Hoover is aboard, have control of the police in all of the proposed locations, particularly in Dallas.
There are numerous other details that will have to be worked out, such as bullet and shell casing plants , linking of bullets to the fake assassin’s rifle, etc.
But these are routine matters that we have employed many times in our previous operations.
Two last items—important ones—are that we will need to work out a way to control the physical evidence and create laxity in the protection of the president.
I have in mind bribing key personnel in the Secret Service to see that we have control of these two items.
The Secret Service personnel who guard Kennedy have become disenchanted with him.
They have lost all respect and are sick of covering for him in his outrageous and reckless escapades.
These bribes, along with the money required to hire professional assassins, will take a large amount of cash.
Although this may seem excessive, we must remember that the payoff will be a thousand fold.
It should not be a problem with the resources available to us through our wealthy backers and our hidden funds.
Also, I should add, we should consider having a complete military takeover of the government in case our plan should blow.
I’m working on some thoughts of how this could be put into action on a contingency basis.
Basically the plan will include the threat of nuclear war with the Soviets as an excuse for martial law.
As mentioned, we will be in a position to blame the assassination on the Cubans or the Soviets.
The people who planned and participated in the assassination, although “rational,” must have been driven by desperation combined with an acute case of arrogance and overwhelming personal ambition; and the planners must have been very much accustomed to conceiving and carrying out complex, bold plots.
My hypothesis is that the primary motivation of the key conspirators was one of self-survival to prevent themselves from being annihilated by the Kennedy brothers, whom they hated.
In the following chapters I will summarize the results of my investigation of the assassination of John F Kennedy.
We will see if the foregoing scenario fairly describes the events and circumstances and is borne out by the evidence.
If not, a scenario will be developed that does fit, without clinging to previous assumptions.
If the perfect crime is defined as one in which the criminals all got away with it, then the assassination of John F Kennedy was the perfect crime.
The reason they got away with it is that they had the power to control the investigation and to seal away any evidence that they could not destroy, change, or manipulate.
As a general guideline, I decided to look for things that appeared to have gone wrong which might reveal the nature of the plot and the identity of the conspirators.
Oswald was supposed to escape and be eliminated, or be shot trying to escape, but the plan went awry.
I reasoned that the things gone wrong must have created enormous problems for the conspirators.
By following these leads, it might be possible to reveal the nature of the conspiracy.
My next step would be to develop precise methods of evaluating the evidence—a very important subject—and then get into the details of the evidence.
MURDER AND COVER-UP “Goddamn the Kennedys,” I heard Clyde Tolson say to Hoover.
My Thirty Years in Hoover’s FBI 9 QUESTIONS OF EVIDENCE I urge the reader to bear with me in this chapter concerning the use of evidence.
This is a very important subject if we are to keep our bearings while maneuvering through the JFK assassination quagmire.
In attempting to understand the evidence in this case, I was immediately confronted with the dilemma of how to interpret the massive amount of information that is available in millions of pages of documents and taped interviews.
It was soon apparent that a methodology was needed to sort the most pertinent material down to a manageable quantity and rationally evaluate the quality and importance of each item.
I was obliged to accept the reality that no evidence, in this or any other complex crime, is of absolute certainty.
There is always some uncertainty—doubts can be raised about any item of evidence if one is willing to search long enough.
Their first order of business is to create doubts in the minds of the judge or the jury.
In practice, many lawyers, even prominent trial attorneys, unabashedly manufacture doubt out of thin air, to the point of lies, obfuscating facts to the point that the jurors are overwhelmed and their verdict is based on sentiment and emotions.
This can lead to hung juries or acquittals, even in cases that are replete with irrefutable evidence of guilt.
Even Pulitzer Prize-winning authors such as Norman Mailer become confused when facing the mountain of conflicting evidence that has accumulated in the JFK assassination.
If one’s answer is to come out of anything larger than an opinion, it is necessary to contend with questions of evidence.
For it is in the nature of evidence to produce, sooner or later, a counterinterpretation to itself in the form of a contending expert in a court of law.
Mailer here is leading up to confessing that he resorted to mere opinion in his massive book on Oswald.
All he provided were fanciful avenues of escape for those who cannot logically refute the evidence of a conspiracy.
In the end, Mailer came up with the nonsense that he thought there was a 75 percent chance that Oswald acted alone.
He then hedged and said that Oswald would never have been convicted in a jury trial if he, Mailer, were defending Oswald.
It therefore becomes necessary to develop means of dealing with the evidence.
After some thought, I concluded that despite its obvious flaws and shortcomings, the method of presenting and evaluating evidence that has been developed over many generations in our legal system is the best that we have.
It has been forged out of the heat of debate between adversaries, guided by our constitution, and grapples with reality.
It uses scientific evidence combined with opinions, intuitions, circumstances, and eyewitness accounts.
Virtually anything that can help to understand the crime can be brought to bear, if the judge permits.
A purely scientific method by itself has the shortcoming that there is always doubt.
And the scientific method does not deal with the moral dilemma and agony of the juror, who despite painful doubts has to weigh the evidence, overcome the doubt, and finally, hopefully, reach a decision in which somebody will either be set free or punished.
Our legal system combines logic, argumentation, fairness, and scientific knowledge in a debate between advocates.
As I progressed in my research, I learned about the legal concept of best evidence that says only the clearest and most credible evidence should be presented by an advocate to prove his or her case, and only to the extent necessary to make the case; all other evidence is discarded.
There is a point at which one must stop considering every scintilla of evidence that presents itself; otherwise the case can never be made; it will collapse under its own weight.
This concept, simple in principle and so essential if I were to hope to complete a readable book, proved to be very difficult to apply to the JFK assassination because there is a super-abundance of evidence.
I found, time and again, the painful necessity of stopping short of tying each chapter into a neat package, with no loose ends.
Thus there wi// be loose ends, which I shall identify as clearly as I can.
For example, photographic evidence is generally considered better evidence than oral testimonies.
But, of course, it is possible to tamper with photographic evidence to the extent that the deception is virtually undetectable.
And as will be seen as critical in this case, evidence that has been forged, by those who are prime suspects in the crime, is tantamount to proof of their guilt.
Oral testimony given under oath, under cross-examination, is generally considered better than interviews or written statements.
The first and freshest oral testimony is generally better than later testimony.
The first testimony is considered superior—but not always; sometimes memories really do become more factual with time.
Scientific evidence backed by experts is generally considered better than oral testimony; yet scientific evidence can be tainted by the biases—or outright dishonesty—of the scientist making the case.
It takes a soul-searching, analytical person capable of change and of suspending many conflicting ideas in the mind for extended periods of time.
In using legal methods of evaluating evidence, I want to dispel any notion that I hold an illusion that a legal trial will ever take place.
Most of the alleged participants in this crime are now dead, so a trial cannot take place; only a few subordinates are still living.
Also, much of the evidence would be held inadmissible because the “chain of possession” rules have been violated in many instances.
What is at stake is historical truth. hope I will be able to convince the reader that historical truth is a very important subject for the long-term survival of the nation.
I don’t think I have to argue that it is extremely perilous to our nation if a political group can, by assassination, bypass a democratic election for the presidency; and, worse yet, if they can get away with it.
As earlier noted, the vast body of evidence and information concerning Kennedy’s assassination requires great reduction and selection to bring it to an understandable level.
I drew on what I consider to be the best of these references and further condensed that work.
In addition, I conducted my own investigations and research in the National Archives in which I discovered new, important documents.
I also was fortunate to find and develop original material, including analysis of the motion pictures and photographs taken at the scene of the crime, and interviews with key witnesses and government officials who are still alive.
FBI reports, Secret Service reports, and documents from the CIA were utilized as they became available under Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and Acts of Congress.
One further source of evidence—unique to the JFK case—is the hundreds of hours of television and radio programs in which witnesses have been interviewed and recorded.
I considered that the vast amount of this material should not be taken lightly in view of the fact that the government of the United States has never allowed the American people to witness a serious trial with the best evidence, and a legitimate judge and a jury to weigh it.
It became apparent to me that I needed to know much more about legal rules of evidence and judicial procedures.
I borrowed law books from an attorney friend and found that most of what I needed to know was in Gilberts Law Summaries by John Kaplan and Jon R Waltz.
I found that there are two basic types of evidence as distinguished from forms of evidence.
The first type is direct evidence, sometimes simplistically termed “eyewitness” evidence, which proves a proposition directly rather than by inference.
It is evidence of a related fact from which the existence of an ultimate fact can be inferred.
Circumstantial evidence is far more prevalent in courtrooms than many realize.
For example, fingerprints are circumstantial evidence, as is DNA analysis; but circumstantial evidence can vary from this virtually irrefutable evidence to broad circumstantial evidence encompassing motive, means, and opportunity.
There is a very wide spectrum of circumstantial evidence that can be admitted by the judge.
Although the term “circumstantial evidence” is held in low esteem by the lay public, it should be noted that legal scholars consider it to be superior to testimonial evidence because circumstances are very difficult to forge; whereas in direct testimonies people can lie or be telling what they believe to be the truth, yet have gross misconceptions of what they saw or heard.
There are many ways in which experienced criminals or professionals, such as government intelligence, can create illusions of certainty of evidence when it is, in fact, a fraud.
This applies in particular to conspiracies where careful advance planning took place and, worse yet, in which, literally, magician’s tricks were employed.
For these reasons the law is inclined to admit broad circumstantial evidence in conspiracy cases.
Most of the rules excluding evidence relate to circumstantial evidence.
In cases of conspiracy, juries like to see a plausible, cohesive theory of both the broad and specific aspects of the crime.
First is testimonial evidence given by a witness; second is tangible evidence—exhibits or tangible things that may be offered for consideration.
Tangible evidence is divided into real evidence—the “real thing,” for example the murder weapon, bullets, a movie film of actual events, a written document, etc.—and demonstrative evidence, which is not the real item involved in the case but rather is a visual or audiovisual aid.
Admissibility of evidence in court is determined solely by the trial judge.
On the other hand, the weight and credibility of evidence are up to the jury to decide.
Unless objections are made, almost any kind of evidence can be received in court.
The most oftenrejected evidence by the judge is broad circumstantial and hearsay evidence.
Hearsay is generally found non-admissible, but it is not widely known that there are numerous exceptions.
In these situations, the public policies rejecting hearsay evidence are simply outweighed by other policies favoring its admission.
There is no single theory or rationale that will explain all of the exceptions or harmonize one with another.
Similarly, Morgan observed, “The test of admissibility should be whether the hearsay is such that the trier can put a reasonable accurate value upon it as evidence of the matter it is offered to prove, and whether direct testimony of the declarant is unavailable or, if available, is likely to be less reliable.
The number of exceptions to the hearsay rule is by no means fixed or rigid.
Confessions by the accused are not hearsay, according to Federal Rules.
Majority view: Most courts, however, regard an extrajudicial confession as hearsay, since it is offered to prove the truth of the matter confessed.
However, like an admission, its probative value outweighs any hearsay objections, and hence it is admissible under a longrecognized exception to the Hearsay Rule.
The rules governing confessions are significant in the JFK case because of numerous witnesses to confessions or near confessions by mobsters Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, Jr., Carlos Marcello, and possibly others such as David Sanchez Morales, Robert Morrow, Richard Case Nagell, and Gerald Patrick Hemming, all of whom are discussed in later chapters.
The legal term reasonable doubt is a very important concept in evaluating evidence.
A reasonable doubt is a fair doubt, growing out of the testimony, the lack of testimony, or the unsatisfactory nature of the testimony. /t is not a mere imaginary or possible doubt, but a fair doubt based on reason and common sense.
It is such a doubt as to leave your minds, after a careful examination of the evidence, in the condition that you cannot say you have an abiding conviction ._ [41 amounting to a moral certainty of the truth of the charge made against the defendant.
The reasonable-doubt standard is considered by the legal system to be the highest standard.
It is an attempt to make certain that the scales of evidence are decisively balanced against the accused before he or she can be convicted of a criminal offense.
I noted that the reasonable-doubt standard is intended to cut both ways.
The accused should not be convicted if there is a reasonable doubt of the truth of the charges or the validity of the evidence; but, on the other hand, the accused should not be acquitted because of imaginary or possible doubts that can always be concocted in any issue—a very important point in the JFK case.
Over the years, critics of proconspiracy evidence have demonstrated that they will stop at nothing to create “reasonable doubt’ out of imaginary doubt to avoid facing the truth of a conspiracy.
Despite overwhelming doubt of the validity of the Warren Commission’s arguments for a lone gunman, proWarren Commission people have kept possible doubts of a conspiracy alive for almost thirty years by using imaginary doubts or insignificant discrepancies in pro-conspiracy evidence.
This is true of virtually every item of evidence that has been developed.
It is immediately attacked and dissected, and shadows of doubt expostulated, keeping the minds of the American people in a state of confusion.
Scientists know that it is impossible to prove anything beyond any possible doubt.
Even Newton’s law is still a theory and, in fact, was proven “wrong” by Albert Einstein.
There is always uncertainty about any item of evidence, perhaps infinitesimal, but always there is some degree of uncertainty.
For these reasons, reasonable doubt can often backfire on the prosecution because many jurors are not capable of comprehending the nuances of the concept, and they confuse a remotely possible doubt with a reasonable doubt—thus we have hung juries or outrageous acquittals.
Preponderance of the evidence is a legal concept that is an alternative to reasonable-doubt standards.
It is generally applied to civil cases in which only a weighing of evidence is necessary.
If the scales of justice tip one way or the other, the accused may be declared guilty or innocent.
One trial attorney (who has pled a case before the United States Supreme Court and with whom I discussed this) felt that preponderance-of-evidence standards should be applied to the JFK assassination because the crime is so important to the nation and because conspiratorial crimes are so difficult to solve.
Thus we have available three levels of proof for forming our judgments or lay opinions in the JFK case.
It has been extremely difficult for individuals without prosecutorial powers to solve the JFK case.
Most of the real progress that has been made is by use of testimonies and evidence gathered by the Warren Commission, the Senate Intelligence Committee, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
But, as might be expected, all of these government bodies were unwilling to carry forward, or were blocked by the government bureaucracy from investigating the government itself.
Therefore, I decided that it was reasonable and justifiable to use preponderance-of-evidence standards in those instances in my study in which reasonable-doubt or clear-and-convincing standards were perhaps not present, but the body of evidence, when examined as a whole, met preponderance-of-evidence standards.
The law says that a person is presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law.
But it should be realized that this is a concept only applicable in a courtroom.
It doesn’t mean that an individual has to follow the same rule—only the law is so constrained.
As individuals, we have the right to form our own judgments at any point in time we become convinced, one way or the other.
And, in the case of the JFK assassination, we certainly are not compelled to accept the proclamations of politically motivated tribunals.
As I studied the Warren Commission Report and its twenty-six volumes, and later the HSCA Reports and their appendices, it soon became apparent that neither the Commission nor the Committee had used a standard of discipline to control its efforts.
They had completely disregarded legal concepts—and even disregarded the most tried-and-true methods of classic criminology—the analysis of motive, means, and opportunity.
As congressionally authorized bodies they were free to impose impossibly high standards when it came to establishing proof of conspiracy, particularly if it involved the federal government.
At the same time they were free to accept ridiculously low standards when it came to establishing the loneassassin hypothesis.
They were also free to disregard any evidence that did not fit into their political agenda, or bury it in the National Archives for seventy years.
This only underscored my determination to apply appropriate standards, insofar as possible, to my analysis of the evidence.
This is the greatest murder mystery in American history, if not of all time.
It is best approached as an intellectual puzzle—the solving of a mystery—in a manner that is as objective as one is capable of.
My first goal will be to develop clear and convincing forensic and scientific evidence that there was, in fact, a conspiracy that assassinated John F Kennedy.
The fact of a conspiracy may be taken for granted by many, but my research forced me to conclude, reluctantly, that it was necessary to take a fresh look at the basic foundation of the evidence and clarify many uncertainties as to whether or not it supports the conclusion of conspiracy.
Only then could I develop broader circumstantial evidence of the master conspiracy.
Although what follows is arcane, it is very critical because it points distinctive arrows in the direction of the prime conspirators.
This will have the goal of laying a minimal foundation that there was a conspiracy consisting of at least two people.
It will be the first step in building the proof of a major sophisticated conspiracy involving several people.
The Zapruder film will be used in this chapter only as supporting evidence of shots that occurred and as one of the constraints on the Warren Commission.
The chapter that follows will provide evidence that the Zapruder film was altered while in the hands of the FBI, therefore implicating the United States government in the conspiracy.
The evidence that there was more than one gunman at Dealey Plaza can be extremely complicated and requires a considerable analytical effort if one wants to understand it in its ultimate detail and subtleties.
But if one is willing to accept a common-sense view, it need not be all that difficult.
Motorcade route Add to this the testimony of over thirty doctors, nurses, medical technicians, and Secret Service personnel who saw a large exit wound in the rear of Kennedy’s head, which could only have been caused by a shot from the front, and one wonders why any more evidence is necessary.
The answer is that nothing more would probably be required in a legitimate trial in a courtroom before an intelligent, unprejudiced jury.
But a more in-depth understanding is required for a crime of the profound magnitude of this presidential assassination.
So we will now plunge into the extensive evidence, with its nuances and complexities, that devastates the idea of the lone assassin.
By so doing, the groundwork will be laid for deducing from the evidence at Dealey Plaza—projecting backward in time—the amazing composition of the master conspiracy.
The Number of Bullets An overview of the evidence examining virtually all of the gunshots can be achieved by reviewing the following table.
This is a summary of the tangible and testimonial evidence of shots, bullets, or fragments of bullets that struck either Kennedy, Connally, or inanimate objects.
These bullets could possibly be the cause of, or have resulted from, the above list of ten shots.
Also, in this same category, two bullet fragments were reportedly removed from Kennedy’s body during the autopsy, and a third fragment was claimed to have been lodged in his skull.
For the single-gunman hypothesis of the Warren Commission Report to be valid (using the evidence provided to them by Hoover’s FBI) there can be only three shots, based first on the evidence presented that only three “empty” cartridges were found.
It was accepted by the Warren Commission that an assassin would not have, in any believable scenario, picked up one or more cartridges and left three.
A second criteria of the Warren Commission that must be met for their lone-gunman hypothesis to be valid is that the time between shots must be 2. seconds or more, based on the minimum time established by FBI tests to reload, quickly aim, and fire the rifle.
A third criteria of the Warren Commission was that the Zapruder film was an infallible instrument for measurement of the time spacing between the shots.
In this chapter I will use only the first criteria of shot count to make my initial case, along with the evidence of the angle and depth of the wounds.
The second criteria will be discussed in the following chapter, but will not be used as conclusive evidence because it is my contention that frames were removed from the Zapruder film, making all timing evidence questionable insofar as rapidity of gun firing is concerned, and invalidating the Commission’s third criteria.
As a further point in analyzing this list, it should be realized that almost all ballistic evidence and earwitness testimony at the crime scene must be viewed skeptically in a highly sophisticated conspiracy, such as might be carried out by those having knowledge of or access to government intelligence.
By 1963, the CIA and military intelligence agencies had developed the use of such exotica as miniature machine guns with silencers and other sophisticated assassination methods, which either make it impossible to trace bullets back to any gun, or make it possible for markings of bullets fired from several rifles all to trace back to one rifle M41 This makes almost anything possible.
It greatly complicates the issue if we are seriously to consider that individuals from military intelligence or the CIA were involved in the conspiracy.
As mentioned before, over the past thirty years there have been endless debates over how to prove that there was more than one gunman at Dealey Plaza.
The simplest way I found was to narrow down the foregoing list of ten shots to an absolute minimum.
If that number exceeds the Commission’s criteria of three shots, there must have been a second gunman.
JFK’s wound in the throat: a small round hole, initially described by the attending physicians at Parkland Hospital, including Dr.
I will concede that all five could have been caused by one bullet, although this is by no means a certainty.
JFK’s back wound, as matched by the bullet holes in his jacket and shirt.
Therefore, JFK was assassinated by at least a conspiracy of two people.
With this seemingly irrefutable evidence of a second gunman, one might ask how the Warren Commission arrived at three shots.
They said, quite arbitrarily, that shots 2, 3, and 4 were all caused by one bullet.
To do this they had to ignore the indisputable evidence of the low, shallow back wound, as well as myriad other items of evidence, including the sworn testimonies of John and Nellie Connally, the timing evidence in the Zapruder film , and the FBI firing tests.
They also had to assume that the bullet found on the stretcher in Parkland Hospital was the bullet that shattered Connally’s rib and wrist bones, despite the fact that the person who found that bullet disputed their assumption of where he found it, and despite the fact that the bullet was in an almost perfect condition, with no measurable weight loss, had no traces of blood on it, did not account for the weight of lead fragments present in Connally’s leg bone as evidenced by x-rays, and had only a slight flattening at its base.
By this willfully capricious combining of shots 2, 3, and 4 into one shot, the Commission now needed only two shots to account for the minimum conceivable wounds on both Kennedy and Connally; they had one shot to spare.
They explained away all the remaining shots by either attributing them to fragments from the fatal head shot, or the one shot that had missed.
When these possibilities ran out they simply ignored the evidence by not mentioning it in their report.
By making all these arbitrary assumptions, Arlen Specter had set the ground rules.
From that point forward the seemingly irrefutable evidence became obfuscated.
It was apparent that the evidence of the location and nature of the back wound would be the crucial test in establishing proof that Arlen Specter’s hypothecations were without any foundation whatsoever.
The bullet would have exited from JFK’s chest, but there was no evidence of a wound in the front of his chest.
Line C-D is the path of the bullet required for it to exit from the throat if it entered at point “X” and passed through the body.
But probing of the wound in the autopsy showed that it did not pass through the body.
Moreover, this path was obviously not possible unless a bullet were fired from the trunk of the limousine, or from street level; but there was no evidence that such a shot occurred.
This obviously requires that there be an entrance wound in the back of JFK’s neck, about five inches higher than evidenced by the bullet holes in the clothing.
There was no such wound observed by personnel at Parkland Hospital or any other witnesses.
In addition, the testimonies of John and Nellie Connally are of great importance because they both testified adamantly that Kennedy was hit by a bullet and, an instant after that, John Connally was hit by a separate bullet.
Their testimonies, in themselves, nullify the Warren Commission’s hypothesis that the same bullet which struck Kennedy in the back also struck John Connally, and in so doing are evidence of a second gunman, and therefore evidence of a conspiracy.
Bullet Holes in JFK’s Jacket and Shirt Bullet holes in clothing of gunshot victims are considered prime evidence in forensic science.
This applies in particular, in this case, where Kennedy had a custom-made jacket and shirt, and where photographs taken during the actual crime showed them to be in a normal position on his back.
In Gerald Posner’s highly publicized book Case Closed, Posner had a serious problem dealing with the evidence of the bullet holes in the jacket and shirt.
He lamely inserted this footnote for a paragraph entitled ““The Neck Wound:” There was also some question as to why the location of the entry wound at the rear base of the President’s neck is several inches higher than is indicated by the bullet holes in his suit jacket and shirt.
Photographs taken during the motorcade show the President’s jacket was often bunched and riding up his back as a result of his waving to the crowd.
Therefore, measuring placement of the holes in the clothing is not an accurate means of determining precisely where the bullet entered the body.
At no point near or at the possible time of the occurrence of the back wound do photographs show the jacket bunched, let alone the shirt.
In fact, no one has ever produced a single photograph or film showing the jacket bunched except possibly after the fatal head wound when Kennedy had collapsed; and we should keep in mind that we are talking about a large amount of bunching —five inches—and with the shirt bunching the exact same amount as the jacket; and without either the jacket or shirt folding over, which would have resulted in double holes in the fabric.
When I learned more about the back brace, it became apparent that the notion that it pushed up the clothing to the extent required was without merit.
I referred to the Warren Commission Report and easily found all one needs to know about Kennedy’s back brace.
It was only six inches wide and only waist high, no higher than the navel.
Posner’s footnote is the total argument of lone-gunman proponents to deal with the bullet holes in Kennedy’s clothing.
The truth is that there has never been a credible argument to dismiss the photographs of the bullet holes in the jacket and shirt.
The bullet holes in the clothing do, in fact, show the true location of the back wound.
Eyewitness Testimonies Concerning Location of Back Wound Two Secret Service agents wrote reports concerning the location of the back wound.
I immediately looked from the right/crowd/physical area/and looked towards the President who was seated in the right rear seat of his limousine open convertible.
At the moment I looked at the back of the President I heard another firecracker noise and saw the shot hit the President about four inches down from the right shoulder.
I was requested by ASAIC Kellerman to come to the morgue to once again view the body.
When I arrived the autopsy had been completed and ASAIC Kellerman, SA Greer, General McHugh and I viewed the wounds.
I observed a wound about six inches down from the neckline on the back just to the right of the spinal column.
Attendants of the Joseph Gawler Mortuary were at this time preparing the body for placement in the casket.
Humes located an opening which appeared to be a bullet hole which was below the shoulders and two inches to the right of the middle line of the spinal column.
Humes with the finger, at which time it was determined that the trajectory of the missile entering at this point had entered at a downward position of 45 to 60 degrees.
Further probing determined that the distance traveled by this missile was a short distance inasmuch as the end of the opening could be felt with the finger.
FD 302, Federal Bureau of Investigation In this single report, the FBI agents clearly documented the location of the back wound as “below the shoulder,” the opening shallow—no more than a finger length—and the bullet entering at a downward angle.
This evidence was reinforced in a newly released document from the National Archives which was discovered by Anna Marie.
Attached to an interview of James Sibert by the HSCA (during its investigation in 1977) were sketches made by Sibert of the location of the back wound that he observed in the morgue.
This evidence leaves no doubt as to Sibert’s view of the location of the back wound.
Note in the sketch on the left that the back wound is well below the collar line.
Of particular note is the sketch on the right showing the back wound well below the neck wound, remarkably similar to line C-D in my sketch of the geometry of the wounds.
In adult, normal-size humans this is invariably about five or six inches below the neckline, corroborating the FBI agents’ report and Clinton Hill’s testimony, and agreeing exactly with the location of the bullet holes in the clothing.
Admiral Burkley was never called to testify before the Warren Commission, despite his having been the only medical person present at the crime scene who was also present at Parkland Hospital in Dallas and was present during the entire time of the autopsy at Bethesda.
Even the Warren Commission was on record, buried in the National Archives, indicating the location of the back wound as being below the elevation of the throat wound.
In a document classified TOP SECRET, dated January 27, 1964, obtained in a Freedom of Information lawsuit by Harold Weisberg, was the transcript of a meeting held by the Warren Commission.
Mr Rankin: Then there is a great range of material in regard to the wounds, and the autopsy and this point of exit or entrance of the bullet in the front of the neck, and that all has to be developed much more than we have at the present time.
We have an explanation there in the autopsy that probably a fragment came out the front of the neck, but with the elevation the shot must have come from, and the angle, it seems quite apparent now, since we have the picture of where the bullet entered in the back, that the bullet entered below the shoulder blade to the right of the backbone, which is below the place where the picture shows the bullet came out in the neck band of the shirt in front, and the bullet, according to the autopsy didn’t strike any bone at all, that particular bullet, and go through.
Shaw & Harris, Cover-Up, 63 The above statement, standing alone, casts severe doubt on the validity of the Warren Report, if not invalidating it.
Finally, we have the testimony of an autopsy pathologist being cross-examined in a court of law.
Ina rare case , one of the autopsy pathologists at Bethesda, Pierre A Finck, was crossexamined under oath concerning Kennedy’s back wound.
This was in a trial of the State of Louisiana v Clay L Shaw during the famous Jim Garrison trial in New Orleans.
I obtained a copy of the transcript from the National Archives, dated February 24, 1969, in which Dr.
Wounds are different in one case from another, and I did not ae This is further confirmation that the back wound was shallow and therefore did not penetrate through to the throat.
At no place in his book does Posner dare mention the foregoing statements of Secret Service agent Clinton Hill, or FBI agents Sibert and O’Neill, or Admiral Burkley’s death report, or Dr.
He did know—and he knew that his case for the lone gunman would be destroyed if he included these testimonies.
Posner’s case, like that of the Warren Commission, is clearly untenable.
The importance of the location and nature of the back wound cannot be overemphasized.
That evidence alone, combined with a simple count of the irreducible number of gunshots, proves—-beyond a reasonable doubt—that there were at least two assassins at Dealey Plaza, both firing at Kennedy at the same time.
Thus, no more than three shots would have been fired from Oswald’s rifle.
But a new document, found by Anna Marie in the National Archives, throws severe doubt on the three-empty-cartridges premise.
When I received this, it appeared to be most important evidence indeed.
How ironic, I thought, after all these years of arguing and controversy over the magic bullet and the number of shots, to discover such conclusive evidence that there were only two empty cartridges.
This FBI document and photograph were never, insofar as I have been able to determine, shown to the Warren Commission.
I had known about these documents in Shaw’s book but had decided to leave them out of this book on the basis that there were possibly other explanations for the change from 2 to 3, such as a simple correction of an honest mistake in the original report.
But now the photographs and the obviously authentic corroborating report in FBI agent Williams’ handwriting elevated the evidence in Shaw’s book to a “best evidence” rating.
For thirty years, this accumulation of evidence of a conspiracy had been buried and suppressed in the National Archives under the guise of national security.
It is difficult to imagine how different history would have been had these photographs been made available to the public in 1963.
I also decided to dig further into the Warren Commission Report and Gary Shaw’s book to see what else was available.
Strangely this had been overlooked by everyone, or it had been seen and dismissed for some reason.
I then looked at the testimony of Dallas Deputy Sheriff Luke Mooney, who was the person who had discovered the cartridges on the sixth floor.
His testimony deserves inclusion here to show how Commissioner Joseph Ball, in his questioning of Mooney, arrived at the Warren Commission’s conclusion of three empty shells.
Yes, sir; he was the first officer that picked them up, as far as I know, because I stood there and watched him go over and pick them up and look at them.
As far as I could tell, J couldn t even tell what caliber they were, because I didn t get down that close to them.
That is just about the way they were laying, to the best of my knowledge.
I do know there was—one was further away, and these other two were relatively close together—on this particular area.
But these cartridges—this one and this one looks like they are further apart than they actually was.
I could not believe my eyes—for thirty years there was a photograph in the Warren Commission Report apparently showing only two empty shells and one round of live ammunition and it seemingly had never been observed by anyone.
She said she was also surprised to see that this was a round of live ammunition and did not know of anyone who had noticed it before or written about it.
I then went back to Gary Shaw’s book and found that, although not mentioning the photograph in the Commission Report showing two empty shells and one live round, he had written that only two empty cartridges were turned over to the FBI by the Dallas police.
It also appeared that this information had been glossed over and suppressed because it would have devastated the conclusion of the Warren Commission of a lone gunman, which was linked to three empty cartridge cases, based on what the FBI told the Commission.
I wondered how an honorable man such as Joseph Ball could have gotten himself involved in such a transparent scheme.
After completing the above writing, yet another document would surface on June 27, 1994 that added credence to the conclusion of only two empty shells.
Note two spent hulls, not three, as was used by the Warren Commission to “make” its case for a lone gunman.
I thought surely no more evidence could ever be necessary to put away forever the Warren Com-mission’s single-bullet fabrication.
The first shot hit Kennedy, the second shot hit Connally, and the third shot hit Kennedy.
Two of the shots fired at the President were splintered...but they had characteristics on them so that our ballistics experts were able to prove that they were fired by this gun...the third shot which hit the President...he was hit by the first and the third...second shot hit the Governor.
The third shot is a complete bullet...and that ruled out of the President’s head...it tore a large part of the President’s head off...and, in trying to massage his heart at the hospital...on the way to the hospital...they apparently loosened that and it fell on to the stretcher.
This is indisputable proof that on November 29, 1963, J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson knew that Connally and Kennedy were hit by separate bullets and, therefore, they knew that the Warren Report was a fraud when it was later issued.
I asked myself what could have been the chain of events that led to this obvious alteration and suppression of evidence.
The initial plan was for three shots to do the job. /t was not necessary that it appear to be a lone assassin.
On the contrary, it was intended to look like a conspiracy originating in Cuba.
The third shot would be fired from the front-right and meant to be the fatal shot.
With this advance plan, two empty shell cases to match Oswald’s rifle were either planted on the sixth floor or in fact fired from Oswald’s rifle.
The conspirators then signaled for a fourth shot from a second location at the rear, to be certain of a fatal shot.
That was the fatal shot that hit Kennedy in the right-front temple, tearing out a gaping hole in the back of his head #24 3.
Acopy of the Zapruder film of the assassination was sent to J Edgar Hoover on November 23.
By that time, the decision had been made to drop the original plan and go to the lone-assassin story.
This is why he told Johnson on November 29 that separate shots hit Connally and Kennedy.
Since only two empty cartridges had either been planted or fired from Oswald’s rifle, and since photographs had been taken and reports prepared to that effect, this evidence had to be suppressed, destroyed, or forged.
A few weeks after Hoover talked with Johnson, the Commission would discover, after analyzing the Zapruder film, that if the film were to be used as timing evidence it would have been impossible for Oswald to have fired all three shots in the time between the shots shown on the film.
The only way the Commission could resolve this was to make the arbitrary assumption that the bullet which struck Kennedy in the back passed through Kennedy’s throat and went on to inflict all the wounds on Connally.
The Commission then used up one more bullet as causing JFK’s fatal head wound.
They were now at the point where two bullets could, with their fabrications, explain all of the wounds inflicted on both Kennedy and Connally.
But having the altered evidence in their possession showing three empty cartridges, there was one bullet left over.
This convenient rationale could be used to partially explain the evidence of other shots.
The Commission stated that it did not know whether the first shot or the second shot was the one that missed.
And this is how it was left in the Commission’s final report and where it stands today.
Then the Commission guided Mooney to state in his testimony that there were three empty shells.
Thus the alteration and deception to conceal the fact of only two empty cartridges were ordered and carried out.
Only later would the timing evidence in the FBI firing test and the Zapruder film force the Warren Commission into its ridiculous magic-bullet hypothesis.
In my later conversations with Mary Ferrell, she pointed out that three empty cartridges were in fact shown in Commission Exhibit 512.
There is a darkened area around it and the cartridge appears to be bent.
Somehow, both the authentic photo and the forged photo slipped through to the Commission.
It shows a pragmatic but botched attempt by the FBI, in concert with the Dallas police, to fabricate evidence to create the illusion that Oswald acted alone after the original plan had gone badly wrong.
Because the people in charge of the investigation, LBJ and Hoover, made it work.
They had the power to tailor and confine the investigation to suit their needs. ok OK ok If the foregoing doesn’t convince the reader, there is much more evidence to prove that there was more than one gunman.
Certain officials in United States government considered it absolutely indispensable that evidence of more than one gunman be suppressed, distorted, or destroyed.
If the foregoing evidence had not been suppressed or distorted it seems inescapable that outrage would have arisen in the American public, and a complete investigation would have been demanded.
The citizens of this country would not have been satisfied until a second gunman was found.
As will be discussed in the following chapters, the government officials were compelled to resort to even more extreme measures to cover up the crime, some that were so bizarre and so ghoulish as to defy imagination.
In a court of law before an impartial and intelligent jury, it would seem that no further evidence would be required to prove a conspiracy of major magnitude.
This evidence, one should confidently feel, would meet reasonable-doubt standards; arguments to the contrary would cease.
To this day, thirty-three years later, there remains a small but influential scattering of people, articulate and intelligent, who write papers, stand on lecture platforms, and righteously defend the fabricated story of the lone assassin.
This is apparent in such influential organs as the Journal of the American Medical Association which has in recent years launched a campaign publishing articles attacking what it derisively calls the Conspirati—as if those who challenge the Warren Commission are a small band of radicals and paranoiacs—ignoring the fact that polls show only 13 percent of the American populace believe the Warren Commission Report.
For more analysis of evidence supporting the conclusion that Connally was struck by a separate bullet, please study the Zapruder frames in the following chapters and in the color photo section.
Included in the captions are arguments of proponents of the lone-assassin hypothesis.
Also included is the story of the alteration of the Zapruder film by the conspirators in a desperate attempt to conceal evidence of a second gunman.
Secret Service agent Glenn Bennett testified that when Kennedy was hit a hole appeared in his back about four inches below the shoulder line.
The same location of the back wound was observed and shown on diagrams by witnesses present at the autopsy.
Note that Kennedy’s jacket is not “bunched up” as claimed by Gerald Posner.
Very clear photographs of the fit of Kennedy’s jacket are shown later in this book.
The cumulative, overwhelming, tangible evidence and testimony that the bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt in Exhibits 10-7 and 10-8 accurately locate the back wound devastates the Warren Commission’s single-gunman hypothesis; it reduces to absurdity Gerald Posner’s argument of a “bunched up” jacket and shirt.
FBI Agent Sibert’s sketch showing location of back wound, neck wound, and head wound.
This shows the location of the back wound well below the collar line and in agreement with the bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt, and testimonies of other witnesses.
These photos show bullets fitted with an accelerator or “sabot,” a small plastic device which allows a smaller caliber slug to be fired from a larger shell casing.
Using such a device with a full charge of gunpowder in the shell casing, the smaller slug will have increased velocity.
The smaller slug also could have been previously fired and recovered, resulting in ballistic markings which match the original weapon and not the 30.06 which fired the “sabot”’ slug.
By using a partially charged cartridge, a “sabot’” can be used for a “meat shot’; that is to fire a bullet at low velocity that does not penetrate the body, but is a marker found in the body that will trace back to a rifle from which the bullet was not fired—i.e., Oswald’s rifle.
Photo B shows bullet in sabot inserted in 30.06-caliber cartridge case.
In Photo A, a man thought to be an FBI agent bends over to pick up an object.
Photo B is a close-up of the man’s hand reaching for an object appearing to be a bullet.
Evidence of Shots Striking the President’s Limousine A dent in the chrome windshield trim of the president’s limousine, evidence of a bullet fired from the rear.
Yet Secret Service Chief James J Rowley wrote a letter to the Warren Commission in which he stated that the damage was on the car before November 22, 1963.
This damage is clearly not visible in any photos taken before the sbooute at aye yet come to light.
Also observed by witnesses after the shooting, and clearly not visible in the Zapruder film before the shooting.
Bullet mark on curb of Main Street, as photographed on the afternoon of November 22. im o* ota sy Bs os a — Section of Main Street curbing removed by the FBI in July 1964.
Position of bystander James Tague when he was nicked in the cheek by a bullet fragment.
Kennedy’s jacket showing an alleged bullet hole 5'D2 inches below the collar line in the back.
This matches the location of the wound spotted on the autopsy drawing and as described by Secret Service agent Clinton Hill.
James Humes was somehow convinced to raise it up to neck level in his written report after it was discovered that the location did not match a downward trajectory through the neck wound, which was required for the Warren Commission conclusions that John Connally was struck by the same bullet that struck Kennedy.
Kennedy’s clothing was never delivered to the autopsy pathologists, a gross violation of procedure.
This hole is 5'D2 inches below the collar line and almost exactly matches the location of the hole in Kennedy’s jacket shown in Exhibit 10-7.
Proponents of the Warren Commission hypothesis explained this by saying that Kennedy’s jacket was hiked up at the time of impact.
But the Zapruder film and a photograph taken at the alleged time of impact shows that the jacket was not hiked up.
Further, they could not explain how the shirt could also have been hiked up by such a large amount without it having been folded over.
Bullets Found That Were Traceable to the Alleged Rifle , Compared to a Bullet Fired Through the Wrist of a Cadaver.
On the left, bullet CE 399, found on a stretcher in the basement of Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
It has never been established that it was Connally’s stretcher and it certainly was not Kennedy’s stretcher.
But that could easily have been accomplished by the conspirators firing the rifle into long tubes filled with cotton or into a tank of water.
This is evidence of a conspiracy with sophisticated advanced planning having taken place well before the assassination.
Warren Commission Report Base of bullet CE 399, showing minor distortion and area where some metal was missing.
Rifle markings of these two fragments positively matched Oswald’s rifle, but the tests were unable to determine if the two fragments were from the same bullet.
These fragments also could have been plants because the limousine had been examined by a variety of security people, including Dallas police, before it was returned to Washington.
Or, for that matter, the bullet fragments could have been planted by the Secret Service in the White House basement in Washington, D.C., after the limousine was returned.
As bizarre as this sounds, we must keep in mind that once we consider the possibility that the Secret Service was involved in the assassination, these unthinkable things become thinkable.
Pristine Bullets—One Found on Dallas Stretcher, Compared to Two Fired into Long Tubes Filled with Cotton.
The bullet in the center is the bullet purportedly found on John Connally’s stretcher.
The other two bullets were fired from Oswald’s rifle into long tubes of cotton; it is difficult to tell the difference between these bullets and the one in the center.
Because of manufacturing variations, all bullet weights are approximate and it is not possible to determine the exact weight loss of a fired bullet without knowing its exact weight prior to firing.
I cannot accept the premise that this bullet thrashed around in all that bony tissue and lost only 1. to 2. grains of its original weight.
See Exhibit 10-9A for example of bullet fired into the wrist of a cadaver.
At first it appeared that a positive link had been made by the HSCA, but the credibility of the tests was severely diminished when it was revealed that the fragments were not traceable back to having come from bullet CE 399.
For some reason, the sheet below, verified by Kennedy’s personal physician, Admiral Burkley, later obtained under a Freedom of Information lawsuit, was kept secret.
Admiral Burkley was never called to testify before the Warren Commission, despite having been present at the scene, on the flight returning to Washington, D.C., and at the autopsy.
This photo is one of eight similar photos from the same set found by Anna Marie in the National Archives.
By the Commission’s own criteria, if there were not three empty bullet hulls then there must have been a second gunman.
Tiprit at ( Yethodiat Horsitel ty Dr. “aul Moollebets button ( at 11 pa.
Jerry Will whe pove ft te Det, Faker. rrtel frapnente taken from body of Mire.
Audrey Pell, Opereting rees noree,to Geverner Connally ae Tod Nolen, D.P.5., to Cept.
Frits, to Crime Live reund 6,5 ( Feetvered ty Tept, Sheriff Luke Mooney at { hil Sin, 62% floce, southeast window, Found by Dep. .heriff Mooney.
The cartridge in the lower circle appears to be a crude attempt of forgery to conceal that it was live ammunition as apparently shown in Exhibit 1014.
Mr Zapruder: .../ started yelling, “They killed him, they killed him,” and I just felt that somebody had ganged up on him and I was still shooting the pictures until he got under the underpass. —I don’t even know how I did it.
But even today, I have elected to stay with the frames in the original Bloody Treason because of their higher fidelity, and they were not subject to errors made in the MIP conversion process.
Costella’s edit that inserts missing frames that were lost in the MPI process, corrects for pin-cushion effects at the sprocket holes, and wrong frame numbers.
Any changes that I have made in the captions are highlighted and in brackets.
The total film, lasting about twenty-six seconds, shows in startling fidelity the assassination of a beloved and idolized president of the United States.
The film shows the facial expressions of horror and disbelief of Jacqueline Kennedy and John Connally.
It even shows a small red spot appear on the back of John Connally’s jacket as he crumples after being struck by the assassin’s bullet.
But, more important, it reveals evidence of a conspiracy that, by deduction from the chain of possession of the film, leads to the conclusion that the highest government officials must have been involved.
Yet the great majority of the American people have seen only a few of these frames, and generally those of very poor quality.
The Zapruder frames were first analyzed by me using Canon color copies that I made from 35mm slides of the film, which I had obtained from David Lifton, author of the book Best Evidence on the Kennedy assassination.
I made a set of slides and print copies of all frames from the film positives.
I compared each frame with those printed in the Warren Commission Report to be certain I was dealing with the same evidence that was used by the Warren Commission.
Then I visited the Washington, D.C., attorney who handles the Zapruder family estate, James Silverberg, Esq., and obtained rental copies of selected frames and a continuous film strip copy made from the professed original 8mm film now held in the National Archives.
I was limited by James Silver-berg to publishing only twenty-six frames, subject to a royalty fee.
The reader is urged to study the frames and their captions and the referenced exhibits.
It cuts across almost all chapters in the book and should be read with that in mind.
The material is graphic and shocking but nevertheless requires careful scrutiny for those who want to understand the prime forensic evidence in the assassination.
JFK was first hit either just before or after he passed behind the freeway sign.
The Zapruder film, when projected on the screen, does not show the limousine slowing down or stopping, contrary to the sworn testimonies of credible eyewitnesses.
The Zapruder film does not show the fatal blowout of the back of JFK’s head described by doctors and nurses at Parkland Hospital.
Additional evidence of frame removal in the film is indicated by John Connally’s position in the limousine shown in the Moorman photograph.
At no frame in the Zapruder film does Connally appear in this position.
The fact of frame removal from the film makes it possible for one gunman from the rear to have had time to fire the fatal head shot and to fire a separate shot that struck John Connally.
By referring to the color photo section, we can evaluate the validity of the foregoing conclusions.
But, first, it will be helpful to study Exhibit 11-1, which shows the timing of the critical events leading up to the fatal shot at Zapruder frame 313, based on the assumption that the film has not been altered or frames removed—an assumption that I will argue is invalid.
This chart is based on the assumption that the Zapruder film has not been altered or frames removed; it is presented here for analytical purposes only.
Refer to color photo section for analysis of the Zapruder frames and tests with athletes which prove the validity of the conclusion that the Zapruder film was altered.
The crucial point to consider is the maximum rotational speed to which the athletes were capable of accelerating their heads and shoulders, as compared to Greer as shown in the Zapruder film.
Note in the table that the maximum angular velocity of Greer is double that of Dawson and three times that of Marler.
Therefore Greer would have required four times the energy of Dawson, and nine times the energy of Marler.
One explanation for the slower speed of Marler compared to Dawson is that Marler was seated in a convertible automobile, thus being more restrained or anchored on his bottom, whereas Dawson was seated on a stool and could spin around more readily.
We will now examine, in depth, how the forgery of the Zapruder film could have been accomplished, and who most likely did it.
Yes; 1 was there and I would say this couldn’t be anybody else, unless—if this is an authentic photograph and it isn’t composed now or changed—I would say that’s me.
Many who believe that there was a conspiracy cite the rapid backward acceleration of Kennedy’s body in the Zapruder film after the fatal head shot as prime evidence of a bullet striking from the front or right; and they cite the measurement of time between shots in the Zapruder film as proof that Oswald could not have acted alone.
But, if frames have been removed from the film, that evidence is put in question, on all sides of the controversy.
As for myself, for years I never questioned the authenticity of the Zapruder film.
This was only after I obtained a high-quality copy of the film and examined it frame by frame in enlarged prints, in light of all of the other pertinent evidence I could identify.
My first thought was to resolve the question of whether or not the missing frames could have been introduced by a mechanical defect in the camera, causing it to randomly skip frames.
Most people with whom I discussed this—including an experienced motion picture editor and an eminent motion picture technologist’ ~—-scoffed at the thought.
But, nevertheless, I thought that the possibility should be dealt with by independent, formal, scientific analysis before proceeding.
I decided to approach Failure Analysis, Inc., an engineering and scientific firm in Menlo Park, California, to see if it could help me analyze a duplicate of the Bell and Howell camera that Zapruder had used to take the movie.
The company became involved in the controversy of the Kennedy assassination when it agreed to do a study for the California Bar Association in which it developed arguments, pro and con, for the lone-gunman hypothesis.
Unfortunately, what most people know about its work is only from those who want to prove Oswald acted alone.
It is not generally known that Failure Analysis, Inc., had developed both sides of the evidence.
Roger McCarthy, had arbitrarily taken the side that there was more than one gunman.
Inasmuch as his company seemed to be very balanced and objective, I felt I could approach him with a request for a proposal to do a failure analysis on Zapruder’s Bell and Howell camera, without expecting him to side one way or the other on the controversy.
She told me that they had decided not to become further involved in the Kennedy assassination controversy because it was costing them too much money.
It was interesting that she said Gerald Posner had called their firm inquiring about their work and had talked only with their scientist who had taken the side of the lone-gunman hypothesis.
The next thing they knew, Posner’s book came out using their material to try to make his case.
McCarthy had taken the side that there was more than one gunman; but, nevertheless, they were not going to get involved further.
One point she did make, however, which proved to be quite revealing, was a suggestion by Dr.
He suggested that it would not be fruitful to pursue mechanical analysis of the Bell and Howell camera but, rather, more information might be gained by studying the white spot appearing on the grass just above the limousine.
I had seen that white spot before and had considered that it might be a good index point for measurement of limousine speed, but had done nothing about it.
I was surprised to see that it was a straight line, indicating no abrupt changes of the limousine speed with respect to the white spot, which one might expect if frames had been removed.
The fact that this was essentially a straight line did not prove whether frames were or were not removed, but it did prove that there was no random skipping of frames.
The reason for this is that if frames had been skipped randomly there would have been at least one distinctive upward jog in the time-motion line on the graph.
So here, without spending several thousand dollars , was proof that there was no random skipping of frames caused by a camera malfunction.
But I also wondered if it were proof that no frames had been removed at all.
The graph shows an almost perfect uniform rate of advance , indicating that there was not random skipping of frames due to mechanical defect in the camera.
It does not prove, however, whether or not there was a deliberate removal of frames in a consistent pattern by the conspirators.
I imagined the limousine standing still, having come to a complete stop.
Further, I imagined that none of the limousine’s occupants were moving and that there were no moving objects in the background.
In this case, the camera could skip frames and it would not be noticed when projected on a screen, or in a frame-by-frame viewing, only if precisely all of the frames in which the limousine was standing still were somehow miraculously skipped by the camera.
If the camera had not precisely skipped all of the missing frames, there would be a horizontal jog in the line.
The possibility of the camera precisely skipping all the missing frames was, of course, nil.
In this case, if there were a random skipping of frames it would show up in jogs upward from the straight line, at least in one spot on the graph.
If they had removed frames in a consistent pattern, say two out of every four frames, or four out of every five frames, and they had removed all of the frames when the limousine was standing still, then the time/motion graph would be a straight line; any excessively rapid motion in the film would stand out as appearing unusual because there would be a sudden jump— such as the rapid movement of Greer’s head and upper body and Kennedy’s head and upper body.
The two foregoing scenarios fit exactly the case we have in these frames.
The limousine is moving slowly, perhaps very slowly, or standing still.
There are no moving objects in the background except people who are standing still or moving very slowly.
At this point, I had satisfied myself that frames had been removed by the conspirators, and I saw that they had an impossible situation.
They could remove frames to delete incriminating evidence and get an apparent uniform speed of the limousine, but they could not conceal excessively rapid movements of passengers in the limousine.
That would have required an almost complete recreation of the film which, with the technology available in 1963, would probably have been impossible.
Their attempts to forge the Zapruder film would ultimately be discovered.
Their only hope now was to suppress the distribution of the film—print only limited frames or poor-quality copies of the film for the public, hoping the forgery would not be discovered until the conspirators were long gone.
The Zapruder film was never shown to the public in complete detail until pried out of the hands of Life magazine by District Attorney Jim Garrison in New Orleans.
I then examined the film for the frames around Z302 and Z303 using the same technique.
The limousine showed an almost perfectly uniform motion, but the rapid turn of Greer, turning backward between Z302 and Z303 with his head in sharp focus, revealed that frames had been removed in a consistent pattern.
Mathematical Proof of Missing Frames Now I considered that calculations should prove, to a mathematical certainty, that a turn as rapid as Greer’s would result in a severe motion blur of his head in the photograph.
This is obviously impossible, but let’s go on with the blur calculations.
Although Zapruder’s Bell and Howell camera had a shutter speed of 1/18. frames per second, the actual exposure time was 1/30 second, according to Dr.
To calculate blur, one simply has to calculate the distance that a point on the cylinder would travel in 1/30 second.
Since any point on the cylinder would travel the same distance, all points would be a blur.
But there is little or no motion blur in Greer’s hairline above the forehead.
And the head and shoulder turn must have miraculously started and finished in the .0213-second period when the shutter was closed, for that single frame, a possibility so far-fetched as to be ridiculous.
The beauty of this discovery is that scientific laboratories and white-frocked scientists are not needed.
Anybody who has an 8mm movie camera or a video camera with frame-by-frame playback can easily prove it.
Pick any number of select subjects and tape them making head turns as fast as they can.
I know of no other evidence in the Kennedy assassination that is so convincing and so easily demonstrable.
In point of fact, as noted in Chapter 11, this test was duplicated by an independent researcher, Charles Marler.
He took motion pictures at 18 frames per second with an 8mm camera while his twenty-year-old son Chad, an athlete with a green belt in karate, sat in a convertible automobile, turning his body as rapidly as he could.
Limousine Slows Almost to a Stop As stated in Chapter 11, additional evidence of forgery of the Zapruder film may be deduced by the fact that during the fatal shot sequence, numerous eyewitnesses testified that the limousine had slowed down drastically or had come to a complete stop, yet the Zapruder film shows a virtually uniform speed during this time period.
There is a long list of eyewitnesses who say the limousine either slowed down, swerved to the curb, or stopped completely.
I selected a few testimonies in the Warren Commission Report to demonstrate the credibility and obvious authenticity of these sworn testimonies.
He picked up a little speed along here, and then seemed to have fallen back into line, and I would say 10 or 12 miles an hour in this area.
Mr Truly. heard an explosion, which I thought was a toy cannon or a loud firecracker from west of the building.
And immediately after two more explosions, which I realized that I thought was a gun, a rifle of some kind.
The President’s—/ saw the Presidents car swerve to the left and stop somewheres down in this area.
And that is the last I saw of his car, because this crowd, when the third shot rang out—there was a large crowd all along this abutment here, this little wall, and there was some around us in front—they began screaming and falling to the ground.
And the people in front of myself and Mr Campbell surged back, either in terror or panic.
They just practically bore me back to the first step on the entrance of our building.
The crowd in front of me kind of congealed around me and bore me back through weight of numbers, and I lost sight of it.
J talked to Jim Chaney, and he made the statement that the two shots hit Kennedy first and then the other one hit the governor.
He was on the right rear of the car or to the side, and then at that time the chief of police, he didn’t know anything about this, and he moved up and told him, and then that was during the time that the Secret Service men were trying to get in the car, and at the time, after the shooting, from the time the first shot rang out, the car stopped completely, pulled to the left and stopped.
Now, I have heard several of them say that, Mr Truly was standing out there, he said it stopped.
Yes, sir; that it had completely stopped, and then for a moment there, and then they rushed on out to Parkland.
Harkness was a Dallas policeman standing in the plaza area south of Elm Street.
When I saw the first shot and the President’s car slow down to almost a stop— Mr Belin.
When I heard the first shot and saw the President’s car almost come to a stop and some of the agents piling off the car, I went back to the intersection to get my motorcycle.
Yes; when President Kennedy straightened back up in the car the bullet hit him in the head, the one that killed him and it seemed like his head exploded, and I was splattered with blood and brain, and kind of a bloody water.
After the Presidential motorcade had passed through the heart of downtown Dallas, experiencing an exceptionally warm and friendly greeting, as the motorcade went down the slope of Elm Street toward the railroad underpass, a rifle shot was heard by me; a loud blast, close by.
I have handled firearms for fifty years, and thought immediately that it was a rifle shot.
After what I took to be about three seconds, another shot boomed out, and after what I took to be one-half the time between the first and second shots (calculated now, this would have put the third shot about one and one-half seconds after the second shot—by my estimate—to me there seemed to be a long time between the first and second shots, a much shorter time between the second and third shots—these were my impressions that day), a third shot was fired.
After the third shot was fired, but only after the third shot was fired, the cavalcade speeded up, gained speed rapidly, and roared away to the Parkland Hospital.
Yet, by merely looking at the Zapruder film with the casual naked eye, it is obvious that the film shows the limousine passing by without slowing, stopping, or swerving.
I was now convinced that frames were indeed missing and that skipping of frames had not been caused by a mechanical defect in the camera.
Beyond a reasonable doubt, frames had been removed by the conspirators to conceal evidence.
I decided to set that issue aside for the moment while I examined the chain of possession of the film; perhaps it would lead me to the conspirators.
The evidence concerning chain of possession of the Zapruder film was almost all from eyewitness testimonies or interviews of eyewitnesses.
Exhibits 12-2A, B, and C show a summary of the key events in the chain of possession.
Abraham Zapruder films assassination; returns to his office in state of shock.
Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels meets with Zapruder and requests copies of film.
Zapruder refuses to give film to police; insists on government representative.
Four film positives developed at Eastman Kodak after three reversal duplicates developed at Jamison Film Company, using Kodachrome II camera stock furnished to Jamison by Eastman Kodak.
Interview of Schwartz by Richard Bartholomew and Noel Twyman, 11/21/94 in Dallas; interview with Bruce Jamison 12/26/94.
Zapruder and Schwartz deliver one copy of the film to Secret Service office in Dallas with understanding that it was to be sent immediately to FBI headquarters in Washington, D:G.. by courier jet plane.
Richard B Stolley of Life magazine contacts Zapruder; asks to meet to view film; Zapruder agrees to meet at 9m.
November 23, 1963 One copy of film obtained by Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley from Sorrels.
It was returned to the Secret Service office in Dallas on December 4, 1963, where it was retained.
Shackelford citing memo of Sorrels to Thomas J Kelley; and National Archives document released 6/12/94 8:00m.: Stolley meets with Zapruder one hour early to view film, along with Secret Service agents.
Shackelford cites Richard Stolley in Esquire that Stolley took Zapruder’s original and a copy when he left Zapruder’s office at 10m. on November 23.
Jackson was “so upset” by head wound sequence that he proposed all rights be purchased from Zapruder and withheld from public viewing.
November 29, 1963 Life publishes issue showing selected frames from Zapruder film.
October 2, 1964 Life publishes issue showing fatal head shot, but again not showing frames 302, 303, 315, 316, 317.
Photograph of 8mm Zapruder film spool received at the FBI lab in Washington, D.C., on November 27, 1963.
Abraham Zapruder shot his film at 12:30m.; afterward, in a state of shock and confusion, he returned to his office, only one-half block from the scene of the crime.
From that point on it becomes somewhat murky as to what happened to the film, depending on whose testimony one wants to believe.
This interview was arranged for me by Erwin Schwartz’s nephew, Richard Bartholomew, who is a researcher and writer on the Kennedy assassination.
We conducted the interview at Vincent’s Seafood Restaurant in Dallas over lunch.
Schwartz said that when he arrived, two Dallas policemen with shotguns were there demanding the film.
Zapruder refused to give it to them, saying that he would only give it to government officials.
Shortly after that, Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels arrived and Zapruder agreed to work with him in giving up the film.
They checked around and found that the best place to get the film developed was Eastman Kodak in Dallas.
Zapruder, Schwartz, and Sorrels then took the film to Eastman Kodak and had it developed.
During that time, Sorrels received a phone call and then told Zapruder and Schwartz that he would have to leave them, and asked if they would do him a favor and get three prints made.
After discussions between Sorrels and Eastman Kodak and another phone call, the decision was made to take the film to Jamison Film Company in Dallas for reversal duplicate copies to be made, which was necessary before more positive prints could be made at Eastman Kodak.
At about 6m. on November 22, Schwartz and Zapruder took the original positive copy to Jamison Film and had three reversal duplicates made.
They had a Jamison representative sign a statement that they would make no more than the three reversal duplicates.
Schwartz and Zapruder then took the three reversal duplicates back to Eastman Kodak where three additional positive prints were made, making a total of four positive prints.
They then went to the Secret Service office and gave one of the prints to agent Sorrels, which, according to Abraham Zapruder, was sent to FBI headquarters on late November 22 or early November 93 80 That was very important information because it has generally been accepted that Eastman Kodak developed not only the original copy of the film but also all of the work.
With Jamison Film entering the scene, I thought new light might be shed on what happened in the chain of possession.
But later, in a lengthy telephone conversation with Bruce Jamison, I became convinced that all Jamison did was make the three reversal duplicates, all the time under the watchful eye of Abraham Zapruder, and no bootleg copies were made.
The notion that Eastman Kodak had done all of the work on the film is primarily from Forrest Sorrels’ testimony to the Warren Commission.
He was the special agent in charge of the Dallas operations for the Secret Service.
So we went on to a building at the corner of Elm and Houston, on the east side of Houston, and across the street from the court house building there, and up to the office of a Mr Zapruder, they have a dress manufacturing place there in that building.
And he was there with another man connected with the business there, and apparently some magazine representatives there.
He said that he didn’t know how in the world he had taken these pictures, that he was down there and was taking the thing there, and he says, “My God, I saw the whole thing.
And so I asked Mr Zapruder would it be possible for us to get a copy of those films.
So then accompanied by Mr Zapruder, and this other gentleman in the business there with him, whose name I don’t recall at the moment, and Mr McCormack, we went then to the Dallas Morning News Building, which is about three blocks from Mr Zapruder’s building, three or four blocks from there, with the idea of getting those films developed right away.
We then went to the television section, WFAA, of the Dallas Morning News, to see if we could get them to handle it there, and they said, no, they would not attempt to do that, but they did assist us by calling Eastman Kodak Co., and they said if we came out there right away, that they would get right on it.
We got a police car, and went right on out to the Eastman Kodak Co., and while there I met another gentleman who had seen some still pictures, and I arranged with him for us to get copies of those.
Also, Sorrels mentions “another man connected with the business there” whom we now see was Erwin Schwartz.
In Zapruder’s testimony, Wesley Liebeler questioned him about the development of the film.
One we have sent to Washington the same night and one went over for the viewers of the FBI on Ervay Street.
The Secret Service—I brought one roll there and they told me to dispatch it by Army plane or I don’t know what they had done with it but it was supposed to have gone to Washington and one of them, I believe, remained here with Mr Sorrels.
He came to my office quite a few times to show them to different people.
This is confirmed in a recent document I obtained from the National Archives showing that a copy of the film was sent to the FBI on November 23 by the Secret Service.
Now we have something appearing to be sinister that enters the picture.
Hunt family had purchased the original of the Zapruder film is not incompatible with any of the foregoing testimonies.
I had ruled out that a bootleg copy could have been purchased by the Hunt family from Jamison Film or one of its employees.
According to Life magazine’s Richard Stolley, he obtained these two copies from Zapruder the next day and sent the original to Chicago and, presumably, also sent the duplicate copy.
From the above we see that one possibility that seems open for Rothermel to have obtained a copy would have been from inspector Thomas Kelley, or someone else in the Secret Service office on November 23.
Hunt could have obtained this copy, had a duplicate made, and later returned it to the Secret Service in Dallas before it was sent to the FBI laboratory in Washington, D.C., on November 27, 1963.
Hunt must have obtained his copy the next day, then returned it to the Secret Service within four days.
This would mean that Rothermel was mistaken when he said he purchased a copy on the evening of November 22—it was more likely November 23.
After many phone calls, Life’s representative, Richard Stolley, finally got through to Abraham Zapruder at around midnight on November 22.
The next morning, Stolley arrived at 8m., an hour early, to meet with Zapruder.
He and some Secret Service agents viewed the film on what Stolley described as a rickety projector.
Stolley later wrote that in viewing the film he saw the fatal head shot with Kennedy’s brains being blown out.
After viewing the film, Stolley entered into negotiations with Zapruder to purchase print rights.
He started with an offer of $15,000 and within ten minutes had settled for $50,000.
Zapruder would later testify to the Warren Commission that Life magazine paid only $25,000 for the film, when, in fact, at the time of his testimony, Zapruder had entered into a contract to receive a total of $150,000, including all rights.
Zapruder testified that he turned the original over to Stolley for Life magazine’s use.
According to Stolley, on November 23 the original was then sent by courier to Life's Chicago office, where it was studied on a Moviola projector and ten black-and-white prints were made.
Jackson was “so upset” by the head-wound sequence that he proposed all rights be purchased from Zapruder and the film withheld from public viewing.
Thus, an additional $100,000 was added to Zapruder’s contract, making it a total of $150,000.
On November 29, 1963, Life published an issue showing selected frames from the Zapruder film.
On October 2, 1964, Life published an issue showing the fatal head shot, but again not showing frames 302, 303, 316, 317.
Not until thirty years later were the rapid head turns noticed, although close scrutiny does show them in the Warren Report prints if one looks for them.
We will ask it and if you would rather not answer it—the Commission feels it would be helpful.
I received $25,000, as you know, and I have given that to the Firemen’s and Policemen’s Benevolence with a suggestion for Mrs.
Mr Zapruder. $25,000 was paid and I have given it to the Firemen’s and Policemen’s fund.
I got letters from all over the world and newspapers—I mean letters from all over the world.
It was all over the world—I am surprised— that you don’t know it—I don’t like to talk about it too much.
Mr Zapruder. \haven’t done anything, the way I have given it, at a time like this.
Zapruder, it would seem, was simply unable to admit that he had gotten so much money for his few seconds of film of the assassination of the president of the United States.
The point is, however, that Zapruder was not telling the truth and, moreover, he was promoting a false image of himself.
Therefore, it casts doubt on other segments of his testimony, although there is no substantial reason to believe that the balance of the testimony was not truthful, at least as Zapruder remembered, or as questions were asked.
Zapruder probably hedged only on the question of how much money he was paid.
There is also reason to question FBI agent Forrest Sorrels’ truthfulness.
Still photos in the Warren Commission Report reveal that Sorrels returned to Dealey Plaza.
Sorrels was either lying or greatly confused about what happened that afternoon.
So those who question Paul Rothermel’s statements should equally question statements of Zapruder and Sorrels.
One of my objectives was to see if the opportunity were present for conspirators to delete frames from the film.
If frames were altered after Life received its copy, then it would seem indisputable that Life must have known about it or have been involved in it.
My research, it will be shown, is that, although extremely unlikely, it was possible for the film to have been edited and frames deleted before Life received its copy.
As long as the conspirators had control of all of the other copies, their secret would remain intact among themselves.
But, in my opinion, it is more likely that one or two individuals within Life were privy to knowledge that the Zapruder film was altered while it was in the hands of the FBI or others.
To make it clear, I am not alleging that Life, as an organization, was part of a conspiracy to murder the president.
But we should keep in mind that Henry Luce, chairman of Life, and his wife, Clare Boothe Luce, were deeply involved in the financing of anti-Castro operations in the Caribbean and were involved in right-wing and antiCommunist activities in 1963 and beyond.
Jackson could have been enlisted by the CIA to avoid exposure of national security secrets, without him or whoever assisted him necessarily being involved in a conspiracy to assassinate the president.
What I am writing here are my opinions, based on analysis of the information that I have developed.
When I first started looking for missing frames, I examined my 35mm copy of the negative of the film for splices.
But at that time I did not know how films were edited and frames removed.
I learned more when I talked to a senior film editor, Leon Carrere, and showed him the work I was doing.
He took me to a bookstore in Hollywood where I obtained several books on film editing, and he pointed out to me how frames are removed from film.
One method is to cut the film and make either hot overlaying splices or butt splices, which are easily detected.
But another method (not easily detectable without the original to compare to) is to use an optical printer in which the film is not cut.
An optical printer, in simplistic terms, projects through one copy of the film over to a blank negative; only the selected frames that are to be left in the film are transferred to the negative.
Mr Carrere told me that this is common practice for editing films, and was common in 1963.
Also, when he examined my questionable Zapruder frames, he agreed that it did appear that frames had been deleted, resulting in the rapid head movements.
He said it was commonplace in editing films to delete scenes or to speed up scenes by deleting frames, or to rearrange scenes for whatever end result was desired.
It was the firm of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall which, incredibly, had employed Lee Harvey Oswald for a few weeks in early 1963.
This film lab did a considerable amount of aerial reconnaissance film development work wh for the United States government.
In particular, top-secret work. ether or not this firm had an optical printer at that time I have not determined, but it seems safe to assume that they did.
Again, I am not alleging that Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall was involved in the conspiracy.
I am only pointing out that the capability might have been available in the city of Dallas to edit the film for removal of frames.
However, if we get into attempting to determine whether or not mysterious blobs could have been matteinserted or painted in to simulate JFK’s head wounds, it is another matter.
Mr Carrere told me this would probably have taken considerably more time than was available on the night of November 22, 1963 L6H This is a very important area of research.
But for the moment I simply want to show that frames were deleted from the Zapruder film and explore whether it was possible that frames were deleted within that period of time between when the film was shot and when Life took it over.
If Abraham Zapruder was not involved in the conspiracy (and I am as certain as I can be that he was not), it would have been necessary for the conspirators to conceal from Zapruder what they were doing; either that, or intimidate Zapruder into not telling all he knew about possession of the film on November 22.
But, barring that, it would have been necessary for the plotters to perform the intricate task of forging the film and then substituting a forged copy of the film overnight, wherever Zapruder kept the film the night of November 22.
Erwin Schwartz told Bartholomew and me that Zapruder took all the copies home with him.
Richard Stolley had written that he thought the film was kept in Zapruder’s safe overnight at his office.
In either case, the film was reviewed the next morning by Secret Service agents and Richard Stolley of Life magazine.
I was surprised at this because of the multiple witnesses who said they saw the limousine either slow down or come to a stop.
I also asked him to describe what he saw at the instant of the fatal head shot.
I also asked him if he saw the explosion of blood and brains out of the head.
We went over this several times with him to be certain that he was clear on this point.
Of course, Schwartz’s statement that the blood and brains went back to the rear and left was completely consistent with all of the eyewitnesses who said they saw the rear of Kennedy’s head blow out and brain and blood go to the rear.
It was also consistent with Dallas motorcycle policeman Bobby Hargis’s testimony that he was riding to the rear and left of the limousine and was splattered with blood and brains.
It is also consistent with the location of a large bone fragment—the “Harper fragment’ (to be discussed in Chapter 14)—that was found to the rear and left of the point of the fatal head shot and was identified as being occipital bone—bone from the rear of Kennedy’s head.
So here we have testimony from a man who first saw the original Zapruder film (he said he looked at it at least fifteen times over the weekend) and who did not see the limousine slow down or stop and saw the eruption of blood and brains in a direction opposite what we now see on the Zapruder film.
Also, interestingly, when Schwartz saw the Oliver Stone film JF‘K he apparently did not observe anything different from what he had originally seen.
But now he was telling us that the blood and brains went backward over the left shoulder instead of forward and upward as is shown in the Oliver Stone film, which is the Warren Commission version.
The point here is that it seems quite plausible that observers of the Zapruder film would not be able to detect the subtleties that we are talking about.
This thought is reinforced by the fact that it took thirty years before anyone noticed Greer’s rapid head turn.
It takes a very close scrutiny, frame by frame, to detect these subtleties.
Therefore it is plausible to me that those who viewed Zapruder’s film in Zapruder’s office on Saturday morning could have been looking at a copy of the original and not notice these subtleties.
The forgeries could have been completed afterward and no one would have known the difference, even the technicians at Life magazine as they processed and published the film.
However, if the forgery of the film was done in Washington, D.C., then, in my opinion, it would most likely have been necessary for someone at Life to cooperate with the government to substitute the forged for the real before Life published frames of the fatal head shot.
These frames were not published until ten months after the assassination.
It could be explained simply that H L Hunt was extremely curious about the assassination and wanted to stay on top of events.
Hunt may have feared that he would be targeted as a suspect in the Kennedy assassination because of his venomous series of public attacks on John Kennedy.
Hunt did have an unaltered copy of the Zapruder film, he certainly had a very valuable piece of evidence because he would have blackmail proof that the government had altered the film.
By now I had learned enough about the chain of possession of the Zapruder film to know that it was riddled with possibilities for deviousness.
Hunt could have succeeded in purchasing a bootleg copy; and at least in remote hypothesis, frame removal could have been accomplished overnight while the copies of the film were allegedly in Zapruder’s home or office, although this would have required blackbag agents substituting forged copies in his home or office, or his silent permission.
But I concluded that, in all likelihood, the film was altered in Washington, D.C. when more time was available.
The scenario of altering the film in Dallas, although possible, appeared too convoluted and loaded with doubt, whereas alteration of the film after it left Dallas was very plausible.
Without resolving these issues with complete, satisfying clarity, my attention was diverted temporarily to the examination of another motion picture film of the assassination taken by Orville Nix, who was standing on the opposite side of Elm Street from Abraham Zapruder.
The Nix Film Having proven to my satisfaction that the Zapruder film had been altered by removal of frames within the segment of frames that I examined , I wondered what the Nix film would show.
I reasoned that if it had not been altered in a similar fashion to the Zapruder film it would show a slowing down or stopping of the limousine if, as I believed, the testimonies of the eyewitnesses were correct.
I obtained a set of slides of the Nix film and made prints on a Canon laser copier.
The Nix film is of very poor quality and of limited use in any analysis; however, it did provide a means of calculating limousine speed.
I had hoped to see an abrupt change in the rate of speed as was described by the eyewitnesses who said they had seen the limousine come almost to a complete stop at or near the time of the fatal head shot.
This indicated that the Nix film had also been altered to make it more or less match the Zapruder film.
This compared to a speed of the limousine in the Zapruder film of about 11 miles per hour.
I wondered if this difference was of significance or simply due to an inability to calculate the speed accurately using the somewhat crude measurements.
The quality of the Nix film is so poor that it is not possible to make good judgments about body movements, rapid head turns, or explosion of the head.
The fact of uniform speed of the limousine, as shown on the Nix film, was confirmed when I obtained documents from the National Archives which showed that photographic analysts had used multiple-exposure techniques on the Nix frames showing the limousine advancing at a uniform rate of speed.
Also they had calculated the speed at 8. miles per hour compared to my 9. miles per hour.
We now had the speed of the limousine in the Nix film at 22 percent slower than in the Zapruder film.
The next step was to determine at what geographical location the Nix film could have been altered.
I found an excellent history and chronology of the Nix film in a new book, Pictures of the Pain by Richard B Trask.
In the book the author had meticulously documented the chronology of the Nix film.
Orville Nix voluntarily turned his film over to FBI agent Joe B Abernathy on December 1, 1963, requesting it to be returned immediately.
Upon receipt of the Nix film the FBI field office had a copy of the film made at Jamison Film in Dallas.
Therefore, the FBI had about three days to work on the film if they altered it.
It was interesting to note that Orville Nix contacted the FBI office in mid-March 1964 and requested an additional print.
Nix didn’t get his camera back from the FBI until June 2, 1964, after many requests.
Orville Nix was never called as a witness to the Warren Commission, in spite of the fact that he had a clear view of the fatal shot and of the grassy knoll area.
He had stated that he thought the shot came from behind the grassy knoll.
It made sense to me that if the Zapruder film had been altered, then the FBI would have altered the Nix film to make it compatible as much as possible.
The alteration of the Nix film would have been even more undetectable than that of the Zapruder film because the Nix film was of such poor quality—details could not be observed.
Its alteration would simply have been to remove frames and create a uniform speed of the limousine.
If one can believe that the Zapruder film was altered, then it is an easy step to believe that the Nix film was altered.
And the proof of alteration of the Zapruder film is to me beyond a reasonable doubt.
Now, examination of all of the evidence led me to the conclusion that the alteration of the Zapruder film took place while in the hands of the FBI, not in Dallas.
Another reason to believe that the forgery of the film took place in the hands of the FBI in Washington is the extensive, time-consuming special-effects film techniques that would have been required.
A mysterious blob appears on the front of Kennedy’s face, and there is an explosion of matter directed upward and toward the front, but the film shows no matter erupting toward the rear, which is in conflict with the testimonies of many eyewitnesses.
Robert Groden, a promoter of the authenticity of the Zapruder film, had pointed out to me that a third film, shot by Marie Much-more, could possibly contradict my conclusion that the Zapruder film had been altered.
Muchmore was moving to a new vantage point on Elm Street when the shots were fired.
Due to its brief sequence on Elm Street, it offers no corroboration or contradiction of the Zapruder film.
The few frames shown in the Warren Commission Report are not enough to reach a conclusion.
From the beginning, as a matter of diligence, I had felt that I should investigate the process and mechanisms by which the forgery could have been accomplished.
A key point in film editing is that it is very unlikely that the 8mm film would have been altered without first enlarging it to at least a 16mm format or, preferably, 35mm.
This was pointed out to me by George Kendall, retired chief engineer of Moviola Corporation, the leading manufacturer of film editing machines in 1963.
I obtained this information from James Silverberg, attorney for the Zapruder family estate.
His law firm has been responsible for all legal and contract matters concerning the film.
Silverberg told me he had established that the film was Kodachrome II by inspection of the markings on the “original” (now in preservation in the National Archives) and after consulting with Eastman Kodak engineers.
Also, close examination of the Zapruder frames shown in the Warren Commission Report in Volume XVIII show Kodachrome II identification markings.
In consultation with Leon Carrere , Peter Silverman (retired chief engineer of Consolidated Film Laboratories in Los Angeles), and others, I determined that all three steps could have been accomplished with an optical printer in conjunction with a Moviola machine.
I now wondered if the original film in the National Archives was, in fact, circa 1963 film stock manufactured at a time compatible with November 22, 1963.
Ryan told me they would reveal the date of manufacture of the 8mm film by Eastman Kodak.
The edge markings were a series of Greek letters, periods, slashes, and alphabetical letters.
Ryan of the markings and, after he consulted his files, he told me the film came from a large production roll manufactured by Eastman Kodak in 1961.
He also told me that this date would have been compatible with Abraham Zapruder shooting his film on November 22, 1963.
Ryan told me that, as far as he could remember, there were only three independent film laboratories in the United States in 1963 that could have processed Kodachrome II film.
He explained that the process was very complicated, involving many steps and requiring special equipment.
He also said that there was not an independent laboratory in the Dallas area that had that capability, and that neither the FBI nor the CIA had the capability to process Kodachrome II film.
This seemed to be potentially important information because, if I ruled out Eastman Kodak having been involved in the final step of the forgery—wit-tingly or unwittingly—then it could have been accomplished in only three private laboratories in the United States.
He said he would check his records and let me know for certain if these were the only laboratories and their exact locations.
Ryan by way of introduction by Peter Silverman, who had been introduced to me by George Kendall, who had been introduced to me by my friend, Robert Casey.
This chain of introductions is typical of the way a network of sources and expertise is somewhat readily developed by those who are interested in investigating a complex subject that has a wide base of information and interest.
In the JFK assassination, in particular, there was a keen interest and willing helpfulness from almost everybody I contacted.
People wanted to know and understand what happened in this dreadful, horrible murder of the president of the United States.
The mystery continues, after thirtythree years, to puzzle and challenge our sensibilities.
When I became focused on the Zapruder film and saw the high probability that it had been altered, I felt it would be very important for me to find a consultant or individual who was nationally recognized as a technical expert in motion picture films.
It was not until February 14, 1995 that I drove up to Los Angeles to meet with him personally.
He offered no other changes or corrections in this chapter, which I consider to be significant.
He was with Eastman Kodak Company in Hollywood, California, from 1947 to 1986 where he held various engineering and executive positions, including regional director of engineering services—motion picture division.
He has received numerous awards, honors, and commendations, including a Scientific and Engineering Award and a Medal of Commendation in appreciation for outstanding service from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
He is a Fellow of the British Kinematograph Sound and Television Society.
A Life Fellow of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers and a recipient of the prestigious Herbert T Kalmus Gold Medal, for outstanding achievement in color motion pictures.
Ryan’s credentials include authorship of several books, technical papers, and articles on motion picture technology.
At the time, he was retired from Eastman Kodak and was active as a consultant in his field.
Ryan was a short education on the processes and equipment that would have been required for the alteration of the Zapruder film in 1963.
I was interested in the state of technology at that time as well as the availability of the necessary equipment, how special or unique it was, and what entities or organizations would have had such equipment at the time.
Ryan would be willing to state some of his opinions on whether or not the Zapruder film had been altered, although earlier I had decided that I would primarily be seeking technical expertise on processes and equipment.
But, of course, if he were willing to give some opinions on the authenticity of the film itself, it would be most welcome.
Ryan outlined the process for editing 8mm Kodachrome II film that would have been required in this case; it involves making an enlargement to 16mm , editing, and then reducing back to 8mm on Kodachrome II stock.
From the information he gave me I constructed a process flow diagram which is shown in Exhibit 12-5.
Optical printer for enlarging 8mm to 16mm or 35mm, or reducing 16mm or 35mm to 8mm.
Ryan had checked in his files and found that there were relatively few independent laboratories available in 1963 that could have done the 8mm/16mm optical printing.
Also there were Calvin Laboratories in Kansas City and Hollywood Valley Film Laboratories in Los Angeles, both of which were no longer in business.
Ryan thought that Colburn Laboratories was still in business in Chicago, being run by George Colburn’s brother, Robert Colburn.
He also told me that the Technicolor Company in Burbank, California, at one time had the capability to process Kodachrome II film.
The reason for the limited availability of Kodachrome process technology in 1963 is that until the mid-1950s the technology was not made available from Eastman Kodak for independent laboratory licensing other than at their own laboratories.
Ryan repeated that only a few companies had purchased the technology from Eastman Kodak at that time.
He said equipment could have been purchased piecemeal to assemble the process, but he could see no reason why anyone would want to do that.
Ryan pointed out that the Kodachrome II process is relatively complicated compared to the process for Ektachrome film.
The Kodachrome II process takes nine different steps requiring special equipment, as opposed to only five steps for the Ektachrome process.
Ryan that no government facilities had Kodachrome II processing in 1963 or even today.
I had always assumed that the National Photographic Interpretation Center, the laboratories in the FBI, or other government agencies would have such equipment.
Only Eastman Kodak and a few licensed private laboratories could have done the final step of development back to Kodachrome II film stock.
Ryan and I thought this would narrow down considerably the entities that could have altered the film.
But on further discussion I suggested that, inasmuch as only the /ast step in the process involved the need for Kodachrome II processing capability, perhaps whoever did the forgery ended up with Kodachrome II exposed film with no visible splices , and then simply sent the film to either an Eastman Kodak laboratory or a commercial laboratory that had the Kodachrome II process and had it developed.
Ryan if he felt that Eastman Kodak or a commercial laboratory would have taken particular note of the film.
He said no, that at one time there were government regulations on pornography which required photographic processors to inspect the film they were developing, but by 1963 those had long since been abandoned.
He said any lab would probably take a roll of 8mm film and simply develop it without even looking at it and give it back to the owner.
He also said that laboratories had contracts for secret and confidential work with the government and would normally process whatever package of materials was sent to them without looking at it.
In sum, this left the field almost wide open for altering and processing the Zapruder film.
The only narrow slot in the field would be the laboratories mentioned earlier for enlarging 8mm film to either 16mm or 35mm.
I wondered if there would be any point in contacting these companies to see if they had received orders in 1963 or 1964 for processing or enlarging the Zapruder film, or returning enlarged film back to 8mm.
It was too long ago and it would probably be a fruitless effort of investigation.
Also, there was no reason to believe that some government film laboratories did not have the capability to enlarge 8mm film on optical printers.
Ryan about the capability in 1963 for special-effects film editing such as that now available with modern computer technology.
He said that, as far as he knew, digital computer capability to create special effects similar to what is now being done was not commercially available in 1963.
It was not until 1973 that this type of computer equipment was developed, using rudimentary digital equipment.
It was under development at Hughes Aircraft Company in Culver City, California, in 1973.
Ryan noted, however, that even in 1973 it would have taken a complete room full of digital equipment to do what is now being done on a desktop computer in special-effects editing.
Ryan the critical frames of the Zapruder film that I had been studying.
Ryan, I asked him again about this, if he had more thoughts on the subject.
Ryan if there was any other reason that could explain the blur of the background figures in 302.
He said he had thought of this but could not think of a logical reason as to why these figures would be blurred other than that the limousine was moving and Zapruder was panning his camera to keep up with the limousine, thus blurring the background figures.
I asked him if it would be possible in special effects to create this blur of the background figures.
He said yes, but he had thought about that and could think of no logical reason why anyone would want to do it.
Ryan to inspect the mysterious blobs on JFK’s face and in the successive frames after the fatal head shot.
I asked if this could be explained in any way other than alteration of film.
He spent some time looking at the series of frames, thinking that he might be able to find possibilities of light reflection from adjacent objects or surfaces that could cause the appearance of the blobs.
He looked at Jacqueline Kennedy’s head or hands as a possibility of light reflection as well as parts of the limousine.
He did note, however, that traveling matte insert techniques were in use in the film industry as early as the 1930s, although it was done with manual techniques as opposed to the current digital computer techniques.
This came as a surprise to me because I had just about concluded that it had been done with traveling matte inserts based on my previous research.
He said that painted special effects can be made to appear three-dimensional when viewed stereoscopically.
David Mantik and I met concerning a new project he had undertaken on the Zapruder film.
He told me that his work was now essentially done on the Kennedy xrays and that he was pursuing what he thought would be additional scientific proof, beyond my work, of alteration of the Zapruder film.
Mantik’s work involved photographic information between the sprocket holes, as was published in Life magazine.
His question to me was whether an optical printer would capture that information.
I promised him I would check into that while he was away for the summer on a medical exchange program to New Zealand.
Ryan and he was certain that optical printers for the 8mm film were available to capture all the information on the film, but suggested that I call Robert Coburn in Chicago who would be able to provide a completely authoritative answer.
I called Mr Coburn and he told me that his optical printers in those days could certainly capture all of the information on 8mm film, between the sprocket holes and even beyond the edges of the film if one wanted.
I asked Mr Coburn if his company enlarged the Zapruder film for Life magazine in the days following the assassination.
He replied that he did remember that his firm enlarged an 8mm film for Life concerning the JFK assassination, but couldn’t recall if it was the Zapruder film.
I asked him if there would be any records available that would show work they did for Life.
He said no; his company was no longer in existence, had gone out with the end of the era of 8mm film, and all such detailed records had been disposed of.
But when I returned to San Diego, I received a telephone call from Charles Marler who suggested that we meet with Dr.
David Mantik and Jim DiEugenio, author of the book Destiny Betrayed on the Kennedy assassination, to look over our research on the Zapruder film.
Mantik’s summer home in Idyllwild, in Southern California’s San Jacinto Mountains.
The Meeting at Idyllwild On Saturday, February 24, 1995, we all met at Dr.
We spent the day looking at the Zapruder slides, high-resolution blow-ups, graphs, and other items of my research material, and had a lively general discussion of the JFK assassination evidence.
Mantik, and I should get together among ourselves and make a final determination of the accuracy of our own observations.
Mantik had obtained copies of the same slides from the National Archives that my challengers were examining, and he showed them to me.
Marler and I had carefully confirmed that the slides we were looking at were accurately numbered.
We had confirmed that the slides agreed with what was shown in the Warren Commission Report.
As noted previously, I also confirmed that the slides upon which our analysis was based were in proper sequence, comparing them to a copy of the original film strip provided to me by Zapruder’s attorney.
In any event, we spent the day at Idyllwild brainstorming various aspects of the Kennedy assassination, looking at the slides and checking my work.
We spiritedly disagreed on several aspects of the assassination evidence as to the plotters, but unanimously agreed that the angles and speeds that Marler and I had calculated for William Greer’s head turn were correct.
As a point of irony, three weeks after the meeting in Idyllwild I received a letter from Marler relaying to me that Dr.
To my knowledge, these frames had never appeared in Life or any national publication.
I noted that it was indeed a peculiar coincidence that this critical frame would be misnumbered.
Only by accident did I make the discovery of the rapid head turn at 317.
I also noted that Harold Weisberg had not noticed the rapid head turn at 317.
I wondered if the frames that would most starkly reveal the forgery of the Zapruder film had systematically been kept from the American public over the years.
Only poor-quality prints were published in the Warren Commission Report.
This is evidenced by the impossibly rapid head turn of the limousine driver, William Greer.
The test subjects included a top amateur athlete and a professional athlete.
Even when cued for the turn in advance, the most rapid head turn of the athletes measured in our tests was only 50 percent as rapid as Greer’s feat.
Had his head turned as rapidly as indicated by the altered film, it should appear as a blob in the motion picture.
Yet the film shows the limousine moving forward at a uniform speed of 11 miles per hour.
Experience tells us that the limousine could not have decelerated from 11 miles per hour to a complete stop in 1/18 second; also, simply viewing the motion picture film, in motion, shows the limousine moving uniformly through the scene, as do measured calculations of forward motion of the limousine on a frame-by-frame basis.
The Zapruder film was altered to eliminate evidence of a fatal head shot, fired from the front—an eruption of material from the back of Kennedy’s head that should have appeared in the film.
Numerous eyewitnesses testify that at the time of the fatal head shot there was an eruption of material backwards from Kennedy’s head.
Also, motorcycle policeman Bobby Hargis testified that he was riding to the rear and left of the presidential limousine and, when Kennedy’s head was hit, it exploded and he was splattered with blood and brain.
But the Zapruder film does not show the eruption of blood from the rear of Kennedy’s head.
Only by removal of frames by the plotters would the eruption from the rear of the head be absent from the film.
There is a slight possibility that the Zapruder film could have been altered overnight in Dallas by other conspirators, but even in that unlikely event the altered film would have had to have been substituted for the copy that was sent by special plane and arrived in FBI headquarters early on Saturday morning.
There is no scenario that does not implicate the FBI in the film alteration.
At the very least, any time segments calculated using the Zapruder film should be considered to be minimal times.
In fact, alteration of the Zapruder film demonstrates the extreme need of the conspirators to conceal the fact of a shot from the front.
We will now go to the amazing evidence of deception in the autopsy of the president’s body at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Washington, D.C., at the very heart of government.
Schaeffer never published his finding, but had copyrighted an article about it.
Schaeffer did not conduct tests as to how rapidly athletes or others could turn their heads.
It was very intellectually satisfying to me that this totally independent discovery with confirming measurements had been made.
Beside her is Senator Ralph Yarborough, who would later testify that the presidential limousine came to a stop at the time of the shots, yet the Zapruder film of the assassination shows the limousine traveling through Dealey Plaza at a constant speed.
Richard Tullius Collection t 92 An excellent view of the presidential limousine from the same side that Mary Ann Moorman took her famous photograph.
Note the position of John Connally with respect to his wife Nellie and Jacqueline Kennedy.
In the Moorman photograph, shown in Exhibit C-1, Connally is on a line directly between Nellie and Jackie.
Richard Tullius Collection The presidential limousine in Dallas on the day of the assassination.
The bottom photo was taken at Love Field as the limousine joined the motorcade.
Secret Service agent William Greer is the driver, and Secret Service agent Roy Kellerman is seated beside the driver.
These photos show a wealth of information, later to become important in understanding the evidence.
Richard Tullius Collection Zapruder Frames NOTE: Reference Frames 302, 303, 316, 317—These critical frames showing the rapid head turns were a special process from my copy of the 35mm film 35mm to large 8 x 10” photos which were then scanned.
The sound of the first shot was indicated to be at approximately this pomt by the Betzner photo and Willis photo , one taken before and one after the first shot.
At this point, Kennedy is blocked from the alleged sniper’s nest by tree foliage.
Michael West, D.D.S., says the first shot was probably fired at frame 152.
The Warren Commission concluded that Kennedy was hit after he passed behind the freeway sign.
For my purposes here, I will go along with the Warren Commission conclusion.
Both his right hand and left hand are starting to reach for his throat.
Note that the right hand is already at throat level and is above the left hand.
Note that Connally’s right lapel appears to puff up or flip out in frame 224.
Michael West that this is evidence of a bullet having passed through Kennedy’s neck and pierced Connally’s chest, exiting through his lapel at frame 224.
This argument is not consistent with the fact that Kennedy had already been hit by frame 224, otherwise he would not be seen reacting in frame 224.
There is always a slight delay in manifest physiological response in one part of the body after getting hit by a bullet in another part of the body.
The fastest human reflex known to science is 40 milliseconds—one blink of the eye.
Yet Posner would have us believe that within a blink of an eye Kennedy was hit by a bullet and his right arm had raised to clutch his throat.
An eyelid is of miniscule weight compared to the weight of a hand and an arm; the reaction of the much heavier mass of a hand and arm is much slower.
His left hand and arm are also reaching up but are at a lower position than his right.
The arms and hands are at approximately the same position as in the preceding frame 224.
It is also clear that the left hand, seen directly below the right hand, is reaching upward.
As in frame 224, John Connally is now turning to his right, as he testified to the Warren Commission.
Connally’s head in terms of her testimony to the Warren Commission will be apparent in subsequent frames.
Connally is turning back to his left, after hearing a shot, but he is not aware that Kennedy has been hit.
Connally continues to look straight ahead after frame 224, where Gerald Posner claims Connally was hit and Mrs.
His right hand is held up to shoulder height holding the brim of his hat.
Posner claims that they remain “locked” in “Thorburn’s Position” until the fatal hit at frame 312/313, which released the “locked” position.
Kennedy’s arms are not locked in position, as would be required for him to be in the Thorburn Position.
In other words, they are faced with the embarrassing argument that Kennedy reacted instantaneously and Connally had a slow reaction.
Thus we have the fallacious argument of the Thorburn Position which states that Kennedy is reacting to a bullet passing through or near his sixth cervical vertebra, causing him to reflex “instantaneously” into the position shown above.
Connally has just begun to turn to her right so that her angle of vision encompasses both Kennedy and Connally.
This is the first time she has turned to look back, as she testified to the Warren Commission.
It was probably at this frame, or in the preceding frame, that she saw that Kennedy had been hit.
His right hand becomes a blur, possibly indicating that it has been hit.
His right shoulder begins to drop, indicating that he has been hit in the back of the shoulder.
Connally has turned so that her angle of vision encompasses Kennedy and Connally.
She sees that Kennedy has been hit but is not yet aware that her husband has been hit.
It was just sort of nothing, the expression on his face, and he just sort of slumped down.
Connally would not have heard the sound of the shot until about one to two frames after frame 234.
She also would not have seen the motion of John Connally’s shoulder until one to two frames later, even though he had already been hit, due to the large mass of his shoulder accelerating slowly.
Connally is looking to her right; both Kennedy and Connally are within her angle of vision.
First I heard the shot, or a strange loud noise—I’m not that expert on rifles—back behind us.
Then next I turned to my right and saw the President gripping at his throat.
I must have been looking right at him when it hit because I saw him recoil to the right... so you see I had time to look at the President after he was already hit, then turn and see John hit by a second shot.
The change can be seen best by noting the red patch behind him which was identified as a bunch of red roses lying on the seat next to Mrs.
Therefore, inasmuch as the alleged assassin’s rifle took a minimum of 2. seconds to fire and reload with the bolt-action rifle, there must have been a second gunman.
Moreover, if frames were removed in this segment, the hypothesis that Connally and Kennedy were hit by the same bullet becomes even more ludicrous.
Connally’s testimony and these photos contradict the contention that Connally was hit in frame 224, because she looked back only once, starting at frame 234.
It was at this point that she saw Kennedy clutching at his throat, after which she said she saw her husband struck.
Kennedy’s arms are now lowered well below their maximum position in frame 232.
They have not been locked in the “Thorburn Position” as claimed by Posner.
His number-one rule by Secret Service oath is to use his body to shield the president, yet only now he looks back, with no indication whatsoever to make any physical move to protect the president or the governor.
Kellerman was interviewed by FBI agents Sibert and O’Neill on November 27, 1963 at the White House.
In the interview Kellerman told the FBI that when the shots rang out he turned toward the rear and “observed President Kennedy with his left hand in back of him appearing to be reaching to a point on his right shoulder.
At the time he made this statement he apparently did not have access to the Zapruder film, which clearly shows that when Kennedy was first wounded he raised both hands sharply toward his throat and in no way did he reach up and extend his left hand behind his back reaching to a point on his right shoulder.
If Kellerman was telling the truth, it lends evidence that the Zapruder film was altered by removal of frames which could have shown Kennedy with his left hand in back of him.
Note the blur of the legs of the two women standing on the left and the woman in the background.
This indicates that Zapruder is panning his camera to match the speed of the limo because the picture of the limo is in relatively sharp focus.
This is a turn of about 105° in one frame, or 0.0546 second, a rotational speed of 1,923 degrees per second.
The fastest known human response is the blink of an eye which is equivalent to only one frame on Zapruder’s camera.
Tests using young, top athletes as subjects could not find rotational speeds in turns of even 50% of the speed that Greer exhibits here.
The head should be a complete blur at a rotational speed 1,923 degrees per second.
This cannot be explained by camera jiggle; if Zapruder had jiggled his camera, both the background figures and the limo would be out of focus.
This corresponds roughly to the amount of blur in the legs of the women in 302, thus confirming that the limo is moving very slowly or standing still in 303.
John Costella believes that the blurs in Z303 can be explained as a combination of background figure motion, limo speed and camera tracking deviation from limo speed and, therefore, Dr.
Ryan’s statement to me—that the lmo was standing stilH—cannot be scientifically supported.
Ryan, no longer living to defend himself, was simply giving me his opinion from the view of a senior, experienced motion picture technology expert—a little over simplified—but never intended to imply that the limo was exactly standing still, or that the background figures were not in some motion or camera jiggle.
Costella is in agreement with me that Greer’s head turns are evidence of frame removal.
Inasmuch as the whole frame is a composite or composites, it is almost meaningless except when compared to other frames.
He clearly was looking at Kennedy during the fatal shot, yet he testified that he did not see the fatal shot.
It is at about this point, or a few frames later, that Mary Ann Moorman snapped a photograph with her Polaroid camera.
And one forensic blood spatter expert, Sherry Pool Gutierrez, considers it to be back 67 spatter from a bullet entering the right temple.
The limousine is moving forward at an apparent speed of about 11 miles per hour, based on my calculations, with the assumption that none of the frames has been removed from the Zapruder film.
Yet, the complete stopping or slowing of the limousine was observed by thirty-six (ee of these, twenty-one said the limousine stopped completely.
Note that the head of the driver, Secret Service agent Greer, is turned around about 150° looking at the president at the instant of impact.
Even if we accept the Warren Commission’s hypotheses that the first shot could have occurred at frame 225, there still would have been 5.15 seconds’ delay in Greer’s reaction time.
Greer is still looking back, observing the aftermath of the fatal head wound.
A strange blob appears on the right side of Kennedy’s face, partially obscuring Mrs.
In the following 48 frames, this blob will inexplicably move around on the side of Kennedy’s face, changing size and shape.
There is no visible wound in the back or top or side of Kennedy’s head.
Witnesses confirm that the face was unharmed, yet this photo shows something appearing to be blood or matter originating from his right cheek.
However, if that were the case, there should be an equally large portion of Kennedy’s scalp missing in this photograph and subsequent photographs.
It is obvious in examining subsequent photographs that this is not the case.
For example, look at frame 317, which clearly shows that the top and side of Kennedy’s scalp is intact.
In frame 335, it appears that the right top front of Kennedy’s scalp may be missing, but that is simply sunlight shining on Kennedy’s head at the particular angle in which it is positioned.
It is possibly some other phenomenon, such as a crude attempt by the conspirators to insert false evidence using film specialeffects techniques.
After the second shot, I glanced over my right shoulder and saw Governor Connally start to fall.
Just so that my eyes over, caught the Governor, I could see, J couldnt see the President.
He has made a 115° turn in one frame—0.0546 second—from the preceding frame.
This is an extremely rapid movement considering that the blinking of an eye takes about .06 second.
See Exhibits C-2, C-3, and C-4 for time-motion test results using top athletes as subjects.
This rapid turn of Greer’s head and body is explained by frames having been removed.
One reason the conspirators might have wanted to speed up the film was to minimize the evidence of the delay in Greer’s reaction in accelerating the limousine.
Bystanders have testified that the limousine had come almost to a complete stop at the time of the fatal head wound.
Another reason would be to delete incriminating evidence (of blow-out of Kennedy’s skull to the rear) on the frames that were removed.
Time-motion tests using a step-frame video camera and an 8mm motion picture camera show that the rotational speed of Greer’s turn is more than double that possible by athletes who were tested.
The rotational speed in Greer’s turn here is 2106 degrees per second, equivalent to 5.85 complete revolutions per second, an obvious impossibility.
None of the athletes tested could equal 50% of Greer’s speed, even when cued to snap their head and shoulders as rapidly as possible.
Look closely and you will see her white gloved hand behind a flap of scalp and hair.
Kennedy said that she was looking to the left and heard “those terrible noises.
And all I remember is seeing my husband, he had this sort of quizzical look on his face, and his hand was up, it must have been his left hand.
And I just turned and looked at him, I could see a piece of his skull and I remembered it was flesh colored. remember thinking he just looked as if he had a slight headache.
This is dramatic, tangible evidence of an exit wound in the rear of the head, corroborated in vivid detail in the above photo.
McClelland’s description of the rear head wound observed at Parkland Hospital and about 30 other witnesses’ descriptions and testimonies are in agreement with Mrs.
Even more corroboration is provided by Secret Service agent Clinton Hill, who ran to the limousine immediately after the fatal wound.
Kennedy’s eyewitness testimony, Clinton Hill’s eyewitness testimony, Dr.
McClelland’s and Parkland Hospital personnel’s eyewitness testimony, and an actual photograph of the flap of scalp with Mrs.
Kennedy attempting to put a piece of skull back in place in the back of the head.
The presence of an exit wound in the back of the head is tantamount to proof of a gunman in the front and therefore proof of a conspiracy.
And then he sort of did this: , put his hand to his forehead and fell in my lap.
You know, then, there were pictures later on of me climbing out the back.
Clinton Hill, the Secret Service agent whose hand you see on the left, thought she was trying to retrieve part of her husband’s head.
This photo was taken on the opposite side of Elm Street from where Zapruder stood.
He can be seen standing on the concrete abutment in the upper right-hand corner of the photograph.
Note on line A-B that John Connally is in a position on almost a direct line between his wife Nellie and Mrs.
He is leaning backward against the left-hand side of the limousine, and appears to be completely out of the jump seat.
This is strong evidence that a block of frames was removed from the Zapruder film at or near the time of the fatal head shot.
The reason it is apparent that a block of frames has been removed is that it would have taken several frames for Connally to have moved from his position in the right-hand jump seat to where he is shown in the above photograph.
If frames were removed here, then of course this would not be frame 314.
This might be true, but my focus here is on Connally’s position in the limousine.
Each photo is equivalent to 1/30 seconds, which is equivalent to 0.61 Zapruder frames.
Motion picture frames, taken with an 8mm movie camera at a shutter speed of 18 frames per second, of a twenty-year-old athlete turning his head as rapidly as possible from backward to front while in a convertible automobile.
The above tests were conducted to determine the maximum speed that could reasonably have been expected for William Greer, or others, to turn their heads under the emergency conditions at the moment of the assassination.
The test for Dawson was made using a Sony model CCD F-40 video camera, which has the feature of step-frame playback at 30 frames per second.
The test for Marler was made with an 8mm movie camera at 18 frames per second.
These tests show that neither of the athletes was able to achieve any more than 50% of the speed that Greer turned his head starting at Zapruder frame 315.
The subjects were instructed to turn their heads and shoulders as rapidly as they possibly could to look straight ahead upon an audible signal.
The video and films were played back and visual estimates made of head position at each frame in the playback.
Lyndon Johnson’s teacher, Joe Crofts Robert A Caro, The Path to Power 13 THE AUTOPSY Of all the evidence, the United States government’s involvement in a cover-up in the autopsy of John F Kennedy is the most torturing and complex.
It is loaded with contradictory testimonies, recanted statements, some evidence that is accurate, some that is obfuscated, and some that has been altered; but it is very important.
To have any hope of dealing with this evidence one must realize that if the vice president, the director of the FBI, and the Secret Service were involved in the conspiracy, and if the CIA and military intelligence cooperated in a cover-up, virtually anything is possible.
Keep in mind that this cabal would have been in a position to manipulate or control everything; and by the time of the autopsy, things had gone terribly, desperately wrong in their plot.
I can well imagine that nothing would be too extreme in their actions to conceal the momentous crime they had just committed.
As I contemplate the words that will follow I feel that I will reach the point where every reader will be seized with utter disbelief.
In brief, the thrust of these allegations is that the conspirators literally stole the body of President Kennedy from Air Force One, took it to a secret location where they enlarged the bullet exit wound in the lower rear of the skull to make the wound extend to the top and right side of skull, and crudely excised a major portion of the brain to remove incriminating bullet fragments.
By performing these operations, they obscured the direction from which the fatal head shot occurred.
They then delivered the body to the morgue at the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital.
While all of this was being done, they deceived the public and virtually everyone in government to conceal the momentous crime that had been committed.
For purposes of analysis, I was obliged to simplify the evidence—sort out the best evidence without being dishonestly selective.
Allegation 1: The president's body was put aboard Air Force One in Dallas in a bronze ceremonial casket; the body was wrapped in a sheet.
But when the body arrived at the morgue of Bethesda Naval Hospital it was in a plain shipping casket and it was in a zippered, military-style body bag.
It arrived at the morgue before the Kennedy party arrived at the front of the hospital in a Navy ambulance which was transporting the ceremonial bronze casket that had left Dallas.
This is the basic starting point in developing the evidence, it would prove that the body had been removed from the casket in which it left Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
When the president’s body left Dallas there was a wound in the back of the head that measured approximately three inches in diameter.
When the body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital, this wound had been expanded to a large gaping hole measuring approximately seven inches by five inches.
The wound observed in Dallas was mainly in the right lower rear region of Kennedy's head.
The wound observed in Bethesda extended from the top of the head near the hairline down to the back of the head, mainly on the right hemisphere, to a point approximately one to two inches above the hairline of the neck.
Surgery had been performed on the head, in secrecy, which enlarged the wound.
When the president's body was first received at Bethesda in the body bag and shipping casket, the brain was almost completely missing.
A wound in the front of the president’s neck was surreptitiously enlarged after the body left Dallas, and before it was delivered to the Bethesda morgue, to make it appear to be an exit wound when in fact it was an entrance wound.
The autopsy report prepared by the Navy autopsy pathologist at Bethesda was changed, after the autopsy was conducted and after the body was taken to the White House, under pressure from officials in the White House to conceal evidence of more than one gunman.
It will be argued here that proof of all of these allegations is not necessary to establish the complicity of employees and officials of the government in the cover-up of the assassination of President Kennedy, if not in the assassination itself.
That is, only proof of two or three of the allegations, in combination, will be required to prove guilt.
This is similar to prosecuting attorneys’ methods, in which they do not place themselves in the position of having to prove a// of their allegations to get a conviction, the reason being that if all allegations had to be proven there would be precious few criminal convictions.
What we must deal with here is an incredibly complex problem of uncovering a shell game, carried out by agents of the federal government, in which their objective was to deceive the American public into believing that there was only one gunman who killed the president.
To achieve this deception, it was necessary that they conceal the fact that there was an exit wound in the back of the president’s head , in which case a conspiracy would have been revealed of such magnitude that it would not have been possible to cover it up.
I found it useful to prepare a chronological time graph, drawn to scale, of the major events.
The advantage of plotting events to a linear scale is that it shows large time gaps and bunching of events.
He was pronounced dead at 1:00m. after having received a tracheotomy (a small incision in the neck to insert a breathing device) and after having cardiac massage.
Kennedy’s body left Parkland Hospital in a bronze-colored ceremonial casket.
The body was placed on a plastic sheet in the casket and wrapped in sheets.
This fact has been affirmed many times on national television and in taped interviews of Aubrey Rike, who was an ambulance attendant at Dallas at the time; and his statement has been confirmed by his assistant at the time, Dennis McGuire.
Also, the fact of the body being wrapped in sheets was confirmed by Dr.
Charles Crenshaw, one of the doctors attending the body at Parkland Hospital, who was present when the casket lid was close PUL When Kennedy’s body was in Dallas, a wound about three inches in diameter in the lower back of the head was observed; the remainder of his head and face appeared to be intact HH This was attested to by over twenty-five witnesses including all of the doctors, nurses, and hospital technicians.
The body was taken from Texas to Washington, D.C., over the objections of the Texas authorities, presumably because it violated Texas law.
But because of the demands of Jacqueline Kennedy and Kennedy’s top aides, and/or because the plot had gone awry, the body was seized after a prolonged argument with Dallas authorities.
The casket was literally forced from the hands of the Dallas authorities and wheeled to a hearse, then driven to Love Field with Jacqueline Kennedy, where the casket was put aboard Air Force One.
He was already president, by law, and the swearing-in ceremony was not necessary.
The presidential plane arrived at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington, D.C., at 6:00m.
At 6:10m., Jacqueline Kennedy and Robert Kennedy departed from Andrews Air Force Base in a gray Navy ambulance and accompanied the bronze casket to Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Strangely, at approximately 6:40 to 6:45m., a black hearse (not the gray Navy ambulance) arrived at the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital at the morgue dock.
The casket has been called a “shipping casket,” common to types used to ship bodies around the country.
The shipping casket was received by First Class Petty Officer Dennis Davia Lt who was chief of the day of the hospital at that time.
Paul O’Connor, who was a Navy hospital corpsman on the autopsy team at the time, told me in 1993 during a three-day interview that the casket was brought into the morgue within 30 to 40 seconds after it arrived and that Dennis David had confirmed that fact to him.
The shipping casket was immediately opened and in it was the president’s body in a military-style, zippered body bag.
The body was removed by first opening a zipper the full length on the front of the body bag. y's Startlingly, as testified by O’Connor and confirmed by Navy x-ray technician Jerrol Custer i (who was present), there was little or no brain inside Kennedy’s head.
O’Connor said there was a huge, gaping hole, seven inches by four inches, in the back and top of the head; and the brain was almost completely gone except for a few fragments.
It should be noted that no surgery had been performed on Kennedy’s head at Parkland Hospital in Dallas; and that when the body left Dallas it was in a bronze ceremonial casket, the head was wrapped in a towel, and the body was wrapped in a sheet, not a body bag.
Also, when the body left Dallas, approximately two thirds of the brain was still intact, and there was a hole only in the back of the head which was about three inches in diameter.
At 6:55m. the Kennedy party, in the gray Navy ambulance, arrived in front of Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Military officers conferred at the door of the ambulance for a few minutes.
Also, just before 7:05m., Dennis David (who had just seen Kennedy’s body delivered to the rear of the hospital about twenty minutes before) walked to the front of the hospital and was standing in an office on the second floor.
He was looking out the window when he saw the Kennedy motorcade with a Navy ambulance arrive and Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy get out and go through the front door.
The truthfulness of Dennis David’s statement is greatly enhanced by the fact that he did not have to remember actual times.
David had to recall only the sequence of first seeing the black hearse arrive with the gray shipping casket with Kennedy’s body in it and then walking to the front of the hospital, looking out the window, and seeing the Kennedy motorcade arrive.
There is no doubt by anyone that the bronze casket was in the Navy ambulance when it arrived at the front of the hospital at 6:55m.
At about 7:05m., when Jacqueline Kennedy was entering the hospital through the front lobby, she was passed in the lobby by Navy x-ray technician Jerrol Custer, who was carrying exposed x-ray film of JFK’s body that had already been taken.
This despite the fact that JFK’s body was supposedly outside ina bronze casket in the Navy ambulance.
Jerrol Custer had already exposed x-ray films of JFK’s body when he passed Jacqueline Kennedy coming through the lobby at the front of the hospital.
Dennis David had already unloaded the body in a shipping casket and delivered it into the morgue and had walked to the front of the hospital when he, too, saw Jacqueline Kennedy get out of the Navy ambulance and go through the front door.
It reveals that Kennedy’s body had been taken from Air Force One, when it was under the exclusive control of the Secret Service, and, by extension, under the control of Lyndon Johnson.
At approximately 7:05m., after the Kennedy party had left the ambulance and entered the front of the hospital, the Navy ambulance drove off with the bronze casket in it.
There was a “chase” of the ambulance by a casket team in a pick-up truck who had been waiting to carry the bronze casket into the morgue.
They followed the Navy ambulance thinking that it was going to drive to the rear of the morgue where they would perform the ceremony of carrying in the casket.
They had two fruitless trips to the rear of the hospital and finally returned to the front of the hospital.
At 8:00m. the bronze casket was delivered to the morgue by the casket team.
The bronze casket was opened in the morgue with official parties present including the head of the autopsy team, Dr.
Boswell, Kennedy’s aide General McHugh, and a casket team member, James Felder.
If it is presumed that Kennedy’s body was in the casket, we have a major conflict in the evidence.
One witness, James Felder, told David Lifton that Kennedy’s body was in the bronze casket when it was opened in the morgue.
This implies that it was not the bronze casket or, if the body was in the bronze casket, it was not Kennedy’s body.
At approximately 8:15m. the “first incision” was made, according to a report prepared by FBI agents James W Sibert and Francis X O’ Neill, who were present at the autopsy.
They also noted in their report that “surgery had been performed on the head” when the body arrived at Bethesda.
The body had been in the morgue since 6:45m., almost four hours, with the autopsy team present all that time.
This would become the official position of the United States government from then until this writing.
Not once has the government budged from this position; neither have Dr.
Humes had not yet written his report (that would be done the next day, after which he burned his original notes—admitted by Humes himself in his report to the Warren Commission) nor had he or Dr.
Boswell examined the photographs taken during the autopsy— and they had only examined the x-rays superficially on the viewing screen in the autopsy room.
A supplemental autopsy report would later state that the brain weighed 1500 grams (an above-normal weight for a human brain), yet all witnesses who observed the brain both at Parkland Hospital and at Bethesda Naval Hospital, who would talk about it, said a large portion of the brain was gone as a result of the head wound.
Between 11:30m. and 3:00m. the body was prepared for burial by personnel from Gawler’s Funeral Home who had been sent to the hospital.
Secret Service agent Roy Kellerman took all of the autopsy and x-ray films and delivered them to Secret Service agent Robert Bouck at the White House.
At 3:56m. the body was taken to the White House, accompanied by the Kennedy party and Secret Service agent William Greer.
The Secret Service maintained possession of the films in the White House for 17 months before turning them over to the control of Robert Kennedy, with other autopsy materials, on April 26, 1965.
These materials included Kennedy’s brain in a stainless-steel container, and microscopic slides of tissues.
This material would be retained in a footlocker by Evelyn Lincoln, who now had an office in the National Archives.
Lincoln then turned over the footlocker to Robert Kennedy’s personal secretary.
Thus it was in the control of Robert Kennedy until October 31, 1966, when it was opened at the National Archives, at which time it was discovered that the brain and the tissue slides were missing.
It seems safe to assume that the container for the brain was never opened by the Kennedys.
The autopsy pathologists did not see the autopsy photographs until three years after the autopsy.
It will now be helpful to review excerpts from a three-day interview I conducted with Paul O’ Connor that cuts across all of the foregoing issues.
O’Connor’s story was first revealed to the public in David Lifton’s Best Evidence.
Lifton provided me with a transcript of his taped interview with O’Connor to compare with my interview.
O’Connor’s first interview was conducted by the HSCA in 1978, but incredibly was buried in the National Archives until 1994.
Neither O’Connor nor any of the enlisted personnel who were involved in the autopsy were called to testify before the Warren Commission, or even asked for written statements.
They were all sworn to secrecy under threat of imprisonment in the federal penitentiary.
Not until 1978, when released by Act of Congress, did they start talking.
He was one of the five full-time members of the autopsy team at Bethesda Hospital.
J Thornton Boswell, who was in co-charge of the team; Army Colonel Pierre A Finck, who was brought into the team as a consultant at the request of Dr.
Humes; and Navy hospital corpsman James Curtis Jenkins, who worked with Paul O’ Connor assisting the military doctors.
During the next three days we talked about the Kennedy assassination and O’Connor’s incredible experience.
All that is related here is consistent in detail and content with O’Connor’s previous testimony with the HSCA and in his other interviews.
I am using my interview because it is far more extensive than the others.
At the time of the autopsy O’Connor had been in the Navy four years and was twenty-two years old.
Prior to serving at Bethesda Naval Hospital he had been at Guantanamo Naval Hospital during the Bay of Pigs invasion and had medically treated the Cuban freedom fighters when they climbed over the fence in panic as the invasion disintegrated.
Also, O’ Connor had later been part of a Marine task force assigned to invade Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis.
His contingent was just off the coast of Cuba ready to land when the crisis was resolved and the invasion canceled.
O’Connor was a very seasoned and experienced young man in November 1963.
Both O’Connor and Curtis Jenkins had assisted in over sixty autopsies and had gone through the training program for pathology technicians at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
But what is unusual about O’Connor was that from the age of fourteen until he joined the Navy, he had been a general helper in a funeral home; he had many years’ experience working with dead bodies.
The point is that it is very unlikely that Paul was thrown into a state of shock and blind confusion when the president’s body arrived at the morgue.
In my interview with Paul, he repeatedly exhibited that he had a very clear head and was not subject to exaggeration or flights of fantasy.
Paul told me that shortly after President Kennedy’s autopsy he had gotten married.
His wife, who was pregnant when he left, gave birth to their baby while he was still serving duty in Vietnam.
He was there only a few months when, while accompanying a Marine company through a village, he was hit by a mortar shell and flipped end over end into a ravine.
He suffered a severe back injury and was sent home to the United States where he was discharged from the service with a permanent disability.
He then returned to his home in Florida and worked as a deputy sheriff for the next seven years in general crime work, which included crime scene investigations.
Paul’s back injury became worse and worse until it forced him to retire in the late 1970s.
When I met him at Washington National Airport in Washington, D.C., he had gotten out of a hospital bed that morning, against his wife’s wishes, to fly up to Washington from Miami.
He told me that he had promised he was going to grant me this interview and he didn’t want to back out on his promise.
Paul was wearing an electric stimulator during the next three days to diminish his back pain.
He appeared very tired and gaunt, but his mind was sharp, which will be evident as I relate his interview.
After meeting at the airport, we had lunch at the hotel where we talked for a couple of hours.
Twyman: Once again, Paul, just describe when you were in the morgue awaiting the arrival of the president and you and other people heard helicopters outside.
Well, we were all in the morgue, preparing for the body to come in, when we did hear helicopters flying overhead.
O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: north side of the hospital; it sounded like he landed at the north side of the hospital and one landed in the rear someplace, very possibly the officer’s club parking lot.
And soon after that, Dennis David and his crew intercepted a black hearse pulling up to the loading dock of the hospital; and they took out what was a pinkish-gray shipping casket.
A shipping casket is used if the person dies in one part of the country and they put him in this casket and ship him to another part of the country where he is subsequently put into a nicer casket.
It was more like a cheap commercial casket, nondescript and not ornate or anything like that.
And so explain to me why you believe that the shipping casket, when it was taken off the hearse, had Kennedy’s body in it.
Well, it was a matter of maybe 30 or 40 seconds between getting the casket out of the hearse and getting the body into the morgue in the casket.
Then the group of men that brought it in left immediately with Dennis David and then we opened the casket.
O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: A sheet wrapped around his head.
And then you saw it in the body bag but with the sheet around the head.
And Aubrey Rike had said that the head was wrapped ina towel, and you saw it wrapped in a sheet.
The sheet was unwrapped by myself; and I think Boswell or Humes helped me unwrap it.
They took the sheet and threw it over in the corner against the wall, which we had to clean up later on, and I was standing right at the head where I observed a huge gaping hole in the side of the president’s head.
It went from above the hairline on the right side through the parietal and the occipital area and down and around to the right temporal area of the skull.
And what astounded me is when I looked at it, I had never seen anything like it in my life.
We noticed when we lifted him onto the table that the rest of the skull that was supposed to be attached was all fractured to pieces too.
Like somebody takes a hard-boiled egg and drops it on the floor; thousand of fractures to it.
You had to part the scalp back, and pull the hair out of the way, and you could look into the cranium.
There was a lot of talk, and a lot of ambient noise, so it was hard for me to pick up anyone talking.
O‘Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: And that was this jagged wound.
And looking at Exhibit 13-7, up at the top in the left-hand corner, there is a flap of scalp folded back.
There was probably a handful of macerated brain tissue which, if it was put together, would constitute maybe a quarter of the brain.
Another thing I want to point out to you too is that the fact that these pictures were taken before the actual autopsy started.
We’ ve already discussed at lunch how Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy arrived with the ambulance at the Bethesda front entrance at 6:55m.
And then it is at 7:05m., there on the left column on the timeline where Jerrol Custer is carrying the x-rays, with an FBI agent or a Secret Service agent escorting him.
Now maybe you can describe to me your exchange with Jerrol Custer when he came back to the morgue, after that trip.
Well, he re-entered the morgue and he was kind of excited and said guess who I saw, and I said who’s that, and he said Jackie Kennedy just walked in the front of the hospital.
Now I didn’t think that much about it until years later when we started to figure how this time fit in with the fact that we have the body back here already in the morgue and the ambulance pulls up front with her in it with the bronze casket.
As a matter of fact he was on his way up with an arm-full of exposed x-rays to get them developed.
In other words, it was emphatic, that’s what brought it to your attention forcefully that this had happened.
The other thing is that Dennis David has said that, after he had seen the casket arrive in the black hearse, he said 20 minutes, maybe 30 minutes later he had gone into an office on the second floor looking down from the second floor balcony to the entrance to the hospital and he saw not only her come in, he saw the motorcade arrive.
Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Right.
And he saw Robert and Jacqueline Kennedy get out of the ambulance and come in and he didn’t know the times but he knew that one was well after the other.
In other words, he saw her come in well after he had seen the hearse and casket arrive in the back, and then if I tie that into what you tell me—that it was just 30 or 40 seconds after he saw that casket taken out of the black hearse—that it was brought in and immediately opened; and there you saw Kennedy’s body in it.
I questioned what sort of logic or proof there was that Kennedy’s body was actually in that shipping casket that Dennis David observed when it was unloaded and they took it into the morgue.
When you leave the loading dock and go into the hospital, your first left turn is the morgue.
It would only take you about a few seconds to off-load that casket and rush it in.
I am just trying to think of some reason, no matter how remote, that an empty casket came in.
The body arrived in a commercial shipping casket as opposed to the bronze casket in which it left Dallas.
The body arrived in a zippered body bag as opposed to being wrapped in a sheet when it left Dallas.
The body arrived at the rear of the Bethesda hospital in a hearse before the Navy ambulance arrived at the front of the hospital with the bronze casket.
Corroboration of Statements of O’Connor, David, and Custer The other Navy enlisted man on the autopsy team was James Curtis Jenkins.
David Lifton interviewed Jenkins in September 1979, after he had first interviewed Paul O’Connor.
Lifton had hoped to confirm the “body bag” story but Jenkins couldn’t remember how the body was wrapped.
He described the wound as a hole that extended toward the rear and, in his opinion, had the appearance of an exit wound that struck from the right front and exploded toward the rear Although Jenkins’ recollections did not exactly dovetail with O’Connor’s, there were no significant discrepancies.
I discussed Jenkins’ statement—that he remembered putting a brain in formaldehyde—with Paul O’ Connor, and asked if that could have been the one-fourth of the remaining brain that O’Connor had acknowledged.
O’Connor agreed that it might have been, but said that he himself did not remember removing any brain from the cranium.
The fact that different eyewitnesses remember different things or slightly different things is, of course, widely recognized in criminal investigations.
Accordingly, I concluded it should not be surprising that Jenkins did not remember a body bag.
It was O’Connor who was up close to the body when the body bag was unzipped, and Jerrol Custer had confirmed that there was a body bag.
Also, years later, Captain John Stover, commanding officer of the Navy Medical School, had remembered there was a body bag.
There is more corroboration of the decoy ambulance and therefore the credibility of O’Connor’s, David’s, and Custer’s accounts.
David Lifton interviewed Donald Rebentisch of Coopersville, Michigan, a chief petty officer who was stationed at Bethesda on the night of the autopsy.
Lifton’s interview was conducted before the local paper, the Grand Rapids Press, was about to publish a story (on January 23, 1981) that Rebentisch had told them.
He provided corroboration for Dennis David’s account by recalling that he had helped unload the first casket, an ordinary shipping casket, and that it had arrived at the back before the gray Navy ambulance arrived at the front.
Rebentisch said that after unloading the first casket, he went upstairs to the lobby area of Bethesda where he saw Mrs.
Now there is additional, recently discovered evidence corroborating Paul O’Connor’s statements and the statements of Dennis David and Jerrol Custer.
This evidence is a document sifted out of the millions of pages in the National Archives by my researcher Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko.
Richard A Lipsey dated January 18, 1978 that had been buried in secrecy for sixteen years.
The interview had been conducted by HSCA staff members Donald Andrew Purdy, Jr., and T Mark Flanagan, Jr.
The Select Committee on Assassinations interviewed Richard Lipsey because of his presence at the autopsy of John Kennedy.
Lipsey began the interview by mentioning that he signed a document in his office about one week after the assassination which forbade him from revealing any information about the autopsy.
After asking us about the validity of this agreement, we responded by saying that we wished he would respond on a voluntary basis and that it was the Committee’s opinion that no harm would occur.
He came to Washington, D.C., when he was selected as an aide to General Wehle.
He said that Wehle’s office would handle all ceremonial military functions in Washington.
After the assassination, Lipsey said that he and Wehle met the body at Andrews Air Force Base and placed it in a hearse to be transported to Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Lipsey mentioned that he and Wehle then flew by helicopter to Bethesda and took JFK into the back of Bethesda.
It is not completely clear here whether the body was transported to Bethesda Hospital in a helicopter or a hearse.
The two interviews corroborate each other in that Lipsey mentions a decoy hearse at the front of the hospital.
The “decoy” certainly appears to be the Navy ambulance carrying the Kennedy party and the bronze casket, without Kennedy’s body in it.
And now, in 1994, we find that in 1978 the HSCA, appointed by the United States government to investigate the crime, had not revealed this obviously important evidence.
It seems that the foregoing accounts from nine credible, corroborating witnesses would convince a jury of proof of a conspiracy to steal Kennedy’s body for sinister purposes.
Aubrey Rike & Dennis McGuire: -Saw body placed in bronze ceremonial casket in Dallas. -Saw body wrapped in sheets and placed on a plastic sheet in the bronze casket. -Accompanied bronze casket to Air Force One and saw it put aboard.
Saw body wrapped in sheets and placed ona plastic sheet in the bronze casket.
Kennedy waiting for the elevator in the lobby of Bethesda hospital after he saw unloading of the shipping casket in the rear of the hospital.
We have here multiple witnesses, all credible, all telling stories that all fit into a cohesive, air-tight , . case—proof of Allegation One, irrespective of resolution of the other allegations.
The body was stolen to conceal the fact of a conspiracy that would have been revealed by the nature of the president’s wounds, and/or the presence of bullet fragments in the president’s body or brain that would not have matched Oswald’s rifle.
We must remember that the president’s body was removed from the bronze casket before Air Force One left Dallas.
So it seems that it must have been planned in advance of the assassination. /t is difficult for me to imagine that such a plan was cooked up within two hours after the president was murdered.
To approach this issue, I now elected to focus on Paul O’Connor’s testimony of the status of the president’s body when it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
I would look for scientific or forensic evidence to corroborate O’Connor’s testimony concerning the condition of the brain when he first saw Kennedy’s body.
A key part of his testimony was that almost all of the brain was missing.
O’Connor stated that, except for a small portion of lacerated tissue, the brain was completely gone.
When I questioned O’Connor on this subject, he had conceded that he did not make a thorough inspection of the inside of the cranium and that perhaps as much as one-fourth of the total brain was still remaining.
O’Connor’s statements have been corroborated, at least in part, by Jerrol Custer, who stated that he could have put both of his fists down into the open wound in Kennedy’s head.
Moreover, there is compelling, inferential evidence that the brain was missing by virtue of the fact that the photographs of the brain in the National Archives are in sharp disagreement with the testimonies of at least four doctors at Parkland Hospital; they described the condition of the massive wound at the rear of the president’s head as having large quantities of cerebellar tissue and other brain matter extruding from the wound.
Let us examine the condition of the brain as shown in the autopsy photos.
Exhibit 13-8 is an exact drawing of a top view of the brain from one of the autopsy photos.
David Mantik, who has examined all seven of the photographs of the brain in the National Archives , has assured me that this drawing is an accurate representation of a top view of the brain as it appears in the autopsy photos. /t shows a perfectly intact cerebellum.
The cerebellum has a surface of narrow, parallel grooves in contrast to the remainder of the surface of the brain which is relatively smooth.
The significance of this visually obvious difference that distinguishes the cerebellum is realized when we examine the testimonies of doctors who observed the head wound at Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
Their statements all agree in testifying to the fact that parts of cerebellar tissue had been blown out of the back of the head and were extruding from the open wound.
Following are four of these testimonies, excerpted from the Warren Commission Report.
Marion T Jenkins There was a great laceration on the right side of the head , causing a great defect in the skull plate so that there was herniation and laceration of great areas of the brain, even to the extent that cerebellum had protruded from the wound.
Charles J Carrico The wound that I saw was a large gaping wound, located in the right occipitoparietal area.
I would estimate to be about 5 to 7 cm in size, more or less circular, with avulsions of the calvarium and scalp tissue.
As I stated before, I believe there was shredded macerated cerebral and cerebellar tissues both in the wounds and on the fragments of the skull attached to the dura.
Robert N McClelland As I took the position at the head of the table that I have already described, to help out with the tracheotomy, I was in such a position that I could very closely examine the head wound, and I noted that the right posterior portion of the skull had been extremely blasted.
It had been shattered, apparently, by the force of the shot so that the parietal bone was protruded up through the scalp and seemed to be fractured almost along its right posterior half, as well as some of the occipital bone being fractured in its lateral half, and this sprung open the bones that I mentioned in such a way that you could actually look down into the skull cavity itself and see that probably a third or so, at least, of the brain tissue, posterior cerebral tissue and some of the cerebellar tissue had been blasted out.
There was a large amount of bleeding which was occurring mainly from the large venous channels in the skull which had been blasted open.
William Kemp clark #® I then examined the wound in the back of the president’s head.
This was a large, gaping wound in the right posterior part, with cerebral and cerebellar tissue being damaged and exposed.
VI, 20 The point here is that the photographs of the brain in the National Archives show no damage to the cerebellum.
The above testimonies, sworn under oath by experienced medical doctors who observed the head wound, clearly and unambiguously describe extruded and damaged cerebellar tissue.
If their testimonies are correct, and there is no reason to believe they are not, then the photographs of the brain in the National Archives are not of Kennedy’s brain.
The most obvious reason is that Kennedy’s real brain had been re-moved—for the most part—before the body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Either that, or the brain remaining in the skull when the body arrived may have been so mutilated by a bullet or bullet fragments exiting from the rear of the skull, or by hurried dissections on the part of conspirators—to remove bullets and bullet fragments from the brain, that would have revealed the true nature of the president’s head and brain wounds, and thus establish that there had been more than one gunman.
Another doctor who was present in the emergency room in Dallas Parkland Hospital was Dr.
Conspiracy of Silence, published in 1992, Crenshaw wrote: ...from the damage I saw, there was no doubt in my mind that the bullet had entered his head through the front, and as it surgically passed through his cranium, the missile obliterated part of the temporal and all the parietal and occipital lobes before it /acerated the cerebellum.
The wound Expert corroboration that the photograph of the brain in the National Archives labeled as Kennedy’s brain is, in fact, of someone else’s brain was provided by Dr.
Robert Livingston in a presentation that he gave at the ASK Conference in Dallas in November 1993.
It simply cannot be true that the cerebellum could have been seen extruding from the occipitalparietal wound—by several experienced and thoroughly competent physicians—and for the same brain to be seen in superior and lateral photographs, and depicted in a drawing showing the cerebellum as being apparently intact.
A conclusion is obligatorily forced, therefore, that the photographs and the drawing of the brain in the National Archives are those of some brain other than that of John Fitzgerald Kennedy 3) There is much more to be said about the missing brain.
It is perhaps the most ghoulish example of destruction of evidence by government in the JFK assassination.
One very suspicious item is a notation in a supplementary autopsy report that the brain weight was 1500 grams.
How strange, when 1500 grams is an above-average normal weight for a human brain.
When we note that about one-third of the brain had been blown away in Dallas, as evidenced by statements of the doctors at Parkland Hospital and also as dramatically indicated in the Zapruder film, it is strange indeed that all three of these doctors would sign their name to a report stating that the brain weighed 1500 grams—an impossible weight, except for a completely intact brain in the extreme upper range of brain weights for humans.
David Mantik has pointed out that this could not have been a simple mistake in the identity of a body part report.
At the time the report was prepared, the only organ being examined was a brain.
This report was presumably prepared two weeks after the autopsy had been completed.
As noted earlier, when the autopsy physicians had completed their examination of the brain, it was transferred to the Secret Service at the White House in a stainless steel coutaines On April 26, 1965, the Secret Service transferred the autopsy materials to President Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, then at the National Archives.
She obtained a footlocker within one day to which she transferred the materials, and kept the footlocker in a security room in her office for about one month.
The footlocker, with keys, was then, according to Lincoln, turned over to Robert Kennedy’s personal secretary, Angela Novello.
Evelyn Lincoln presumed that it was moved to another part of the archives; she said that she had no more direct contact with the material.
But an HSCA document indicated that the footlocker was removed from the National Archives by Robert Kennedy’s representatives and later returned.
On October 31, 1966, the footlocker was officially turned over to the National Archives, at which time Novello produced a key, the footlocker was opened, and it was discovered that the brain and tissue slides were missing.
The HSCA concluded that they were probably disposed of or otherwise made inaccessible by Robert Kennedy.
This was based in part on the speculation of Kennedy’s attorney, Burke Marshall.
Marshall opined that Robert Kennedy wanted to avoid future public display of the brain.
Others speculate that it was to avoid future public disclosure that President Kennedy had Addison’s disease and had kept it from the public.
Ironically, if there was a brain in the container, it not that of President Kennedy, as indicated by the evidence in this book.
If Robert Kennedy did in fact dispose of the brain and tissue slides, he was destroying prime evidence of a conspiracy.
The president’s body was removed from the casket in which it had been transported and was placed on the autopsy table, at which time the complete body was wrapped in a sheet and the head area contained an additional wrapping which was saturated with blood.
Following the removal of the wrapping, it was ascertained that the president’s clothing had been removed and it was also apparent that a tracheotomy had been performed, as well as surgery of the head area, namely, in the top of the skull.
All personnel with the exception of medical officers needed in the taking of photographs and x-rays were requested to leave the autopsy room and remain in an adjacent room.
The importance of this statement—that surgery had been performed in the top of the head—is extremely significant because surgery had not been performed on the top of the head at Parkland Hospital; only a small incision had been made in the throat wound for the purpose of inserting a tracheotomy tube.
Sibert and O’Neill later stated that they were quoting statements of the autopsy pathologist in their report.
Corroboration of the accuracy of the statement about surgery in the head was, in part, provided by Dr.
Perry the next day at Dallas and asked him if any surgery had been performed at Parkland Hospital.
Simple logic tells us that if surgery had been performed on the top of the head when the body arrived at Bethesda, and if it had not been performed at Parkland Hospital, then it must have been performed sometime between the time the body left Parkland and when it was taken into the Bethesda Naval Hospital.
This of course leads to the conclusion that surgery was performed when the body was in the possession of the conspirators, after they had removed it from the casket placed aboard Air Force One in Dallas.
This all dovetails with the statements of Paul O’Connor and Jerrol Custer that the brain was almost completely missing when the body arrived at Bethesda, and it dovetails with the evidence, previously discussed, that the photographs of the brain in the National Archives are not of Kennedy’s brain but rather a substitute brain.
We now arrive at the question of the size of the head wound observed at Bethesda Hospital compared to that observed at Parkland Hospital.
To answer these questions, we can examine the statements of the doctors at Parkland Hospital with the statements of the doctors at Bethesda Hospital, along with actual photographs and sketches of the head wound.
This was corroborated by David Lifton in a November 1966 phone call to Dr.
Robert McClelland, in his testimony to the Warren Commission, described a wound in the back of the head corresponding roughly to the numerical descriptions by Drs.
Thus we have three doctors at Parkland Hospital, who were attending to Kennedy, agreeing that there was a wound of approximately 2 2 to 3 inches in size, located in the back of the head.
Humes wrote, “There is a large irregular defect of the scalp and skull on the right involving chiefly the parietal bone but extending somewhat into the temporal and occipital regions.
Humes’ dimension was partially corroborated in a sketch prepared by Dr.
Boswell, the autopsy pathologist who was co-responsible for the autopsy.
He showed a portion of the skull labeled “missing” as 10 by 17 cm in size.
Boswell in the photograph of the large defect in the skull shown in Exhibit 13-7.
I made a dimensional outline of this wound by tracing over the photograph.
There has been a controversy about the orientation of the large defect photograph in Exhibit 13-7.
A few have claimed it was solely at the top of the head , and turned around 180° from that described in the caption.
It is also consistent with the description of Paul O’Connor and the orientation of the head when the photograph was taken by John Stringer, Jr.
Three of the doctors at Parkland reported seeing a wound in the back of the head with a dimension of 2 % to 3 inches; Drs.
Humes’ description, but it is grossly larger than the description of the wound by the doctors at Parkland Hospital.
If we take the largest dimension mentioned at Parkland which corresponds to an area of 7 square inches—and compare it to the smallest dimension at Bethesda corresponding to an area of 19. square inches, we have a discrepancy of nearly three to one in the size of the wound observed at Bethesda compared to that observed at Parkland.
This controversy exists even among those who believe that there was a conspiracy involving the federal government, including forgery of the motion picture films.
I agree with the view of David Lifton—that the wound was in fact greatly enlarged by the conspirators sometime after they removed the body from the bronze casket in Air Force One.
Sibert and O’Neill’s report of surgery on the head; Paul O’Connor and Jerrol Custer’s statements of the essentially empty cranium when the body arrived at Bethesda; the evidence that the photographs of the brain are not of Kennedy’s brain and, finally, the ultimate complete disappearance of the brain.
All of this is entirely consonant with the head wound having been enlarged in order for the conspirators to get at the brain before the autopsy.
Those who wish to believe that the head wound was the same at Bethesda as it was at Parkland because the flap of scalp obscured the wound at Parkland are, of course, free to do so.
But to me it seems self-evident that the conspirators would not have gone to the extreme risk of stealing the president’s body, taking it to a secret location, and then smuggling it into the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital had they not had some drastic purpose in mind, such as modifying basic evidence.
The Navy enlisted men have been willing to come forth, be questioned, appear on television, and be subjected to cross-examination by the public, whereas the commissioned officers have not talked with anyone except under the most benign, controlled conditions from friendly government investigators, or from a friendly Journal of the American Medical Association.
The Moral Dilemma of Commander Humes On November 22, 1963, Commander James Humes was assigned the project of supervising the autopsy of the assassinated president.
At that time, Commander Humes was chief of pathology at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
He had performed relatively few autopsies, and none involving gunshot wounds.
He presided over an autopsy that is now commonly recognized as being either fraudulent or the most bungled in all of history.
I have reached the opinion that they were the victims of intimidation and duplicity on the part of the executive branch of the federal government, in the guise of the necessity of a cover-up for national security purposes.
There is evidence to support the contention that the Navy pathologists participated, perhaps unwittingly, in a cover-up and that it was intimidation from above that compelled them.
Much more will be written in a later chapter concerning Lyndon Johnson’s incredible hands-on orchestration of a cover-up.
Pierre Finck, one of the three pathologists who conducted the autopsy of President Kennedy.
These notes were recently obtained by Anna Marie from the National Archives.
However, the prosectors /sic] involved in Kennedy’s autopsy are still required not to release information to the press.
Brig Gen Blumberg, AFIP Director, calls me within two hours, notifying me of the same White House orders.
Because the wound of entry in the front of his neck required that the president had to have been assaulted frontally, this seemed to me to be a matter of utmost importance for the autopsy.
I therefore telephoned from my home in Bethesda to the Bethesda Naval Hospital where the autopsy was to be performed.
This was prior to arrival of the president’s casket from Dallas to Andrews Air Force Base.
I was put though to the Officer of the Day who quickly provided me telephone access to Commander James Humes who was to head the autopsy team.
Humes said he had not heard much reporting from Dallas and Parkland Hospital because he had been occupied preparing to conduct the autopsy.
I told him about reports describing the small wound in the president’s neck.
I stressed that, in my experience, that would be evidence for a wound of entry.
I emphasized the importance of carefully tracing the path of this projectile and of establishing the location of the bullet or any fragments.
I said, carefully, that if that wound were confirmed as a wound of entrance, that would prove beyond peradventure of doubt that a bullet had been fired from in front of the president —hence that if there were shots from behind, there had to have been more than one gunman.
The FBI wont let me.” 1 wished him good luck, and the conversation ended.
Livingston, unambiguously, before the autopsy started, that the front neck wound was probably an entry wound.
Humes wrote that he learned about the neck wound the next day when he telephoned Dr.
Perry had described the wound as a “puncture wound” in the front of the neck, “approximately at the midline Not only that, Dr.
Humes did not probe or dissect the neck wound to determine its nature or direction, despite having been forewarned by an imminent medical scientist in a high position in the federal government at that time.
Although one may write this off as a slip of the mind under the extraordinary pressure of the moment, it is difficult to believe that Dr.
Livingston, a fellow medical doctor in the United States government, had told him, in no uncertain terms, in the telephone call.
We can now add to the above the appalling incompleteness of the autopsy when it was declared to be complete in the early hours of the morning of November 23, 1963.
Had not determined the path of the bullet that entered Kennedy’s back ( a cursory probe indicated only a finger-length depth of penetration); Had not probed or dissected the wound in the front of the neck; Had not located an exit wound from Kennedy’s head; Had been denied access to Kennedy’s clothing showing the bullet holes; and Had been denied access to the autopsy photos.
What they had observed was a huge, gaping hole in the right side, back, and top of Kennedy’s head which they were unable to make sense of.
Only the next day, after the fact, would Humes cobble together a report that would arbitrarily connect the back wound that was six inches below the collar line to the throat wound, designating the throat wound arbitrarily as an exit wound when in fact it had been described as having the characteristics of an entrance wound, and disregarding the fact that in probing the back wound, the probe had stopped at no more than a finger length into the back.
Humes burned his original notes recorded at the autopsy in his fireplace.
Humes must have burned his notes to eliminate discrepancies with his final re-port—discrepancies that would have, must have, been revealed had his original notes been retained.
It is inescapable that if the clinical observations at Parkland and the autopsy evidence at Bethesda had been interpreted and reported accurately to the Warren Commission, it would have shattered the loneassassin hypothesis.
As is true for many aspects of this complex case, a book could be written on the subject of Dr.
But suffice it to say, in my opinion there 1s little question that their actions and inactions speak of a cover-up, a concealment of facts, and a distortion of history.
I do believe, however, that they were somehow misled and intimidated directly from the White House, under the guise of national security, to produce an autopsy report tailored to support the lone-gunman scenario that was being railroaded through the government.
This position of the federal government on the autopsy, including the FBI and the CIA, has never been modified after thirty-three years of controversy, and after mountains of evidence to the contrary.
At this point, I was satisfied that all five of my initial allegations had been sufficiently proven to have a high probability of standing up ina court of law.
In my interview with Paul O’Connor in Washington, D.C., I questioned him about this.
He was adamant that the body had not been delivered to the morgue twice.
This was in direct conflict with Lifton’s hypothesis that there had been a second casket opening with Humes, Boswell, and others present.
Lifton’s hypothesis was that the casket switch had been made when all personnel were required to leave the autopsy room for x-rays to be taken—a period of about thirty minutes.
He said that when he was ordered to leave the autopsy room he went into an adjacent anteroom where he stood observing everything going on in the autopsy room, “with his nose pressed against the window” in the connecting door.
O’Connor was certain that Kennedy’s body had remained on the autopsy table during the entire period and that a body/casket shell game had not been going on, at least in the autopsy room.
O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: O’Connor: Twyman: plausible alternative to Lifton’s hypothesis.
The Navy ambulance, according to what we have developed here so far, had a bronze casket in it which was empty.
The body was brought in a shipping casket from the rear of the morgue, and the Navy ambulance was driven back and forth from the front to the rear for some reason.
There were thousands of people on the grounds near the hospital that night, just onlookers.
And now this may be a scenario that goes with what we are talking about—deception of the public.
Yes, that makes sense; of course we never saw anything like that because we were in the morgue.
We’ve explained, so far, the black hearse, the bronze casket delivered to the morgue at 7:07m. and Sibert and O’Neill kept out of the morgue.
The bronze casket could have been brought in and put down and then taken right back out.
So that could explain the bronze casket being brought in for appearance and then taken right back out again.
They bring in the bronze casket, it goes inside, presumably it is opened, the body is taken out, the casket is taken back and put in the hearse and driven away.
In other words, it could explain the black hearse, shipping casket, bronze casket in, bronze casket out.
Anyway, I can see that there is an explanation for the appearance of the in-and-out Navy ambulance.
Although the foregoing explanation seemed plausible, it still had flaws in it.
Boswell, General McHugh, and a casket team member, James Felder, all witnessed the bronze casket being opened with a body in it that presumably was Kennedy.
Upon arrival at Bethesda, O’Neill stated that the ambulance stopped at the front entrance where Jackie and RFK disembarked to proceed to the 17th floor.
The ambulance then traveled to the rear where O’Neill, Sibert, Greer , and Kellerman placed the casket on a roller and transported it into the autopsy room.
O’Neill stated that he was present when various persons placed the body on the autopsy table.
Doctors then proceeded to remove the sheet covering JFK and to photograph the body.
O’ Neill said that he remained “right next to the body,” a distance of closer than two yards.
I traveled from Andrews Air Force Base in the ambulance with the President’s body and accompanied the coffin to the autopsy laboratory and saw the body removed and placed on the autopsy table.
What we have here is testimonial evidence from credible witnesses that, when all taken together, lead to the conclusion that Kennedy’s body was delivered to the Bethesda morgue twice.
If I hadn’t interviewed Paul O’Connor, I probably would have accepted Lifton’s thesis that the body was delivered the second time in the bronze casket while most of the key personnel had been ordered to leave the autopsy room while x-rays were being taken.
But O’Connor’s testimony was so adamant and so convincing that I found myself in a dilemma.
When the bronze coffin was delivered to the Bethesda morgue, the body in it was not that of John Kennedy, but a substitute body.
O’Connor said that during the autopsy he was able to see, through the door, part of the coffin placed there.
O’Connor said it was peculiar that an Air Force major’s body would be delivered to Bethesda because they normally handled only Navy personnel.
He had never recalled Army or Air Force personnel being sent to Bethesda.
I suggested to O’Connor the possibility that when the bronze coffin was first brought in to the morgue, it was brought in to the anteroom empty.
Then, the Air Force major’s body was placed in the coffin and it was then taken back out to the Navy ambulance where it was returned to the front of the hospital.
It was at this point where the ambulance was joined with the casket team and the ambulance was then driven to the rear of the morgue where the bronze casket was removed from the ambulance, then taken into the anteroom of the morgue, and opened for viewing.
The coffin was then closed and later removed from the anteroom with the Air Force major’s body in it.
I asked O’ Connor if it seemed possible that something like this could have happened from his vantage point during the autopsy.
When I returned to California, I called David Lifton and ran the hypothesis by him.
I also discussed Paul O’Connor’s statement that the bronze casket could not have been delivered to the autopsy room while he was out and the x-rays were being taken.
I was now stuck with an incredible hypothesis—not only of the conspirators stealing Kennedy’s body from Air Force One and secretly performing an obliteration of evidence, by surgery on the head, but further, concocting a scheme whereby they were able to fool almost everybody by playing a shell game of casket and body switches.
It was too much to contemplate, so I went back and examined the evidence that the body was delivered in a shipping casket to the rear of the hospital while, at the same time, the Navy ambulance was parked at the front of the hospital with an empty bronze casket in it.
After carefully reviewing this evidence, along with my previous development of evidence of forgery of the Zapruder film, and the evidence that the photographs of the brain that are now in the National Archives are not photographs of Kennedy’s brain, and the facts surrounding the disappearance of the brain, and the long list of credible witnesses who testify to all these events, I could think of no explanation of the second delivery of Kennedy’s body in the bronze casket other than that it was the body of someone other than Kennedy.
For years I had pondered the fantastic evidence surrounding the autopsy.
We have the spectacle of the conspirators seizing the Zapruder film on the day of the assassination and engaging in a highly sophisticated procedure to alter the film and delete frames.
We have the forgery of evidence concerning the number of bullets; the ghoulish spectacle of the conspirators at some secret location, widening the opening in Kennedy’s skull, and partially removing his brain to eliminate incriminating bullets; and now the possibility that someone else’s body was secretly placed in the bronze coffin before it was delivered to Bethesda.
First of all, the very idea of a conspiracy to assassinate the president of the United States, concocted by a band of criminals and government employees and carried out in a covert operation, was in itself unbelievable.
But as evidence upon evidence piled up, all of these actions and manipulations remained in a coherent body.
And particularly a crime to assassinate the president of the United States, in a conspiracy that went drastically awry, and for which desperate measures had to be taken to cover it up, would be bizarre to the extreme.
Nonetheless, although there was no doubt in my mind that the essential story of theft of Kennedy’s body and alteration of the head wound was true, I was left with a sense of uncertainty about the intricacies of the delivery of the body to the morgue twice.
I had hoped to develop a scenario in which they were all unwitting of the game that was being played on them.
But we should keep in mind that solving a crime does not require that every last detail and nuance be clarified with absolute certainty; otherwise few crimes would ever be solved. ok OK OK The primary conclusions in this chapter will be reinforced when we examine the work of Dr.
David Mantik, a medical doctor, radiation oncologist, and physicist at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital in Rancho Mirage, California.
Mantik in Chicago in 1993 at a symposium on the assassination and later formed a close working relationship with him concerning his work on the x-rays of President Kennedy’s head.
Timeline Between Arrival of Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base and “Formal” beginning of Autopsy.
Timeline from “Formal” Beginning of Autopsy to Delivery of Body, X-Rays, and Photo Negatives to White House.
Humes officially announces results of autopsy—‘two shots from reas” 1:00 am FBI agents Sibert and — O'Neill leave the autopsy room—job complete Kellerman delivers x-ray ~t— photos to Bouck 4:30 am Exhibit 13-4.
The statements above require careful study and are not presented as clear and convincing evidence of when a shift of the president’s body was made; it shows only possibilities.
At this point it remains a mystery as to whether the body was hidden in a compartment aboard Air Force One and removed after the plane landed in Washington, D.C., or was taken off Air Force One in Dallas and flown back to Washington by a military or private plane.
Recent research by Craig Roberts has revealed that there was a large cargo compartment where the body could have been hidden underneath the floor where the casket was placed, accessible through a trap door under the carpeting.
Layout of Morgue and Autopsy Room at Bethesda Naval Hospital Showing Entrances and Exit of Shipping Casket and Body.
MasPrra TBSTHEZDA mARLAND NOVEMBER 22 aay OAdcssine& Room and SHowens re. aut on TO One es rtprin Cancer Fars Deas Tx, Exhibit 13-6 The Top of the President’s Head as Observed by Witnesses at Bethesda Naval Hospital When the Body Arrived.
Paul O’Connor said that this was what he first saw when the body arrived at the Bethesda morgue in a body bag.
When the scalp was parted, the huge gaping hole in Exhibit 13-7 was revealed, to the astonishment of those present. a Exhibit 13-7.
This very important photo shows the massive defect in the right side, back, and top of the president’s head.
The rounded portion of the remaining skull in the back of the head is clearly visible.
Paul O’Connor said that this is exactly what he saw at Bethesda Naval Hospital after parting and reflecting back the scalp; and he agrees that it is a photo of the back and top of the head.
At Parkland Hospital, doctors observed the brain extruding from a wound about three inches in diameter.
Yet this photo shows an essentially empty cranium, without extruding brain, and a wound much larger than three inches.
This evidence indicates that the brain was removed from the cranium sometime between the time the body left Parkland Hospital in Dallas and when it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Paul O’Connor agreed with me that this photo is a view of the rear of the head, looking at a downward angle.
This was buttressed in an HSCA interview of John Thomas Stringer, Jr. on August 12, 1977, by Donald Andrew Purdy.
On the left is a drawing from the National Archives by Ida Dox of what is supposed to be John Kennedy’s brain, which was examined in the autopsy.
It is an exact rendering of a photograph in the National Archives, and has been authenticated as such by Dr.
David Mantik who examined both the drawing and the photographs in the National Archives.
Note the distinctive appearance of the cerebellar portion of the brain when compared to the right and left cerebral hemispheres.
Several physicians attending Kennedy at Parkland Hospital in Dallas testified under oath that the large portions of the cerebellum were extruded or were blasted out through a large wound in the occipital bone in the back of the head; yet this drawing shows a completely intact cerebellum.
On the right is a midline view of a typical head and brain, which shows the location of the cerebellum in a vertical cross-section.
Moreover, a large piece of occipital bone was found behind and to the left of the presidential limousine on the day after the assassination.
All this evidence fits into a pattern indicating a fatal shot from the front.
David Lifton weed S CEREBELLUM On left: View of Kennedy’s brain from above.
Outline of the Large Jagged Defect in the Back, the Right Side, and the Top of the President’s Head.
This sketch was made by tracing over the original image used in Exhibit 13-7.
But the defect as shown here is much larger and more extensive than the wound described by personnel at Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
Jenkins said that only one segment of bone was blown out—it was a segment of occipital or temporal bone.
He noted that a portion of the cerebellum was hanging out from a hole in the right-rear of the head.
The massive size of the wound is considered to be evidence that the head wound was enlarged sometime between the time the body left Dallas and before it arrived at the Bethesda morgue.
This is a top view of the skull, crudely showing a large defect that extends from the parietal region “somewhat into the temporal and occipital region,” as described by Dr.
Occipital Region Right Typed notes allt by stathor Source: Autogsy Report, Whew Canmeisaion The dimensions of the “missing” bone agree closely with the dimensions of the large defect in the autopsy photo in Exhibits 13-7 and 13-9, which agree with Dr.
Well, this was an attempt to illustrate the magnitude of the wound again.
And as you can see it’s 10 centimeters from right to left, 17 centimeters from posterior to anterior.
This was a piece of 10centimeter bone that was fractured off of the skull and was attached to the under surface of the skull.
There were fragments attached to the skull or to the scalp and all the three major flaps.
Humes, in his autopsy report, wrote, “There is a large irregular defect of the scalp and skull on the right involving chiefly the parietal bone but extending somewhat into the temporal and occipital regions.
In this region there is an actual absence of scalp and bone producing a defect which measures approximately 13 cm. in greatest diameter.
Sagutal suture aD protuberance ——a Mastod Dotted lines added by author approximate the perimeter of the large defect observed at Bethesda Naval Hospital Dr.
All of this is consistent with the photograph of the large irregular defect in Exhibit 13-7, and its dimensions shown in Exhibit 13-9.
This orientation and approximate size and location of the defect was confirmed by Paul O’Connor, who was one of the first to observe it.
But when the body arrived at Bethesda, the wound was much larger, as shown above and in the autopsy photo in Exhibit 13-7.
According to Humes’ testimony and autopsy report, the frontal bone was not involved.
He wrote that the skull hole involved “chiefly” the parietal but also extended into the temporal and occipital bones, indicating that the wound was in the right rear of the head and surely was a wound of exit, although this was apparently unknown to Humes; the wound had been enlarged in secrecy by the conspirators to confuse the autopsy pathologists.
This bone fragment, measuring 2'D23 by 23, was found at the rear and to the left of the location of the presidential limousine when the fatal head shot occurred.
It was found by medical student Billy Harper the day after the assassination.
Cairns examined it, along with another pathologist, and they both stated that it came from the occipital region of the skull.
The fragment was photographed in the Methodist Hospital photographic lab.
The Harper fragment is strong evidence of a shot from the front, perhaps explaining its strange disappearance.
If it were available today, it could be analyzed and scientifically identified as to its location in the skull.
Interior Surface Neither the Commission nor Specter ever saw any of the photographs or x-rays corroborating the autopsy report.
Gaeton Fonzi Investigator for Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations 14 THE AUTOPSY PHOTOGRAPHS AND X-RAYS The autopsy photos and x-rays, along with the Zapruder film, were among the most carefully guarded and suppressed evidence in the JFK assassination.
Only when Jim Garrison started his investigation in 1967 did Life magazine reluctantly part with the Zapruder film, and only then did it become available to the public by way of bootlegged copies made in the outside developing laboratory utilized by Life.
Although the word “shocking” is now almost a cliché, it aptly describes the manner in which the autopsy photographs and x-rays were handled by the government.
Boswell, were not allowed to examine the photographs, and were only able to superficially examine the x-rays before finishing their report on the weekend after the assassination.
Roy Kellerman of the Secret Service retained possession of the photographs and x-rays in the early morning of November 24 and turned them over to his chief, Robert Bouck, whose office was in the Executive Office building of the White House.
It was not until three years after the autopsy that, finally, Humes and Boswell were called forth to examine them.
If Secret Service agent James K Fox had not somehow obtained a set of the photographs and x-rays we might never have seen them.
But Fox did obtain a partial set and made it available over the years until the dissemination was widespread.
It was only then, when the cat was out of the bag, that the government allowed access to the photographs and x-rays in the National Archives, and then only to selected medical persons who were approved by Burke Marshall, friend and attorney of the Kennedy family.
In this chapter, I will examine the autopsy x-rays as they relate to certain autopsy photographs that are considered to be authentic, and as related to the Zapruder film, and to the testimonies of the autopsy pathologists at Bethesda and the physicians at Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
David Mantik, Mp, 4 a radiation oncologist (board-certified by the American College of Radiology) at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital in Rancho Mirage, California.
Mantik became interested in this subject in 1992 and began to analyze and experiment with x-ray techniques to examine the possibility that the x-rays taken of Kennedy in the autopsy had somehow been altered to conceal the evidence.
He arranged to visit the National Archives and examined the original xray negatives.
Over the years he has visited the National Archives six times, in each case pursuing his research and diligently making his precise measurements.
He made thousands of measurements of the optical density of one-millimeterdiameter circles to survey the x-ray negatives.
Several hundred individual measurements were made for each negative, in order to quantify and chart a pattern on the film of its capacity to transmit light from a constant source.
Mantik experimented in his laboratory in Rancho Mirage to determine if it were possible to forge x-rays by making a composite from the original, using overlays to create the appearance of bone or brain in the x-rays when, in fact, they were absent.
He also experimented with x-rays of human skulls that were filled in quadrants with brain-equivalent tissue to confirm his estimates of missing brain from Kennedy’s x-rays.
Concurrently with this research he analyzed the results of his optical measurements of the original x-rays in the National Archives.
Rather than attempting to go fully into the technical details of optical densitometry, I will present here only my simplified understanding of the subject, and only to the extent required to attain a rudimentary grasp of Dr.
It is really somewhat useless for the reader to try to delve into this x-ray evidence without at least a superficial knowledge of the subject.
Mantik is working on a paper that he intends to publish, as well as a book.
He has been selfless enough to spend many hours with me and allow me to present a skeleton preview of what his finished work will reveal.
His publications will, of course, provide more complete and final results.
What I am doing here is applying his discoveries in an effort to achieve a synthesis with the larger picture of medical, forensic, and photographic evidence.
Optical Densitometry Please refer to Exhibits 14-1, 14-2, 14-3, and 14-4 at the end of this chapter.
Also, the reader will find it helpful to study the other Exhibits, 14-5 through 14-8, in which the evidence of photographic forgery is included.
The term “optical density” is a measure of the opaqueness of x-ray film.
Optical density, also called OD, is expressed as the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of incident light to transmitted light through the film.
Clear portions of film have low optical density and dark portions have high optical density.
In looking at an x-ray of the head, we are concerned with brain and bone tissue for the most part.
On an x-ray positive print, which we are looking at here in the Kennedy x-rays, bone and brain tissue will appear as white or translucent, and absence of brain and bone tissue will appear as black.
Therefore, strong white means much bone and/or brain tissue and very low optical density, and strong black means very high optical density and absence of bone and brain tissue.
An OD of 2. will appear quite dark on a positive print, and an OD of 0. will appear very white.
Attenuation may be thought of as a dampening of the intensity of the x-ray, therefore a lessening of its impact on the x-ray film.
Xray film BRAIN BONE 2S ——_» — y X-rays from > ———_> power source . ae oe ——_> > Head Model Metallic serean energized by x-rays to emit flourescent light Bone has a higher attenuation of x-ray transmission than brain tissue of an equal thickness.
However, in the head, there is a much greater thickness of brain than bone except on the outer edges of the skull when visualizing it from one direction.
Visualize the head as a sphere of 3/8-inch thick bone with a six-inch-diameter brain inside 124) On the center line of the diagram, the brain tissue is therefore 16 times the thickness of one side of the skull bone, and it is 8 times the thickness of both sides of the skull.
On the right and left side of the skull, however, the bone thickness through which the x-rays penetrate becomes much greater than the 3/8-inch thickness on the center line.
From the foregoing, we can deduce that an x-ray positive print of a typical head would have a white ring around the periphery, with a center of varying shades of gray.
Examination of Exhibit 14-3, which is an x-ray of Kennedy’s head while he was alive, shows this to be true.
On the other hand, an empty skull with no defects in it would appear as a bright ring with a dark center approaching black.
This is shown in part in Exhibit 14-1 which shows a dark area F with a bright periphery indicating an intact skull in that part of the skull, but virtually devoid of brain matter.
As earlier noted, the dampening of x-ray transmission through a substance is measured as attenuation.
For our purposes assume 2:1 for the attenuation ratio of bone compared to brain of equal thickness.
Since the brain in the head at the center line of our diagram is eight times the thickness of two layers of bone, it would provide four times the attenuation of the bone.
However, if one-half of the skull is missing, there is only one skull thickness that the x-ray is penetrating.
In that case, the brain would provide eight times the attenuation of the bone.
The point here is that when looking at an x-ray of the head, absence of bone is not readily detected by the human eye if one is looking at the film through the maximum thickness of the head.
Also, when looking at the film at the right or left sides of the head in our diagram, the bone thickness becomes large relative to brain thickness because, in moving from the center to the side, there is a gradual decrease in attenuation attributable to brain, and an increase in attenuation attributable to bone, again making absence of bone not readily visible to the untrained eye.
Only by using a sensitive instrument can reasonable, quantitative sense be made of x-rays, and the relative proportions of brain and bone tissue be estimated.
That instrument is an “optical densitometer” which measures optical density in x-ray films, from which can be precisely calculated the light transmission through the developed film and, for a given film characteristic, correlated to authoritative standards of the related bone and brain tissue.
This is widely used and is standard practice in radiation oncology, in which the nature and size of brain tissues and bone tissues have been observed and documented for a wide range of cases.
This instrument can also be used to detect other objects in the brain such as bullets, which have an extremely high attenuation of x-ray transmission.
In addition, the measurements can be used as a basis for calculation of approximate thickness of tissues or objects, or detection of one object superimposed on another object.
There is a general misconception among the lay public and, curiously, among many medical doctors and even radiologists, that x-rays are sacrosanct; that they cannot be forged HOH But Dr.
Mantik has demonstrated that it is possible to forge an x-ray, at least one of 1963 vintage, if the objective is limited to concealing missing bone or brain tissues in one location.
The final product is the original with the patch added 1044 There is an alternative method to create a deceptive x-ray that Dr.
Mantik has pointed out; that is to shield the body itself, in this case a portion of the head , and then to take the x-ray, which will not show the hole inasmuch as it has been shielded.
Mantik’s research, he favors alteration of the x-rays as the method most likely used by the forgers.
A variety of methods can be used to blend in the patch so that it is not readily detectable to the naked eye.
But itis detectable by an optical densitometer unless the patch is done with infinitely scrupulous care and precision-blending techniques, as will now be discussed.
The Right Lateral X-Ray Unfortunately for the conspirators, it appears that they used a relatively crude method when producing the right lateral head x-ray in Exhibit 14-1.
He discovered a patch used by the conspirators that was so opaque that it had an attenuation nearly equivalent to a head of solid bone—and that he had never before seen in any other x-ray of human heads, or in the literature, or in measurements of x-rays of nineteen cadavers (and visual inspection of many others) from the 1960s and 1970s in coroner’s cases for death by gunshot to the head.
Moreover, the ratio of the optical transmission proved to be 1000:1 between the dark area F in Exhibit 14-1 compared to the white area F, whereas in clinical practice this ratio is seldom greater than 2:1.
This startling deviation indicates that a very opaque patch on area P had been used to produce the right lateral x-ray.
Mantik first observed, the maximum ratio of light transmission from any dark to any light portion of the x-ray film was 3.89, with an average ratio of about 1.0.
He also examined x-rays taken of the parietal bone just behind the ear, in numerous skulls, and found that the optical density at that location was almost identical to the optical density in area P in Exhibit 14-1.
Inasmuch as the parietal bone extends all the way across the head, it is equivalent to a head of solid bone, an impossibility for area P inasmuch as a head has brain in it in that area.
Mantik had discovered that the right lateral x-ray of Kennedy’s head had been forged or otherwise produced in a crude attempt to conceal either missing bone or missing brain, or both, in that portion of the head.
Curiously, however, the fact of missing brain or bone in area P is in fact observed in the anteriorposterior x-ray shown in Exhibit 14-2.
The Anterior-Posterior X-Ray A great value of the AP x-ray in Exhibit 14-2 is that, except for one small anomaly, it is authentic.
The portion that is not authentic is the bright circle labeled as “6.5mm object,” which appears to be a sliver of a bullet embedded in the outside of the skull on the back of the head.
None of the autopsy pathologists at Bethesda, or others present, observed such an object, despite the fact that finding a bullet was one of their primary objectives.
Mantik suspects that this object may have been artificially superimposed on a much smaller authentic metal fragment in a composite forgery after the original x-rays were developed.
Mantik interviewed Jerrol Custer, one of the xray technicians who was present at the autopsy.
Custer told Mantik that the day after the autopsy, a skull was brought to him, strangely, and he was asked to x-ray it while placing a bullet on the skull.
Mantik that there was something very suspicious going on with regard to the x-rays.
The AP x-ray in Exhibit 14-2 is consistent with the head wound photo in Exhibit 14-4.
In the previous chapter we established that the head wound photo is authentic, and that it is consistent with the descriptions of the head wound by both Dr.
Boswell at the autopsy, and that it is consistent with the description of the head wound described by Paul O’Connor.
The AP x-ray, the autopsy photo of the head wound, and the testimony by key witnesses at the autopsy are all consistent.
However, the lateral x-ray is inconsistent with these items, at least in area P where we find the patch.
Mantik’s analysis is in my opinion almost completely consistent with the fundamental discoveries of David Lifton and all the other evidence that I have presented in this book, including evidence of missing frames in the Zapruder film.
My conclusion that frames are missing in the Zapruder film was thoroughly discussed in preceding chapters.
Now we have the AP x-ray which also shows that a blow-out in the back of the head had taken place.
This again is corroborating proof that frames were deleted in the Zapruder film to take out the eruption of brain and skull material that should have, must have, appeared at the rear of the head at the time of the fatal head shot, had not frames been deleted.
An equally important corollary point is that if, in fact, the massive wound in the side and top of the head actually did occur in Dealey Plaza, then many more frames must have been deleted from the Zapruder film—frames that would have shown the blow-out of brain and skull in the right side and top of the head.
Alteration of the Zapruder film to that extent would have been impracticable by removing frames, because it would have required that all of the frames after the fatal _.. head shot be removed.
This would have created a major, uncorrectable, and obvious disturbance in the continuity of movement in the film.
Rather, it is the result of dissection of the head and removal of brain and skull material in a secret location, after the body left Dallas, as was first proposed by David Lifton.
I have found no scenario of events other than David Lifton’s that so completely and consistently fits the cumulative evidence in the Zapruder film, the autopsy photographs, and the autopsy x-rays, combined with virtually all of the testimonies of the dozens of witnesses.
Kennedy’s body was secretly removed from Air Force One, taken to a secret location where the exit wound in the head was enlarged to obscure its nature and to remove incriminating bullet pathways and fragments, and a large portion of the brain was removed; and the body was then delivered to the Bethesda morgue.
The ambulance that arrived at the front of the hospital contained the bronze casket, without Kennedy’s body in it.
It is clear to me, beyond a reasonable doubt, that a massive attempt was made by persons in the federal government to alter the Zapruder film and the autopsy photos and x-rays, and to alter the president’s body, all done to conceal evidence of a conspiracy.
President Kennedy was assassinated by a conspiratorial group of great power and ruthlessness, and the crime was covered up by the executive branch of the United States government, starting within two hours after the assassination.
The evidence is persuasive, convincing—indeed overwhelming—on both counts.
It seems, on its face, that such drastic cover-up measures would not have been committed unless those in the government who covered up the crime were part of the plot.
By “those” I mean, most likely, Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover, who were in charge of the investigation.
Without a doubt, Hoover’s FBI was guilty of concealing, destroying, and suppressing other prime evidence; and Johnson most certainly would have been aware of Hoover’s actions and the goings-on in the autopsy.
However, if we are to remain objective, we must keep our minds open to the possibility that the cover-up by the United States government was carried out for some reason other than involvement of Hoover and Johnson in the assassination plot itself.
In other words, the assassination and the cover-up could have been two distinct, unconnected operations, perhaps for national security reasons.
My instincts rebel against that being true, but nonetheless I am compelled to maintain the thought while more evidence and analysis are developed in the chapters to follow.
National Archives BULLET FRAGMENTS Note: Very white area P indicating a composite forgery; very dark area F indicating almost complete void of brain behind intact right-front skull.
David Mantik to have been altered to conceal evidence of a blow-out of brain from the right hemisphere of the head through a hole in the rear of the skull.
This was accomplished by either making a composite x-ray in which area P was masked to conceal the absence of brain or bone in that region, or by shielding that portion of the head when the x-ray was taken.
Mantik believes that these are bullet fragments resulting from a shot from the front entering the right lateral forehead at the hairline.
The optical density in area P is nearly equivalent to a head of solid bone.
To the contrary, the dark area in area F has optical density equivalent to air or close thereto, indicating an almost complete void in that region.
Light transmission calculated from optical density measurements in area P and area F show an extremely abnormal ratio of P to F of about 1000:1, compared to what would normally be expected of no more than 2:1.
This x-ray in area P is inconsistent with the AP x-ray in Exhibit 14-2, and it is inconsistent with the autopsy photo in Exhibit 14-4.
It is also inconsistent with the testimonies of the doctors at Bethesda and Parkland Hospitals and the testimony of Paul O’ Connor.
David Mantik to be authentic except for a 6.5mm sliver of what appears to be lead embedded on the outside of the skull in the back of the head.
Humes and Boswell, in which they describe the head wound, and it is consistent with the testimony of Paul O’Connor in which he described a large amount of missing brain when the body arrived at Bethesda.
However it is not consistent with area P in the lateral x-ray in Exhibit 14-1 in that it does not show abnormal ratios of optical density from dark to light areas.
But itis consistent with the lateral x-ray in that it shows large portions of missing brain in the right upper hemisphere, down to at least the surface of the cerebellum, and also shows large portions of missing brain in the left upper hemisphere.
An important aspect of this x-ray is that, with the one exception of the bullet sliver, it is consistent with the large defect in the head shown in the autopsy photo in Exhibit 14-4.
Using optical density measurement from both the lateral and AP x-rays, Dr.
Mantik estimates that the right side has very little brain remaining, and the left side appears to have about 60 to 65% remaining, resulting in a composite estimate very close to that observed by Paul O’Connor, who said that only about 25% of the total brain remained when the president’s body arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Photograph of Premortem Lateral X-ray of President Kennedy’s Head as Viewed from Right Side.
National Archives This x-ray taken of President Kennedy shows what normal variations in optical density of a head should look like.
Compare this to the lateral x-ray in Exhibit 14-1 which shows an optical density in area P that is much less than the above, indicating that Exhibit 14-1 is a forgery.
This illustrates the difference in optical density of bone compared to brain when viewing the circumference.
Photograph of Large Defect in Back, Top, and Right Side of President Kennedy’s Head, Taken during the Autopsy.
This photograph is repeated from Chapter 13 for convenience of reference.
It is also consistent with Zapruder frame 335, insofar as a blow-out in the back of the head is concerned.
Ruler Finger Very important is the fact that the blow-out of the right side of the head shown in this photo does not show in the Zapruder film and, therefore, is corroboration that the head wound was enlarged at a secret location after the body left Dallas.
D2 inch to 3 inch exit wound in the back of the head as described by 25 doctors, nurses, and technicians who witnessed it at Dallas Parkland Hospital and Bethesda Naval Hospital.
It has never been conclusively established how this photograph could have been produced or where it was taken—it is obviously a deception of some sort.
A possible explanation is that there is a hair piece being held in place to cover up the 2'D2 inch to 3 inch wound, with some airbrushing on the portion above the hairline.
This photograph was taken before the reconstruction of the head by the undertaker, because the “bat wing” shaped flap above the ear is still intact.
Compare this photograph to the top of the president’s head shown in Exhibit 14-6.
The two photographs were presumably taken in the same setting; yet it seems impossible that they are of the same head.
Photograph of the Top of the President’s Head as Observed by Witnesses at Bethesda Naval Hospital When the Body Arrived.
Paul O’Connor told me that this was what he first saw when the body arrived at the Bethesda morgue in a body bag.
When the scalp was parted, the huge gaping hole in Exhibit 14-4 was revealed, to the astonishment of those present.
Compare this to the back of the head photo in Exhibit 14-5, which also shows part of the top of the head.
There is obviously no way that these two photos were taken in the same setting.
Humes, say that there was only one photo session which occurred just after the body was delivered to the Bethesda morgue and before manipulations of the body were commenced.
One possible answer to this conflict is that there were, in fact, two photo sessions, the first taken at an interim secret location where the photo in Exhibit 14-5 was made before the skull opening was enlarged and the brain partially removed by the conspirators.
In this scenario, the large hole in the back of the head that was described by doctors in Dallas could have been covered up by a wig, or by a matte insert, or by airbrush used to conceal it.
Full-Face Photograph of President’s Head, Viewed from Forward Right-Hand Side.
Note that the throat wound is much larger than the tracheotomy incision described by Parkland Hospital personnel.
The original wound, as described by doctors at Parkland Hospital, was a very smalldiameter hole resembling an entrance wound, which was incised with a surgical knife to permit insertion of a tracheotomy tube.
Mantik told me that this is the best evidence he has seen that the body was altered before it arrived at the Bethesda morgue.
This photo is evidence that the wound was enlarged, or the photo painted over, to give the appearance of an exit wound.
Tom Robinson, the mortician who prepared the body for burial, testified to the HSCA on January 12, 1977 that he had noticed this hole.
He described it as a little wound, about 'D4-inch in diameter, on the right side of the forehead up near the hairline.
Doctor Mantik told me that this wound is in line with the trail of bullet fragments that we see in the x-ray in Exhibit 14-1, leading from front to back of the head.
Also note the wooden structure in the upper right-hand corner of this photo.
Paul O’Connor told me that there was no such wooden structure in the Bethesda morgue.
This indicates that this photograph, along with some of the other autopsy photographs, was taken at an interim location where work was done secretly on Kennedy’s body before it was delivered to the Bethesda morgue.
Photograph of Side of the President’s Head and Neck, Showing the Neck Wound and the President’s Head Resting on a Metal Head Rest.
Paul O’Connor told me that the metal head rest shown here was not in use at the Bethesda autopsy room; instead, contoured rubber chock blocks were used.
Also, go back to Exhibit 14-7 which shows a wooden structure blocking the front door to the autopsy room.
According to O’Connor, no such structure was present at the Bethesda autopsy room during the autopsy.
This is evidence that the president’s body was intercepted before it arrived at Bethesda and, during that time, the above photo and other photos were taken.
GANGSTERS, COPS, AND SPIES The arrangements for a typical mob contract: A mob murder is usually a methodical job, performed by a coordinated team of specialists.
Up to 15 gunmen, drivers, spotters, and other backup personnel, plus several cars are used on some jobs.
Appendix 15 THE MAFIA AND THE DALLAS POLICE In this chapter evidence will be examined that implicates certain Mafia chieftains in the Kennedy assassination.
At the same time we will look at the role of the Dallas police as likely co-conspirators, and at the motivation of certain Mafia chieftains to reach the momentous decision to join in a conspiracy to assassinate the president of the United States.
Our premise here is that their motivation was primarily a matter of their personal survival, but mixed with no small amount of anger and desire for revenge against the Kennedys.
Before delving into the details it will be useful to first ask ourselves the question whether or not it would have been feasible for the Mafia, acting within its own organizational capacity, to mastermind, execute, and cover up the assassination, in light of the evidence presented in previous chapters.
The Mafia obviously could not have accomplished these things unless it had accomplices who were high government officials with enormous cunning and sufficient power to see that cover-ups of such a complex plot would be accomplished inside the executive branch of the United States government.
As the reader is by now aware, a thesis of this book is that these accomplices were, at a minimum, Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover.
Whether or not these two were blackmailed into the cover-up, or pragmatically took advantage of the terrible event, or were willing participants in the initial plot itself, remains to be seen as we progress.
They cite the argument, just noted, that the Mafia simply did not have the capability to execute and sustain the cover-up.
They also point out that the Mafia did not have the sophistication to conduct the disinformation scheme of setting up Oswald as a Communist connected with Cuba and the Soviet Union.
These points may be well taken but, as will be argued, they do not take into account the Mafia’s capability to influence powerful “legitimate” interests, including not only the vice president of the United States and the director of the FBI, but also the CIA and wealthy right-wing extremists and business interests.
Taking the foregoing into account, I decided that I should first examine the basic evidence for Mafia complicity before going into the broader evidence related to its penetration of world-wide “legitimate” power structures.
I began with specific evidence that certain Mafia chieftains felt, justifiably, that their power and the existence of their organizations were being threatened by the Kennedys, as was their fear of imminent incarceration in a federal penitentiary.
Motives of the Mafia to Assassinate John Kennedy When John Kennedy assumed the office of the presidency in 1961, Robert Kennedy immediately launched an unprecedented program against organized crime in the United States.
By all documented evidence available, this amounted to no less than a crusade to do away with the Mafia, specifically Sam Giancana, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, Jr., and their financier and cohort, Jimmy Hoffa.
Acting on the demands of his father, President Kennedy had appointed his thirty-five-year-old brother as attorney general.
That must have been an unmistakable signal to the mob that the Kennedys, as a family, were out to get them.
Sam Giancana and Jimmy Hoffa had experienced their fill of Robert Kennedy when he was counsel to the McClelland Committee and had personally attacked and humiliated both of them on national television.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations did a thorough job of investigating the Mafia.
In this chapter I will draw primarily on the HSCA Report, as well as on the works of David Scheim, Robert Blakey, and John Davis in developing the basic data and evidence.
Exhibit 15-1 includes graphical plots of the buildup of Justice Department activity against organized crime after the Kennedys took office.
And there was a 1,700 percent increase in days in court—from 61 to 1,081.
The above chart illustrates the dramatic increase of activity in the Department of Justice against the Mafia that took place during the Kennedy administration.
These figures plummeted when Robert Kennedy was stripped of power by Lyndon Johnson, and J Edgar Hoover was again given full reign.
If the Mafia’s objective in murdering the president was to get Robert Kennedy off their backs, they seem to have succeeded.
The Kennedy brothers may have been intellectually brilliant but they were surely deficient in emotional intelligence.
After all, they were very young and came from a sheltered background and had very little of life’s experience outside the lawns and clubs of New England, Washington, D.C., and the Court of St.
It appears that they did, indeed, deliberately pursue parallel paths of using the mob for favors while trying to destroy it.
It could be that the brothers just did not realize that this was dangerous in the extreme.
Whether or not he ordered that the arrangement between the CIA and the Mafia be stopped is uncertain.
Of course, the foregoing material, in and of itself, is not proof of Mafia complicity in the conspiracy, but it is a building block; it shows motive.
Jack Ruby’s Connections with Organized Crime The conspirators’ cover was blown when Jack Ruby shot Oswald while he was in the middle of a circle of dozens of Dallas policemen.
The plotters must have been in a state of high anxiety to go to such desperate measures.
Of all the incidents that triggered suspicion of a conspiracy involving the Dallas police, in the minds of the American people, Ruby’s shooting of Oswald stands foremost.
It has now been concluded, with the exception of a few remaining defenders of the Warren Commission Report, that Oswald was shot to silence him because he had enough information to unravel the conspiracy.
G Robert Blakey, chief counsel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, reached that conclusion.
The original plan of the conspirators, it would appear, was to have Oswald killed when leaving the scene, or later after flying him out of the country, and to pin the crime on him as a Communist and an agent of Cuba.
For reasons not fully understood, the plan went awry and Oswald was captured, unharmed, by the Dallas police.
Jack Ruby at first claimed to have shot Oswald out of sympathy for Jacqueline Kennedy and her children.
The committee also questioned Ruby’s self-professed motive for killing Oswald, his story to the Warren Commission and other authorities that he did it out of sorrow over the assassination and sympathy for the president’s widow and children.
Ruby consistently claimed there had been no other motive and that no one had influenced his act.
A handwritten note by Ruby, disclosed in 1967, however, exposed Ruby’s explanation for the Oswald slaying as a fabricated legal ploy.
Tom Howard was an attorney who was Mafia-connected and had visited Ruby in jail less than three hours after Ruby shot Oswald.
Tonahill later said, ““What Ruby wrote down disturbed me very much. | thought about it, walking all the way back to my hotel room.
With the above-written confession of Jack Ruby—that his story of why he killed Oswald was a lie—it would seem to be enough to convince a jury of his participation in a conspiracy.
But we need to go further in examining the evidence that the Mafia was deeply involved in the Kennedy conspiracy.
The starting point is Jack Ruby’s contacts with the Mafia in the months preceding the assassination, and in the aftermath of his shooting Oswald.
The heart of the evidence is in telephone records of incoming and outgoing calls from Ruby’s night club from April through November 1963.
Exhibit 15-2 illustrates these calls with Jack Ruby as the hub of a network branching out to major underworld figures throughout the United States.
These gangsters were the head bosses covering the entire United States.
Giancana covered everything west of the Mississippi including Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Dallas.
Carlos Marcello had his own fiefdom in New Orleans which overlapped Giancana’s territory into Dallas.
Trafficante covered the southeastern United States, headquartered in Florida.
The arrows show the direction of the calls, either incoming or outgoing, and the dates and number of calls are shown on the spokes of the wheel.
In parentheses under each Mafia associate’s name is his immediate Mafia chieftain contact.
This diagram shows Ruby’s links with mob chieftains throughout the United States in the months preceding the assassination.
It demolishes the lie perpetrated by Hoover’s FBI that Ruby was not associated with organized crime.
Ruby travels to New Orleans Mid-Nov: Al Gruber visits Ruby in Dallas Exhibit 15-3 shows the buildup of these calls starting in May 1963, peaking out in early November, and then declining to virtually no calls from November 17 through November 22.
Jt should be noted that on April 23, 1963 the first news release came out concerning Kennedy’ trip to Dallas.
It was shortly after that when Ruby’s activities began to accelerate and reach a frenzied pace.
This chart shows toll calls from Ruby’s Carousel office phone, compiled from telephone records subpoenaed by the FBI and telephone bills found in Ruby’s possession.
The less frequent calls from his home phone are not included, as records for such calls prior to May 1963 are not available.
There are smaller gaps in his Carousel toll call records for the periods January 1-16 and March 2-April 9, 1963.
Note the buildup of out-of-state calls starting in May 1963, after the announcement that John Kennedy was going to visit Dallas.
It demolishes the lie bought by the Warren Commission that Jack Ruby was not meaningfully connected with organized crime.
Telephone calls of particular significance are those between Nofio Pecora and Jack Ruby.
One of the telephone calls was from Pecora to Ruby on August 4 with a return call from Ruby on October 30.
You may recall that Oswald was thrown in jail in New Orleans for getting into a scuffle with anti-Castro Cubans while Oswald was distributing pro-Castro literature.
The records show that he was assisted in getting out of jail by Emile Bruneau, who paid a small fine on Oswald’s behalf.
It was discovered years later by the HSCA that Bruneau had been closely associated with Nofio Pecora, who was one of two major associates of Carlos Marcello.
And it is Pecora’s name that showed up as having placed a telephone call on August 4, 1963 to Jack Ruby from the number in New Orleans of Pecora’s office phone in the Tropical Court trailer park, of which Pecora was the manager.
Pecora had received a telephone call from Carlos Marcello on June 24, 1963 at the very same telephone at Tropical Court from which Pecora called Ruby five weeks later.
This exchange of calls fits into the intense pattern of calls between Ruby and Mafia figures that occurred between April 23 and November 9, 1963.
An FBI report, omitted from the Warren Commission Report and withheld even from National Archives files until 1970, summarizes Gruber’s police record of six arrests under two aliases in Illinois, Indiana, and California, with a conviction for grand larceny.
Al Gruber was a friend of Ruby’s from Chicago where they had roomed together for a year.
In mid-November 1963, after a ten-year separation, Gruber paid an extended visit to Ruby in Dallas HA In addition to the above contacts, other organized crime figures appearing in Ruby’s network of telephone calls reveal the depth and extent of his contacts with the Mafia.
Baker maintained close and frequent contacts with notorious mobsters throughout the country.
The name , ; “Barney,” with three of Baker’s phone numbers, was found in one of Ruby’s notebooks.
Frank Caracci was identified in a 1970 Judiciary Committee hearing as a “Cosa Nostra involved” gambler and strip joint operator.
Glaser’s underworld clout was suggested by one incident in 1961, in which Jimmy Hoffa was displaced from the best suite in the Las Vegas Riviera Hotel to accommodate Glaser.
Russell D Matthews was described in one FBI report as a burglar, armed robber, narcotics pusher, and murderer.
He worked for mob-controlled Cuban casinos in the latter 1950s and turned to Dallas underworld pursuits in the 1960s.
In January 1974, Matthews was subpoenaed by a federal grand jury in Houston concerning a reported contract to kill informants of corruption in the Houston Police Narcotics Division.
Lewis J McWillie, described by Dallas police as a “gambler and murderer,” served the Syndicate in several domains.
From September 1958 until May 1960, McWillie was manager of the mob-owned Tropicana Hotel in Havana; the hotel’s other top men included mobsters Giuseppe Cotrini, John Guglielmo, Norman Rothman, Willie Bischoff, and Meyer and Jake Lansky.
McWillie was finally forced out of Cuba in January 1961, along with the rest of the mob, with most of his assets confiscated.
Their close association was exhibited during a week-long trip to Havana by Ruby in 1959, during which he saw McWillie frequently.
Moreover, Ruby reported he once had four guns shipped to McWillie in Cuba.
And on May 19, 1963, according to sales records confirmed by McWillie, Ruby had a revolver shipped from Ray’s Hardware Store in Dallas to McWillie in Las Vegas.
Murray W “Dusty” Miller was the head of the Southern Conference of Teamsters in 1963 and later became secretary treasurer of the Teamsters International.
Like many of Ruby’s other mob contacts, and like Ruby himself, Weiner had been involved in the mob’s Cuban operations.
Weiner was also active in the Teamsters, as demonstrated by his frequent mention in FBI files with Jimmy Hoffa and union bigwig Allen Dorfman.
On October 26, 1963, Ruby placed a twelve-minute call from the Carousel Club, person-toperson, to Weiner in Chicago.
When questioned by the FBI three days after Ruby shot Oswald, Weiner refused to provide any information about this call.
Yaras was one of a group of mobsters monitored by an FBI bug in 1962 while planning a murder contract in Miami and discussing previous killings.
The bug provided grisly transcripts detailing mob executions, later published by Life magazine, and saved the life of the intended victim.
Yaras served as a go-between for Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante.
Like Marcello, Trafficante, Hoffa, and Ruby, Yaras had engaged in mob operations in Cuba.
Yaras told the FBI that he knew Ruby for about fifteen years in Chicago, and related enough details about Ruby’s habits and personality to indicate more than a remote acquaintance.
Although Yaras had no recorded contacts with Ruby in 1963, a curious indirect link brings us full circle among Ruby’s associates.
Note in Exhibit 15-1 that on November 7 and 8, 1963, Jack Ruby exchanged calls with teamster thug Barney Baker.
Two weeks later on November 21, 1963, at 6:17 m., the night before the assassination, a three-minute call was placed from the home phone of Baker in Chicago to a “Dave” in Miami, Florida.
Baker, as identified by telephone records, was Ruby’s old friend, syndicate killer Dave Yaras.
Frank Goldstein in San Francisco confirmed a ten-minute call person-to-person placed by Ruby on November 12.
Goldstein describes himself as a “professional gambler These telephone calls and contacts are by no means the only ones.
Many of the calls in Exhibit 15-1 may have been simply to tip off the recipient that Ruby would be placing a call froma pay phone later.
Also, Ruby is reported to have met with Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana’s man in Los Angeles and Las Vegas, at two small motels in Miami sometime in October 1963 1201 It was during this same period that Ruby again traveled to New Orleans, between October 1 and October 15.
Johnny Rosselli, Mafia hit man graduated to a top Mafioso operative, was Sam Giancana’s right-hand man in the plans of the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro.
He became a close friend and drinking buddy with William Harvey, the man in charge of ZR/RIFLE, the CIA program to assassinate foreign leaders.
Rosselli had met with Harvey at his home in Washington, D.C [21 in June 1963.
Shortly after testifying to the Senate’s Church Committee, Rosselli was murdered in the late summer of 1976; his body was found cut into pieces and stuffed in an oil drum that floated to the surface in a Florida intercostal waterway.
Recapping at this point, we are building a very powerful body of circumstantial evidence that links the Mafia to the JFK assassination and shows that Jack Ruby was a Mafia operative.
We also have a very strong case that Ruby’s silencing of Oswald was not, as he initially claimed, done out of impulse and emotion for Jacqueline and Caroline Kennedy, but was ordered by someone, probably the mob, to prevent Oswald from testifying because Oswald would have blown the case wide open.
Common sense tells us that the conspirators did not plan to have Oswald executed on national television.
It appears that things went terribly wrong and Ruby was ordered to correct the mistake.
Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, was illegally deported to Guatemala by Robert Kennedy.
In 1963, before the assassination, Marcello uttered his famous death threat about John Kennedy.
Marcello was involved with the CIA in the attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro.
In 1992, Marcello was the only person still alive who was a major conspirator in the assassination of John Kennedy.
He resided in New Orleans but was in the advanced stages of Alzheimers disease and uncommunicative.
AP/Wide World Photos Johnny Rosselli, close subordinate of Sam Giancana.
Shortly after he testified the Church Committee, Rosselli was chopped into pieces and stuffed in an oil drum in the late summer of 1976.
AP/Wide World Photos eS Santo Trafficante, Jr, Mafia chieftain in Florida.
Trafficante was reported to have made a death-bed confession to his attorney, Frank Ragano.
AP/Wide World Photos Jimmy Hoffa, Teamsters president who had close ties with the Mafia.
Hoffa reportedly put up the first money to finance the JFK assassination.
AP/Wide World Photos David Ferrie, close associate of Guy Banister, Carlos Marcello, Oswald, and Clay Shaw.
He mysteriously committed suicide within three days after news reporters revealed that he was named by Jim Garrison as a major player in the conspiracy.
AP/Wide World Photos Jim Garrison, famous district attorney of New Orleans, who in 1967 obtained the indictment and prosecution of New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw for conspiracy with David Ferrie and others to assassinate John F Kennedy.
The trial collapsed when insufficient evidence was presented to link Shaw conclusively into the conspiracy.
Shaw was acquitted by the jury, but much of the evidence of conspiracy developed by Garrison in his investigation has proven over the years to be close to the mark.
Curiously, however, Garrison did not seriously implicate the Mafia or the Dallas right wing in his investigation.
AP/Wide World Photos Clay Shaw, New Orleans businessman and homosexual who was prosecuted by Jim Garrison.
Years after Shaw’s acquittal, it was revealed by the CIA’s Victor Marchetti that Shaw and Ferrie were CIA agents.
Conclusive evidence was later developed by the House Select Committee on Assassinations that Shaw was closely linked to David Ferrie and Oswald.
A United States State Department document shows that Shaw was a member of the board of directors of Permindex, an Italian-based corporation that was a CIA front and was linked to French OAS terrorists.
A CIA document, released in 1996, revealed that he was closely “associated” with the CIA from 1948 to 1956.
AP/Wide World Photos As mentioned earlier, Carlos Marcello made a death threat against President Kennedy in 1962 and even described how it would be done.
Marcello’s anger could have constituted a motive for the assassination.
There was a witness, moreover, who said the New Orleans Mafia leader had been quite specific about the manner and method of his revenge.
Edward Becker, a former Las Vegas promoter who had lived on the fringe of the underworld, told of a meeting in September 1962 at Churchill Farms at which Marcello became enraged at the mention of Robert Kennedy’s name.
Blodgett had employed Becker on occasion in 1962; he said that he believed Becker’s account.
The HSCA severely criticized the FBI for trying to discredit Becker’s story and for failing to investigate leads that would have confirmed it.
There are numerous other links of Marcello to the Kennedy assassination, the most important of which is his association with David Ferrie, and both Marcello’s and Ferrie’s connections to Oswald.
Ferrie was brought to public attention by Jim Garrison in his celebrated case in 1967; but three days after Ferrie’s name became public, he was found dead of an alleged cerebral hemorrhage, induced by an overdose of drugs.
Among them was Eladio del Valle, who was murdered in Miami within a day or two after Ferrie’s death.
Marcello’s connections to David Ferrie are extensive and well documented.
Ferrie worked for Marcello as a pilot and worked for Marcello’s attorney, G Wray Gill, as a research assistant.
Marcello also was listed as a sponsor for a service station that Ferrie operated in 1964.
David Ferrie, a rabid anti-Communist and a homosexual with a penchant for boys, was associated with the Cuban Revolutionary Council and with Guy Banister, a private detective, ex-FBI agent, and reputed high leader in the ultra-right Minutemen.
Ferrie was also associated with Clay Shaw, a New Orleans businessman who was a homosexual, a CIA operative, and connected with worldwide, extreme right-wing organizations, among which was Permindex, allegedly a CIA company in Italy.
Ferrie was a frequent associate of Oswald, having been seen with him around New Orleans many times by numerous witnesses.
Also, Oswald was a former cadet in the Louisiana Civil Air Patrol commanded by Ferrie.
Two photographs have recently been discovered showing the two together.
His role in the CIA was confirmed in 1975, when Victor Marchetti, former executive assistant to the CIA deputy director, stated that during high-level CIA meetings in 1969, CIA director Richard Helms revealed that Ferrie and other figures in the Garrison investigation, including Clay Shaw, had indeed worked for the agency #41 Oswald’s connections to Marcello include the fact that Oswald’s surrogate father and uncle, Charles Merret, was a Marcello lieutenant.
Also, according to an FBI informer , sometime in April 1963, Oswald received money from a man who was later discovered to be a top lieutenant of Carlos Marcello—Joe Poretto—in the Town and Country restaurant managed by Anthony Marcello, Carlos’s brother.
The FBI questioned Anthony Marcello shortly after the assassination but then quickly dropped the inquiry.
It was also the address of Guy Banister’s office and was next door to the office of Jim Braden, a Mafia operative who was arrested in Dealey Plaza immediately after the JFK assassination, but immediately let go.
Garrison certainly knew about Carlos Marcello, who was the biggest mobster in New Orleans.
Some suspect that Garrison was blind to the Mafia connection because he had been compromised by them.
Others suspect that Garrison was a shill for the mob and that his entire investigation was a ruse to direct attention to the CIA and away from Marcello.
To his detractors I suggest that of all the investigative work done in the JFK assassination, few have withstood the test of time as well as Jim Garrison’s, although he was strangely silent on the Mafia.
A central part of Garrison’s case was a visit by Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw to Clinton, Louisiana, in August-September 1963.
Oswald in Clinton, La—While reports of some Oswald contacts with anti-Castro Cubans were known at the time of the 1964 investigation, allegations of additional Cuba-related associations surfaced in subsequent years.
As an example, Oswald reportedly appeared in August-September 1963 in Clinton, La., where a voting rights demonstration was in progress.
The reports of Oswald in Clinton were not, as far as the committee could determine, available to the Warren Commission, although one witness said he notified the FBI when he recognized Oswald from news photographs right after the assassination.
In fact, the Clinton sightings did not publicly surface until 1967, when they were introduced as evidence in the assassination investigation being conducted by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison.
In that investigation, one suspect, David W Ferrie, a staunch antiCastro partisan, died within days of having been named by Garrison; the other, Clay L Shaw, was acquitted in 1969.
Aware that Garrison had been fairly criticized for questionable tactics, the committee proceeded cautiously, making sure to determine on its own the credibility of information coming from his probe.
The committee found that the Clinton witnesses were credible and significant.
They each were interviewed or deposed, or appeared before the committee in executive session.
While there were points that could be raised to call into question their credibility, it was the judgment of the committee that they were telling the truth as they knew it.
There were six Clinton witnesses, among them a State representative, a deputy sheriff and a registrar of voters.
By synthesizing the testimony of all of them, since they each contributed to the overall account, the committee was able to piece together the following sequence of events.
In the late summer of 1963 it was targeted by the Congress of Racial Equality for a voting rights campaign.
Oswald first showed up in nearby Jackson, La., seeking employment at East Louisiana State Hospital, a mental institution.
In addition to the physical descriptions they gave that matched that of Oswald, other observations of the witnesses tended to substantiate their belief that he was, in fact, the man they saw.
For example, he referred to himself as ‘Oswald,’ and he produced his Marine Corps discharge papers as identification.
Some of the witnesses said that Oswald was accompanied by two older men whom they identified as Ferrie and Shaw.
If the witnesses were not only truthful but accurate as well in their accounts, they established an association of an undetermined nature between Ferrie, Shaw and Oswald less than 3 ... 1126] months before the assassination. é Evidence of associations between Oswald, Ferrie, Shaw, and Banister that have been reported over the years have developed into an iron-clad case.
In a 1994 conference in Washington, pc,4 James DiEugenio, author of Destiny Betrayed and specialist on Jim Garrison and the New Orleans evidence, presented extensive documentation that he has recently developed of the trip by Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw to help Oswald get a job ina state mental hospital in Jackson, Louisiana.
This trip was a very strange event, corroborated by forty-five witnesses.
In addition to David Ferrie, Carlos Marcello had contacts with the CIA that could have provided him with the expertise to plan and carry out the Oswald impersonation schemes previously noted.
First of all, Marcello was involved and played a role in the 19611963 CIA/Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Second, Marcello had a close friend in Washington, a lobbyist by the name of Irving Davidson, who served as an unofficial lobbyist for the CIA on Capitol Hill.
Davidson had contacts with almost anyone in the CIA, and with J Edgar Hoover.
It is possible, and should be considered seriously, that David Ferrie himself could have cooked up the scheme to provide an Oswald impersonator to go around Dallas, as in the rifle range and the MercuryLincoln dealership incidents.
Ferrie could also, working with other CIA operatives, plausibly have sent Oswald or an impersonator to Mexico City to make contact with the Soviet and Cuban embassies there in order to implicate Oswald as appearing to be plotting some sinister activities with the Communists.
One might conclude that Carlos Marcello—working with the mad genius David Ferrie, other CIA-linked rogues, and Mafia minion Jack Ruby—could have singlehandedly been the mastermind behind the conspiracy.
Marcello’s associates in Dallas could plausibly have worked with right-wing businessmen and the Dallas police to control events there.
I would say that it is not likely that such extreme steps would be planned before the fact; but plausible if done after the fact when Oswald was captured, throwing everything into a cocked hat.
In other words, it seems impossible that Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover would have agreed to the forgeries of the Zapruder film and the autopsy x-rays unless forced to do so by a botched plot of which they were a part.
He was sometimes known as “the professor,” or “the master of intrigue,” by his associates in the anti-Castro movement.
Ferrie had strong organizational abilities; he organized the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol into a highly respected unit.
He, like Marcello, had an ability to influence others to do his bidding.
Ferrie practiced hypnosis (he had an extensive library on hypnosis in his apartment—and there is some indication of his involvement in MK/ ULTRA), and both Ferrie and Marcello were right-wing extremists and militant segregationists.
Present at the trial, a very important event indeed, were Carlos Marcello, his family, and David Ferrie.
David Ferrie’s boss, Carlos Marcello, had just dealt a devastating legal blow to Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department.
And President Kennedy, of whom Ferrie had made public statements outlining a cross-fire plot of how Kennedy should be assassinated, had now been assassinated in Dallas.
And now, Lee Harvey Oswald, Ferrie’s friend, had been captured by the Dallas police and accused of the crime.
What a calamity this must have seemed to David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello.
That very evening, Ferrie took off in his car with two young male companions and headed for Houston, Texas, driving through a thunderstorm and arriving in Houston at 4m. on November 23.
The route of this fascinating trip and the timing of events is shown in Exhibit 15-4.
Before Ferrie and his companions left New Orleans, Ferrie had placed a telephone call to a motel in Houston that was owned by Carlos Marcello and made a reservation for the night.
After that, he telephoned the owner of the Winterland Skating Rink in Houston and asked about the skating schedule.
Sometime during the afternoon of the next day, Saturday, November 23, Ferrie placed a collect call to the Town and Country Motel in New Orleans, Carlos Marcello’s headquarters.
But while in Houston, Ferrie and his companions never got around to ice skating.
They happened to arrive just before Jack Ruby’s friend from Dallas, Breck Wall, arrived there.
Breck Wall visited the home of Thomas J McKenna and, shortly thereafter at 11:44m. on November 23, he received a telephone call from Jack Ruby.
It does not take much imagination to suspect that the frenetic trip was precipitated by Oswald having been captured in Dallas and that there was an urgent need to communicate with Jack Ruby in a manner that would be difficult to trace.
First is the logical assumption that somebody must have communicated with Ruby, ordering him to eliminate Oswald.
And, finally, the trip may have been to accomplish both purposes—the first purpose being hastily added on when Oswald was captured, thus accelerating Ferrie’s departure from New Orleans on that stormy night.
Evidence that Ferrie’s mission to Houston and Galveston was to fly a get-away plane was reinforced when Dick Russell paid a visit in 1975 to a gay activist named Raymond Broshears who had been a roommate of David Ferrie.
He was going to fly these people on to Mexico, and eventually to South Africa, which did not have an extradition treaty with the United States.
They had left from some little airfield between Dallas and Fort Worth, and David had a twin engine plane ready for them and that was the purpose of his mad dash through a driving rainstorm from New Orleans.
They did not L301 Broshears went on to tell Russell that David Ferrie had told him that Lee Oswald did not kill the president.
He also said Ferrie had told him that four people were going to shoot Kennedy.
He said that later in 1964 Ferrie told him that one of the men fired from a sewer opening along the parade route, another from the grassy knoll, and someone from behind.
He said Ferrie told him that Carlos Marcello was the one who put up the money and that Marcello was the person most closely aligned with the people who actually engineered the killing.
He said Ferrie told him he never worked for the CIA but might have been working for them without realizing it.
Ferrie said that he was working for people he saw as patriotic Americans.
Broshears said Ferrie participated in the assassination for patriotic purposes and was manipulated by the government.
Ferrie told him he was going to be killed, and the next thing Broshears knew, Ferrie was dead.
While Ferrie and his companions were in Texas, the New Orleans police were on a major manhunt for him.
The reason for trying to find Ferrie was that he had been identified on a television program as being a friend of Oswald’s and this had triggered an allegation by Jack Martin, a private investigator and friend of Ferrie’s who worked for Guy Banister.
According to Martin, Banister then pistol-whipped him, beating Martin over the head with the butt of his .345 magnum.
It was the next day that Martin saw the television program during which three men were discussing Oswald’s friends in New Orleans and mentioned David Ferrie.
That afternoon Martin decided to get in touch with the police and telephoned his friend, New Orleans Assistant District Attorney Herman Kohlman, and told him that he suspected that Oswald and Ferrie had conspired to assassinate President Kennedy.
The next day, Sunday, November 24, Martin told a friend of Kohlman that Oswald and Ferrie’s relationship went back to 1955 when they had both served on the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol.
Martin said that Ferrie had taught Oswald how to fire a rifle with a telescopic sight and that Ferrie hated Kennedy and he had once heard him discussing with Oswald the possibility of assassinating Kennedy.
The noose around Ferrie tightened on the morning of November 25 when the FBI learned that Ferrie’s library card had been found on Oswald at the time of his arrest.
The library card having been found on Oswald was revealed to the FBI by Marcello’s attorney, G Wray Gill.
When Ferrie learned in Galveston that the Dallas police were looking for him, he returned to New Orleans on Monday, November 25.
He was then interviewed by the FBI, the Secret Service, and the New Orleans police.
They were never mentioned in the FBI summary report and were not turned over to the Warren Commission.
Also, all of the November records of David Ferrie’s telephone calls were declared “unavailable” by Ferrie’s lawyer, G Wray Gill.
This information only started to surface in 1967 when Jim Garrison began his re-investigation of the Kennedy assassination.
As we can see throughout this book, further study of a given subject reveals intricacies of the conspiracy that lead to other suspects.
In Ruby’s case, a fuller understanding of his murder of Oswald serves to implicate the Dallas police force, with credible evidence that some of its officers were involved in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
Then, he just happened to have an impulse to pull out his revolver, charge Oswald through a cordon of police , and fatally shoot him.
The second answer proposed does not require these ridiculously improbable coincidences.
It assumes that there was some very intricate planning and timing which involved bringing Oswald into the basement at the precise time that the police knew Ruby would arrive.
The purpose of the Sunday telegram at 11:17m. in that case would be to stage a reason for Ruby to be in the vicinity of the police station at that time.
If it were timed that way, then someone in the police department is guilty of giving the information as to when Lee Harvey Oswald was coming down.
To do this, it will be helpful to examine Ruby’s activities in November 1963 and in particular on November 21, 22, 23, and 24.
In doing so, we get an extremely interesting portrait of a highly agitated man involved ina conspiracy.
Met racketeer Al Gruber and mob hit man Paul R Jones in Dallas over a two-week period; both Mafia connected.
Ruby visits Las Vegas where he could have met Lewis Mc Willie, mob hit man November 21: Noon: Visits office of Lamar Hunt with Connie Trammell Late Night: Met with Jeah Aase and Lawrence Meyers at Cabana Motel where Eugene Hale Brading was also staying.
Kennedy shot while Ruby was at Dallas Morning News Building 1:30-2:00 pm: Ruby seen at Parkland Hospital by Seth Kantor 2:00-3:00 pm: Went to Carousel Club and placed phone call to Al Gruber in Los Angeles 7:00 pm: Seen at Dallas Police station 10:00 pm: Went to Synagogue for services About 10:30 pm: Has Nichols’ parking garage attendant sign receipt that Karen Carlin was given $5 at 9:30 11:30 pm: Back to Dallas police station; attends press conference where Oswald is displayed.
The three hadn’t been together since 1947, and Al Gruber hadn’t had contact with Ruby for the preceding ten years.
During this same two-week period, Ruby phoned another mob hit man, Lennie Patrick, in Chicago.
And on November 17, Ruby took a trip to Las Vegas where he met Lewis McWillie, yet another mob hit man and contact of Santo Trafficante, Jr., in Tampa, Florida.
The relationship of Ruby and McWillie went back to the days when Trafficante ran gambling casinos in Cuba, before Castro took over.
So here we have Jack Ruby, in addition to his frenzy of telephone calls to Mafia figures all over the United States, having personal meetings with mob hit men shortly before the assassination of John Kennedy.
The next suspicious activity of note was on the evening of November 21, the day before the assassination, when Ruby met with a Jean Aase and Lawrence Meyers at the Cabana Motel in Dallas.
By a curious coincidence, Eugene Hale Brading was also seen at the Cabana Motel.
It was Braden who was arrested in Dealey Plaza a few minutes after the Kennedy assassination as he just happened to be leaving the Dal-Tex Building, which is one of the buildings from which it is believed a shot or shots were fired at Kennedy in the motorcade.
It just happened that Braden was a Mafia-connected figure, an ex-convict on parole, and just happened to be visiting in Dallas at that time and just happened to be in the Dal-Tex Building to make a phone call.
When Kennedy was shot at 12:30m. on November 22, it is virtually certain that Jack Ruby was in the Dallas Morning News Building.
Mary Ferrell, veteran researcher in Dallas, told me that she had four witnesses confirming that fact.
Ruby is next seen at Parkland Memorial Hospital between 1:30 and 2:00m. by the highly respected newsman Seth Kantor.
Kantor testified that he ran across Ruby in the hallway and spoke to him briefly.
It has long been suspected that Ruby planted the magic bullet, number 399, on the stretcher.
Next, between 2:00 and 3:00m., Ruby went to his Carousel Club and placed a phone call to Al Gruber in Los Angeles.
One evident reason is that Oswald, instead of being shot while escaping as planned, had been captured by the Dallas police, and therefore a major problem had emerged; Ruby could have been calling Al Gruber to ask for further instructions.
It should be noted that Al Gruber was an associate of Johnny Rosselli who was Sam Giancana’s right-hand man in Los Angeles.
He is carrying a loaded gun, to which he admitted in his testimonies to the Warren Commission.
Then, at about 10:30m., he had the Nichols parking garage attendant sign a receipt that Karen Carlin was given $5 at 9:30m.
Next, at 11:30m., Ruby returned to the Dallas police station where he attended a press conference at which Oswald was displayed.
Ruby interjected to tell everybody that it was actually “The Fair Play for Cuba” committee.
At some time between 2:00m. and 3:00m., Ruby met a Dallas policeman by the name of Harry Olsen who was with a dancer, Kay Coleman.
During all of the preceding, Ruby had exhibited outbursts of tears and emotion about the Kennedy assassination.
He alternately appeared to be grief-stricken, highly energized, and agitated.
At one time, when he was with his sister, he went in the bathroom and vomited out of overwhelming emotion.
So now, at 4:00m. on the morning of November 23, Ruby gave a demonstration of a twist board at the Dallas Times Herald Building, much to the amusement of people watching.
He then called an employee to bring a Polaroid camera so that the three of them could take a picture of an “Impeach Earl Warren” sign at Dealey Plaza.
They went to Dealey Plaza and took the picture while Ruby talked about the importance of this sign because it implied a right-wing conspiracy to kill Kennedy.
He is next seen at 3:00m. on November 23, standing in front of the county jail waiting for the Oswald transfer.
Oswald was scheduled to be moved to the jail at that time but there was a last-minute change.
When Ruby learned this, he went to the Dallas police station—to the third floor—still carrying his loaded gun.
On the evening of November 23, Ruby was observed at various places in Dallas where there were pay telephones.
The next evidence of Ruby’s whereabouts was shortly after 2:15m. when the Dallas sheriff's office and the FBI offices received warnings that Oswald would be shot in the transfer to the county jail the next day.
The man in the sheriff’s office who received this call later identified the voice as belonging to Jack Ruby.
At 2:30m. the Dallas police received a similar warning that Oswald was going to be shot during the transfer.
We now arrive at the morning of November 24 when Ruby shot Oswald at 11:17m.
There is conflicting testimony concerning Ruby’s activities that morning.
According to Ruby, and supported by the telephone record, he received a telephone call from one of his nightclub strippers, Karen Carlin, at 10:19 m., requesting that $25 be wired to her as an emergency loan.
After receiving the call, Ruby stated that he went to the Western Union office and wired the $25 to her at 11:17m.
Ruby said he then walked over to the Dallas police building, walked down an auto ramp leading to the basement, and on impulse pulled out his gun and shot Oswald in the abdomen at close range.
The problem with Ruby’s story is that there are several credible witnesses who testified that Ruby was hanging around the Dallas police building all morning between 8:00m. and 10:30m.
These witnesses were TV news crewmen and a preacher who saw Ruby on an elevator in the police building at about 9:30m.
Correspondingly, Ruby’s cleaning lady, Elnora Pitts, testified that she called Ruby’s apartment some time after 8:00m. when a strange voice responded who did not appear to know who she was.
This is based on evidence that Senator placed a telephone call from the Eat Well Cafe to attorney Jim Martin in Dallas a few minutes before Ruby shot Oswald, requesting that the attorney represent Ruby for the shooting that had not yet occurred.
L136] An understanding of what actually took place is facilitated by placing oneself in the minds of the conspirators after Oswald was captured.
The conspirators, in a panic, realized that Oswald must be silenced—immediately.
Having Oswald killed in his jail cell was too obvious and would clearly implicate the Dallas police.
The only alternative was to have him shot while being transferred to the county jail while in the presence of a large number of newsmen and bystanders.
The unlucky person selected to perform the execution was Jack Ruby, who was ordered to do so by his Mafia superiors.
This order was coordinated through Ruby’s telephone calls to Al Gruber in Los Angeles, and Ruby’s subsequent telephone call to Breck Wall in Galveston after David Ferrie arrived there.
Obviously this scheme would take considerable coordination and planning to make it appear to be an act of emotion by an enraged citizen who was an admirer of the Kennedys.
There must have been a reason for Ruby to be near the police station at the time of the transfer.
Otherwise it would look less emotionally spontaneous and more deliberately planned.
Thus his placing the telegram to Karen Carlin at 11:17m. following her call to his apartment at 10:19 m.
Karen Carlin would have to be brought into the scheme, at least to get her to place the 10:19 m. call.
She would later be intimidated by the conspirators to testify to that effect.
Shortly after her testimony she disappeared and has not been seen or heard from since BA In order for Ruby to be on top of things and to receive messages regarding the exact timing of the transfer, he would have to be free on the morning of November 24 and near the Dallas police building.
When the time of transfer was set, Ruby would be signaled, and he would then go to the Western Union office to place his telegram.
When he came out of the office and was walking toward the police building, he would be observed by a conspiratorial coordinator, and at that moment Oswald would be brought down the elevator and into the police building basement, timed exactly for the execution.
If there were an unanticipated delay in bringing Oswald into the basement, there would be a means devised to hold Ruby off for a few minutes.
This would be accomplished by someone in the Dallas police station simply leaving a door unlocked leading from the alley to the basement.
Supporting evidence is found in the statements of Karen Carlin just after the assassination.
As stated earlier, one of the purposes of this discussion is to establish evidence of the involvement of the Dallas police in the scheme to silence Oswald.
Most compelling is evidence showing that, indeed, the killing of Oswald by Ruby was carefully orchestrated and would have been practically impossible without the help of the Dallas police.
To be more specific, there was a Dallas policeman who may have been directly involved—Sergeant Patrick T Dean.
He was also in charge of security in the basement of the police building that morning.
Further, he was on good terms with Joe Civello, Mafia boss in Dallas, subordinate to Carlos Marcello in New Orleans.
It is especially noteworthy that Dean is the one who verified Ruby’s statement that he entered the basement via the auto ramp, which was later refuted by numerous witnesses as having been impossible without their having seen him.
In summary, in view of all of the foregoing evidence and circumstances, Ruby’s murder of Oswald has all the appearances of a meticulously planned event, involving elements of the Dallas police and the Mafia.
This suspicion was confirmed to columnist Jack Anderson in the 1970s by the aging mobster Johnny Rosselli, who described Ruby as “one of our boys” and said that Ruby had been ordered to kill Oswald.
Combining that with the evidence of Dallas police complicity in Oswald’s murder further strengthens the case against the Dallas police.
Tippit in Oak Cliff, Texas, a suburb of Dallas, sometime between thirty-six and forty-five minutes after the murder of John Kennedy.
Bowley, who was driving by and a , saw Tippit’s body lying next to his squad car.
Oswald was blamed for Tippit’s murder although it was established that he was nine-tenths of a mile away, standing at a bus stop no earlier than 1:03m.
After leaving the depository building at approximately 12:33m, Lee Harvey Oswald proceeded to his rooming house by bus and taxi.
If we take the latest time of the shooting of Tippit as 1:10m., Oswald would have had to run a sixminute mile to be at the scene of the crime.
Yet the Warren Commission could not locate one witness who saw Oswald, or anyone else, running or walking from his rooming house to the scene of the Tippit slaying at 10th Street and Patton Avenue.
Relationship of Oswald’s Rooming House and Tippit Murder Scene to the Texas Theater.
Oswald still would not have had time to walk to the @usuncrime scene Ltn.
Oswald’s rooming house was the equivalent of eighteen blocks from the Tippit murder scene.
Therefore, if Oswald had left his rooming house at 1:03m. , he could not have arrived at the murder scene until 1:21 m., six minutes too late to commit the murder.
Oswald could not have shot Tippit unless he were driven to the murder scene by someone.
But, obviously, that is an entirely different matter; Oswald would have needed an accomplice to do the driving.
It was very important for the Warren Commission to establish that Oswald shot Tippit because it added to their theory that he was some sort of a crazy nut, wantonly killing people.
Their circuitous argument was that Oswald killed Tippit because he had just killed Kennedy and was fleeing the scene; then they turned it around saying that Oswald was a nut who could have killed Kennedy because he was a crazy killer as proven by the murder of Tippit.
Of these, only Helen Markham identified Oswald at the scene of the murder.
When I saw this man I wasn’t sure, but I had cold It is obvious from her testimony that Helen Markham had an extremely confused mind.
Clemons stated that she saw two men standing near Officer Tippit’s car at the time of the murder.
She saw one of the men with a pistol waving the other away as he ran down to Jefferson Street.
The second man she described as tall and thin, in clothing totally different from what Oswald was wearing that day.
Benavides was the closest of the witnesses; he was located only a few yards away when the murder was committed.
There were several other witnesses who had valuable information, none of it linking Oswald to the crime, but they, too, were not called by the Commission.
One of these witnesses was Frank Wright, who saw the last part of the scene that was described by Clemons.
Mr Wright, who had been inside the house, came out in time to see Officer Tippit roll over on the ground, probably the last move of his life.
Then the man circled around the police car and got into an old, gray car on the other side of it.
It seemed to me quite probably that this was the second man Clemons had observed, the one who was waved off by the short, heavy one who ran away.
If Oswald was innocent of the Tippit murder, the foundation of the government’s case against him collapsed.
There was one other witness, Warren Reynolds, who identified Oswald in a line-up as the man he saw running away from the scene.
Reynolds had initially told the FBI that he would ‘hesitate’ to identify Oswald as the running man.
After a miraculous recovery in the hospital, Reynolds had second thoughts about what he had seen and decided the running man actually was Oswald.
Not only had the Commission failed to tie Oswald to the murder of Tippit, by either the timing evidence or by eyewitnesses, they also failed to tie the four bullets found in Tippit’s body with Oswald’s revolver.
Not only that, three of the bullets were copper coated and manufactured by Winchester Western Company.
The fourth was a lead bullet manufactured by the Remington Peters Company.
Bullets are never sold in mixed lots, which raises the question of how Oswald happened to have the revolver loaded with bullets from two manufacturers.
Four cartridges allegedly found at the crime scene were matched to Oswald’s revolver, but not until a six-day delay by Dallas police, during which time they had possession of the revolver.
The initial list of evidence by the Dallas police did not include cartridges of any kind, arousing suspicion that Oswald’s revolver had been fired after the fact to produce the cartridges.
Poe, who later testified that he believed he had marked them with his initials.
There were no initials of any kind on any of the four cartridges. According to the Commission Report, the four bullets found in Tippit’s body could not be identified with Oswald’s revolver. Of the four bullets, three were from one manufacturer and the fourth from another manufacturer.
Bullets are not sold in mixed lots. There was a six-day delay by Dallas police in submitting the cartridges to the FBI, during which time they had possession of the revolver and plausibly could have fired bullets to create the cartridges. The cartridges, belatedly submitted to the FBI, did not bear the initials of Officer Poe, who had marked them with his initials when he found them.
My view is that, instead of going to 10th and Patton, Oswald had walked or was driven to the Texas Theater for some purpose, probably to rendezvous with someone who would get him out of the country where he would later be murdered.
A second scenario is that Tippit was murdered by the conspirators to set up Oswald as a wanton killer, thus linking him to the JFK assassination.
A third scenario is that Tippit was supposed to have picked up Oswald at a spot near Oswald’s rooming house, but for some reason he failed to do so, either losing his courage or bungling the effort.
The plotters, fearing that Tippit would talk, ordered that he be killed.
In this scenario, Tippit was supposed to have taken Oswald to a private airport, where he would be flown somewhere and killed.
Oswald, missing his ride, in desperation proceeded on foot and ducked into the Texas Theater, knowing nothing else to do.
He was spotted going into the theater and then captured; I tend to favor this scenario.
I decided at this point not to pursue the murder of Tippit further, however fascinating the mystery.
I now turned to consideration of another Mafia leader who is a prime suspect in the assassination, namely Sam Giancana.
The talking started before the assassination and has continued to this day.
David Atlee Phillips, suspected of being the mysterious Maurice Bishop and perpetrator of the multiple Oswalds, said before he died that fringe elements of United States intelligence may have been involved in the conspiracy.
As earlier noted, Lyndon Johnson’s mistress, Madeleine Brown, has said that Lyndon Johnson implied before Kennedy was killed that it was going to happen.
Marita Lorenz, CIA contract agent, stated in depositions for a courtroom trial that Frank Sturgis told her that he and a group of anti-Castro Cubans had been involved in the Kennedy assassination.
And, finally, Sam Giancana’s brother, Chuck Giancana, revealed in a recent book Double Cross that his brother Sam Giancana confessed to the entire crime in 1966 (in an hour-long discussion at Chuck Giancana’s suburban home in Chicago), just before Sam Giancana was to move to Mexico City.
I have often thought that if the full truth ever came out about the Kennedy assassination, it would be in the form of talk and confessions by individuals who were either part of the assassination or were friends or relatives of the conspirators.
A great irony is that most or all of these confessions and revelations must be dismissed by investigators.
But professional killers and political leaders have perfected their art so that they leave no trails— the art of “plausible deniability,” a term coined by spy agencies.
Often the only evidence we will find to identify the ringleaders will be in such hearsay, or their signals of confession reflected by their guilt-ridden acts or braggadocio before or after the crime.
Another way to attempt to discredit information is if it is published in a book and the book is sold for a profit.
But to throw out all of this information as not being of courtroom quality is to perhaps throw away the only information that will tell the whole story; and, out of a foolish adherence to “science” and a hypercritical skepticism, let heinous criminals free.
In this book, I have carefully attempted to segregate evidence and information that is of courtroom quality from the kinds of evidence and information described above.
But if one seriously wants to get a complete story of the assassination, and is not personally compelled to play the role of professional skeptic, it is indispensable to consider such information.
That is not to say that all confessions and information that are printed or released are worthy of lengthy consideration.
There have been many people who have confessed to the killing of John Kennedy.
Obviously we have to separate the mentally unbalanced who confess to crimes and those who write books or tell stories purely for profit from those who are telling a genuine story.
My approach has been to take the most credible stories first at face value, summarize them, and then examine them to see if I can find discrepancies or conflicts when they are fitted into a total picture, or valid reasons to suspect that they are either fraudulent or invalid.
In the controversial book Double Cross 4E Chuck Giancana seems to portray Sam Giancana as bragging rather than confessing.
The story in Double Cross is, without exaggeration, all hearsay, without a shred of documentation in the book to support it, and thus should be viewed very critically; but that does not exclude the possibility that it is essentially true.
Ruby had been Sam Giancana’s “man in Dallas” for years, running guns for the CIA as well.
He had previously demonstrated loyalty and the ability to work with the CIA during the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
At one point Ruby went so far as to give David Ferrie a job in his Carousel Club.
He used his associations with the Dallas police force to gain entry to the police station during Oswald’s transfer.
Oswald’s uncle was a Marcello lieutenant who had exerted a powerful influence over the fatherless boy.
Oswald had formed an alliance with the United States intelligence community, first as a young man in the Civil Air Patrol with David Ferrie, a homosexual CIA operative and Mafia smuggling pilot.
Chuck Giancana had also heard the names of several Texas politicians, including Lyndon Johnson and John Connally, whom Sam Giancana said had received substantial Mafia and oil money backing.
The decision to finalize the plans for their elimination of the president were made in the early spring of 1963.
He said that fanatical right-wing Texans, Lyndon Johnson, Nixon, and a Bay of Pigs action officer were involved.
Chuck Giancana stated that a key man of Sam Giancana’s was Richard Cain.
Sam Giancana said that the Dallas assassination had taken months to mastermind.
Dozens of men were involved, and the hit had been planned for several different cities—Miami, Chicago, Los Angeles, and Dallas.
That city provided the best opportunity for a successful assassination.
From Chicago, Sam Giancana brought in Richard Cain, Chuckie Nicoletti, and Felix “Milwaukee Phil” Alderisio, who all worked previously on the Bay of Pigs operation.
In fact, Giancana said it was Cain, not Oswald, who actually fired from the infamous sixth-story window.
Tippit as the actual gunmen—along with Frank Fiorini “4, and Lee Harvey Oswald, the man Giancana said they intended to frame as the lone assassin.
During the operation, Sam Giancana said the CIA upper echelon sequestered themselves in a hotel surrounded by electronic equipment.
With the aid of walkie talkies, the men were able to secure their firing positions and learn of Oswald’s whereabouts immediately following the hit.
Tippit, who both—like Richard Cain— had served in Chicago’s sheriffs’ department and held positions in law enforcement on the Dallas police force.
We’d overthrown other governments and other countries plenty of times before.
He said the murder of President Kennedy was little different from the plot to kill Castro, the murder of Vietnam’s leaders, that of Panama’s president—or any of the other dozens of military/CIA-sponsored coups perpetrated throughout the world.
The above key items, if they can be believed, explain virtually the entire assassination, except that they do not name the top CIA people and do not specifically name the implied Texas right-wing wealthy backers.
To get another opinion on the story, I wrote to a veteran assassination researcher, Paul Hoch.
In brief: Any information actually originating from Sam Giancana is perhaps hopelessly obscured by the obvious contributions of the author’s “research” to Double Cross.
The references to Roscoe White, Charles Harrelson, Frank Sturgis and Jack Lawrence are in my opinion sufficient to discredit the book as evidence.
Between you and me it amazes me that stuff like that can get published.
To arbitrarily toss it in the trash because of a few defects could be a serious mistake.
He is, after all, accusing the mob and his brother of assassinating the president of the United States.
This would seem to be a dangerous thing to do, even so long after the event.
Double Cross is a biography of Sam Giancana insofar as his early family life and life of crime are concerned.
The book was actually written by Sam Giancana’s nephew, Sam M Giancana, son of Chuck Giancana.
Chuck Giancana related these stories to his son and collaborated in writing the book.
Sam M Giancana has appeared on television on numerous occasions and has strongly attested to the truth of the book.
Chuck Giancana and his son Sam say that they wrote the book out of a concern for their country and out of a belief that they should not keep this information secret any longer—it had preyed on their minds too long.
They say the book was written with “no small measure of fear” involved.
They said that they have become tired of being under the stigma of being related to Sam Giancana and living under a changed name.
In an interview on national television, David Scheim, author of the highly respected book Contract on America, stated that the information in Double Cross fits very well into what he knows about the assassination 22 I was impressed by the fact that Double Cross was published after I had started my book; I had already developed my overall hypothesis, in which I had concluded from an analysis of motive, means, and opportunity that the Mafia, the CIA, J Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson were the most likely combination to make the plot work and to cover up the crime.
Sam Giancana’s book also buttresses my initial assumption that the primary motive in the crime was a defensive reaction of the conspirators to save themselves from being annihilated by the Kennedys.
In the case of Sam Giancana, his brother relates Sam’s rage and feeling of having been double-crossed by the Kennedys who accepted his favors, led him on, and then proceeded to try to destroy him.
Sam Giancana was shot and killed on June 19, 1975 in the basement den of his home in Chicago.
He was shot at close range in the back of the head while frying sausages with his back turned toward his executioner.
His execution was just before he was scheduled to appear at a Senate Church Committee hearing.
The killer entered the basement through heavy steel doors that had been opened by Giancana.
He was shot witha .22 revolver pressed against the base of his skull at the back of his head for the first shot.
He was then shot in the mouth with five more bullets under the chin into his brain.
The .22 revolver was traced by the FBI to the Miami, Florida, territory of Santo Trafficante.
According to his brother Chuck, Sam was on good terms with the mob, in his weakened condition was no threat to it, and he had taken care of everybody.
But Chuck did say that one week before Giancana’s murder, Giancana had ordered the execution of Jimmy Hoffa, indicating perhaps that Giancana was killed by inter-Mafia rivals.
He wrote that “undoubtedly, Giancana was murdered to prevent him from talking about the CIA-Castro plot or any other Mafia secret EL Sam Giancana had spent eight years in Mexico between 1966 and 1974 with his cohort Richard Cain.
Giancana was commandeered from his walled garden in San Cristobal, Mexico, by immigration agents and extradited back to the United States for a hearing before a grand jury in 1974.
He cooperated with the grand jury but, according to Chuck Giancana, said nothing of importance.
Before moving to Mexico in 1966, Sam Giancana spent one year in jail from June 1965 to Memorial Day 1966 for contempt of court.
It was just after his release from jail in 1966 that he told his story to his brother Chuck and soon left for Mexico City Santo Trafficante, Jr.
During the course of its investigation of Santo Trafficante, the House Select Committee on Assassinations examined an allegation that Trafficante had told a prominent Cuban exile, José Aleman, that President Kennedy was going to be assassinated.
Aleman testified that Trafficante made that statement in a private conversation with him some time in September 1962.
Aleman was quoted as having noted that Trafficante had spoken of Jimmy Hoffa during the same conversation, indicating that the president would “get what is coming to him” as a result of Kennedy’s intense efforts to prosecute Hoffa.
Aleman stated that during the course of the discussion, Trafficante had made clear to him that he was not guessing that the president was going to be killed; rather, that he did in fact know that such a crime was being planned.
The fact that Hoffa had on several occasions discussed the possibility of the assassination of Robert Kennedy has been noted.
Note that the discussion included the advisability of having the assassination committed somewhere in the south while Robert Kennedy was riding in a convertible.
Also, Hoffa had stated that in this type of plot a lone assassin with a rifle and a telescopic sight would be used and the origin of the fatal shot or 1.63) shots would be obscured.
This, of course, is a precise description of what happened at Dealey Plaza, except that John Kennedy was the target instead of his brother.
Ragano said he passed this message on when he met with Marcello and Trafficante in the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans when he said, “You won’t believe what Jimmy wants me to tell you.
Ragano said that neither Trafficante nor Marcello even cracked a smile.
Years later Santo Trafficante made a deathbed confession to Frank Ragano of his involvement in the assassination of John Kennedy.
This happened in early 1987 when Trafficante, having just turned seventytwo, knew he did not have long to live.
His kidneys had failed, his heart was weak, and he faced triplebypass surgery at the Texas Bypass Heart Institution in Houston.
Ragano also appeared on national television and very convincingly told the same story.
As Trafficante contemplated death, he called Ragano to his side in Tampa, Florida.
They had a long series of conversations during which Trafficante voiced his indignation over the Kennedys and their intrusions on his “business” and personal life.
As the conversation proceeded, Ragano was stunned when Trafficante brought up the subject of the JFK assassination.
The dying Trafficante said he believed a mistake had been made, and he blamed it on Marcello.
Blakey wrote that he thoroughly investigated Ragano’s statements and “all things considered, we believe Ragano was telling the truth, as best he remembers iz tO This confession, added to Sam Giancana’s confession, tends to confirm my feeling that the enormity of the crime of assassinating a beloved president of the United States must have weighed heavily on the conspirators, even though they were gangsters and killers beforehand.
But Ragano wrote in his autobiography, Mob Lawyer, that he thinks that Trafficante showed no remorse or guilt in his confession.
Throughout his adult life, Santo was an incessant reader of biographies and an amateur student of history.
I remember his indignation when he had been compelled to lie before the House Assassination Committee and distort the circumstances of the Mafia’s sham alliance with the CIA to kill Castro.
Putting this evidence together, it appears that Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, Jr., and Jimmy Hoffa may indeed have been the origin of the first plans to assassinate John Kennedy.
Hoffa’s target was initially Bobby Kennedy but, on the urging of Marcello, the target was changed to John Kennedy.
At the age of thirty-nine he inherited his father’s organized crime operations in Florida and Cuba.
Of all the mobsters, Trafficante was the most urbane and sophisticated.
He wore only custom-tailored clothing, had manicures, and collected books on history.
And, of all the Mafia chieftains, Trafficante was the one most deeply affected by Fidel Castro’s takeover of Cuba.
When Castro took over Cuba, Santo was thrown into prison after his gambling and hotel activities in Cuba were run into the ground by Castro’s government.
Trafficante admitted to the HSCA and others that he was involved with the CIA in the plots to assassinate Fidel Castro.
These plots originated when the CIA contracted with the Mafia for its assistance, using Robert Maheu (better known as the manager of Howard Hughes’ activities in Las Vegas) as a go-between.
Maheu made a contact through Johnny Rosselli in Los Angeles and the plot to kill Castro got under way.
From the evidence available to date, Robert Kennedy apparently was not aware of the plot to kill Castro using the Mafia when he stepped up his activities against organized crime, making specific targets of Hoffa, Trafficante, Giancana, and Marcello.
An explosive situation developed wherein the Mafia chieftains knew that they had compromised the United States government and thereby could have been emboldened to carry out a plot to assassinate the president.
They could well have thought that the United States government would never investigate the crime because of the secret partnership between organized crime and the CIA to assassinate Castro.
If, on top of this, the Mafia could induce Lyndon Johnson and Hoover to join in the conspiracy , all the elements would fall in place for the crime and cover-up.
The Mafia had considerable prejudicial evidence against Lyndon Johnson, having bribed and compromised him many times in the past—Johnson was in deep political trouble with the possibility of going to the penitentiary for his involvement in the Bobby Baker scandal.
And Johnson was about to be dumped from the Democratic ticket, thus putting an ignominious end to his political career.
And Hoover feared that President Kennedy, at the end of his present term, would not reappoint him as FBI director.
Then Trafficante had Johnny Rosselli killed, leaving only Trafficante and Marcello.
After Rosselli’s death, Trafficante—in an FBI wiretap—tremarked, “Now only two people are alive who know who killed Kennedy.
Ruby was closely associated with organized crime at the time of the assassination, as evidenced by a large number of suspicious phone calls and meetings with Mafia hit men, greatly accelerated during the months and days preceding the assassination and continuing during the days following.
Ruby shot Oswald deliberately, not out of emotion, as evidenced by his own handwritten confession to Joe Tonahill, and the improbability of his being able to shoot Oswald when surrounded by the Dallas police unless the shooting was planned in some detail with their cooperation.
Ruby was connected to New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello through Marcello’s associates in New Orleans.
Oswald was connected to Carlos Marcello through his uncle Charles Murret and through David Ferrie.
David Ferrie worked for Carlos Marcello as a pilot and consultant, and he also worked for Marcello’s lawyer, G Wray Gill.
Oswald, David Ferrie, and Clay Shaw were seen together in 1963 in Clinton, Louisiana, and at various other locations.
Oswald was connected to David Ferrie years previously through the Civil Air Patrol and was seen with David Ferrie by numerous witnesses around New Orleans in the summer of 1963.
Money was passed to Oswald by a Marcello lieutenant in early 1963 at about the time that Kennedy’s plan to go to Dallas was made public.
Marcello had high-level connections with the CIA, Clint Murchison, Bobby Baker, and Lyndon Johnson.
Marcello was directly involved with the CIA, along with Trafficante, in the plots to assassinate Fidel Castro.
David Ferrie was associated with ex-FBI agent Guy Banister, whose office was at the same address as the Fair Play for Cuba committee that consisted of one person, Oswald.
Carlos Marcello had threatened Kennedy’s assassination in 1962 and described how it would be done, mirroring the way it actually happened.
David Ferrie made a trip to Houston, Texas, on the night of the assassination.
While in Houston, Ferrie made a telephone call to Marcello’s Town and Country Motel in New Orleans whereby he could have been given a final message to relay to Ruby to eliminate Oswald.
David Ferrie died mysteriously just before he was to be indicted by Jim Garrison.
The Dallas police falsely pinned the murder of Officer Tippit on Oswald, and the FBI cooperated with them in this subterfuge.
Jimmy Hoffa was obsessed with killing Robert Kennedy and was plotting ways to do it in 1962.
He sent a message to Santo Trafficante, Jr., and Carlos Marcello that John Kennedy was to be killed.
In September 1962, Santo Trafficante, Jr., told José Aleman of a plot to assassinate John Kennedy, saying, “Kennedy is going to be hit,” and described how it would be accomplished.
The foregoing list in its totality constitutes a persuasive indictment of organized crime, in collaboration with the Dallas police.
Also, the FBI clearly was involved in altering evidence and selectively suppressing other evidence.
If we combine this with the evidence of forgery of the Zapruder film, forgery of the autopsy x-rays, and the evidence of the theft of Kennedy’s body and manipulation of the autopsy, we have compelling proof of complicity by the executive branch of the United States government—at least in the cover-up.
Also, they could not have continued the suppression of the truth for the many years following, up to the present day, without cooperation at the highest levels in the FBI, the White House, and other powerful interests.
This leads to a logical inclusion of J Edgar Hoover in the cover-up in league with Lyndon Johnson.
More evidence relating to the Mafia will be included in the chapters that follow; and evidence implicating the FBI and J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson will be more fully developed.
KOK OK Epilogue In the fall of 1995, Anna Marie sent me a copy of an FBI document that she found in the National Archives.
It was a teletype concerning Carlos Marcello while he was in prison in Texas.
In his senile condition, he had apparently mistaken prison guards for his own body guards and had spoken to them about the Kennedy assassination.
A Justice Department memorandum on November 26, 1963 indicated a connection between Rubenstein , Frank Chavez, and Tony Provenzano.
Apparently, what we have here are the mutterings of a senile, aged mobster, perhaps playing out a flashback of his previous experience after he had met with Hoffa’s Provenzano to plan the Kennedy assassination.
This story becomes even more interesting when we discover that Tony Provenzano was the one who had $500,000 delivered to Richard Nixon in exchange for favors to Teamsters Union President Frank Fitzsimmons, to help Nixon in the Watergate affair when he had an urgent need for $1,000,000 of hush , er money to bribe an ex-CIA officer, E Howard Hunt.
The story becomes even more fascinating when we realize that Tony Provenzano has been linked as a prime suspect in the disappearance of Jimmy Hoffa.
It turns out that it was impossible to find the black cat in the dark room, since it was not there in the first place.
Oleg M Nechiporenko, Former KGB Intelligence Officer 16 CIA AND MAFIA OVERVIEW What follows is a highly condensed overview of matters relating to the partnership of the CIA with the Mafia in attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro, while at the same time Robert Kennedy was out to destroy the Mafia, perhaps not knowing of the partnership at first, but with full knowledge after May 1962 when it is known for certain that he was informed.
A thesis of this book is that these contradictory purposes were one of the causes of the JFK assassination.
Overlaid on this will be the complexities of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban missile crisis, and how these events may have contributed to John Kennedy’s murder.
Before examining details of the evidence relating to the CIA, I sketched a quick overview of the key events of the Kennedy assassination that appear to be CIA or Mafia connected.
FBI observes Rosselli meeting with Ruby in Miami®°) November 9: Milteer says JFK will be killed@® November 22: JFK assassinated and poison pen device given by CIA to AM/LASH for assassinating Castro@”) It has long been suspected that the roots of the assassination of John Kennedy go back to the Bay of Pigs disaster, which took place only three months after he became president.
Kennedy had known about the plans for the Bay of Pigs before he was elected to the presidency.
It is generally acknowledged that he was tipped off about these plans during the 1960 campaign and that he used this information against Richard Nixon during the debates by pushing for aggressive action against Castro, knowing that Nixon couldn’t respond without giving away the secret.
After being elected and having several meetings with top people in the CIA and the military, Kennedy approved the plan, which included major revisions proposed by the Department of State regarding the landing site, the timing, and the extent of preparatory air strikes.
Kennedy’s decision to go ahead relied in part on the CIA’s foolish notion that it could be a completely covert operation— that it would not be recognized by the outside world as connected with the United States.
Thus, on April 17, 1961, the CIA launched the poorly conceived and badly planned invasion of Cuba, using only a small band of Cuban exiles who were directed by CIA officers and United States military specialists.
The plan was based on the supposition that the invasion would trigger an uprising in Cuba, and that Castro would be overthrown by the Cuban populace.
At the last moment, when things started going wrong, the CIA asked for United States air strikes.
Conceivably, the air strikes might have made the invasion successful, at least for the establishment of a strong beachhead.
Many Cuban exiles were slaughtered; embitterment of the CIA and the Cuban exiles against Kennedy began; and Kennedy was tarnished with the reputation of being spineless and a traitor to the CIA and the anti-Castro Cubans.
In the fall of 1994 I had the opportunity to converse with two people who were involved at both ends of the spectrum of the Bay of Pigs operation.
One was an ex-Navy frogman (at whose request I identify by alias Jim Lance) who participated in the invasion.
Lance was one of six frogmen who went ashore to reconnoiter the beachhead and then witnessed the debacle that followed from aboard a ship off the beach.
On the opposite end of the spectrum was Robert McNamara, secretary of defense in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.
McNamara was with Kennedy at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion when the decision was made not to provide additional air support when it was requested 2 Based on my discussions with McNamara and Lance, one can see the Bay of Pigs operation as a classic example of tragically different perceptions—at the level of the president and at the scene of battle.
From the viewpoint of McNamara and Kennedy, they had little or no choice after Kennedy was elected but to proceed with virtually irreversible plans already underway.
Hundreds of Cubans were in place, having been trained for months in Guatemala.
Everything was set to go and could not be delayed without danger of the cover being blown through the news media.
And, unbeknownst to Kennedy and McNamara, Castro’s agents had infiltrated the operation and knew much of what was supposed to happen.
Although not expressed to me by McNamara, it seems probable that if Kennedy had canceled the entire operation before the invasion he would have been politically devastated by the Republican party, particularly in view of Kennedy having made a political issue of the lack of action against Castro under the Eisenhower administration.
And Kennedy would have been branded even more cowardly by the Cuban exile community and the ultraconservatives in the United States From the viewpoint of the Cuban exiles and United States intelligence operatives at the beachhead, Kennedy had betrayed them.
According to McNamara, a key point is that Kennedy had never promised the United States air strikes in the first place and had been badly misled by the CIA in its bungled planning.
Looking at both perspectives, it seems that Kennedy and McNamara probably made the courageous and correct decision by refusing to provide direct United States air cover.
The alternative would likely have escalated to a major invasion of Cuba by United States military forces, with probable loss of American lives in the scores of thousands, and many more thousands of Cuban lives lost.
In fact, at that time Castro had the overwhelming support of the Cuban people; they were prepared to fight to the eng HH Moreover, an invasion of Cuba by the United States could well have precipitated a crisis of grave and unpredictable consequences with the Soviet Union in Europe, particularly in relation to Berlin.
Jim Lance told me that when the air support was “called off,” all other support was cut off, including supplies for the forces ashore.
Again, this was probably Lance’s misconception, because supplies could have been interrupted due to other logistical failures.
McNamara told me that he knew nothing about supplies having been deliberately cut off.
This talk, Lance said, went through all the ranks—from enlisted men to high-ranking officers.
From the foregoing, it seems that John Kennedy should not have been blamed for the Bay of Pigs failure.
My feeling at this point is that the Bay of Pigs fiasco did in fact enable the Mafia and other prime conspirators to recruit some of the angry CIA personnel to join in the plot.
And, of course, we can suspect that money flowing from the Mafia, and their wealthy allies, to radical CIA personnel and angry anti-Castro Cubans could have been employed as an added inducement.
Following the Bay of Pigs failure, Kennedy went on national television to state that he accepted full responsibility for the debacle.
But he then proceeded to fire two of the top men of the CIA—Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell.
Kennedy waited only one month before informing Dulles and Bissell that they had to go.
Next in line, General Cabell, deputy director of operations, was fired seven months later, after Kennedy assumed that Cabell had leaked information from a White House meeting.
At the time he fired Dulles, Kennedy put his thirty-five-year-old brother Robert in unofficial control of CIA covert operations, notwithstanding the fact that Robert knew virtually nothing about it.
There was good reason to believe that many key people in the CIA took Kennedy seriously; their survival as an organization was being threatened, and Kennedy had already carried out the first steps by firing the leaders.
John Kennedy must have had no idea of how serious his precipitous actions might become.
He had fired Allen Dulles and other top CIA officials and operatives, threatening the very existence of the organization for making one major mistake.
Dulles was a truly deserving national hero for his accomplishments in the OSS while he was an agent in Europe during World War II, and in other accomplishments in CIA covert actions— then unknown to the public.
For example, Dulles was the mastermind behind the successful coup in Iran, orchestrated by CIA’s Kermit Roosevelt, with its brilliant short-term results, albeit arguably disastrous long-term consequences.
It was Dulles who gave the CIA its character—good and bad—and infused it with his ideas and experiences in the field.
He was now being replaced by John McCone, a Republican business executive and anti-Communist from California.
When Robert Kennedy was given unofficial control of covert operations, he immediately tangled horns with William Harvey.
Harvey was in charge of CIA assassination operations (the ZR/ RIFLE program) and was in charge of the covert program for the overthrow of Castro.
Harvey, like Dulles, was a legend, having been responsible for the exposure of the Burgess-McLean spy ring in British intelligence and having masterminded the Berlin tunnel project between East and West Berlin.
In January 1963, Robert Kennedy, disgusted with Harvey, reassigned him to a post in Rome as chief of station—a major comedown.
At the same time that Robert Kennedy was put in control of covert operations for the CIA, he unleashed his first attack on the Mafia.
On April 4, 1961, the attorney general had Carlos Marcello seized, spirited to an airplane without being allowed to talk to his family, and flown to Guatemala where he was dumped without luggage and with little cash.
He organized a “get Hoffa squad” in the Justice Department and demanded that J Edgar Hoover step up the prosecution of organized crime.
The first ominous evidence we have of Hoffa’s reaction is when he started recruiting an assassin to take care of Bobby Kennedy.
In July/August 1962, Hoffa passed the word to Santo Trafficante and Carlos Marcello, through his attorney Frank Ragano, that John Kennedy must be killed.
It was in September 1962, shortly after Hoffa’s threats and message, that Marcello uttered his famous JFK death threat in the presence of Ed Becker.
This occurred at the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis, the first signs of which began in August i9ggt 4 and ended about twelve weeks later.
The Cuban missile crisis was defused when Kennedy agreed to remove United States nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy and not to invade Cuba.
When this got out to the Cuban exiles and the CIA, it was viewed as further betrayal by Kennedy.
The crisis between Kennedy and some of the renegade operatives in the CIA, and the radical Cuban exiles, had now reached a point of no return.
Santo Trafficante shared the feelings and motivations of the Cuban exiles with a passion.
He had been badly burned in Havana when Castro made a deal with him for his operation of five lucrative gambling casinos, only to see them quickly run into bankruptcy because all the people with money to gamble had either been exiled, forced underground, or not permitted to come to Cuba.
Castro later relented and let Trafficante return to the U.S., but Trafficante and the Mafia never gave up their desire to recapture their lucrative operations in Havana.
This motivation was shared with many wealthy Cuban exiles then in Florida.
Together, they formed a very powerful group largely bearing a combined hatred for both Kennedy and Castro.
Throwing gasoline on the fire, Kennedy started shutting down United States anti-Castro operations except for a few specific covert operations sponsored by Robert Kennedy in the JM/WAVE segment.
At that point, hope of Castro being thrown out as long as the Kennedys were in power had all but vanished for many of the anti-Castro Cubans, particularly the radical right-wing Cubans who were not favored by the Kennedys and who were in competition with the left-wing, anti-Castro Cubans whom the Kennedys supported.
During the Cuban missile crisis William Harvey took it upon himself to assemble a covert action team of commandos and send them into Cuba.
When the Kennedys found out about this, Harvey was assigned to Rome, presumably forever.
Nonetheless, he showed up in the spring, summer, and fall of 1963 in ominous meetings in the Florida Keys at anti-Castro camps with Johnny Rosselli, David Atlee Phillips, and a CIA assassination expert by the name of David Sanchez Morales.
Shortly after that, Rosselli met with Guy Banister in New Orleans, and Phillips met with Oswald in Dallas.
In early November 1963, Joseph Milteer told an FBI informant that Kennedy would be killed by rifle fire; this was only a few days before Kennedy was assassinated.
It is interesting to observe how rapidly all these initial, irreversible events took place.
Within only four months after taking office, the youthful Kennedy brothers went on what now could justifiably be described as a reckless rampage by attacking a cabal of powerful, ruthless men who were partners in crime, had virtually unlimited resources, and were capable of committing any heinous act.
It appears that initial serious plans to assassinate John Kennedy began to form in the spring or summer of 1962 in retaliation for the Kennedy brothers’ actions.
The assassination plans were put into action and culminated about a year later at Dealey Plaza.
Jt reveals a unique sequence of events and a singular combination of people and circumstances, with actions initiated by the Kennedy brothers that could plausibly have led to the assassination.
It is possible that certain angry, threatened employees or ex-employees of the CIA and angry, threatened Mafia chieftains and Cuban exiles got together, perhaps through their underlings, and decided to commit the crime of the century.
As earlier noted, they all were natural allies with the extreme right wing and with J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson.
In subsequent chapters, I will attempt to arrive at an understanding of the possible combined roles of the CIA, Oswald, military intelligence, the military, the Cuban exiles, and right-wing extremists in the Kennedy assassination.
Thousands of scholars have spent hundreds of thousands of hours in such attempts.
I hope that I will not become engulfed in the morass and endless blind alleys that have bedeviled others before me.
A good starting point is to examine the question of Oswald impersonators.
David Atlee Phillips is suspected by many to be the mysterious “Maurice Bishop” who handled Oswald in Dallas before his famous trip to Mexico City and who controlled the evidence in the aftermath.
But Phillips may have been in a program to provide Oswald with his bona fides for another CIA mission, not knowing that Oswald would be co-opted by others as a fall guy in the assassination.
UPI/Corbis-Bettmann E Howard Hunt has long been suspected of being a conspirator in the JFK assassination, but insufficient evidence has been developed to clearly substantiate such charges.
He was a key CIA officer in the Mafia/CIA plots to assassinate Fidel Castro and in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
A White House consultant during the Nixon presidency, Hunt pleaded guilty to all charges against him in the Watergate bugging trial and went to prison for it.
Richard Helms, deputy director of the CIA at the time of the JFK assassination.
In February 1962 Helms authorized CIA officer William Harvey to recruit free-agent assassins for the ZR/RIFLE project to assassinate foreign leaders.
Some of these assassins may have been used to kill John Kennedy under the control of ZR/RIFLE personnel without Helms necessarily having known about it.
UP//Bettmann ~ James Jesus Angleton of CIA counter intelligence, spy master, and genius at growing orchids.
He spent a large part of his career in the CIA looking for Soviet moles.
UPI/Bettmann Marita Lorenz as a young woman with former lover Fidel Castro.
Lorenz testified under oath in a civil trial that she had traveled with Frank Sturgis to Dallas on November 20, 1963 in a caravan of three cars carrying weapons along with Lee Harvey Oswald, three Cubans, a pilot, and Gerry Patrick Hemming.
But her story has been widely challenged due to inconsistencies, only adding to the “wilderness of mirrors” in the CIA’s role in the assassination.
Daily News Photo Roy Hargraves, Paramilitary operative in anti-Castro Cuban operations.
This photograph shows Hargraves standing on a mass grave of 61 Batista supporters whom he had allegedly just killed.
In the first edition of Bloody Treason it was mistakenly identified as Frank Sturgis.
It was only after the first publication of Bloody Treason that Gerald Patrick Hemming told me, smiling, that it was of his associate, Roy Hargraves, and was planted in the archives by him and Hargraves, although Hemming had read my manuscript before it was published but he didn’t inform me of the mistake until later, after publication.
He was the man portrayed in Oliver Stone’s movie JFK who sent Colonel “X” to the South Pole during the Kennedy assassination.
Lansdale was deeply involved in CIA operations in the Philippines and Vietnam.
He was promised an ambassadorship to Vietnam by President Kennedy but the appointment was withdrawn when Dean Rusk, secretary of state, objected.
Colonel “X,” who was actually Colonel Fletcher Prouty, claims that Lansdale went to Dallas and was there on November 22.
General Charles P Cabell, Deputy Director of the CIA, was fired by President Kennedy in January 1962, nine months after Kennedy informed CIA Director Allen Dulles and Richard Bisell, planners of the Bay of Pigs disaster, that they would be fired.
General Cabell was the brother of the mayor of Dallas at the time of the assassination.
Kennedy’s firing of General Cabell was based on erroneous information that he had leaked White House secrets to the news media.
General Cabell knew Clay Shaw and once gave an introductory speech at an event sponsored by Shaw in New Orleans.
Davis, a Texan, was checked into a hotel in New Orleans in August 1963.
At the time of the assassination, he was arrested in North Africa with the name Oswald in his possession.
Gary Shaw Collection Rolando Masferrer Rojas, former Cuban senator under the dictator Batista, and later antiCastro Cuban drug trafficker and associate of Santo Trafficante.
He allegedly was the financial conduit between Carlos Marcello and covert CIA operations against Fidel Castro, and knew of plans for the JFK assassination.
Barnes allegedly knew a plot was afoot to kill JFK and was trying to find out what was going on by sending infiltration agents Richard Case Nagell and Robert Morrow into Cuban exile groups.
Odio was one of the few witnesses in the Kennedy probe who had not exploited her role or capitalized on her early notoriety.
She refused interviews—despite being offered large sums of money—and had gone into hiding.
Gaeton Fonzi Former Investigator for the HSCA 17 TWO OSWALDS IN DALLAS We will now examine evidence of an Oswald impersonator in Dallas in the months preceding the Kennedy assassination.
The answer could be that the real Oswald was a patsy, and the plotters felt that they had to lay down a trail of evidence—before the assassination—that pointed unmistakably to Oswald.
Our first development of evidence of an Oswald impersonator will concentrate on three episodes.
A chronology of the activities of Oswald and his alleged impersonators during the sixty days prior to the assassination is shown in Exhibit 17-1.
Most of the information is from the Warren Commission, which did a very thorough job on the details of this subject, although the results, being inconvenient to their goal of creating a story of a lone assassin, were largely dismissed.
September 26, 2:35m.:Boards bus in Houston for Laredo, Texas and Mexico City.
Left New Orleans on bus to Houston at 12:20m; arrived Mexico City at 10:00m. on Sept.
Left New Orleans on bus to Houston at 12:20 pm; arrived Mexico City at 10:00 .a.m. on September 29.
To prove that there was an Oswald impersonator, it will be shown that there were instances of Oswald being in two different places at the same time—therefore there had to be an impersonator.
If there were an impersonator, we have strong evidence of a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy and the inference that the plotters were trying to set up Oswald.
An example of an Oswald impersonator occurred on November 10, 1963 when a man resembling Oswald was observed by Garland G Slack practicing at a rifle range in Dallas.
Slack’s testimony was corroborated in part by Malcolm H Price, who testified that he had adjusted the rifle scope for a person on September 28, 1963 whom he believed to have been Lee Harvey Oswald.
The first time that I saw this person was in September, the last week —the last Saturday of September, and that was the afternoon that they opened the rifle range.
Ls Price went on to testify that he had seen this man on several other occasions practicing at the rifle range.
He said he recalled seeing this customer on four or five occasions and on each occasion he wore a “bulldogger, Texas style” hat and had bubble gum or chewing tobacco in his cheek.
The witnesses who claimed to have seen Oswald at the firing range had more than a passing notice of the person they observed.
Malcolm H Price, Jr., adjusted the scope on the individual’s rifle on one occasion; Garland G Slack had an altercation with the individual on another occasion because he was shooting at Slack’s target; and Sterling C Wood, who ona third date was present at the range with his father, Dr.
Homer Wood, spoke with his father and very briefly with the man himself about the individual’s rifle.
Two other persons believed they saw a person resembling Oswald firing a similar rifle at another range near Irving two days before the og PAB assassination. is The problem with the September 28 and November 10 incidents is that the person identified as Oswald could not have been Oswald; the reasoning being that Oswald was, according to the Warren Commission, indisputably in Mexico City on September 28, ostensibly visiting the Cuban and Soviet consulates, and was visiting his wife continuously at the Paine’s home in Irving, Texas, between , ae November 8 and 11.
The Commission simply did not consider that the person resembling Oswald was an impersonator.
They were looking for a lone assassin, not an impersonator The Lincoln Mercury Automobile Incident Albert Bogard, an auto salesman at a Lincoln-Mercury auto dealership in Dallas near the Texas Schoolbook Depository building, testified to the Warren Commission that in the early afternoon of November 9 he met with a prospective customer who went with him on a wild test drive of a new Lincoln Continental automobile on the Stemmons Freeway at sixty to seventy miles per hour.
The customer told him that in several weeks he would have the money to purchase the automobile.
Bogard testified that the customer gave his name as “Oswald,” which Bogard wrote down on the back of a business card.
After Oswald’s name was mentioned on the radio on November 22, Bogard asserted that he tore up the card and threw it in the trash can, saying that he supposed Oswald would no longer wish to buy a car.
The assistant sales manager at the time, Frank Pizzo, and a second salesman, Eugene M Wilson, stated that they recall an instance when the customer described by Bogard was in the showroom.
Another salesman, Oran Brown, recalled that Bogard asked him to assist the customer if he appeared during certain evenings when Bogard was away from the showroom.
Brown stated that he too wrote down the customer’s name and both he and his wife remember the name “Oswald” as being on a paper in his possession before the assassination.
Bogard’s testimony was also corroborated in a lie-detector test conducted by the Fp 484) As noted, the real Oswald was in Irving, Texas, on November 9.
A corroborating witness remembered the man attempting to purchase the car on credit, instead of cash, and when he was told that he might be unable to do so without a credit rating he replied, “Maybe I’m going to have to go back to Russia to buy a car”— indicating that the man was trying to attract attention to himself as a Communist nut.
Upon examining photographs of Oswald, witnesses who were at the agency said that the man they saw resembled Oswald, although there were differences in one witness’s testimony, who said that the man who had identified himself as Oswald was only about five feet tall and his hairline did not match Oswald’s in the photograph.
Of course the Commission could have viewed this as evidence that he was an imperfect impostor using Oswald’s name, yet they chose to conclude merely that the man wasn’t Oswald, ignoring the obvious.
A further example of the fallacious reasoning of the Commission is that they concluded that because Oswald was in Irving at the time of the incident, it was evidence that the man at the dealership could not have been Oswald.
The Commission went on to say that it could not find the piece of paper with the name Oswald on it on November 23 after a search through the auto agency and its refuse.
Therefore, the Commission concluded, the testimonies of Bogard and the corroborating witness Oran Brown were suspect, despite the fact that Brown’s wife corroborated his testimony.
The Mysterious Visit to Silvia Odio Another incident perhaps indicating two Oswalds, and definitely that Oswald was being set up ina conspiracy, has to do with Cuban exile Silvia Odio, who had a very strange visit on an evening sometime between September 24 and 29, 1963.
She testified in a deposition to the Warren Commission that late in September 1963 three men came to her apartment in Dallas and asked her to help them solicit funds for activities against Fidel Castro.
Odio, twenty-six years old at the time, was a member of the Cuban Revolutionary Junta , an anti-Castro organization.
She came from a prominent, wealthy family in Cuba and both of her parents were prisoners of Castro.
She testified that the men exhibited personal familiarity with her father, telling several details about him, and they appeared to be Cubans or Mexicans.
Odio said that the men told her that they had just come from New Orleans and that they were then about to leave ona trip.
Odio suggested doubts that the men were in fact members of JURE, she was certain that the American who was introduced to her as Leon Oswald was Lee Harvey Oswald.
Her sister, who was in the apartment at the time of the visit by the three men, and who stated that she saw them briefly in the hallway when answering the door, also believed that the American was Lee Harvey Oswald.
By referring to the date on which she moved from her former apartment, October 1, 1963, Mrs.
Odio fixed the date of the alleged visit on the Thursday or Friday immediately preceding that date, 1.e., September 26 or 27.
She was positive that the visit occurred prior to October 1 Silvia Odio, Cuban exile from a prominent, wealthy Cuban family, is an important witness in the Kennedy assassination.
She testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald and two others (who appeared to be Cubans or Mexicans), one of whom called himself Leopoldo, visited her home in Dallas on or about September 25, 1963.
Silvia and her sister Annie, who witnessed the event, had decided not to tell anyone about it.
Buta trusted friend, Lucille Connell, learned about it through a third sister, Sorita, and told another trusted friend.
This is evidence of Oswald being involved in or maneuvered into a conspiracy.
Despite a major effort, the Warren Commission and the FBI were never able to discredit Odio’s testimony, and the identities of the two men accompanying the man they called Oswald have never been established.
Assassination Archives It should be noted that although the above statement from the Commission Report says that the men visited her on September 26 or 27, Odio was not positive of the date except that it was in late September and before October 1821 The Commission’s reaction to Odio’s testimony was to request an investigation by the FBI to identify and locate the two men whom Odio stated accompanied Oswald.
On September 16, 1964 the FBI came up with a Loran Eugene Hall in Johnsondale, California, who “told the FBI that in September 1963, he was in Dallas, soliciting aid in connection with anti-Castro activities.
He told the FBI that he was accompanied by a Lawrence Howard and a William Seymour.
He said that “Seymour was similar in appearance to Oswald; he speaks only a few words of Spanish,” as Odio had testified that one of the men did.
The foregoing information was submitted by the FBI to the Commission in a letter dated September 21, 1964, which had the effect of explaining Odio’s story without implicating Oswald.
But within a week, the other two men whom Hall said had accompanied him were interviewed.
The Odio problem had been finessed by the FBI, but it left open the mystery of who, in fact, was the man introduced as Oswald, and the identities of the two men who accompanied him.
While the FBI had not yet completed its investigation into this matter at the time the report went to press, the Commission has concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was not at Mrs.
Odio’s apartment in September of 1963 1881 Not only had the FBI failed to give the Commission its information on time, the Commission had proceeded to reach a conclusion without the FBI having completed its investigation (insofar as the Commission knew) and the Commission had so stated in its report.
Thus, the Commission had flagrantly ducked a most important item of evidence of a conspiracy.
It does not take a suspicious mind to conclude that the FBI had deliberately delayed investigating the Silvia Odio story—which was powerful evidence of a conspiracy—until the information would not have to be submitted in time for the Warren Commission to use it.
Later information would connect Loran Hall with Lawrence Howard and Gerald Patrick Hemming, all three deeply involved in the radical right-wing, and suspects in the JFK murder.
If the Commission had not allowed the FBI to manipulate it, a conspiracy might have been revealed.
What made the Odio evidence so believable is not only Silvia Odio’s credibility (she was thoroughly checked out by the FBI and found to be very credible) but the fact that, shortly after the incident, she wrote a letter to her father in prison in Cuba and related the incident to him.
Both her father and the psychiatrist confirmed that she informed them of the incident before John Kennedy was assassinated.
Moreover, her sister Annie was the one who opened the door when the strangers arrived, and she confirmed Silvia’s story and also recognized Oswald as being one of the three 1 1 strangers 182) L120] Silvia Odio’s father, Amador Odio, responded to her letter warning her to be careful because he knew of no one in JURE whom these people might be.
This has led to the suspicion that the two Cuban visitors accompanying Oswald were members of another anti-Castro group called Alpha 66.
This group was on the extreme right and was involved in the efforts of the CIA and the Mafia to assassinate Castro.
The JURE group was considered to be leftists or Communists who wanted to get rid of Castro but would maintain some sort of social democracy in Cuba.
This raised the suspicion that the right-wing group was implementing a scheme to link JURE, the left-wing group, with the assassination The founder of Alpha 66 was Antonio Veciana, who later testified to the House Committee on Assassinations that he had met Oswald along with a Maurice Bishop in Dallas in late August or early September 1963.
Maurice Bishop, as will be discussed at length later, was a code name for a CIA operative who was believed to be Oswald’s control agent.
It is evidence of the likelihood of a conspiracy involving Oswald with Cubans who professed to be members of a leftist, anti-Castro organization.
It proved to be impossible for the FBI or the Warren Commission to build even a flimsy case to refute it.
First, we should keep in mind that Odio testified it was not Oswald who said that President Kennedy should have been assassinated.
It was one of the Cubans—not speaking in the presence of Oswald—who telephoned Odio later and planted the idea in her mind.
If the Oswald who was visiting Odio with the Cubans were a witting impostor, Leopoldo would more likely have made his statement in front of “Oswald” and not bothered to telephone later.
Oswald’s whereabouts at the time of the visit to Odio’s apartment are shown in Exhibits 17-2 and 17-3.
It is known with a high degree of certainty that Oswald was in New Orleans until the morning of September 25 when he cashed an unemployment check at a store in New Orleans.
It was thus established that Oswald could not have left New Orleans before 8:00m. on September 25.
Another point at which Oswald’s location is picked up is in Houston, Texas, where at 2:35m. he boarded a Continental Trailways bus headed through Alice, Texas, and Laredo, Texas, to Mexico City.
The reason it is believed that Oswald was on the bus is that he was observed sitting alone at 6:00m., before the bus reached Alice, by two English passengers, Dr. and Mrs.
Later in the bus trip, Oswald was very talkative with passengers on the bus, attracting attention to himself and talking about having just returned from Russia.
Oswald crossed the border into Mexico before 2:00m. on September 26; this was firmly established by Mexican immigration records.
Therefore, the time not accounted for is between 8:00m. on September 25, and 2:35m. on September 26—a period of about eighteen hours.
During this period, Oswald could have been driven “4 or flown from New Orleans to Dallas, visited Odio on the evening of September 25, and then been driven or flown to Houston in time to make the bus connection to Mexico City at 2:35m. on September 26.
He could not have visited Odio on the evening of September 26 or any later date until he returned to Dallas on October 3y Exhibit 17-2.
Warren Commission) September 25 8:00m.: Earliest time Oswald could have left New Orleans 12:20m.: Oswald could have left New Orleans on Continental Trailways bus 1:05m.: Oswald in Austin Selective Service Office 10:50m.: Arrived in Houston; made phone call to Horace Twiford (call could have been made from Beaumont) September 26 2:35m.: Left Houston for Laredo—one ticket purchased—could have been Oswald 6:00m.: Oswald seen on bus, sitting alone, by Dr. and Mrs.
Oswald talked to passengers on bus, said he was traveling from New Orleans 1:20m.: Bus scheduled to arrive at Laredo—Mexican immigration showed Oswald crossed border into Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, before 2:00m. 4:00m.
Oswald arrived in Mexico City Notes: No airline tickets were sold to Oswald from Houston to Dallas, the only means of public transportation during this time period.
If Oswald did not go by bus from New Orleans to Houston, he could have traveled from Dallas to Alice, Texas, and caught the bus that left Houston at 2:35 am, but he could not have been on the bus at 6:00 am when seen by the McFarlands, and no tickets were sold during the period of September 23 to 26.
The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was not in Dallas on September 25, 26, or 27, and that he stayed in Mexico City until returning to Dallas on October 3.
So, if it were September 25 when Oswald and the two Cubans visited Odio, it could have been the same Oswald who went to Mexico City on the bus from Houston.
Recall that Odio had fixed the date that the three men visited her as being between September 24 and 29.
The Warren Commission Report had perhaps inadvertently put the date at September 26 or 27.
The Warren Commission investigators determined that there was no indication that Oswald had flown by commercial airlines from New Orleans to Dallas, or Dallas to Houston.
They also determined that no bus tickets had been sold by Continental Trailways between Dallas and Houston during the period September 23 to 26.
Continental Trailways was the only bus line on which Oswald could have made connections to the bus leaving Houston for Mexico City at 2:35m. on September 26.
New Orleans via Beaumont, Houston, Alice, and Laredo, with Possible Side Trip to Dallas and Austin.
Therefore earliest time of arrival at Austin would be 3m. if Oswald left New Orleans at Sam.
The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald most likely boarded a bus in New Orleans at 12:50 m. on September 25 that arrived in Houston in time to make the connection to Laredo and Mexico City.
In fact, Oswald told passengers on the bus from Houston to Laredo that he had done just that, although of course it is possible that he was not telling the truth.
The Commission did not seriously consider that it was possible for Oswald to have gone from New Orleans to Dallas, visited Odio, and then made the bus connection in Houston, if he had been driven or flown by an accomplice along the legs of the journey.
It should be noted that he was in fact with two accomplices when he visited Odio.
There is credible testimony that Oswald was interviewed at a Selective Service office in Austin, Texas, on September 25, between 1:05m. and 1:35m.
He and his driver would have had to average about 80 miles per hour to make the journey.
Therefore, he would have had to travel by air ina private or military plane.
Dannelly was of the firm belief that the date on which Oswald contacted her was September 25, 1963, based on her habit of going to the bank during lunch break on every other Wednesday, which was payday.
The evidence of Oswald being in both Austin and Dallas is very important.
If we take both instances as being true, it is inescapable that Oswald was being flown around Texas in a whirlwind series of meetings on September 25, 1963 in which his name was clearly put forth and which tied him in one instance to being a potential threat to Governor Connally and the other to a leftist division of anti-Castro Cubans.
This suggests either a serious blunder on the part of the conspirators or a deliberate staging to link Oswald in a conspiracy—not a lone nut—because the conspirators must have realized that future investigations would reveal the impossibility of Oswald being in all of these places unless he had accomplices to fly him.
Of these two, the LincolnMercury incident is the strongest evidence in that corroborating witnesses testified that the man identified himself as Oswald, when, in fact, Oswald was visiting with his wife in Irving, Texas, at that time and could not have been the man at the Lincoln-Mercury agency.
The rifle-range incidents, although significant, depend solely on eyewitness identification of an Oswald “look-alike,” without the person having identified himself as Oswald, and are therefore the weaker evidence.
If it were the real Oswald, he had accomplices who flew him from New Orleans to Austin to Dallas, then back to Houston.
These accomplices set him up by telling Odio that he was a nut who could kill Kennedy.
If it were an Oswald impersonator, it still was a conspiracy setting up Oswald.
In either case, it does not seem to show Oswald as a lone nut without accomplices, as was later portrayed by the Warren Commission.
A pattern is emerging that the conspirators never intended for the assassination to appear to be the act of a lone gunman without accomplices.
Rather, the lone gunman idea was a creation of the Warren Commission, after the fact.
But CIA people working on the KGB would certainly want to talk to Oswald because if Oswald had defected to the Soviets... it would be to the KGB that he would tell all these matters.
The camera was a Minox which was used almost exclusively at that time for spy work, both for the Soviets and United States intelligence.
Reference to “microdots” in his notes; this espionage term was not commonly known to the general public in 1963.
The extreme ease and speed with which he left the United States and entered Russia; also his Russian wife Marina’s swift approval for coming to the United States and the attendant flagrant bypassing of passport procedures—not only when Oswald went to Russia but when he returned and subsequently easily obtained a passport to travel to Mexico City.
Oswald’s relationship to a CIA contact , George de Mohrenschildt, who was his “baby sitter’ and who secretly debriefed him when he returned to Fort Worth.
The strange absence of official CIA debriefing when Oswald returned from Russia.
Oswald’s proficiency with the Russian language, suggesting that he must have had secret training while in the Marine Corps.
Oswald spoke Russian so fluently that when his wife Marina first met him she thought he was a Russian citizen.
Oswald’s meeting with CIA officer David Atlee Phillips and a CIA contract agent and radical anti-Castro Cuban exile, Antonio Veciana, in Dallas in September 1963.
The fact that there were names of military intelligence personnel in Oswald’s address book.
Of the hundreds of books written on the Kennedy assassination, about half of the material has dealt with Oswald.
David Lifton has been working night and day, seven days a week, for the past seven years on an exhaustive book about Oswald.
I cannot hope to cover in detail even a small portion of what is known about Oswald.
Rather, I will focus on what I consider to be the most important information and how that fits into the overall scope of my thesis.
To begin, there is evidence that Oswald was recruited into military intelligence while he was in the Marine Corps in 1957, at Atsugi Air Force Base in Japan, as part of a program to send young military men posing as defectors into the Soviet Union.
This program was described by Victor Marchetti, who resigned from the CIA in 1969, disillusioned with the agency after fourteen years of service.
Marchetti had been a staff officer in the office of the director of the CIA and an executive assistant to the deputy director.
At the time, in 1959, the United States was having real difficulty in acquiring information out of the Soviet Union; technical systems had, of course, not developed to the point that they are at today, and we were resorting to all sorts of activities.
One of these activities was an ONI program which involved three dozen, maybe forty young men who were made to appear disenchanted, poor, American youths who had become turned off and wanted to see what communism was all about.
They were sent into the Soviet Union, or into Eastern Europe, with the specific intention the Soviets would pick them up and “double” them if they suspected them of being United States agents, or recruit them as KGB agents.
They were trained at various naval installations both here and abroad but the operation was being run out of Nag’s Head, North Carolina.
For a variety of reasons that will be discussed, many believe that Oswald was one of these recruits.
He left the Marines, defected to the Soviet Union where he immediately announced in public that he was rejecting his American citizenship and turning over everything he had learned while in the Marine Corps at Atsugi Air Force Base , and had become a Communist.
After living in the Soviet Union for about two years, he announced that he was disillusioned and wanted to return to the United States.
Meanwhile, he had married a young Soviet woman, Marina, who was the niece of a Soviet MVD officer.
Even if Oswald were an agent, or ex-agent, or double agent, it can be argued that he could have operated alone to assassinate the president.
In fact, the whole affair could have been very embarrassing to the CIA and the Navy.
A major damage-control operation, using every technique in its repertoire, would be their first instinctive reaction.
We can take this thought further and say that proving that Oswald was a CIA or ONI agent could be part of their defense, in that it could be argued that it would have been very stupid to use one of their agents as a fall guy when it would be so likely to be discovered by future investigators.
More logically it would have originated, if in the CIA or ONI at all, with some of their more fanatical rogue agents, and not by top officials.
I would add that Oswald, it seems, was a very impressionable and confused young man, froma broken home without a father, and with many problems.
Yet, paradoxically, he joined the Marine Corps, a gung-ho, patriotic act.
At the age of seventeen Oswald could have been persuaded to go in many directions—Communist, Communist spy, patriotic soldier, American spy, or what have you—as long as it gave him some sense of belonging and purpose which had been badly lacking in his background.
Moreover, it should be kept in mind that Oswald was only twenty years old when he defected from the Marine Corps and went to the Soviet Union.
He probably would not have been given a mission of any great importance.
L128] While Oswald was at Atsugi Air Force Base, he was considered to be somewhat of a loner but was praised by his officer as being competent, intelligent, and a person who could be trusted to catch on quickly and do a job well.
Oswald worked in the radar room at Atsugi that monitored the spy flights of the U-2 aircraft over the Soviet Union; he had first-hand access to flight information.
The first indication we have of his spy activity was when he began studying the Russian language, presumably on his own, and when he was wandering around the base at Atsugi with a camera, taking pictures.
He then started going off on two-day trips to Tokyo where he began having an affair with a beautiful Japanese nightclub hostess who worked at one of the smartest clubs in the city , catering to American officers—not enlisted men like Oswald.
The girls were expensive, costing more than a month’s salary for one night.
Oswald told Bucknell that after he was first approached at this bar he reported the incident to his superior officer and was debriefed by a man in civilian clothes.
He said he was told to go back and give false information to the woman, who was a known KGB agent.
We might reasonably speculate from this that it was Oswald’s first introduction to spy work and the beginning of a short career that would end in his death in the basement of a Dallas jail; he could have started his spy career as a double agent in Atsugi.
As Oswald continued his stay at Atsugi, he began to develop a reputation for being a troublemaker.
He was accused of deliberately pouring a drink over a sergeant but was later acquitted in a court martial.
Found guilty of using “provoking words,” he had to spend eighteen days in the brig.
Also, according to the record, he accidentally shot himself in the arm, inflicting a minor wound, before his unit was due to leave Atsugi.
He did this with a pistol that he kept in his locker, which was against service regulations.
According to his friends, Oswald began to speak bitterly against the Marine Corps and avoid Marine acquaintances.
The next incident of Oswald attracting attention to himself as a troublemaker or an eccentric was when his radar unit moved to Taiwan in 1958.
While alone on guard duty at night, he fired several shots into the darkness, claiming he had been fired upon by men in the woods.
Shortly after that, Oswald declared he could not stand doing sentry duty.
He was then transferred back to Atsugi where he took up again with a strikingly beautiful Eurasian woman; Oswald told a friend she was half Russian.
Oswald was then transferred to the Marine Corps Air Station in Santa Ana, California.
It was in Santa Ana that Oswald exhibited an intensified interest in learning the Russian language.
He applied to take a Marine proficiency examination in written and spoken Russian.
Although he failed, he did show a knowledge of the basics of the language.
In the weeks following, he was observed studying Russian books and a Russian language periodical for hours.
Around the barracks, Oswald constantly talked with his Marine friends about Communist ideology and world affairs.
He began to openly profess Marxist doctrine, claiming it was the best political system in the world.
Next he wrote to the Cuban embassy in Washington and began to receive letters with the Cuban official seal.
He confided to his friend, Nelson Delgado from Puerto Rico, that he had visited the Cuban embassy in Los Angeles.
Delgado said later that he once saw Oswald in a conversation outside the base with a man wearing an overcoat and concluded the man was a Cuban.
All of this could have been staged to build a case that Oswald was converting to communism, and led up to the time when he applied for discharge from the Marines, using a fake story that his mother was ill.
Shortly thereafter, on the pretense that he was going to Europe to study philosophy at the Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland, Oswald went to New Orleans and boarded a ship bound for Europe.
He disembarked at the British Port of South Hampton on October 9, 1959.
By midnight the next day he was checking into a hotel in Helsinki, Finland Within two days, after no known advance notice, the consulate in Helsinki granted Oswald a six-day visa to enter the Soviet Union.
This suspicion was reinforced by the claim of Swedish intelligence that they detected a flying visit by Oswald to Stockholm where he may have visited the Soviet embassy.
All of this is strangely sophisticated behavior for a twenty-year-old high school dropout who had never traveled anywhere except in the Marines and had very little experience in anything.
Oswald was mustered through the Soviet consulate in Helsinki with unusual speed, and on October 16 he arrived in Moscow by train.
There he was met by a Russian representative and taken to the Hotel Berlin where he registered as a student.
Two weeks later, Oswald walked into the American embassy in Moscow and renounced his American citizenship.
He also said that he had voluntarily told Soviet officials that he would make known to them all information concerning the Marine Corps and the specialty radar operation knowledge he possessed.
After the assassination, these agencies would deny any interest in Oswald other than routine.
Two years later, when Oswald returned to the United States with his Russian bride, there was little debriefing of Oswald or Marina and no major investigation of them—at least none admitted by these agencies; the only action taken was that he was given a dishonorable discharge.
During Oswald’s time in Russia he was sent to the city of Minsk where he was put up in a roomy apartment with a balcony overlooking a river that was considered luxurious by Soviet standards.
He was given a job ina Russian radio and television factory and put on a monthly allowance.
This was brought up by FBI director J Edgar Hoover when he wondered aloud to the Warren Commission on the subject.
It was in Minsk that Oswald met Marina, whom he would marry within six weeks after a whirlwind courtship.
Marina later remarked that when she met Oswald he spoke flawless Russian and she actually thought he was a native citizen.
In the previous chapter we described the way in which, in the last sixty days before the assassination, Oswald was being set up as a fall guy, at times by the use of an Oswald impersonator and at other times by the use of the real Oswald—in one case to establish Oswald as a left-wing, pro-Castro activist; in another case as a lone nut speaking sympathetically of going back to Russia; or in another case as a wild rifleman practicing on the rifle range and annoying people; and, in yet another case, possibly as part of a conspiracy of leftist anti-Castro activists.
One case that is indeed strange goes back to January 20, 1961, the time of Kennedy’s inauguration, when Oswald was in Russia.
This event occurred in New Orleans at the Bolton Ford dealership on North Clayborne Avenue when two men came into the dealership on that day and said they wanted to buy ten Ford pickup trucks.
When the first man said that the bid should be in the name of Oswald, the truck salesman, Oscar Deslatte, printed the name Oswald on the sales form.
The two men dealing for the trucks said they should get a good bid because they were buying them for a patriotic cause in that they were members of the Friends of Democratic Cuba.
This incident was confirmed by another auto salesman at the agency, Fred Sewall.
He also tried to call a number that may have been his contact in military intelligence, but the call was cut off.
Remarkably, Oswald spoke Russian with little accent, although he reportedly had no formal training in Russian and was a high school dropout.
His wife Marina said that when she first met him in Russia she thought he was a native Russian.
Oswald knew David Ferrie, who was first accused of being a part of the assassination by district attorney Jim Garrison in New Orleans, and who later committed suicide when the matter became public.
Ferrie was an employee of Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, who was under extreme attack by Robert Kennedy.
There is little doubt that these activities were part of an intelligence operation to establish Oswald’s bona fides as a radical Communist and supporter of Fidel Castro.
This was either a part of the conspiracy to kill JFK—or the real conspirators knew about these activities and maneuvered Oswald into a position where the assassination could be pinned on him as a Communist radical.
National Archives Following President Kennedy’s assassination, the two car salesmen remembered Oswald’s visit and called the FBI, who arrived and picked up the bid form with tongs.
The foregoing incident was discovered by Jim Garrison’s investigating team in New Orleans, which obtained a copy of the articles of incorporation of the Friends of Democratic Cuba and discovered that it was in the name of Guy Banister.
As you may recall, it was Guy Banister who was up to his eyeballs in the conspiracy along with David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello.
In the very month that John Kennedy was inaugurated, an intelligence project being run by Guy Banister was using the name “Oswald” in bidding for pickup trucks for apparent use in the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
More important, the young American who had done the bidding either knew Lee Oswald or knew his name.
This fascinating evidence shows that someone connected with anti-Castro operations was falsely using Oswald’s name and implies that Oswald must have been designated long before the Kennedy assassination as a person whose name and identity could be used for disinformation purposes by United States intelligence agencies.
Although it is difficult to imagine what the CIA had in mind in creating Oswald-type characters in 1961, the evidence indicates that this was in fact going on.
This was picked up by J Edgar Hoover, who issued a memorandum that someone was using Lee Harvey Oswald’s name and birth certificate for false identification purposes.
The deeper one gets into studying Oswald the more mysterious it becomes.
Future investigators would go after Oswald like hounds chasing the scent, only to end up frustrated and tearing their hair out because each trail meandered into the forest and petered out.
Exhibit 18-1 shows some of the most important activities of Oswald for the first nine months of 1963.
What I am looking for here is a systematic pattern of evidence showing that the CIA or some other entity was setting up Oswald as a fall guy for the assassination of the president.
When Oswald received the rifle he allegedly posed for backyard photographs taken in Irving, Texas, holding the rifle along with Communist literature.
As Jim Garrison said, this may be the first time in the annals of assassinations where the assassin has been so stupid as to purchase his weapon by mail order, use an alias, have the name of the alias in his wallet when he is captured, and have pictures taken of himself holding the rifle along with inflammatory literature—which was easily found.
But the strange thing about this charade is that it has the distinct appearance of being a set-up of Oswald in which he apparently willingly participated.
Some of Oswald’s Activities and Related Events—First Nine Months of 1963 Prior to 1963 Oswald went to Russia on Oct., 1959 and returned to the United States on June 13, 1962.
He went to Fort Worth, Texas, on June 14, 1962 and then moved to Dallas in early October 1962 (WCR, 713) January 1963 Employed by Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, Inc., in Dallas from 4th quarter 1962 until 2nd quarter 1963.
February Oswalds meet Ruth Paine through de Mohrenschildt March 12 Purchased rifle by mail from Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago March or April Oswald seen being passed money by Marcello associate at Town & Country Motel in New Orleans Backyard pictures taken in Irving, holding rifle, with revolver, Communist newspaper April 10 Oswald allegedly attempted to kill General Walker in Dallas April 23 News release—‘JFK Going to Dallas” April 24 Oswald went from Dallas to New Orleans; stayed there until Sept.
Volunteered to Carlos Bringuier to train Cuban exiles in guerilla warfare, fight Castro (Blakey, 184) Aug.
Seen in Clinton, Louisiana, job hunting with Clay Shaw, David Ferrie On August 9, arrested in New Orleans for street scuffle with Cubans when distributing Fair Play for Cuba material Late Aug. or early September Met with CIA’s “Maurice Bishop” in Dallas September Oswald, Ferrie, “Clem Bertrand,” & Perry Russo at party at Ferrie’s apartment.
As strange as this may seem, there is a consistent pattern of his participation in self-incrimination.
The most blatant example was when he allegedly attempted to kill Major General Edwin Walker in Dallas on April 10, 1963.
On that night, someone fired a rifle through a window in General Walker’s home, hitting the window frame and missing his head by inches as he sat at the desk in his study.
During the Warren Commission investigation it was concluded that Oswald was the lone shooter.
This was based primarily on the testimony of his wife Marina who said that Oswald came home late that night, nervous and excited, and confessed to her that he had attempted to kill General Walker.
But from the beginning there was an abundance of evidence suggesting that there was more than one person involved in the shooting.
He had been relieved of his command by President Kennedy for using his position to distribute right-wing propaganda to his men.
Walker had then resigned from the Army in anger and had thrown himself into a variety of rabid rightwing political activities, including inciting a race riot in which two people were killed.
He then had been temporarily consigned to a mental institution by Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
General Walker was a leading member of the John Birch Society ZH At the time of the shooting incident at General Walker’s, a fourteen-year-old boy, Walter Coleman, was standing in the doorway of a nearby house and heard the shot.
When he looked over the fence to see what was going on, he saw at least two men.
He testified to the House Assassination Committee that he saw some men speeding down the alley in a light green or light blue Ford, either a 1959 or a 1960 model.
He said he also saw another car, a 1958 Chevrolet, black with white down the side, in the church parking lot adjacent to the Walker’s house.
He said the car door was open and that a man was bending over the back seat as though he was placing something on the floor of the car.
The young Coleman said that he had gotten a good look at these men and neither one resembled Oswald.
This evidence was reinforced by one of General Walker’s aides, Robert Surrey, who had spotted two men prowling around the house peeking in the windows about four days before the shooting incident.
Another of the general’s aides said that while on watch for prowlers a few days before the incident he noticed a “Cuban or darkcomplexioned man in a 1957 Chevrolet’ drive slowly around the general’s house on several occasions 7241 After the assassination investigators found among Oswald’s possessions a photograph showing a rear view of General Walker’s house and parked outside was a 1957 Chevrolet.
When the photograph was produced by the Warren Commission a hole had been cut in the picture where the car’s numbered plate should be.
Marina Oswald said that when she had seen the photograph she was positive there was no hole in it.
On April 24 Oswald moved to New Orleans; his wife and children followed him in the latter part of May.
Upon arriving in New Orleans, Oswald obtained a job at the Reilly Coffee Company 7231 located just down the street from Guy Banister’s office.
In mid-June Oswald was taken by his uncle, a Marcello lieutenant with whom he was living at the time, to a Jesuit seminary where he made a speech describing the failures of communism.
Here we have another example of Oswald putting forth a right-wing image in contradiction to his other actions with a left-wing image.
At almost the same time, on June 16, Oswald for the first time handed out Fair Play for Cuba materials outside of the Naval shipyard in New Orleans.
Oswald came to town with two men—one was David Ferrie and the other, an older man who, according to Jim Garrison, was Clay Shaw.
According to Jim Garrison, all of Oswald’s activities in New Orleans that summer were part of the CIA’s “sheep-dipping” of Oswald to create his bona fides as an unstable character going from one job to another.
There appears to be little doubt that Oswald was being prepared for some future role by his handlers, who were CIA and FBI connected as well as Mafia connected.
But the possibility should not be dismissed that the sheep-dipping of Oswald may, in part, have been for some other mission that was unrelated to assassinating JFK, such as preparing Oswald to be a double agent who would later defect to Cuba, or even return to Russia on a second mission.
The Oswald sheep-dipping operation in New Orleans continued through September until Oswald left for his trip to Mexico City on September 25.
It was during this period in New Orleans that, according to Jim Garrison, Oswald was seen receiving money from Clay Shaw at Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana, by a heroin addict by the name of Vernon Bundy.
Garrison also brought forth a witness by the name of Perry Russo who claimed he had been at a party of homosexuals in New Orleans in which he participated in a conversation with Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, and Oswald in which Ferrie talked of assassinating JFK with triangular crossfire.
KK In summary, we can conclude with reasonable confidence that Oswald was a CIA agent who was sent to the Soviet Union on a special mission.
And there is little room for doubt that he was set up by some entity as a fall guy in the JFK assassination plot.
Whether or not Oswald was knowingly part of the plot remains uncertain.
He could have been involved in another covert operation unrelated to the Kennedy assassination, but have been co-opted by the real conspirators.
The evidence that Oswald was linked with Guy Banister and anti-Castro Cuban operations, and Clay Shaw and David Ferrie, is virtually unassailable.
Gaeton Fonzi, Former Investigator for the HSCA 19 OSWALD’S TRIP TO MEXICO CITY Over the years since the assassination of President Kennedy, there has been an almost continuous evolution of evidence and information concerning the events of Oswald’s trip to Mexico City.
Although there still remain redacted portions of the information, and key documents that have not been released, it is now possible to piece together enough evidence to provide a valid base for the purposes of this book.
That may be true, but I haven’t found a strong-enough argument to reach that conclusion.
Therefore, I will confine my analysis to the assumption that it was the real Oswald who traveled to Mexico City, and examine whether it was an Oswald impersonator who visited both the Cuban and Soviet consulates while the real Oswald was elsewhere in Mexico City.
Maurice Bishop asks Antonio Veciana to bribe his cousin Guillermo Ruiz, in Castro’s intelligence service in Mexico City, to make statements that Oswald visited with him and his wife in 1963.
CIA leaked to Warren Commission that Oswald had contacted KGB office On October 10, 1963, more than one month before the assassination, the Mexico City CIA station sent teletypes to the FBI, the State Department, and the Department of the Navy with the following message: Subject: Lee Henry Oswald.
It seems that if the CIA as an organization were in fact involved in a conspiracy to set up Oswald in the assassination, it would not have deliberately released a teletype with a description of a man it said was Oswald when the description was unquestionably erroneous.
The next clue is that on the day of the assassination the CIA in Mexico City sent a packet of information by special plane to the FBI in Dallas.
The packet contained a photograph taken outside the Soviet embassy in Mexico City on October 1, and it identified the man in the photograph as Oswald.
It showed a much older, much heavier man who had no resemblance to Oswald.
The photograph seemed to be consistent with the description of the man referred to in the teletype sent on October 10.
When the CIA was later questioned about the contradiction between the written and photographic descriptions of Oswald and the real Oswald, it said that there had been a mix-up in the photos.
As time proceeded, it became determined to prove that Oswald had in fact visited the Soviet and Cuban embassies.
Yet the CIA was unable to produce any photographs of him entering or leaving either of the embassies, despite ten photo opportunities with automatically operated surveillance cameras located in buildings across the street.
She remembered... was the name of an American who had come to the Cuban Consulate to obtain a visa to travel to Cuba in transit to Russia, the latter part of September or the early part of October of this year, and in support of his application had shown his passport, in which it was noted that he had lived in that country for a period of three years; his labor card from the same country written in the Russian language; and letters in that same language.
Accordingly, the declarant, complying with her duties, took down all of the information and completed the appropriate application form; and the declarant, admittedly exceeding her responsibilities, informally telephoned the Russian consulate, with the intention of doing what she could to facilitate issuance of the Russian visa to Lee Harvey Oswald.
However, they told her that there would be a delay of about four months in processing the case, which annoyed the applicant since, according to his statement, he was in a great hurry to obtain visas that would enable him to travel to Russia, insisting on his right to do so in view of his background and his loyalty and his activities in behalf of the Cuban movement.
Then, on January 22, 1964, the CIA leaked to commission members that Oswald had made contact with a KGB officer, Valery Kostikov, while in the Soviet embassy.
The commission also received a report that Oswald had been seen receiving $6,500 inside the Cuban consulate on September 18, 1963, during which discussions of killing Kennedy took place 2041 The FBI soon discredited this report as a fabrication.
These possible links between Oswald and a KGB or Cuban assassination plot so disturbed Warren Commission members that they were content to take the word of the FBI and CIA for Oswald’s Mexico activities.
After all, if these statements were true and became known to the American public, the government’s options to prevent escalation to nuclear war would be greatly reduced.
Immediately after the assassination, cable traffic began to flow between CIA headquarters at Langley and the CIA Mexico City station in which it was finally ordered by Langley, after a dispute with CIA Mexico personnel, that Silvia Duran be arrested and interrogated by the Mexican authorities.
Duran, a twenty-six-year-old Mexican national, had been employed at the Cuban consulate only one month before Oswald arrived in Mexico City.
What we see here is clear evidence of a cover-up, ordered by top levels of the CIA, of Oswald’s activities in Mexico City.
It also indicates a very close relationship between the CIA and the Mexican authorities.
One man who may have been involved is Richard S Cain , the notorious Chicago mob figure and right-hand man to Sam Giancana who was also an FBI informant, and at the very least, a CIA contact.
Cain’s expertise was in electronic surveillance, most notoriously the tapping of telephones.
In the period 1950-52 he had tapped the telephones of Cuban revolutionary leaders in Miami on behalf of Batista; in 1960 he was approached by his former employer to install phone taps on behalf of former Cuban President Prio.
According to an obituary notice in the Chicago Tribune, the CIA had engaged Cain in 1960 because of his Havana mob contacts, and also to wiretap the Czech embassy in Havana.
U2 The Cubans at the Nassau conference confirmed to me that the DFS was indeed corrupt in 1963.
And we see from the cable traffic that the CIA ordered DFS officials to participate in a conspiracy to cover up evidence in Mexico City relating to the Kennedy assassination.
There seems to be no end to the ring of corruption and deceit into which the CIA had become embroiled.
I wondered if some of the Cubans and Soviets in Mexico City in 1963 were not also involved in the corruption.
When Oswald visited the Cuban consulate he made such scenes, in a series of three visits on September 27, that he was finally ordered out of the building.
His anger was provoked when he was told that he could not get a Cuban visa in the three days he was seeking.
Present at the final scene were Silvia Duran and her supervisor, Cuban consul Eusebio Azcue.
Fifteen years later, Azcue told the HSCA that he was convinced that the man who visited the embassy in 1963 was not the Oswald arrested in Dallas.
He based his belief on his memory of the man calling himself Oswald as five foot six inches tall, with dark blond hair and distinctly different facial features.
Azcue’s testimony was reinforced by his memory of when he first saw a movie of Ruby killing Oswald.
Also presumably not revealed to the Warren Commission was the fact that Silvia Duran, while being interrogated by the DFS, had described Oswald as short with blond hair.
CIA translation of report by DFS, document no.758, 6 Silvia Duran’s description of Oswald was repeated in more detail when she testified before the HSCA in 1978.
Note that this translation says that she was “sure that it was the same person” but only after checking data in the consulate’s archives.
When Duran checked the data in the files, all she would have been able to see was a visa application photo which does not show Oswald as blond but with very dark hair.
This meeting with Oswald was revealed by Oscar Contraras, who was studying to be a lawyer at the university.
Contraras belonged to a left-wing Cuban group that supported the Castro revolution and had contacts in the Cuban embassy.
He was reluctant to reveal much about the incident, but Anthony Summers was able to find Contraras later in Mexico City and interview him 2141 Contraras told Summers that one evening in late September 1963 he and three other students were sitting in a university cafeteria when a man at a nearby table introduced himself.
This made a distinct impression on Contraras and his friends because they connected “Harvey” and “Oswald” to a popular movie about a rabbit.
Contraras said that the man who claimed to be Oswald was only about five feet six inches tall.
He remembered this because he is five feet nine inches tall and looked down on Oswald in conversations.
Oswald told the students that he was having trouble getting a visa at the Cuban embassy and wanted to know if there was anything they could do to help him.
They agreed to help him and that night contacted the embassy, including consul Azcue and a Cuban intelligence officer.
They were told to break off contact with Oswald at once, that the embassy officials suspected him of trying to infiltrate left-wing groups.
When the students next saw Oswald, they told him that the Cubans did not trust him and would not give hima visa.
Oswald kept up his attempts to be friendly to the Mexican students and ended up spending the night at their apartment.
At the time of the Summers’ interview, Contraras was the editor of a Mexican newspaper, El Mundo.
Contraras questioned how Oswald could have known that these particular students, out of all the students at the university, might indeed be able to help him.
Contraras said he believed this was not divine inspiration, and that something else the Cuban official said when warning him to drop Oswald helped arouse his suspicion.
Further evidence of an Oswald impostor comes from an episode involving a voice tape recording.
When pressed as to why the tapes, clear proof of Oswald’s Mexican visit, had not been given to the Warren Commission, Phillips said that they had been routinely destroyed about a week after they were taken with the reasoning that Oswald had not been considered important prior to the Soke, IZE3 assassination.
However, after Phillips’ 1976 testimony, a five-page FBI document dated November 23, 1963 that refuted Phillips’ story became public in 1979 in the HSCA report.
According to this report, FBI agents who were questioning Oswald in Dallas were informed by CIA officers that Oswald had contacted the Soviet embassy in Mexico City.
The Central Intelligence Agency advised that on October 1, 1963, an extremely sensitive source had reported that an individual identifying himself as Lee Oswald contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages.
Special agents of this Bureau, who have conversed with Oswald in Dallas, Texas, have observed photographs of the individual referred to above and have listened to a recording of his voice.
These Special Agents are of the opinion that the above-referred-to individual was not Lee Harvey Oswald.
In other words, the CIA wiretap of Oswald was not destroyed in October but was available to FBI agents on November 23.
Once again, testimonies had placed the FBI and the CIA in embarrassing positions.
Later in the HSCA investigation, the FBI denied that a tape recording of Oswald’s voice had been received.
J Gordon Shanklin and James Hosty were the two FBI agents involved in destroying a note that Oswald left with the FBI in Dallas shortly before the assassination, which leaves one inclined to question the FBI agents’ second version and believe the original report—it was very explicit, leaving no doubt that the FBI had listened to a recording of a voice, and the voice was not Oswald’s.
Final corroboration that Phillips lied in his testimony to the HSCA was provided sixteen years later.
We have up here the tape and the photograph of the man who was at the Soviet Embassy, using Oswald’s name.
That picture and the tape do not correspond to this man’s voice , nor to his appearance.
In other words, it appears that there is a second person who was at the Soviet Embassy down there.
Moreover, Hoover would have known that they were not telling the truth.
It seems evident that they were all working in concert with the CIA to protect David Atlee Phillips and the CIA, thus suppressing evidence of a conspiracy.
David Atlee Phillips has long been suspected of being the mysterious Maurice Bishop, a code name for a CIA undercover agent who was seen with Oswald in Dallas and who attempted to recruit Antonio Veciana to offer a large sum of money to Veciana’s relative, Guillermo Ruiz, a “Cuban official” in Mexico City who reportedly witnessed Oswald in the Cuban consulate, to say that he and his wife had been contacted by Oswald in Mexico City.
Veciana said that he had agreed to contact his relative, but had been unable to do so.
This testimony was given by Veciana to the usca 2EI Veciana, a Cuban exile leader, had been a respected accountant in Cuba and one of the founders of Alpha 66, a radical right-wing Cuban exile organization intent on doing away with Castro.
He is considered by Gaeton Fonzi, the HSCA staff member who dealt with him, to be a very reliable witness.
In his testimony, Veciana said that Maurice Bishop was his control agent who had been working with him over a period of thirteen years, during which he had met with him over one hundred times.
He said that Bishop had guided him in planning attempts to assassinate Castro.
At his meeting with Fonzi, and later in his testimony to the HSCA, Veciana described a meeting between himself and Maurice Bishop in Dallas in late August or the first days of September 1963.
He said that he had met with Bishop often in Dallas during their long association.
During this particular trip he met with him at a skyscraper building in downtown Dallas which has been tentatively identified as the Southland Center.
They met in a public area on the first floor; Veciana arrived a little ahead of schedule.
Veciana said that there was a young man standing with Bishop who gave him the impression of being very quiet, very strange, and preoccupied.
The young man was with them ten or fifteen minutes, until Bishop told him something like, “all right, see you later,” and dismissed him.
Veciana said that after the assassination he identified Oswald when his face suddenly appeared in newspapers and on television.
Then, Veciana said, he at once ’ , eee recognized Oswald as the young man he had seen in Dallas at the meeting with Bishop.
In the staff report, the HSCA noted that there was absolutely no doubt in Veciana’s mind that the man was Oswald, not just someone who resembled him.
UPI/Corbis-Bettmann mS Antonio Veciana, a Cuban businessman who later became the leader of Alpha 66, testified to the HSCA that after the assassination his CIA controller, “Maurice Bishop,” attempted to get him to bribe his relatives in Mexico City to say that Oswald had visited them at the Cuban embassy in Mexico City in late September/early October 1963.
He also testified that he and Maurice Bishop had been headed for a meeting in Dallas when they encountered Oswald, and Bishop spoke with him.
After Veciana’s testimony, he was ambushed and shot in the head, but he recovered.
Evidence from multiple sources shows that Maurice Bishop and Phillips were the same person.
When we combine the above with Veciana’s testimony to the HSCA that Bishop attempted to get him to bribe a Cuban official and with proof that Bishop was in fact CIA officer David Atlee Phillips, we have a direct linkage of the CIA to Oswald and possibly to the assassination of John Kennedy.
In his testimony, Veciana would not identify David Atlee Phillips as being Maurice Bishop.
He was perhaps anticipating the danger in which he was placing himself.
His fear was justified inasmuch as he was the victim of a murder attempt in late 1979.
Four shots were fired in an ambush and a fragment of one bullet struck Veciana’s head.
He miraculously recovered, but privately expressed concern that the attempt was linked to his testimonies concerning Maurice Bishop.
Despite considerable effort by the HSCA (involving a composite artist’s picture based on Veciana’s descriptions), they were unable to bring themselves to identify Maurice Bishop as being in reality David Atlee Phillips.
But Gaeton Fonzi, the HSCA staff member who investigated David Atlee Phillips and Maurice Bishop, was not so reluctant.
I state that unequivocally, although Veciana cannot officially identify him publicly as such.
In addition to the abundance of evidence...which unerringly points to Phillips being Bishop, believe me, I know that he was.
He never opened up on specifics, but he did say something about the assassination of President Kennedy.
It should be noted that Phillips’ remark does not preclude that he himself was part of this rogue operation, or that his statement to Walsh was designed to confuse future investigators about Phillips’ true role.
One of Phillips’ specialties in the CIA was psychological disinformation schemes to set people on false trails.
The fact that Maurice Bishop was a CIA employee was confirmed by John McCone, director of the CIA at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
He said vaguely that Bishop had been a senior officer, that he had met with him “two or three times” at CIA headquarters.
At the Nassau conference, Castro’s General Fabian Escalante confirmed that there were two independent sources in Cuba who testified to Cuban officials that David Atlee Phillips used the name Maurice Bishop.
In addition, Wayne Smith, who was formerly stationed at the American embassy in Cuba as a State Department representative, confirmed to me at the Nassau meeting that David Atlee Phillips was a close associate of David Sanchez Morales.
The importance of David Sanchez Morales was noted previously; he is suspected of being a ringleader in the JFK assassination.
This subject, with more on Phillips, will be addressed in a later chapter concerning the execution phase of the assassination.
Analysis of Recently Released Phone Taps, Cable Traffic, and Related Events in Mexico City Referring to Exhibit 19-2, we see that after arriving in Mexico City by bus at about 10:00m. on Friday, September 27, Oswald checked into the Hotel del Commercio at 10:30m.
At about that time, a man called the Soviet consulate to inquire about getting a visa to travel to Odessa in the Soviet Union.
Then at about 12:00m. a man calling himself Oswald arrived at the Soviet embassy.
Oswald’s appearance at the Soviet consulate was reported by Colonel Oleg M Nechiporenko in his book Passport to Assassination, and was confirmed by Valery Kostikov, who was also one of the consulate employees who was receiving visitors that day.
According to Nechiporenko, both he and Kostikov believe that the man in the Soviet embassy was the real Oswald.
They immediately recognized him on November 22 when his picture appeared on television.
He was of medium height, with a longish face, a narrow chin, and a high forehead that clearly tended toward baldness.
The fact that the man spoke very poor, mangled Russian is, of course, in conflict with the fact that Oswald spoke fluent Russian.
Phone Taps, Cable Traffic, and Related Events During Oswald’s Stay in Mexico City.
Oswald at Russian embassy 2 4:05m.: Silvia Duran calls Soviet embassy saying American is in Cuban embassy wanting to know the name of the man he had previously dealt with in the Soviet embassy 4:26m.: Soviet embassy calls Cuban embassy and asks Silvia Duran if American has been at the Cuban embassy.
Oswald at Russian embassy 11:51m.: Silvia Duran calls Soviet embassy; says Oswald, who had previously been to Cuban 5 sth22 embassy want to talk.
Oswald departs Mexico City by bust31 Thursday, October 3 1:35m.: Oswald crossed Mexican border to United States from Nuevo Laredo into Texas.
Unidentified man outside calls Soviet embassy, speaks in broken Spanish, then English, says he’s looking for visa to Russia The next information we have is that Cuban embassy employee Silvia Duran called the Soviet embassy at 4:05m., saying that an American was at the Cuban embassy who wanted to know the name of the man he had previously spoken with at the Soviet embassy.
Then, at 4:26m., the Soviet embassy called the Cuban embassy and asked Silvia Duran if the American had been at the Cuban embassy.
At that point it was revealed that the American’s Russian wife also wanted to go to the USSR via Cuba.
The Soviet replied that he had not yet had a reply from Washington, D.C., where he had sent a telegram to get further information.
The next clue we have is that at about 9:30 or 10:00m. the next day , a man calling himself Oswald appeared at the Russian embassy.
This was reported by Nechiporenko and also by Pavel Yatskov, who was the first to show up at the Russian embassy that Saturday morning.
The Russians were getting together for a volleyball game that they usually played beginning around 10 o’clock on Saturday mornings.
His pale features and the extremely agitated look of his face were especially noticeable.
Nechiporenko described Oswald as the same man who was at the Soviet consulate on September 27.
Kostikov also described him as the same person 7241 Nechiporenko wrote that while Oswald was with him and Kostikov, Oswald said he feared for his life at the hands of the FBI, and then took out a revolver saying he must carry it to protect himself.
He wrote that Oswald became “hysterical, began to sob, ‘I’m afraid they are going to kill me.
Let me inp i238 Then, at 11:51m, a woman who called herself Silvia Duran phoned the Soviet embassy to say that Oswald, who had previously been in the Cuban embassy, wanted to talk.
The HSCA, in its analysis, made a note of the caller speaking broken Russian, indicating that this person probably was not Oswald.
Another contradiction is that the Cuban consulate was normally closed on Saturday, so if Duran were in fact with Oswald it would have been somewhere outside the consulate.
Moreover, when Silvia Duran testified before the HSCA she emphatically stated that Oswald had not returned to the Cuban embassy on Saturday, September 28, and that she had not called the Soviet consulate on his behalf on that day 2321 Then there was a hiatus insofar as cable traffic and telephone wiretaps are concerned, until three days later when an unidentified man called the Soviet embassy saying he was “at your place last Saturday and talked to your consulate” and asked if anything new about the telegram to Washington, D.C., had transpired.
Then, strangely, an unidentified man phoned the Soviet embassy in Mexico City at 3:39m., speaking in broken Spanish, then English, saying he was looking for a visa to Russia.
If we assume for the moment that the Russians at the Soviet embassy were telling the truth; and even if we discount Duran’s, Azcue’s, and Contraras’s identifications of Oswald (although neither one described anyone resembling Oswald), we can conclude with a high degree of certainty that there was an Oswald impostor in Mexico City, calling in from the outside on September 28th, along with someone calling herself Silvia Duran.
Oswald spoke fluent, not broken, Russian, and Silvia Duran testified that she did not call the Soviet embassy with Oswald on September 28.
Therefore, either there were impersonators of Oswald and Duran, or the telephone transcripts were fabricated by either the CIA or the DFS, or both acting together.
It should be added that Colonel Nechiporenko was in the Soviet embassy on Saturday, September 28, and nowhere in his book does he mention a call from Silvia Duran and Oswald on that day.
Likelihood that the Photo Surveillance Operation Would have Missed Oswald CIA officers who were in Mexico in 1963 and their Headquarters counterparts generally agreed that it would have been unlikely for the photo surveillance operations to have missed ten opportunities to have photographed Oswald.
They also reveal that he was at the Soviet Embassy at least twice on those same days.
Oswald’s visits were after dark; Oswald’s visits were on Saturday afternoons or Sundays; the case officer had given the photographic base house agents the days off that Oswald visited; the pulse camera was not working.
It is known that Oswald’s visits were on a weekday during daylight hours and Saturday morning.
This Committee has not been able to determine with certainty, because of the missing production, whether all of the base houses were operating on the days of Oswald’s visits.
This Committee believes that the pulse camera was in operation on at least one of the days that Oswald visited the Cuban Consulate and that the LILYRIC base covering the Soviet gate should have been operating at the time of Oswald’s visits to the Soviet Consulates on September 27th and 28th.
Lopez told Bob Dorff that he personally examined and counted every photographic negative, all numbered in sequence, taken by the CIA cameras before, during, and after the summer and fall of 1963—and that none of the negatives contained a picture of Oswald.
Unless the CIA made up a false set of negatives, this is compelling proof that Oswald was never at the Cuban or the Soviet consulates.
The real Oswald did not enter or leave either the Soviet or Cuban consulates; the photographs would have identified an impersonator of Oswald and set off a firestorm of alarm—direct, unquestionable evidence of a conspiracy to set up the Cuban government and/or the Soviets in a plot to assassinate the president of the United States.
Or, The photographs might have revealed an Oswald accomplice who was outside one or both of the consulates; but this still would be evidence of a conspiracy of almost equal proportions, and perhaps would be even worse for the conspirators if the accomplice were to be identified as a CIA agent, or if the accomplice’s identity might in some other way unravel the conspiracy.
In any event, clearly there were impersonators of Oswald telephoning in to the Soviet consulate.
And the witnesses in the Cuban consulate described someone who was not Oswald.
Also at the conference was Jeremy Gunn from the congressional review board.
General Fabian Escalante: Fidel Castro’s chief of personal security—the man who has kept Castro alive over the many years.
At the time of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City, Lechuga was Cuba’s ambassador to Mexico.
Each of these Cubans had spent recent years researching the Kennedy assassination.
They comprised a very serious group that had done extensive investigative work on this subject.
This was a very informative conference that touched on a wide range of topics relating to the assassination.
For this chapter, I will confine the material to that concerning Mexico City.
One of the most significant items that I heard at the conference was the degree to which the Cuban consulate and Cuban embassy had been electronically bugged by the CIA in 1963.
The Cubans said that in 1964 they found microphones planted all over the place—in window frames, telephone outlets, furniture —to the extent that it would have been impossible for the CIA not to have heard everything that took place there, including, of course, Oswald’s voice in his conversations with Silvia Duran or Eusebio Azcue.
What we see here is a consistent pattern of the CIA withholding vital information from the American public—for thirty-two years—that would have revealed a conspiracy.
Much additional material from the Lopez Report is still being withheld.
In light of this additional new evidence, it is increasingly obvious that the United States government (CIA, FBI, LBJ) suppressed all evidence that there was an Oswald impostor in Mexico City because that would have revealed a conspiracy.
This goes back to the Dallas incidents of Oswald impostors, which the FBI and the Warren Commission also would not address.
There was a puzzling aspect of the Nassau conference with regard to the Cubans.
Although I agreed with their conclusion that Oswald was in Mexico City for the purpose of implicating Cuba in the assassination of Kennedy, I could not agree with their conclusion that it was the real Oswald who was at the Cuban embassy on September 27, 1963.
Shrugging their shoulders, they acknowledged that they had no explanation.
But they said that they based their conclusion on Silvia Duran’s statements to Cuban officials before she was arrested and interrogated by the Mexican police.
Duran identified Oswald after she went back to the files in the Cuban consulate and saw his picture on a visa photograph.
I wondered whether the Cubans might have been motivated to be untruthful about their statement that it was the real Oswald in the Cuban consulate.
Without equivocation, they stated that the purpose of Oswald’s visit to the Cuban embassy was to incriminate Cuba in a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
I could not think of a reason why the Cubans were not telling what they actually felt to be true, but I remain puzzled.
Reflecting about this we arrive at the following hypothesis: Everything was prepared to document Oswald’s visit, because there was a plot to implicate Cuba in the assassination which would unfold after the North American response.
Nevertheless, almost immediately after the detention of Oswald in Dallas when the investigations began from the main center (of the United States government) about the materials concerning Oswald in Mexico, there began to be offered mistaken reports.
For certain is that almost immediately after the murder of Oswald, in the clumsy and hasty conditions known by all, appeared the theory of the “lone assassin,” and the “Cuban conspiracy” passed to the back burner.
These are essential questions that the North American authorities should respond to, to the public, when the assassination of John F Kennedy is clarified, once and for all.
The Cubans at the Nassau conference stated several times that they believe that John Kennedy was assassinated by intelligence agencies of the U.S.—i.e., the FBI, the CIA, and/or military intelligence.
They stated that they believed that John Kennedy was assassinated because he was planning to make peace with Cuba, and that initial contacts were being arranged between Fidel Castro and the United States State Department or a representative of John Kennedy at the very moment that Kennedy was murdered in Dallas.
Silvia Duran’s Relationship with Oswald During the 1976 HSCA investigation, information was developed that Silvia Duran had a sexual affair with Oswald when he was in Mexico City.
Moreover, witnesses stated that Oswald, along with two other men, had attended a twist dance party in September 1963 at the home of Duran’s cousin, Ruben Duran, at which Silvia Duran was present and which was comprised of Communists and Communist sympathizers.
The Cubans at the conference thought so and strongly expressed that opinion.
They said that they believe the information is false, but I remain puzzled.
In 1965 Elena Garro reported that Silvia Duran had been Oswald’s mistress while he was in Mexico City.
The CIA Station did not consider the information significant and told the agent to end his contact with Ms.
If that information is accurate, then that Silvia invited Oswald to a party would not have been surprising.
Silvia Duran admitted that the Mexican police had questioned her on this point but denied that she had had an affair with Oswald.
Duran denied having any extramarital affairs while she was married to Horacio Duran.
This denial is not consistent with evidence of her reputation at the Cuban Consulate. reported to that all that would have to be done to recruit Silvia Duran, whom he referred to by using the Spanish word for whore, would be to get a blond blue-eyed American into bed with her.
There is also CIA information that indicates that Silvia Duran had an affair with a [ | in the early 1960s.
But numerous CIA documents speak of a sexual affair between Silvia Duran and Oswald.
Headquarters attention is called to paragraphs 3 through 5 of report dated 26 May.
The fact that Silvia Duran had sexual intercourse with Lee Harvey Oswald on several occasions when the latter was in Mexico City is probably new, but adds little to the Oswald case.
The Mexican police did not report the extent of the Duran-Oswald relationship to this Station.
During this latter conversation, Elena admitted she had gone to American embassy on an earlier occasion with her daughter and mother-in-law and talked to two embassy officers about this matter.
She said since the embassy officers did not give much credence to anything they said, they did not bother to give a very complete story.
The following info supplements and in some instances corrects that given in the memo of Dec 10.
Silvia is married to Horacio, a weak man, who was converted to communism by Ricardo Guerra.
Elena has nothing to do with Silvia whom she detests and considers a whore.
All three were obviously Americans and did not mix or dance with other people.
The three were friends, because Elena saw them by chance the next day walking down the street together.
Although Elena had returned from Europe in June or July, she had already met Eusebio Azcue and knows positively he was at party.
On another occasion (not clear whether before or after the party in question), she attended a party where she saw Eusebio Azcue, Emilio Carballido, and a Latin American Negro man with red hair.
Carballido and Azcue, with others, were in heated discussions on that occasion about Kennedy and they came to conclusion that the only solution was to kill him.
Elena said Carballido is known as a Castro agent; he had been to Red China, Soviet Union, and many times to Cuba.
Jose Vasquez Anaral, formerly with Rockefeller Foundation in N.Y. and who is now a professor at Rutgers.
The day after assassination, Elenita encountered Sefiora de Azcue in Sanborne.
Azcue was called back to Havana after assassination and his wife followed shortly.
CIA’s Oswald Chronology, P 8593, 92 In the above testimony by Elena Garro, we see that Oswald was in Mexico City, with other Americans, consorting with Communists at a party on September 2 or 3, 1963.
She also claims that she was at another party where Eusebio Azcue was in heated discussions with others to the effect that Kennedy should be killed.
Reviewing the manner in which the CIA Mexico City Station and the Legal Attaché’s office in Mexico City handled Ms.
Garro’s allegations reveals that, at best, her allegations were handled in an irresponsible manner because they were dismissed after a superficial investigation.
The Legat, after talking to Elena, dismissed her story after interviewing one person whom she said may have been at the party.
The manner in which the official American community handled Charles Thomas’ reporting is detailed in Section VI, C., 11, above.
It would appear that whereas the FBI has discounted the Elena Garro allegations, the CIA is still considerable disturbed by them.
Under the circumstances it is unlikely that any further investigation of this matter will ever take place unless it is ordered by a high official in Washington.
The Committee attempted to locate Elena Garro 2421 Although the Committee established telephonic contact with Ms.
Garro, the Committee was totally frustrated in this aspect of its investigation, but yet believes that there is a possibility that Lee Harvey Oswald did attend a twist party at the home of Ruben Duran.
Before trying to bring all of this together, we will examine two other incidents, both quite incredible.
It contained sensational revelations of a plot to assassinate President Kennedy being discussed in the Cuban consulate in Mexico City, involving Oswald, with money having passed to Oswald.
ON 2 SEP REPORTED IN MEX TO PROFESSOR EDELDERIO TORRES, ADDRESS GENERAL ZUAZUA NUMBER 37, INTERIOR 8.
As will be discussed in a later chapter, when Lyndon Johnson received it he unquestionably used it as a reason for establishing the Warren Commission, referring to the “documents from Mexico City” and telling reluctant candidates for the Commission, including Earl Warren, of impending nuclear war if it were to be revealed that Cuba was behind the assassination.
Once again we have the FBI shutting down evidence of a conspiracy after only two or three days of investigation and, once again, ignoring the possibility that the person in the Cuban embassy could have been an Oswald impersonator, or actually Oswald himself having been flown from New Orleans to Mexico and back in a private or government aircraft.
When Gaudet was interviewed by the FBI, he said that he had left New Orleans on September 19, 1963 via Pan American Airways and that he had not seen Oswald on the plane.
But Oswald presumably could have flown to Mexico immediately after getting his tourist card and been there on September 18.
Curiously, Gaudet telephoned the FBI office on November 27 stating that he had heard that Jack Ruby from Dallas, Texas, had purchased paintings for one Lorenzo Borenstein.
This, of course, is exactly what appears to be the reason for the whole Mexico City affair, as well as for the Oswald impersonators in Dallas.
What Alvarado did not say was who helped him fabricate the story and who ordered him to tell it.
It should be noted that Alvarado himself stated that he was a Nicaraguan secret service agent.
With the CIA’s ability to penetrate virtually any intelligence agency in the world, it would not be surprising if Alvarado were also a CIA double agent.
Another CIA document dated December 10, 1963 reported the results of an FBI/DFS/CIA interrogation of Alvarado on December 5 and 6, using “technical” means, which by the wording in the lengthy report presumably meant lie detector tests, at least.
Once Subject was shown a photograph of Oswald taken by the New Orleans police in 1959.
The next time Subject was shown a photograph of Oswald which appeared in the local newspapers after the assassination.
This examiner told Subject that the test results indicated that he was lying and that the “apparatus” was calling Subject a liar.
Subject’s reply to this was that he had respect for the apparatus and if that was what it said then that must be so.
Of course, it could have involved anything from hypnosis, drugs, beatings, etc.; and the results of the lie detector tests could simply have been rigged— perhaps not uncommon for the FBI, the DFS, and the CIA in those days.
The Gilberto P Lopez Story What appears to be yet another disinformation scheme to implicate Castro’s Cuba is revealed in two CIA documents released unredacted on December 1, 1995.
When we combine this with the other stories—Oswald receiving $6,500 in the Cuban embassy, Oswald at the Communist twist dance party with two companions, Oswald’s visits to the Cuban and Soviet consulates, and Oswald’s supposed sexual affair with Cuban consulate receptionist Silvia Duran—we have either an elaborate disinformation scheme or evidence that Castro’s Cuba ordered the murder of the president of the United States and left a trail leading to themselves littered with “evidence” that could not be ignored.
The Cubans stated that the delayed flight from Mexico City to Havana never happened.
They dismissed it as being impossible to have happened without them knowing about it.
Furthermore, on its face, it is ridiculous to seriously think that Castro would be behind such a plot paraded before the world, inviting his total destruction.
Castro has not survived all these years without being prudent, calculating, and careful.
This brings us to consideration of evidence that the CIA had double agents in the Cuban embassy.
CIA Double Agents in Mexico City We now have proof of CIA double agents in Mexico City.
Also, Luisa Calderon is similarly a suspect, along with other candidates.
Moreover, the CIA had double agents who had the means to contact the Soviet embassy, as indicated above.
There is also the likelihood that the CIA had penetration agents in the Soviet embassy in Mexico City.
The HSCA questioned David Atlee Phillips concerning CIA double agents in Mexico City.
Remember, Phillips was chief of covert actions in the Cuban section in the Mexico City station in 1963 and is one of the prime suspects in the JFK assassination conspiracy.
He was also—by profession, by training, and by disposition—an accomplished, if not congenital, liar.
Mr Phillips stated that he had first heard Duran’s name from the telephone intercept transcripts.
Mr Phillips had previously mentioned the CIA Mexico City Station’s interest in recruiting a former Cuban Ambassador to Mexico named Lechuga.
He added that he doubted that Duran would have been pitched because the station could not identify any of her weaknesses; but when he was confronted with a statement from one of the station’s assets who had reported to his case officer “that all that would have to be done to recruit Ms.
Duran was to get a blonde, blue-eyed American to go to bed with her,” Phillips said that it did indeed sound as if the station had targeted her for recruitment, but he still held to his position that he had never heard of her being pitched.
Mr Hidalgo, professing not to remember all the details, stated that he thought that Duran was a Cuban intelligence agent.
At the time when this contact told me of Silvia Duran I tied the two together, yes, sir.
I don’t know, how at that time it was obvious to me as an intelligence agent that there was some connection there but it was of no interest whatsoever to me.
I do remember that when I next saw this contact of mine I mentioned the fact to him and let him proceed to do whatever he wanted to.
Only recently have I come across part of a CIA document dated May 26, 1967 that provides inferential evidence that Silvia Duran may have been a CIA asset in the Cuban embassy.
It pertains to a meeting in a CIA safehouse with a man who is presumably a CIA penetration agent in Cuban intelligence.
He mentioned specifically the case of Silvia and Horacio Duran that then explained the background of his relationship with them.
He related that Silvia Duran worked as a receptionist at the Consulate in 1963-64 and was on duty when Lee Harvey Oswald applied for a visa.
Basing our conclusions on CIA documents and all of the other evidence, we can say with certainty that the CIA had double agents and plants in the Cuban embassies and the Soviet embassies.
Compounding the confusion, there are serious questions as to the reliability of parts of Nechiporenko’s book.
To be realistic, we must consider the possibility that the CIA has had the KGB’s cooperation, from the day of the assassination, to cover up a conspiracy.
It is reasonable to me that the CIA could have contacted the KGB or Khrushchev immediately after the assassination to make such an arrangement, ostensibly to prevent nuclear war.
The cable traffic in and out of the Soviet and Cuban consulates is probably genuine because it reveals details of conspiracy that the CIA was attempting to hide for thirty years.
It seems evident that if fabricated, the statements must have been designed with great care before the assassination.
It was a continuation of staged or fabricated events starting with Oswald in New Orleans, in Dallas, and then Mexico City.
It has all of the earmarks of a covert intelligence operation of the kind in which David Atlee Phillips,k.a.
This is a continuation of the pattern of the FBI’s participation in the Dallas cover-up, and the New Orleans cover-up as well.
One possible answer is that Phillips did not know about the CIA electronic surveillance of the Cuban consulate and therefore was not concerned about using an Oswald impersonator in the consulate.
But one would presume that Phillips, head of Cuban operations in the Mexico City CIA station, certainly would have known of the surveillance.
Another more plausible answer is that it was never intended for knowledge of the CIA electronics surveillance operations to become known to the public—its revelation was a bureaucratic snafu, caused by an unknowing clerk who searched the files looking for Oswald and found one that was not supposed to have been filed, but that contained a photo and description of someone obviously not resembling Oswald.
This could explain Phillips’ panic after the assassination and his initial attempts to bribe the Cuban consulate staff to say that Oswald was there, only later to tell Veciana that everything had been taken care of once the decision had been made by LBJ, Hoover, and the CIA to scrap the scheme to pin the crime on Castro, because by then the perfect plan was coming apart at the seams.
Such manufacturing of benign scenarios to get the CIA off the hook ultimately becomes absurd.
The objective, it seems, must have been much larger— to provide a false sponsor for the assassination of President Kennedy and to precipitate an invasion of Cuba.
Unless further evidence develops to the contrary, it seems reasonable to conclude that a radical faction, at a middle to high level in the CIA, was involved in the assassination of John Kennedy.
In this scenario, the sheep-dipping of Oswald in New Orleans would have been conducted by an agency of the United States government to discredit the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, but somewhere along the line, probably in Dallas, it was picked up by CIA radicals to provide cover for their plot to assassinate Kennedy.
My thesis continues that these two were probably not involved in the planning details; 1.e., they were informed only that the assassination of John Kennedy was going to happen and of the role they would jointly be required to play, which was to orchestrate a convincing cover-up if found to be necessary.
More analysis will be presented concerning this thesis and the culpability of the CIA in chapters that follow.
Although there is much more that can be said about Oswald’s trip to Mexico City, I must leave that for others.
We will now examine other evidence of CIA and Mafia involvement in the Kennedy assassination —the fascinating mystery of the French Connection.
It contained the testimony of John Scelso , a high-ranking intelligence officer in the CIA who was superior in rank to Mexico City Station Chief Winston Scott.
Scelso testified that James Angleton had immediately gone into action to do all the investigation and that Richard Helms had called a meeting and told Angleton and others that he was in charge; everybody should report everything to Scelso and no one should have any conversation with anyone without Scelso being present.
Scelso complained to Helms who told him he had no control over Angleton.
Scelso said that Angleton had “enormously influential contacts with J Edgar Hoover,” that he had his own direct line.
In the latter part of his testimony, Scelso was extremely critical of William Harvey, describing him as a thug and a wacko, whom he suspected of being the one who murdered Sam Giancana.
Scelso also testified that he suspected Angleton of having ties to organized crime.
This shocking statement has large ramifications in light of recent evidence that Oswald may have been part of an Angleton operation out of CIA’s counter-intelligence division.
It seems apparent that Helms was ordered to take the investigation away from Scelso and turn it over to Angleton, who would do the bidding of Hoover.
More and more we see that Hoover had his allies and agents within the CIA, leaving open the possibility of combined FBI/CIA-radical factions in a conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy, in concert with the Mafia.
The importance of this is that it links Oswald’s activities in New Orleans to Phillips and the CIA; also, to Dallas—the DRE safe-house on Hollandale Street, and gun running involving Jack Ruby—adding to the credibility of the evidence that Phillips was the Maurice Bishop who met Oswald in Dallas.
Moreover, it places Phillips even more deeply in the JFK assassination plot.
It involves a complex cast of characters who operated with code names, false identities, and forged files with false dates, making their traceability very difficult if not impossible.
One of the techniques used was to employ false names that were in fact other real people who had reputations that would make them suspects for the crime.
Eager investigators would track down a suspect only to find that person having a perfect alibi.
In Chapter 16, CIA and Mafia Overview, | outlined a plausible scenario for the execution phase of the Kennedy assassination which involved rogue elements of the CIA and their Mafioso counterparts in the CIA’s program to assassinate Fidel Castro.
What follows is an extension of that scenario and an analysis of how it might have involved the recruitment of French Corsican assassins through the Mafia in Marseilles, France.
Also to be discussed are allegations that part of the assassination team was recruited from the radical French OAS organization that had been involved in plots to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.
These terrorists opposed Kennedy because of his long-standing support for a free Algeria.
The first conclusive evidence of CIA plots to assassinate foreign leaders was ina November 20, 1975 report by the Senate Select Committee which was studying governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities; the committee, more commonly known as the Church Committee, was headed by Senator Frank Church.
This report drew extensively on a 1967 report by the CIA inspector general on CIA plots against Fidel Castro.
It was not until January 8, 1994 that the complete inspector general’s report became public by release from the National Archives.
Going into Business It was probably in 1959, or at the latest 1960, that the Executive Branch of the United States government, using the CIA as its instrument, decided to go into the business of murdering foreign leaders.
The main subject of concern at that time was Patrice Lumumba of the Belgian Congo, who was considered to be dangerously leading that country into communism.
Having experienced the fall of Cuba to communism and Fidel Castro, the Eisenhower administration, the military, and the CIA were gravely concerned that many more Third World countries would follow.
Whether or not President Eisenhower specifically ordered Patrice Lamumba to be executed is not clear, but it seems certain that he knew about the plans.
In these discussions, it is important to keep in mind that use of “plausible deniability” greatly affects an understanding of how it would be possible for rogue elements of the CIA to take it upon themselves to assassinate the president of the United States.
Prevalent throughout CIA documents are the use of plausible-deniability terms, such as “get rid of Castro,” “do something drastic about this man,” “eliminate that person,” etc., which could later be said to have meant something other than actual murder.
Operatives within the CIA would not even tell their superiors specifically what they were doing, and they would employ such potentially misleading terminology even with their subordinates and assassin squads.
This worked all the way to the top of the CIA, where even the director would not be told what was going on in certain clandestine operations.
And if presidents were involved in such activities, it would have been discussed on a one-to-one basis, with nothing in writing between Allen Dulles and the president.
This form of plausible deniability has been used throughout history by heads of state and crime chieftains when ordering executions.
A simple utterance of a code phrase or nod of the head or lift of a finger would be sufficient for the underlings to do their work.
It seems reasonable that Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover could have been involved in the plot in a similar, deliberate manner without their knowing the details of the plot.
They would know only that it was going to happen and be given only the briefest outline of what their potential roles could become in the event certain items needed to be covered up.
The subprograms also included the development of knowledge on crowd reactions to events in motorcades, and mass psychological control of entire populations.
More sinister yet, a massive project was undertaken to develop programmed assassins using hypnosis and drugs and other mind-control techniques.
Bissell and Edwards both expressed the belief that Dulles authorized the initial phase of the assassination plot involving underworld figures.
They acknowledged, however, that Dulles were not told about the plot until after the underworld figures had been contacted.
The words said to have been used to brief them—‘an intelligence operation’—do not convey on their face that the plot involved assassination, although Bissell and Edwards insist the real meaning must have been understood.
There is some other evidence which can be said both to suggest that Dulles and Cabell did know and to suggest that they did not know.
HSCA Also, Allen Dulles was the one who first proposed massive experimentation in mind control using, among other things, LSD and hypnosis (sometimes on unwitting subjects) for creation of the “Manchurian Candidates” or patsies.
It seems beyond a doubt that Allen Dulles should be viewed in history as the man who, more than anyone else, was responsible for the conception and implementation of these two programs that pushed the United States over the brink into despicable criminal activity of the worst sort.
One of the theses of this book is that unintended consequences of these criminal programs resulted in the assassination of John F Kennedy.
I found it useful to prepare a chronological list of the major political assassination plots in the 1960s.
Note: The use of the word “sponsor” in the following chronological list is not intended to imply at this point in our narrative that agents of the CIA actually pulled the trigger or performed the murders.
But it does imply that the CIA was behind and supportive of the plots, and decisively aided in their conception, promotion, and execution.
United States Targeted Individual: Presidential candidate Robert F Kennedy Results: Killed by gunfire Primary Date/Sponsor: October 25, 1970 Country: Chile Targeted Individual: Gen’| Rene Schneider (in a botched attempt to block Salvador Allende from attaining the presidency) Results: Killed by gunfire I noted it interesting that all of the known successful assassinations in this list were accomplished by gunfire.
The first two attempts that used poisons or toxins did not work, primarily due to inability to deliver them.
This might counter the assertions of many that if the CIA had wanted to kill John Kennedy, it could have poisoned him, or blown up his limousine; that never would gunfire have been used.
One answer could be that only gunfire had worked in their previous plots.
I also noted that the assassinations of John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Martin Luther King, Jr., all occurred under the reigns of J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson, and that Robert Kennedy’s and Martin Luther King, Jr.’s assassinations occurred in rapid succession in 1968 when it became apparent that Robert Kennedy would likely capture the presidency; and they occurred before Johnson left office.
Also, because of King’s agressive campaign to get the United States out of Vietnam and his promotion of racial integration, the extreme right wing had motives.
Less obvious was LBJ’s motive to have King killed, because he was leaving office.
Also less obvious was the Mafia’s motive, other than that Carlos Marcello was a racist.
The committee gathered evidence indicating that WI/ROGUE was a soldier of fortune and a criminal.
The CIA sent him to the Congo after providing him with plastic surgery and a toupee so that Europeans traveling in the Congo would not recognize him.
He is indeed aware of the precepts of right and wrong, but if he is given an assignment which may be morally wrong in the eyes of the world, but necessary because his case officer ordered him to carry it out, then it is right, and he will dutifully undertake appropriate action for its execution without pangs of conscience.
For the purpose of ZRRIFLE activities, you are hereby authorized to retain the services of Principal Agent QJWIN and such other principal agents and sub-agents as may be required.
This authorization will continue to be in force through 31 December 1962, subject to renewal at that time.
As established by contract with him, QJWIN’s salary will be $7,200 per annum.
Accounting for the expenses of QJWIN and other agents involved in this activity will be in the form of receipts for funds received by them, and these receipts will be retained in the ZRRIFLE covert operational file.
Because of the sensitive nature of this activity, accounting for funds will be by general category and by your certification.
In addition to the salary established for QJWIN, you are authorized the expenditure of $7,500 through 31 December 1962.
This memorandum is to be considered in lieu of project and constitutes authorization for all travel, per diem, operational and other expenses.
According to CIA documents, QJ/WIN’s relationship with the CIA lasted six years.
He was terminated on February 14, 1964, about three months after John Kennedy was assassinated.
DISPATCH TO: Chief ATTN: FROM: Chief of Station SUBJECT: QJWIN Termination 14 February 1964 1.
QJWIN has been terminated. told him on 21 April that the operation in which he was to play a role had been shelved and therefore his contract, which ran out on 29 February, was not renewed.
He was reassured that this action did not result from anything he had done and his past cooperation was appreciated.
It was mentioned as conceivable that the operation might have been off and running if he had been able to establish his cover last year.
QJWIN accepted the reason for termination and said he would always be available, if he could be of any assistance.
In discussing his future, suggested, now that he has received all the necessary authorizations for doing business in Germany, he seriously consider going ahead with the venture in Cologne.
His only hesitation is in committing himself to a long lease on a shop.
Since January 1962 , QJWIN’s only assignment has been to establish cover.
This requirement was confirmed by DIR-12541 of 28 May 1963 and during ’s discussions in headquarters in July 1962, 27 months and some $18,000 later, he is still not in place, although made an issue of this with him in August 1963.
Whether he ever really intended to commit himself to this assignment remains a question. has strong doubts.
QJWIN’s personal history reflects major instability and the habit of hedging his bets is undoubtedly part of his character.
There is nothing to indicate that he has discussed his KUBARK relationship with anyone except, perhaps, his wife.
QJWIN knows the telephone number of the station’s outside phone, but this phone is being dismantled in October of this year.
In either case, there appears to be no question that QJ/WIN was a key element—a most important CIA operative—who could have been either involved in or knowledgeable of the Kennedy assassination plot.
I decided to develop a description of QJ/WIN, as detailed as available information permitted, and see where it would lead.
Harvey’s Notes for Concept of ZR/RIFLE Upon receiving his assignment to develop and implement assassination capability for the CIA, William Harvey sat down with a note pad and outlined the design of the project—its objectives, personnel, security provisions, etc.
He outlined his thoughts concerning how to recruit outside professional assassins and what their qualifications should be.
They show the workings of the fertile, logical mind of one of our nation’s master spies in designing the program that may have been co-opted later to assassinate John F Kennedy.
Although the notes are undated, most likely they were written sometime in 1962 because they mention that QJ/WIN was already under a written CIA contract.
Inasmuch as this contract was apparently authorized on February 19, 1962, it seems safe to conclude the notes were made after that date.
As early as 1960, QJ/WIN’s expenses were being paid by the CIA through William Harvey.
The notes state that QJ/WIN was first contacted in 1958 through the Bureau of Narcotics.
This leads to suspicion that the Bureau of Narcotics and the CIA were very close in nefarious joint-venture, covert operations during this period, including the mind-control program.
Numerous CIA documents show that Harvey was involved with QJ/WIN and was involved in recruiting spies or assassins in the early 1960s, before the February 19, 1962 contract.
In any event, the notes clearly lay out the beginning concept of the CIA’s assassination programs, whether or not the notes were written in 1962.
These are strikingly parallel to the three phases of the JFK assassination plot postulated in Chapter 8, The Mastermind.
Also, note “Corsicans recommended” presages what, it can be deduced, actually occurred in Dallas, based on French intelligence and FBI reports. bce a pees bald os aa Pee for ———} > 4.
Other miscellaneous notes regarding expense disbursements and interviews by Harvey have been found and could be the balance of the forty-three pages, but that is not certain since the pages are unnumbered.
Nevertheless, it seemed that the notes could yield invaluable clues if analyzed in detail.
What follows is a composite of the first nine pages of Harvey’s notes that were found in five different files in the National Archives and then pieced together.
These notes are a result of many hours of searching, followed by painstaking analysis over a period of two years.
They include the latest and most complete copy of Harvey’s notes which were released from the National Archives on April 25, 1995.
Agents will be spotted in several areas, including the United States, but for operational security reasons will probably not be used in their countries of residence.
Present developmental activity is being conducted in the WE and EE areas, but it is anticipated that this will be extended to other division areas.
The project will be operated against third-country installations and personnel.
The following statement of “objective” was obviously written by Harvey to conceal the true nature of the project.
There is no doubt that these notes are for Project ZR/RIFLE and for assassinations.
Since these requirements are subject to frequent revision, no listing of targets would be valid for the duration of the project.
Specific operations will be mounted on the basis of need and opportunity.
The project will be conducted by Division D with assistance from area divisions and stations as needed.
In response to the increasing requirements for the operational procurement of freight code and cipher materials, Division D in 1960 began the spotting of agent assets as a developmental activity.
During the same period requirements from NSA became more refined and, in many respects, more sensitive.
Because most stations are not equipped to conduct this type of operation and because of the desirability of completely centralized control over this entire effort, it was determined that Division D, which is in closest touch with NSA on procurement requirements, could best conduct the activity.
The spotting activity has now advanced far enough to justify removing from the DDA category.
Personnel: QJWIN is under written contract as a principal agent, with the primary task of spotting agent candidates.
QJWIN was first contacted in 1958 through the Chief of the Luxembourg I.S. by the Chief of Station, Luxembourg, in connection with an illegal narcotics operation into the United States.
For a period of a year and a half he was contracted sporadically by COS [Chief of Station] Luxembourg, in behalf of the Bureau of Narcotics.
Within Kubark, one focal point for control, search, tracing, case officering, etc.
Max. security for only; no or traces; possibilities of one man No PA’s or intermediaries; rigid case officering from start to finish.
No use of any agent who has worked for a United States government agency.
Kubark/D . no discussion in stations,e. no “steam” until ready to go 4) Blackmail: No American citizens or or people who have obtained United States visas.
Planning should include provisions for blaming Soviets or Czechs in case of blow.
Use of case officers who can pass as foreigners—and limited official reference.
Aside from the obvious significance of the totality of these notes, what we see here is a master plan which has in it the key elements of the JFK assassination plot.
A key element of the plan was “non-attributability” with maximum project security.
Within the CIA only “one focal point” was recommended for control, search, training, case officering, etc.
This indicates that there would be a project manager similar to the one I hypothesized in Chapter 8, The Mastermind.
This strikes a ring of familiarity to the advanced disinformation plans for setting up Oswald so as to blame the Soviets or the Cubans; again, this is similar to my hypothesis.
We must realize that any files we have looked at or any files we find in the future may very well be phony files with forged documents in them.
Note also that he rules out recruitment from Sicilians for fear that Sicilian agents would lead to the Mafia.
This seems to have special significance because Harvey obviously is attempting to shield the Mafia from being discovered in their plots.
It is very significant that the recruitment of French Corsicans is what actually appears to have happened based on documents received from French intelligence, FBI documents, and other documents that will presently be discussed.
Thus we have evidence of the French connection which would later materialize in the form of French OAS members and French Corsican organized crime assassins.
Again, this is similar to my hypothesis in Chapter 8, in which the “mastermind” spoke of bringing professional assassins of foreign origin into the conspiracy.
These requirements, if met, indicate that a very high standard of competence and a unique balance of ruthlessness and stable personality would be the makeup of the assassins.
Also shown on this diagram is the major cast of characters involved in this bizarre story.
Some of the evidence supporting the diagram has already been presented.
This diagram shows linkages; it is not offered as evidence of a conspiracy among all these individuals and organizations.
It was first discovered by Mary Ferrell, veteran assassination researcher.
He was in Fort Worth on morning of 22 November and in Dallas in the afternoon.
In January he received mail from a dentist named Alderson living at 5803 Birmingham, Houston, Texas.
The French are concerned because of de Gaulle’s planned visit to Mexico.
They would like to know the reason for his expulsion from the United States and his destination.
They would like a check of our files with indications of what may be passed to French.
Upon the FBI’s receipt of this information (received from the French; therefore, the FBI was not in a position to suppress it), the FBI contacted Dr.
Alderson said he had not seen the Frenchman since serving as a security officer with him shortly after World War II when he was working for the CIA at the time.
From what I can gather, he was in the French underground movement in Algiers.
In France, you don’t have a thing if you’re from a poor family unless you have a military career behind you.
So, he was very interested in his career and this is why I never did really understand why he left it.
She was a well-to-do, beautiful woman from a Southern France wine family.
The last I heard from her, she was the one who told me that he had left the French Army and had gone underground trying to save Algeria.
So, evidently, he was rather committed, or felt committed, to leave his career, which was the only career he had.
The last contact I had with the CIA was in France when I was working for him.
So, the only contact I had in this country was with the pp ool Alderson described Souetre as having been about twenty-five years old in the early 1950s and speaking English, Spanish, and German without an accent.
He said that Souetre knew many French politicians and described him as a political activist of the radical right, neo-Nazi persuasion.
And he became a military/political activist in Algeria, greatly agitated at the prospect of a Moslem Algeria, as opposed to a French Algeria.
According to a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit filed by Bernard Fensterwald, Jr., Souetre became head of the OAS in the South Zone of Algeria in June-July 1963.
In August, a large number of OAS groups merged to form the “Armée Nationale Secrete,” which had representatives in Canada, New Orleans, and Latin America.
In 1982, Souetre was director of Casino at Dironne les Bains on the French side of the Swiss/France border.
He suggested that the person there may have been Mertz using Souetre’s name.
Thus we have evidence of a French soldier of fortune, who called himself Jean Souetre (a.k.a.
Michel Roux), who was a member of a right-wing French militant group, being in Dallas on November 22, and then three persons, all with the name of Mertz, flying on November 23 from Houston to Mexico City.
The exception here is that it was a John Mertz instead of a Michel Mertz.
If this isn’t complicated enough, there was also a Michel Roux visiting the Dallas-Fort Worth area at the time of the assassination.
The FBI ostensibly came up with his name when looking for Souetre and his aliases on behalf of the French.
Michel Roux was a deserter from the French Army after three years of service.
The reason for Roux being in the Dallas-Fort Worth area on this unique date in history is somewhat curious.
According to the FBI, Roux was a room clerk in a hotel in Paris where he met two American tourists who, for some strange reason, invited him to come to Fort Worth.
He then took a bus to Houston and called his kind acquaintances and told them he was in the country and would like to see them.
The incredible Texans drove over to Houston, picked him up, and took him back to Fort Worth; then they took him to a hotel, the Fox Manor, where he stayed during his visit.
This would be Roux’s alibi if it could be confirmed through the mysterious friends in Fort Worth.
He stayed in Mexico City for a short period while obtaining a visa and then returned to France from Laredo, Texas, on December 6, 1963.
At the time, he had no visible means of support, no auto, no driver’s license, and rarely left his apartment.
How Roux, the lowly room clerk, financed and arranged his trip to Texas and Mexico, and became wealthy enough to return in luxury in 1982, remains a mystery.
He would have been about forty-three years old at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
Mertz spoke almost perfect English, German, and Spanish, as well as French.
His exploits have been recorded in a number of books and magazine articles.
Mertz married Paula Scheller Martel, the adopted daughter of Charles Martel, operator of the famous bordello in Paris by the name of The Sphinx.
This was Mertz’s introduction into the underworld of France and Canada.
Mertz became actively engaged in both espionage and the smuggling of narcotics on a large scale from France to both the United States and Canada.
By 1960, Mertz was one of a number of Frenchmen who had both French spy agency and narcotics connections.
He was sent to Algeria as a reserve captain and pretended to be an OAS sympathizer.
He learned of plots to assassinate Charles de Gaulle and is credited with having saved de Gaulle’s life.
Between 1961 and 1969, Mertz and his colleagues were alleged to have moved two tons of heroin across the North Atlantic.
He was closely associated with well-known French gangsters, including Christian David and other French gangsters connected to the Guerin organization in Marseilles.
Of special significance, Mertz was also closely connected with the Trafficante organization in Florida.
Mertz was considered an “untouchable” in France because of his SDECE and Gaulleist connections.
However, Mertz was arrested in 1969 for his drugsmuggling operations and in 1971 was convicted and sentenced to five years in prison.
As noted above, one of Mertz’s contacts in both heroin smuggling and French intelligence was a man named Christian David.
It was Christian David who would tell a remarkable story concerning the Kennedy assassination, perhaps revealing the identity of the assassins at Dealey Plaza.
Christian David was arrested in Brazil in 1972 and charged with being a member of a smuggling ring that had imported more than one thousand pounds of heroin into the United States over a three-year period.
After his arrest in Brazil, David was extradited to the United States and sentenced to twenty years in prison.
He was nearing the end of his prison term in 1985 when he was interviewed by a California writer, Stephen J Rivele, to whom he told his story; David was fifty-eight years old at the time of the first interview.
Rivele’s research plunged him deep into the history of the CIA’s collaboration with organized crime and drug traffickers.
Jean Souetre , also known as Michel Mertz and Michel Roux, both actual people.
The FBI reported that Souetre, or someone using his name, was in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Souetre had contact with an anti-Castro group in New Orleans in 1963 and met in Dallas with General Edwin Walker in April 1963.
He was also at a meeting in April 1963 in Madrid, Spain, with E Howard Hunt.
In 1983 Souetre denied being in Dallas on November 22, 1963, saying it may have been Michael Mertz, using his name.
David had been a member of the French Connection network and the leader of the Corsican network in South America known as the Latin Connection.
The purpose of that group was to fight the right-wing terrorists in Algeria.
A former French OAS officer claims that David’s victims ran to fifty-four.
After Algeria was granted independence, Christian David returned to organized crime.
David was a wealthy fashion plate and became a household ; name in France.
When Rivele first interviewed David, David was awaiting extradition to France to stand trial for murdering a policeman in connection with the murder of Mohammed Ben Barka, the Moroccan politician.
David told Rivele that he had information on the Kennedy assassination, in return for which he wanted a deal with the United States government that would block his extradition to France.
But when the federal government found out, it got the judge to lift his stay of extradition, and David was flown to Paris.
In prison there since 1985, he was interviewed repeatedly by Rivele, as well as by Lesar.
Lesar provided me with copies from the Assassination Archives of Rivele’s correspondence with him in which Rivele transmitted his notes of his interviews with Christian David.
In May or June of 1963 he was offered a contract by Antoine Guerini, the Corsican crime boss in Marseilles, to accept a contract to kill “a highly placed American politician” whom Guerini called the “biggest vegetable” —1.e., President Kennedy.
David told Rivele that he turned down the contract because it was too dangerous.
When English intelligence officers were parachuted into the Marseilles area they were hidden in the cellars of Guerini’s night clubs.
His younger brother Barthelmy was later awarded the Legion of Honor for his wartime exploits.
David said he learned what happened about two years after the assassination in a meeting in Buenos Aires during which Sarti, another drug trafficker named Michele Nicoli, David, and two others were present.
This is how the assassination was carried out as David told it to Rivele.
First Meeting of Rivele with Christian David, January 15, 1986 Met in private room with David for two hours.
Gave him letter from Congressman Dellums asking for information, explained that we might make a deal with the House Intelligence Committee if David gave me specific, verifiable details about the assassination.
However, after prodding he did confirm that the Lucien he had referred to as having accepted the contract on JFK was Lucien Sarti, as we had thought.
Said that about two weeks before the assassination, Sarti flew from France to Mexico City, from where he drove or was driven to the United States border at Brownsville, Texas.
Sarti crossed at Brownsville where he was picked up by someone from the Chicago mafia jaz This person drove him to a private house in Dallas.
David believes that Sarti was traveling on an Italian passport, and that he spoke to his driver in Italian.
Did admit that he was working for the CIA in Congo in 1960-61, to kill Lumumba.
Admits he discussed intelligence network with a man in a hotel in Leopoldville but would not say who initiated conversation.
Says CIA tried to kill him in South America in 1972, killed Sarti in Mexico.
Said Dan Mitrione, killed by the Tupamaros, was in contact with him, had his name on a list and warned him several times to stay in line.
Repeated that everyone who has expressed knowledge of the assassination has been killed, and he will be killed if he goes back to the United States to testify.
I began to have the impression that he meant he would implicate himself.
Denied that his appearance had ever been changed surgically, though claims all photos of him are faked.
Gave me the impression that the photo was not authentic, or did not truly resemble Sarti.
Said CIA manipulated Oswald and him in the same way, and would be killed in same way if he is not careful.
Third Meeting of Rivele with David, January 17, 1986 David’s lawyer had been to see him that morning to tell him that the government was going to try to have him committed.
Sarti stayed in Mexico several weeks before going to United States but not more than a month.
He corrected himself, saying not the bridge but that there was a little hill next to the bridge, there was a wooden fence on that hill, and Sarti fired from behind the wooden fence.
He said there was somebody in an office building but could not remember where it was.
Said they cased Dealey Plaza, took photographs and worked out mathematically how to set up crossfire.
Could not remember how much heroin Sarti was paid, that Sarti was not in drug trade at the time, but heroin was the liquid currency of the time.
Said that Antoine Guerini was only the intermediary between Sarti and the Chicago mafia, that once he had put them in touch he withdrew from the affair.
Would not say how they got to and from Dealey Plaza, or comment on photo of Frenchy.
At the end of the conversation, in discussing Sarti, he mentioned that you can shoot better with one eye than with two; that when you have only one eye you are a better shot than someone with two eyes.
Said there was no comparison since you’re not distracted by the sight in the other eye.
This recalled the France Soir article which said that Sarti had lost the sight in his left eye in a car accident.
Fourth Meeting of Rivele with David, January 18, 1986 Met with David for an hour.
Said in response to my question that he thinks Antoine Guerini was involved in plots against Castro.
Knew Otto Skorzeny as a Nazi, did not want to say how he knew him but said he never worked together with him.
Said people who picked up Sarti in Brownsville were from the city of Chicago as opposed to Chicago area.
Said Sarti moved several times on his way from Mexico City to United States and wasn’t in Mexico City very long.
He said such a man shoots faster and more accurately than one with two eyes.
Said he frequently went hunting with Sarti who always shot better than he.
I showed him an aerial photo of Dealey Plaza and asked him to point out where Sarti shot from.
He repeated that Sarti fired from the front, that he was not in a building.
Said Sarti wanted to be on the bridge but it was guarded so he had to move down towards the hill.
Said you can’t understand the wounds if you don’t realize that one gun was low, “almost on the horizontal” as he said several times.
Refused to comment on whether Nicoli was involved in plot, but also refused to deny that he was.
Insists that Sarti was assassinated, no reason for the Mexican police to kill Sarti.
Said that Antoine Guerini was very careful about whom he hired for the affair.
Refused to say who the other two gunmen were or to give me their nationalities.
In speaking of Sarti, David said that Sarti was not a friend of his, that they worked together but he would not have chosen Sarti as a friend.
When I asked what he replied that there were only two reasons why you killed someone, either to save yourself or to save a friend.
Evidently he was forced to jeopardize himself several times to get Sarti out of jams.
He said, no, that’s something entirely different and he would explain it to me later on.
Fifth Meeting of Rivele with David, January 25 Refused to answer any questions.
Said there were documents, statements made under torture which proved he was telling truth.
Refused for the dozenth time to tell me his brother’s name or what hospital he is in.
Asked if he could name others who knew about the assassination who had been killed to prevent them talking.
Sixth Meeting of Rivele with David Met with David in company of Jim and Dan Alcorn.
Refused to answer questions, refused to give information before he was released.
Said anything he said about assassination might be used to have him committed.
His Marseille lawyer had seen him the day previously and told him not to cooperate with us as he would soon be getting out of jail.
He will write down the essentials of what he knows about the assassination and give it to a Corsican lawyer of his acquaintance.
The lawyer will retain this information and contact Jim to confirm that it is what David promised.
In return Jim and Dan will appeal on David’s behalf to the Court of the Hague.
If they are instrumental in getting David out, they get the information.
If David gets out otherwise, he will sell the information and give the money to his family.
Said he will write down what he knows about the Congo separately and give it also the lawyer.
Said he would soon be getting out, or if not would be put under psychiatric observation for a few months and then released.
Said all three gunmen had living relatives who would revenge them if he told, and that they would trace the information back to him.
Said only Sarti had an explosive bullet and only Sarti was paid in heroin.
Said find out who Sarti’s contacts in United States were and I will know who was involved.
Jim and Dan joined us late afternoon and firmed up details of the agreement.
It is conceivable to me that he was not involved in the actual assassination, but the nature of what he has said suggests that he was.
Frankly, I think it likely that he will not survive for another year, unless he is freed.
I accept the idea that Sarti was the man on the grassy knoll, and it strikes me as quite possible that Nicoli was another of the gunmen.
Asked who could corroborate his story, David suggested that Rivele locate Michele Nicoli, who had been with the group in Buenos Aires in 1965 when the assassination was discussed.
Rivele ultimately made contact with Nicoli after a lengthy search in North and South America.
He was aided in the search by Michael Tobin, a high-level official in the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Nicoli, who testified against French Connection members in 1972, was living under the Witness Protection Program, using a new name.
The DEA official vouched for Nicol1’s truthfulness in the strongest terms, saying that he had proven himself to be one of the most reliable witnesses over the years that the DEA had experienced.
Riveles contacts with Nicoli took place over many months, and he proved extremely reluctant to talk.
In the end, however, he told both Rivele and Tobin essentially the same story as had David.
Nicoli told Rivele that the Mafia in the United States had hired Sarti.
Later, Nicoli was interviewed on a BBC television program and repeated his confirmation of David’s story.
As far as could be ascertained, Nicoli and David had not been in touch with each other since the early seventies.
By 1987, DEA official Tobin was satisfied that the matter should be pursued.
And he formally notified his superiors that he wanted to conduct a grand jury investigation drawing on Nicoli’s statements.
After receiving death threats, he lived incognito in California until recent years.
When I talked with Jim Lesar in Washington, D.C., in 1993, he said that Christian David was still alive and in prison.
Kk We can now go to a connection between QJ/WIN and a young adventurer and thief by the name of Thomas Eli Davis III, who was from a respected family in Beaumont, Texas.
Ruby said that Davis had first approached him about using some of Ruby’s strippers in pornographic movies, but later the two had become involved in gunrunning activities #4 Davis was in North Africa at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
But he was jailed in Tangier in connection with the Kennedy assassination.
According to correspondence between J Edgar Hoover and the State Department, Moroccan security police arrested Davis because of a letter in his handwriting which referred in passing bho kets) a wae 2 to Oswald and the Kennedy assassination.
Ze In early 1963, Davis had contact with anti-Castro Cubans as confirmed by his wife and family.
Davis admitted to reporter George Carter that he used the name Oswald while in North Africa.
But Davis’s story was never told because it was not investigated by the Warren Commission or by the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
In September 1973, Davis was electrocuted when he cut into a 7,000-volt power line while attempting ; po oy hood] to steal copper wire from a construction site.
Going back to Jean Souetre, there is important information that links him to right-wing extremists General Edwin Walker and General Charles Willoughby, as well as to CIA officer E Howard Hunt and anti-Castroites in New Orleans.
Hunt in Dallas, and the John Birch Society, sponsors of the infamous blackborder ads vilifying Kennedy.
Le Cavelier found that Jean Souetre traveled widely in Latin America and the Caribbean between 1962 and 1971.
Souetre’s official residence was Madrid, which under the Fascist dictatorship of Franco was a center for the international right wing—including, as we have seen, a site of occasional visits by General Charles Willoughby.
Hunt, as noted earlier, was then Tracy Barnes’s clandestine-affairs chief in the CIA’s Domestic Operations Division.
Also at the meeting, Le Cavelier continued, were OAS Intelligence Director Jean Claude Perez and several Hungarians looking to expand the global anti-Communist network.
Several of those present proceeded “in the direction of the Caribbean, then towards New Orleans.
Bringuier, of course, was the exile whom Oswald also encountered in the summer of 1963.
That was Guy Banister’s office, and the address stamped on Oswald’s Fair Play for Cuba literature.
First, the employment of French Corsican assassins was planned by Harvey; and evidence shows that French Corsicans were in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and that they were professional assassins.
Third, Harvey was very specific in recruiting only top professional assassins from outside the country.
Fourth, Harvey specified rigid controls to keep plots limited to a few participants with strict rules of conversation and no paper trail.
However, there is enough information available to form the basis of a major project in that regard which some future researcher could fruitfully undertake.
In any event, there is no doubt that the CIA contracted with agents who had the cryptonyms WI/ROGUE and QJ/WIN and that these agents were professional assassins, and that they were either French Corsicans themselves or French or Europeans who recruited French Corsicans.
Christian David told Steve Rivele that he was approached by Antoine Guerini, Mafia chieftain in Marseilles, to perform a hit contract on John Kennedy.
David said that he turned it down, but the contract was later accepted by Lucien Sarti and two unnamed accomplices.
Sarti and his two accomplices were French Corsicans connected with the Mafia in Marseille.
David’s statements were confirmed by Michelle Nicoli, who was considered to be a very reliable witness by the United States Drug Enforcement Agency.
Sarti was the gunman behind the picket fence; he was aided by two other Corsican assassins.
The three assassins had met in Mexico City and crossed the United States Mexican border where they were met and handled by the Chicago Mafia.
A further indication that Christian David was telling the truth is that he said that he met Lucien Sarti in the Belgian Congo in 1960.
CIA documents confirm that both WI/ROGUE and QJ/WIN were in the Belgian Congo in 1960, in connection with the assassination of Patrice Lumumba.
This links David in CIA assassination operations that were assisted by QJ/WIN under the direction of William Harvey.
Christian David stated that he was an associate of Michael Mertz in heroin trafficking.
QJ/WIN helped Thomas Eli Davis get out of jail shortly after the Kennedy assassination when he was arrested while using Oswald’s name in North Africa.
Thomas Eli Davis was in New Orleans in the summer of 1963 while Oswald was there, and Davis had been involved with Jack Ruby in Dallas in gunrunning activities related to Cuba.
French intelligence documents and FBI documents show that a man calling himself Jean Souetre was in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Souetre was a French OAS terrorist and hated Kennedy because of Kennedy’s support of a free Algeria.
FBI documents show that both Michel Mertz and Michel Roux were in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
A French intelligence source states that Jean Souetre had connections to E Howard Hunt, General Walker, and General Willoughby.
This was the address of Guy Banister’s office and the address on Oswald’s leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
There is a linkage between all of these characters which encompasses operations in New Orleans, Dallas, the Caribbean, Cuban exiles, right-wing extremists, the CIA, French terrorists, Jack Ruby, Oswald, Guy Banister, and on in a complete circle.
It seems unreasonable to conclude that all of this is just coincidence.
What we probably are looking at here is a matrix of the execution and cover-up phases of the Kennedy assassination.
In brief, the evidence in this chapter strongly suggests that the assassins at Dealey Plaza were originally identified and checked out by the CIA through the ZR/RIFLE project to assassinate foreign leaders of Third World countries, but once this capability was developed it was used to assassinate John F Kennedy.
This does not necessarily mean that the CIA was behind the Kennedy assassination.
But it does leave open the possibility that rogue elements, or ex-employees of the CIA, or an outside cabal of plotters, found it convenient, with Mafia cohorts, to hire the same killers they had come to know in ZR/RIFLE and use the same covert methods.
In particular, I will examine a further chain of evidence suggesting that William Harvey, Johnny Rosselli, and CIA operatives managed the execution phase of the assassination.
I will also examine the possible roles of right-wing extremists in Dallas, New Orleans, and Europe.
In the long run, the actual identity of the gunmen at Dealey Plaza may not be of great importance; they were hired guns.
The most significant finding here is that there were four or five individuals in Dallas at the time of the assassination who were terrorists, murderers, drug smugglers; connected with organized crime, the CIA, and its assassination programs; and, moreover, connected to right-wing extremists in Dallas, New Orleans, and Miami.
The evidence strongly indicates that a covert assassination capability developed by the United States could have been turned against the very core of our constitutional government.
KKK Epilogue The importance of Christian David having known Dan Mitrione— and having been warned by him that if he talked he would be killed—was pointed out to me by Gaeton Fonzi in Fort Lauderdale in October 1996 when he and I were there to interview Gerald Patrick Hemming.
I had sent this chapter for Fonzi’s review months before, and he had finally noticed Christian David’s reference to Dan Mitrione.
It struck Fonzi that this was very important inasmuch as it was corroborative of Christian David’s statements, by virtue of the fact that it placed David into a network including David Sanchez Morales, the CIA assassination specialist who worked for William Harvey.
The fact that Dan Mitrione was warning Christian David that he would be killed if he talked lends even more credence to his story, and to the story of David Sanchez Morales, which will be reported in the chapter immediately following.
Here we have strong linkages between Christian David, David Sanchez Morales, and the Guerini mob in France.
This, we shall see, leads to William Harvey and Johnny Rosselli, and the assassination of President Kennedy.
KKK I watched the Academy Award ceremonies on television in March 1996, and to my surprise saw that Steve Rivele had received an Academy Award nomination for best screenplay for Oliver Stone’s film, Nixon.
What a difference, I thought; Rivele had graduated from plodding around Europe, risking his life looking for QJ/WIN and WI/ROGUE, then going into hiding after receiving death threats, and now was a celebrity.
It takes an even greater leap into fantasy to believe that Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone nut.
Yet, despite all the substantive and overwhelming evidence confirming Oswald’s association with the CIA, as well as his contacts with a number of Agency assets, the CIA still officially denies that it has any relationship at all with Oswald.
Moreover, it fosters and deliberately maintains the issue as a matter of public debate.
Gaeton Fonzi Former Investigator for the HSCA and the Church Committee 21 THE CUBAN OBSESSION In previous chapters we saw how the CIA’s program to assassinate foreign leaders may have been turned against our constitutional government, and how the personnel and capabilities developed for that program may have been utilized to carry out the assassination of John Kennedy.
We saw evidence that CIA’s William Harvey planned the use of French Corsicans as assassins in his ZR/RIFLE program, and evidence that French Corsican assassins, recruited by the Mafia, were in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
We saw evidence that basic documents related to the crime were altered or suppressed by the Dallas police with the cooperation of the FBI, or vice versa.
We saw that the FBI, in cooperation with the CIA and the White House, suppressed evidence of a conspiracy to set up Oswald in Mexico City.
We saw evidence that Kennedy’s body was literally stolen from Air Force One and modified before it was delivered to the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
We saw evidence that the autopsy and x-rays were altered to conceal the true nature of Kennedy’s wounds.
We saw evidence that the brain examined after the autopsy was not Kennedy’s brain.
It is clearly evident to me that a massive cover-up, directed by people in the United States government, was underway before Air Force One left Dallas on November 22, 1963, only two hours and seventeen minutes after the fatal shots, but it is not clear who masterminded the conspiracy; nor is it clear who organized it, planned it, and directed the intricate operations.
In this chapter, and the chapters that follow, we will continue to struggle with these central questions.
Looking over this evidence of conspiracy, it appeared that a most fruitful area for further study might be the CIA’s antiCastro operation in Miami and its relation with the Mafia.
Perhaps by studying that milieu, additional keys to the puzzle would be found.
The prime cast of characters in this chapter includes the CIA’s William Harvey, who, as earlier stated, loathed the Kennedys.
It includes mobster Johnny Rosselli, who was closely involved in the same operations with Harvey.
And a most important character to be studied will be a CIA assassination specialist by the name of David Sanchez Morales, who was David Atlee Phillips’ number-one “executive action” man in covert operations over the years.
You may recall that David Atlee Phillips, also known as Maurice Bishop, was the man who met with Oswald in Dallas in September 1963 and who went to great extremes to conceal the truth of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City.
In Chapter 8, The Mastermind, | speculated that there must have been a single person, a project manager, who planned the assassination.
According to Gaeton Fonzi, and supported by CIA documents, staff members in the closing stages of the HSCA investigation in 1976 felt that person was William Harvey.
As I delved deeper into this story, Harvey loomed more and more as a central figure.
William King Harvey I went to Washington, D.C., and searched the Assassination Archives, and had Anna Marie search the National Archives.
I went through every book that I could find on the CIA and the JFK assassination, and was able to put together the following sketch of this outlandish and confounding man.
William Harvey had a long and flamboyant career as a central figure in high-level CIA covert operations.
It was Harvey who uncovered Guy Burgess and Donald McLean as British agents in Washington, D.C., working for the Soviet Union.
Harvey also uncovered Kim Philby as the “third man” when Burgess and McLean defected to the Soviet Union.
Harvey was responsible for masterminding the construction of a twenty-five-foot-deep tunnel between West Berlin and East Berlin, working in conjunction with British intelligence.
This tunnel provided access to underground communication lines connecting Moscow with Berlin.
Harvey had a brilliant photographic mind, an incredible memory for things in which he was involved.
Harvey’s briefings would last for hours, all recited from memory of his files.
His capacity for planning and carrying out intricate master schemes of a covert, illegal nature was legendary.
He would frequently place his two guns on his desk or point them at subordinates to make a point.
Once, in a meeting with CIA photo analyst Dino Brugion, Harvey held in his hand a foot-long stiletto.
He cleaned his nails with the stiletto and then threw it at a target on his office wall.
Allen Dulles once described Harvey as a conspirator or a cop, but he didn’t know which.
Harvey took his orders from Special Group , which was chaired by General Maxwell Taylor and augmented by Robert Kennedy.
The president’s brother treated Harvey with utter contempt; he browbeat Harvey and his aides relentlessly.
Harvey was the antithesis of the sleek sophistication of the Ivy League types admired by the Kennedys.
Two minutes later, while Harvey was still talking, Kennedy got up and walked out of the room.
Robert Kennedy took things into his own hands; he bypassed Harvey, dealing directly with CIA and anti-Castro operatives.
Harvey began suggesting ominously that the attorney general’s habits were traitorous.
He was dealt the ultimate humiliation by the Kennedys when, in January 1963 (after Harvey, on his own, ordered commando raids on Cuba at the height of the Cuban missile crisis), he was removed from his post as head of Project Mongoose and sent to a much lesser post at the CIA station in Rome, Italy.
His drinking and repulsiveness got worse, shocking the Rome diplomatic corp.
His relationship with his first wife, who was also an alcoholic, deteriorated.
Harvey would fly into rages, kicking down doors, throwing glasses and card tables or anything else he could get his hands on.
In short, William Harvey was a man of extremes—extreme indulgence of alcohol, extreme eating, extreme self-destructive behavior.
If ever there were someone in government who had the capability and destructive nature to plot the assassination of the president—and the pathological boldness to carry it out, without a major error— Harvey would seem to be that man.
Before he died in 1976 of a heart attack, he instructed his wife to burn his papers and tell no secrets, to which instructions she has complied.
It is easy for me to see that when Robert Kennedy insulted and humiliated Harvey, then sent him to Rome, ending Harvey’s career of action and power and breaking his self-confidence, Harvey may have felt his very survival was at stake.
Like Lyndon Johnson, J Edgar Hoover, Carlos Marcello, and Jimmy Hoffa, Harvey faced the end of everything he had wanted and worked for if John Kennedy continued in office.
Of course, this alone does not mean that Harvey was the mastermind of the Kennedy assassination, but it shows his motives and state of mind.
With his knowledge of covert assassination operations, and his relationships with the Mafia and professional terrorists in Europe , Harvey could see to it that the assassination was planned, organized, and pursued to fulfillment.
According to Bradley Ayers, a former Army captain seconded to the CIA at the time, Morales personally controlled mobster Rosselli—and Rosselli was seen with him and another senior CIA officer, William Harvey, as late as summer 1963, after the agency had supposedly severed its connection with the Mafia.
The source of this information, Banister’s former secretary, told ... that another visitor to the office was Oswald himself.
The alleged assassin, she gathered, was involved in ‘undercover’ activity sanctioned by Banister.
CIA officers controlling a top mafioso, who meets in 1963 with an anti-Castro operative suspected of manipulating—perhaps of setting up—the young man who is supposed to have murdered the President of the United States.
It will be useful to refer to Exhibit 21-1, which shows an organization chart for the JM/WAVE variety of sources. and ZR/RIFLE projects that I constructed from a Exhibit 21-1.
Simplified Organization Chart for Task Force W, Showing Its Relationship to JM/WAVE and ZR/RIFLE Projects.
Harvey is a prime suspect for being the mastermind of the plot to assassinate John F Kennedy.
Harvey was a drinking buddy and cohort of Johnny Rosselli, Mafia hit man who worked for Sam Giancana.
He worked with David Sanchez Morales at the CIA’s JM/WAVE station in Miami.
Unknown oe wv ae M Ss i) Weel ease ‘eae David Atlee Phillips worked with David Sanchez Morales over the years in CIA assassination operations, and he was active in plots to kill Fidel Castro.
He was seen in Florida in the summer of 1963 with William Harvey and David Sanchez Morales when Harvey was supposed to be in Rome, Italy.
AP/Wide World Photos \ Ruben Carbajal, shown at his El Molino Restaurant in Phoenix, Arizona, was a lifetime friend of David Sanchez Morales.
Carbajal, along with Phoenix attorney Robert Walton, heard Morales’s remark about John Kennedy.
He sees Morales as a very patriotic American, who did his duty to protect his country against its enemies.
Noel Twyman David Sanchez Morales, number-one action man for David Atlee Phillips’ covert CIA operations.
The top photo was probably taken in 1959 when Morales was 34 years old.
Morales worked for William Harvey in Project Mongoose, and was close to Johnny Rosselli.
The bottom photo was taken when Morales was in high school in Phoenix, Arizona.
Morales died suddenly of a heart attack in 1978 at the age of 53, just after his name was put on a list of people to be questioned by the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Later, records reveal that Phillips was on leave at the JM/WAVE station in Miami and didn’t return to the Mexico City station until October g L220] In Chapter 19, it was conclusively established that Maurice Bishop was a pseudonym for David Atlee Phillips.
Item in my list was dependent on the credibility of Summers’ prime source, Captain Bradley Ayers.
Bob Dorff turned out to be the person who had done the investigative work and who had the ingenuity to put the story together.
What follows is the story of Dorff’s investigation, along with additional new evidence.
After Anthony Summers published his book Conspiracy in 1980, he received a telephone call from Bradley Ayers, who told him that he had been a United States army captain assigned to CIA operations in Florida in 1963 and had information that he would not talk about on the telephone, but would reveal if he could meet personally with Summers.
But Summers, already busy on another book, did not follow up on the lead.
It was not until early 1988 that Bradley Ayers’ story would be investigated by Dorff on the suggestion of Summers.
Summers gave Dorff a list of “things to be done” on the JFK assassination, one of which was to contact Captain Bradley Earl Ayers.
Summers did not have Ayers’ address or telephone number but did remember that he was a private investigator living somewhere in Minnesota.
Within two months he found him through a Houston, Texas, private investigator, Joe West.
Ayers was running a private-detective agency out of Woodbury, Minnesota.
After some difficulty, Dorff found Ayers’ phone number and telephoned him.
It turned out that Ayers was going to be in Los Angeles in about two weeks.
Dorff had remembered a book entitled The War That Never Was by Bradley Ayers.
Published in 1976, the book was Ayers’ account of his experience at the JM/WAVE station in Miami, Florida.
Fonzi did not know much about Morales except that he had been in the CIA dirty tricks department.
Incredibly, neither Fonzi nor the other members of the HSCA staff knew that Morales was chief of operations of JM/WAVE —a very important position, indeed.
This caught Fonzi’s attention because Oswald had been reported in the company of dark-skinned Latin American men in New Orleans and Dallas.
Dorff added Morales’s name to a list of people he intended to ask Bradley Ayers about when they met.
Dorff told me he almost fell out of his chair when he heard this because he had learned from Fonzi about a big Indian (in Spanish, “El Indio”) who had been in David Atlee Phillips’ book The Nightwatch.
Phillips wrote of an “EI Indio” who was with him in all of his field operations throughout the years.
Dorff told me that now Bradley Ayers was telling him that a “Big Indian,’ who was chief of operations at JM/WAVE, was Ayers’ boss.
This clearly appeared to be a connection between Johnny Rosselli, David Atlee Phillips, and David Morales.
The HSCA had somehow missed all of this in its investigation, probably because it had run out of time when the investigation was prematurely shut down.
I questioned Dorff about the believability of Bradley Ayers as a witness.
He told me that in his discussion with Ayers over a period of several months he had come to believe Ayers’ story.
His conviction was based on Ayers’ grasp of details of JM/WAVE in 1963 that appeared in Ayres’ book, in which he had written of Colonel Rosselli and the descriptions and pseudonyms of other characters.
Dorff noted that this was written in 1973 before Ayers could have known the details or gotten the names from available documents or books.
He was convinced that Ayers was telling the truth—enough so that he joined with Ayers in an investigation to track down more information about David Morales.
Dorff provided Ayers with about $5,000 to partially cover out-of-pocket expenses for Ayers to take a trip to New Mexico, where it was thought Morales resided when he died of a heart attack.
One notable point that came out of my discussions with Dorff is that he had learned from Ayers that Harvey was in the Florida Keys with Morales and Rosselli in the summer of 1963; Dorff had passed that information on to Anthony Summers, who then reported it in the 1991 paperback edition of Conspiracy.
Dorff sent me copies of notes he had made during his interview with Ayers which confirmed Ayers’ statements.
He also provided me with a copy of an affidavit, signed by Bradley Ayers and notarized, in which Ayers confirmed the real names of the characters in his book, as stated above.
Morales was one of several people who died suddenly when their name was put on congressional investigation lists in that period.
But before I relate more of the story of the investigation of Morales, there is newly discovered documentary evidence that tends to corroborate Bradley Ayers’ statements.
William Harvey in April, 1963 The United States Inspector General’s Report stated that William Harvey had met Rosselli in Miami and Los Angeles in February 1963 and again in Washington, D.C., in June 1963.
Also, the report quoted Harvey as saying he had received a telephone call from Rosselli in April 1963.
It seems significant that this occurred after Harvey had been removed from anti-Castro operations in Florida and after he had informed the Mafia that they would no longer be involved in attempts to kill Castro.
Voucher—All Chargeable to OPS Expense QJ/WIN/ZR/RIFLE The QJ/WIN reference struck me as very important.
He alleged that an assassination team trained to assassinate Fidel Castro had been turned against President Kennedy.
I went over the new material with her; it included a rich new lode on QJ/WIN, and Harvey’s tour of Europe when he interviewed potential assassins for the ZR/RIFLE stable.
When I returned to San Diego, I examined Harvey’s expense accounts and telephone records and found— presumably for the first ttme—documentary evidence of Harvey being in the Florida Keys in April, 1963; moreover, there was evidence showing that he was involved in some complicated operations.
The expense accounts were headed QJ/WIN, and Harvey had been instructed to handle QJ/WIN expenses through himself.
Between April 13 and April 21, 1963, Harvey was staying at a motel in Plantation Key, Florida, probably in room 22, and spent at least three days there.
During this time, a boat was chartered to go to Islamorada, Florida , and phone calls were made to Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Miami, Perrine , and Indianapolis.
Also one round-trip plane flight, first class, Miami/Chicago was purchased.
An expense account for this period was filled out, dated April 20, 1963.
During this period, there was reimbursement for dinner for three (two unofficial Americans and Harvey) at the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami on April 20, 1963.
In addition, there was reimbursement to ZR/RIFLE/MI for operational hotel rooms at the Eden Roc Hotel in Miami.
While Harvey was staying in room 22 at the motel in Plantation Key, someone else was staying next door in room 21 who listed his address as 56510 Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles.
The dinner at the Fontainebleau Hotel and the rooms at the Eden Roc Hotel struck a familiar note.
I remembered that Sam Giancana and Johnny Rosselli had met with William Harvey in the Fontainebleau Hotel in 1961 in what may have been their first meeting.
Inasmuch as QJ/WIN and ZR/RIFLE were exclusively equated to assassinations, it looked like an assassination operation.
If nothing else were to be concluded, the expense and effort had been worth it.
I reasoned that at some point, somewhere, the plotters would have needed to meet to finalize the details.
I noted that Jean Souetre was reported as having met with anti-Castro Cubans and General Edwin Walker in April 1963, and that he also visited anti-Castro training camps in New Orleans during that same time period.
I prepared a memorandum summarizing the above questions and mailed copies to Bob Dorff, Mary Ferrell, and Gaeton Fonzi to get their interpretations.
Mary Ferrell had told me that the way to track down a telephone call made in 1963 is to call the public library in the city, ask for directory service, and then ask them to find the person whose name is listed for the telephone number in the crisscross directory.
I passed this information to my niece, Lori Miller, whom I had enlisted to do research projects for me.
Within about two weeks, Lori found that the Miami public library had telephone records dating back only to 1973, and that only one phone number turned up a name.
It was a woman by the name of Elaine Briley, which probably had no significance.
Meanwhile, Bob Dorff pointed out that Wilshire Boulevard addresses did not go as high as 56510.
I was disappointed, but consoled myself that this did not necessarily negate the importance of the documents.
At least we had the cities that Harvey had called , all of which could have significance.
It showed that Harvey was very busy during this four-day period and was certainly involved in some type of an operation that he was coordinating.
Without these documents, I would have been dependent solely on the Inspector General’s Report, which had little detail.
Also, Dusty Miller exchanged calls with Ruby on August 2 and November 2, 1963.
I remembered that Rosselli had been convicted in a card-cheating scandal at the ; Friars Club in the early 1970s.
The Friars Club was founded by George Jessell and was frequented by Hollywood comedians.
As another shot in the dark, I called information and got the current number of the Friars Club.
The last five digits matched exactly those digits of the phone number in Harvey’s expense account; only the prefix CR was changed.
It seemed extremely improbable that the last five digits would match in the Crestview exchange—there would be only one CR30850.
I then called the Friars Club and talked to a man named Clifford who was apparently the manager.
He had no knowledge of what the telephone number for the Friars Club was in 1963 and indicated he could care less.
When I pressed him to look in his files, he turned icy and terminated the conversation.
Next I called Pacific Bell in Los Angeles and got a very cooperative operator who wanted to help me solve my problem.
She checked with her supervisor who told her that they had 1963 numbers in microfiche but would not release them without a court order.
But it certainly did appear that Harvey was telephoning Johnny Rosselli from the Florida Keys in April 1963, and Harvey was there in a ZR/RIFLE/MI meeting with QOJ/WIN, whose only function was political assassinations.
Next, I checked a map and found that Perrine, Florida, is just south of Miami on the Atlantic coast.
Islamorada appeared to be one of the principal towns in the Florida Keys.
Located about halfway down in the Keys, it has a population of about 1500.
This, of course, was the region where the CIA had training camps in 1963 for assassination squads.
Plantation Key is only five miles from Islamorada on the west coast of the Keys.
Then I received from Bob Dorff a rare copy of Bradley Ayers’ book, The War That Never Was. assumed it would have information concerning the locations mentioned in Harvey’s expense accounts.
In particular I noted that Ayers had written about two CIA safe-houses located on Plantation Key.
Years later I got a phone call from Bradley Ayers who was passing through San Diego, and I joined him for lunch at Denny’s near the Del Mar Race Track.
My guess is that Harvey was staying at the Plantation Yacht Harbor, a motel/marina on the Bay side which, I dimly recall, may have had some mob connections.
It’s about a 40 minute drive south of the JM/WAVE station in South Dade County.
Another point in this geographical lecture is that the Eden Roc is just north of and in walking distance of the Fontainebleau.
William Harvey and QJ/WIN were in the Florida Keys and probably working on some sort of assassination operation in April 1963.
It seemed that they were involved in this with Johnny Rosselli and possibly David Morales.
I questioned Bob Dorff about this, and he said that as far as he knew no one until now had ever produced documents that would confirm what Bradley Ayers had said—that Harvey was meeting in the Florida Keys with Morales and Johnny Rosselli in the summer of 1963.
I asked Dorff if he thought Ayers may have been mistaken about the summer and he said it was possible.
Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli had met in the Fontainebleau on occasions.
Moreover, Hoffa’s man, Dusty Miller, who lived in Chicago, called Jack Ruby in Dallas from the Eden Roc Hotel on November 8, 1963 in the midst of other phone calls between Jack Ruby and mafioso hit men, only two weeks before the assassination.
The pattern of Harvey’s phone calls to Las Vegas and to the Friars Club in Los Angeles, his meetings in mob hangouts in Florida, and his receiving a visitor from Chicago, suggested Mafia.
It suggested that Harvey was coordinating a very important project with mafiosi and QJ/WIN of the French Connection.
The report by the Frenchman, Le Cavalier , that Jean Souetre (of the radical right-wing OAS) was in New Orleans in anti-Castro training camps in April 1963, and then later met with General Walker in Dallas in that same period, loomed even larger as I contemplated the possibilities of this information.
I pondered whether I should put the arcane detail about the telephone numbers in the book, and decided that I should.
Perhaps, someday, someone who reads this might know the people identified with these phone numbers and cities.
I also hoped that more information and clarity would emerge as my research progressed.
CIA Executive Action Man In June 1995, I had the opportunity to talk with an attorney in Phoenix, Arizona, by the name of Robert Walton, who knew David Morales well.
Walton was Morales’s attorney in the 1970s and had been introduced to him by Ruben Carbajal, who was Morales’s life-time good friend.
Walton told me that because of attorney-client constraints he had not talked with anyone about Morales until years after Morales had died, but felt compelled now to tell what he knew that might relate to the JFK assassination.
He first told this story to Bradley Ayers and later to Gaeton Fonzi who reported it in his book in 1994.
At the time of the Kennedy assassination, he was thirty-eight years old and was a seasoned veteran in CIA covert operations.
By his own account , he participated over the years in CIA assassination operations in South America, Vietnam, Bolivia, Chile, and other places.
Ruben Carbajal remembers in high school when Morales single-handedly and coolly took on a small gang of street bullies who had harassed him, and dispatched all of them in quick succession.
When Morales graduated from high school, he volunteered to join the Navy but was turned down, after which he attended college at Arizona State, USC, and UCLA over the next two years.
Shortly thereafter , he was assigned to the CIA, underwent special training, and reported as a “political officer” for the State Department in Caracas, Venezuela.
It was in Caracas that Morales worked with David Atlee Phillips; he also later worked with him out of the American embassy in Havana from 1958 to 1960.
From there, after Castro took over, Morales moved with Phillips to Florida to become part of the Bay of Pigs invasion, then to operations with him at JM/WAVE in Miami, and subsequently to operations in Vietnam and Laos.
While in Vietnam, Morales was part of the infamous Phoenix Program in which perhaps 23,000 (estimates vary widely, up to 80,000) Vietnamese civilians were systematically assassinated in a CIA program to fight the North Vietnamese, “fire with fire,” hoping that they would kill a few Vietcong in the process.
Morales rose high in rank while assigned to the CIA—to brigadier general according to Carbajal, who said that Morales had an office in the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon before he retired.
He said that Morales had a parking spot in the front row with the top brass with his name on it.
A long line of high-ranking military brass and well-dressed, important looking people in civilian clothes wearing sunglasses flew in from all over the country to attend his funeral services in Phoenix, much to the surprise of his old friends who had no idea he was such an important person.
When Morales’s body was interred in the small town of Wilcox, Arizona, the line of mourners extended all the way through town, amazing the local citizens.
Carbajal said that Morales was not an alcoholic but that he enjoyed polishing off a complete bottle of scotch.
Morales had gained the reputation in the agency of having a loose tongue when drinking.
In Blond Ghost David Corn wrote that “Morales hated communists, and years later bragged to an Agency colleague how he had once in South America parachuted out of an airplane with men he suspected of being communists.
Before they all leaped, the story went, Morales sabotaged the parachute packs of the Reds.
Morales’s bad temper was confirmed by Carbajal , but Carbajal said that Morales did not display that temper much, except when doing a job.
Carbajal said that then you had better look out if you didn’t do what Morales wanted.
He also knew David Atlee Phillips at the time Phillips was a CIA agent posing as a consultant in Havana.
I asked Smith if Phillips had in fact worked with David Morales in Cuba in those years.
In passing, I mentioned that, based only on having seen photographs of David Atlee Phillips and having read some of his testimonies, I had difficulty imagining that he could have been the type of person who would plot to kill the president of the United States.
He became close friends with Johnny Rosselli when they were together at JM/WAVE working on plots to assassinate Fidel Castro. would head off to favorite watering holes for drinking bouts.
One perhaps significant bit of information was brought to my attention by Bob Dorff.
He said that in his discussions with Bradley Ayers, Ayres had mentioned that Morales would frequently travel from the JM/WAVE station in Miami to Mexico City.
The significance is that David Atlee Phillips was stationed primarily in Mexico City, and Mexico City was the center for much intrigue in the JFK assassination.
They My first conversation with Morales’s attorney, Robert Walton, was a telephone call on June 6, 1995.
Walton recounted Morales’s astonishing words about political assassinations, and told of other strong indications of Morales’s personal involvement in the JFK assassination.
Walton represented both Ruben Carbajal and David Sanchez Morales and was at one time in a commodities business with them.
Walton’s relationship with Morales was first reported in Gaeton Fonzi’s book The Last Investigation.
The purpose of my call was to confirm that material and learn what else I could.
Only three people heard that remark: myself, my wife, and Ruben Carbajal.
It took place in a hotel room at the Dupont Plaza , and we were the only three there.
It happened in 1973 and I had just had a coronary and I’d taken some time off.
David’s father had run off on his family and so he spent most of his time over at the Carbajal house as a kid.
So we were back there with them , Ruben and I, to meet David and discuss the two of us going into a commodities business; basically we were going to set up in Guadalajara while I took about a year off from the law to get my heart working right again.
As a part of it he’d wanted to know who I was, right down to where I was baptized, so that he would feel safe about providing information to either Ruben or me, and know that he could trust me to the same extent that he trusted Ruben.
I went back a couple of times, Ruben went back more often than that and through David met a lot of people including one that...his name slips me right now...he was later involved with supplying arms to Qaddafi and is now doing three life sentences.
But that was for about a one-year...we tried it for about one year, didn’t make any money.
We chased a lot of rumors and most of them David would check out and tell us that they didn’t exist.
And the two or three that did exist, for one reason or another we could never get them closed.
After that David retained me for legal work on two or three occasions, so I felt I had an attorney/client obligation not to reveal anything that he told me.
He just came off the bed when I mentioned that I'd done some volunteer work for Jack Kennedy in 1958.
I said no need to correct it, but I did not introduce Jack Kennedy for a speech at Harvard.
What I did do was come up with the idea that this fellow who had just liberated his country and was going to be speaking at the United Nations ought to also speak to the American public; and I called around and got a hold of his entourage and scheduled him into Harvard stadium to make his first address to the American public.
And somehow, during the course of the evening, that was all overcome and we did end up being pretty close friends.
I think it’s just mentioned in Gaeton’s book, the thing that amazed both me and Ruben time and again, that he would reach into his pocket and pull out a little black plastic card—it looked a little smaller than your typical credit card, just maybe slightly smaller.
And it just had a few gold numbers or letters on it—no insignia or anything else.
And I still have yet to find anybody else that was in the company at that time that could tell me what it was and how come it worked so well for him.
Someone had given me, way back in the ’60s, a Screencraft, West Yarmouth on Cape Cod, hand-decorated, John Kennedy and Robert Kennedy ceramic deal that you can hang on the wall.
I remember that one time I had that somewhere in my office and he saw it and he offered to take it out and break it for me.
And we got to talking about Robert and I thought he was getting close to also talking about Martin Luther King but I didn’t press it, and it just drifted away.
I always wondered in my mind whether he was about to tell me that he had an involvement there also, or not.
He told me, you know, for his lifetime, he could just see in his mind, all the people that he knew just being butchered, and he was up there in the air and couldn’t do anything about it.
I think there were other instances beyond that that he never conveyed to me.
You’re right, it was a very deep, in a sense almost uncharacteristic, hatred.
Because if I could think back, on most of the other people, he talked of them in kind of a detached form.
But if you put it in the context of everything else, in a total story, it has significance.
David telling us story after story about how he worked with the Bolivians to track down Che Guevara and that he was there when they made the arrest; and that he ordered them to chop his head off and then he kicked it as far as he could so there would be no stories that he’d been caught and captured but had escaped.
He also told us stories that night about having his wife along when he did an assignment in Venezuela and killed the leader of Venezuela and that having his wife along almost compromised things and they almost got caught.
That same night he told us he had killed two ranking Vietnamese generals who were not cooperative, and the leader of Laos.
I can tell you when, because I relate it to when I had the coronary in November of ’72...this was spring of ’73.
But I had represented him later on some legal matters including a DUI (driving under the influence of alcohol) and that’s why I didn’t feel I could say anything, at least while he was alive.
He was part Mexican, part Yaki , but he said, “I’m worried about my own.
As I reviewed the foregoing conversation, I was struck by its historical importance.
Here we have Morales’ own words, recounted by his attorney, o> of Morales’s direct involvement in CIA political assassinations—not behind-the-scenes manipulations as reported by the Church Committee.
We also have Morales’s perhaps unwitting confession of either his involvement, or the CIA’s involvement, in the JFK assassination.
It is confessional and state-ofmind testimony of the words of the deceased suspect himself from a most credible witness.
I noted the parallel of Morales’s story to that of Jim Lance concerning the Bay of Pigs.
Morales was in the air above the Bay of Pigs invasion helplessly watching his friends on the beach being slaughtered because, Morales thought, John Kennedy was a traitorous coward.
At the same time, Jim Lance was watching the slaughter on the beach from a ship offshore.
And John Kennedy and Robert McNamara were in the White House making a decision which history would never fully understand.
I reflected that this is the material from which great tragedies are born.
I also reflected about Morales’s father having deserted his family when Morales was very young.
I wondered if that had anything to do with Morales’s rage and murderous nature.
Carbajal told Bob Dorff an amazing story in the January 1995 taped interview.
Morales told Carbajal that he took $2 million from the $10 million that had been funded by the CIA for the Allende assassination; he said that Morales took it for himself.
I have often wondered if CIA agents would have been able to resist pocketing some of the cash that flowed through their hands in CIA covert operations, or in the drug-running partnerships with the Mafia in which they engaged over the years.
Carbajal said that when he needed to get in contact with Morales while still in the service in the late 1960s, he would call a number in San Francisco, use the code letters AID, and could then get a message to Morales.
Carbajal made a point of saying that Morales was in special forces at that time.
This connected Morales to the Army’s covert assassination operations through their special forces.
I was particularly touched by a remark of Ruben Carbajal’s friend, Frankie, who thought highly of Morales.
Johnny Rosselli in New Orleans I found that Summers’ source for Item 3 of my list was buried in an endnote in the back of his book Conspiracy.
Rosselli has been identified as taking an active part in anti-Castro military operations in spring 1963.
An exile training camp was being established in southern Louisiana at that time and with financing and support from organized crime.
New Orleans would have been a natural enough place to find John Rosselli.
Jim Braden, California Mafioso, also associated with right-wing elements in Los Angeles—the Minutemen.
The reader will recall that Braden was picked up by the Dallas police on November 22, 1963, just after the assassination, when he was leaving the Dal-Tex building.
Braden said that he had gone in the building to make a telephone call froma pay phone.
The linkage of Braden to New Orleans goes back to 1963 when parole records show that Braden made several trips there.
And, as previously noted, Oswald was also identified by Delphine Roberts, Banister’s secretary, as having been at Banister’s office on several occasions.
This was reported by Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker in their book American Mafioso, based on FBI reports uncovered by a federal investigator thirteen years after Rosselli’s murder.
This investigator relayed the contents of his investigations, on a Camp Street.... confidential basis, to Washington, D.C. reporter Scott Malone.
Here, and throughout this book, we have compounding linkages between Harvey, French Corsican assassins, French OAS terrorists, Rosselli, Phillips, Morales, Banister, Ferrie, Oswald, and Marcello— all occurring at times when the planning of the Kennedy assassination would likely have been taking place.
Time and again, the evidence leads to this same menagerie of assorted political fanatics, deviates, and murderers—all operating plausibly under the protection and cover of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover—and all fitting into the political and criminal matrix of the United States in 1963.
Follow-up Interviews with Ruben Carbajal and Robert Walton I decided that I should take a trip to Phoenix, Arizona, and talk with Carbajal and Walton myself.
The opportunity to meet and talk with these two men was too important to miss.
On the flight from San Diego to Phoenix on July 19, 1995, I had a sense of excitement.
I had appointments to meet first with Ruben Carbajal at 2m. that day in Phoenix at El Molino, his Mexican restaurant.
I checked into the Doubletree Suites near the Phoenix airport and took a taxi to the El Molino.
The restaurant turned out to be a bar with Ruben’s memorabilia posted behind it, and a few tables.
There were eight or ten patrons drinking at the bar or enjoying beer and Mexican food at the tables.
Carbajal was there, sitting at one of the tables, talking with some friends.
He was surprisingly spry and young-looking and greeted me with enthusiasm.
We sat down at one of the tables, ordered beers, and started the interview.
We talked for more than two hours with my tape recorder running in the noisy surroundings.
That evening at the Doubletree I listened to the tape and it was completely garbled.
Fortunately I had arranged for breakfast the next morning with Ruben and knew I could at least capture the key points on tape then.
He said that he found this along with $8 million more, $10 million total.
You know, I made that point to you yesterday about how Nixon had authorized $10 million.
Yousee, I didn’t even know Nixon had authorized $10 million until you told me.
Over the next years she disappeared for a while, went back to Boston, I guess.
Well I thought that she had said to the effect that the CIA told her not to get an autopsy.
Well, I think they might have told her that, but I wasn’t a witness to that; she was very rebellious about it.
She’s not the type to maneuver around unless there’s some force behind it.
I mean I can read people pretty good, you know, and that, to me, was my opinion.
I understand she used to work for Morales in Germany, so she was part of the military establishment.
But for about 3 1/2 or 4 years, the terrorists took over Uruguay, you know, for the government.
So when they got all settled down thinking they were high on life, living free, nobody’s gonna touch them, they all moved into these complexes, you know, apartments, fancy apartments.
That’s when the CIA, which is where Didi was the leader, took over and, like I said, they went from door to door, knocking on doors.
For example, this one tenant lived here, they knocked on the door and wiped everybody out.
All those things, nobody writes about them, nobody knows anything about them.
We’re thinking that everything is handed down, like everything is copacetic, you know, here it is.
They forgot who all the people were who worked to put it together, save other people’s asses, you know.
Bob Walton could tell you more about that, because he remembers it better than I do.
But let’s go over what your evaluation of that statement is; what it could mean.
But you know, you wouldn’t make a statement like that unless you knew what was behind it or knew enough about it, you know, that you could put the finger on somebody, you know.
That’s my way of thinking because how in the hell would you make a statement like that.
Walton mentioned that Morales told him, he thinks it was on that same trip.
So Walton inferred that since he said he was also in L.A. when Bobby Kennedy got his, that perhaps he was in Dallas when Jack Kennedy got his.
Walton was clear that Morales didn’t say specifically that he was in Dallas.
Well, you know, there were 8 million people in Los Angeles at that time.
J was in Los Angeles when Bobby Kennedy got his, so there may not be any significance to that.
When his brother made him the general attorney of the goddamn nation, he had never had one court trial.
And then, I haven’t forgotten, when he said he told the blacks to take whatever you want, man, it’s yours.
When a person makes a statement...there’s a lot of ways... you’ve got a lot of leeway which way you want to go with it.
Bob Walton probably told you the same thing; he was definitely just one way.
I played golf and tennis for about five years and just finally couldn’t take it any longer, so I got into writing this book.
I’ve got to check out this mine there you know, and then we’ll see and talk to my people there, the government officials there, get that squared away.
Every time I’m down in Mexico about ten days I’ve got to come back over here.
It takes me about another week putting things together, or maybe two weeks, and then we head that way again.
That is when the information became known, but then only to that committee.
It is extremely unlikely that Carbajal would have known about it at the time of the interview in 1995.
In my judgment, this makes Carbajal’s story about Morales very authentic.
But Carbajal seems only to take it to mean that “we” was the CIA, not necessarily Morales himself.
It goes beyond anything revealed in any government documents or the Church Committee Report, of which I am aware.
Its linkage to the French Connection via CIA’s Dan Mitrione and Christian David is very important.
Many CIA operatives who were handling cash for CIA illegal operations must have skimmed some of it for themselves.
Kok The evening before the breakfast interview with Ruben Carbajal, I had dinner with Robert Walton at the Doubletree during which I taped our conversation.
I started taping after I asked him a question concerning Morales’s seeming cold-bloodedness in the assassinations in which he had been involved.
He’d just say, “T’m the one that was working down in Asuncion and I was monitoring where Che Guevara was and I had the Bolivian police arrest him.
When I told them to shoot him, I said wait a minute and I asked them to chop his head off and I kicked it thirty yards, fifty yards, whatever, so there would be no stories about we only wounded him and he was still alive somewhere.
About the only time he was ever human about it, he’d tell one story about assassinating the president of Venezuela, I think it was the president, it was the leader anyhow.
He said he made the mistake of having his wife along and he almost didn’t get them out because she created a real drag.
There were no details, but he also talked about wiping out the head of Chile, the head of Laos, Vietnamese generals.
I had to wonder if he was pulling my leg and kind of telling stories like a nineteenth century pirate might tell, you know, he’s got a peg leg and he’s sitting there telling the little kids what Robert Lewis Stevenson was going to make a mint writing about.
I mean, Hemingway’s short story The Killers, there wasn’t a lot of flowery description, there wasn’t any talk about hesitation or argument.
Ruben told me about how Morales told him about going down in Uruguay and they would Walton: wipe out political dissidents that had taken over the government and restore another government and they would just go in and mow down everybody in their rooms with machine guns.
I don’t know the history on that but apparently there was a coup in Uruguay and then we didn’t like the government and so our CIA, according to Ruben, and just to replace the government there, went in and killed everybody.
He also spent a lot of time—I just wish I had a tape recorder and I didn’t—on details on the Bay of Pigs. ve flown over that about five or six times, and I still can’t picture everything, but he spent a lot of time explaining that was, I think, probably a turning point in his life.
After the Eisenhower administration, getting whatever they wanted without any hassle, somebody said no.
You know there’s a gross misunderstanding about Kennedy’s role in the Bay of Pigs.
It was a misperception of the men there like Morales; and I’ve talked to another man who was a frogman at the Bay of Pigs, down on the beach.
Those people thought Kennedy had betrayed them when actually Kennedy had never promised the air cover in the first place.
He had promised to let these dozen or so B-26 bombers do a job and they screwed up.
They didn’t get all of Castro’s planes and then the Navy and the CIA came to Kennedy and McNamara and asked to use Navy strike planes off the carriers; in other words for the United States to intervene directly, and Kennedy turned it down.
I got the impression, and it may have been from Gaeton’s book, I don’t know, that the appearance of a couple of old P-51 mustangs and a Catalina PBY were a total shock to the attack forces that he had organized.
They didn’t realize that Castro even had these vintage World War II aircraft.
I mean, Castro really had a small air force, but they didn’t take out three fighter planes and those fighter planes really played havoc.
If we had gotten those three, the disaster probably would have never happened.
I was fortunate to get an interview with Robert McNamara on this about a year ago.
I think I have it pretty well documented exactly what happened from the point of view of the men on the beach and men like Morales; and the point of view of McNamara and Kennedy in the White House.
And you have a sort of drama where there are two different perceptions of what’s going on.
But then, he caught himself in a position untenable in that he had made an issue of this in defeating Nixon in the election; he had made an issue of Castro that enough wasn’t being done and that we should be more overt and so forth.
So the minute he got elected, he was presented with this plan, and politically he couldn’t turn it down, he would have been finished, politically.
So he goes ahead with this stupid plan, and the Kennedys are young green, and the plan was misconceived by the CIA to begin with, and Kennedy changes the beachhead site at the last minute over to another site.
But Kennedy and McNamara, when it finally came down to where they had to authorize escalation in order to win, beyond what they had approved, they wouldn’t do it.
That’s the betrayal that Morales and people like him there on the beach saw of Kennedy.
It’s not that Kennedy was a coward, it’s just that he was smart enough to not let this thing escalate to where we would have had to invade.
Idon’t care, but just for the significance of it being totally accurate.
So if anybody asks me later how come you revealed whatever David told you, at that time we were just business partners.
I had...1t was kind of a testy evening...because I guess, in a sense, somewhat like the position I’ve taken in the last ten years because of all the heart problems I’ve had, I want to leave a mark.
This man had that same feeling back in the early 70s; he really felt that he was doing the right thing for this country, that there were all these bad guys out there.
Not only the Castro’s but the Russians, the corrupt people within the turmoil in Vietnam and, in his own mind, he really thought that he was Zorro.
That he was getting rid of the cancer within the organization and I don’t think he ever considered himself to be a hit man.
I got the impression that on a lot of these things he’d be hiding down the fifth level in some consulate in Asuncion or whatever.
Alfred Hitchcock had a great half-hour show back in the late ’50s, where I can still see his face, the British actor, but he’s taking a trip around the world.
What he’d done was steal money, do his five years in jail, and then when he got out he’d dug up the money.
With the interest on the bond notes, he was able to take a trip around the world.
His enjoyment was more at influencing the system in his own mind, seeing that right prevailed over wrong, which was communism or any kind of a government that was alien to our United States.
When he told me, “We got that son of a bitch,” he told me he was in Dallas.
I doubt very much that he personally pulled the trigger or anything else, but he was there, he helped organize it.
Well, you know, you can see where a person that feels betrayed by the father of the country, and this was part of the thing I was developing psychologically, that Morales felt betrayed by his father who abandoned the family and then he admires Kennedy and gets betrayed by the father of his country.
I was just trying to think, how can a man get this murderous nature and how could any man who considers himself a patriot become involved to kill the president of the United States.
Thad one client that reminded me a lot of what I thought David might be.
I found out only because I was representing him in an accident case and I had to get his medical records from the military.
He came out and challenged the same officer a second time and they gave him a psychological dismissal for the good of the service.
I wasn’t aware of that until we were trying to settle the medical case and I get his military records.
He showed up with a cane and he started trying to beat me with the cane...he was hitting me with the cane.
He had two or three more incidents that I reluctantly represented him in.
He wanted to be a big shot but he also felt that the people who were giving him the orders were really no better than he was.
I don’t know how you would have felt or how I would have felt if we’d have had fathers just run out and abandon the family.
Well, hey, in those days we didn’t have the word dysfunctional, which we have now.
Simpson thing where his father turned out to be a homosexual and abandoned the family or just left, I guess.
You and I would have had difficulty, I know, in even imagining what that might do to us if we had fathers like that.
He had his faults and I had a lot of problems with him, but basically he was an honorable man who stuck with the family.
I think it could make a permanent, deep scar psychologically in a person that even though they may never express it, ever, it may come out in various ways.
My time with David, even his adult life, isn’t one hundredth as much as the time that Ruben had with him.
I might have been with David a total of a dozen or fifteen times, whereas during that same period of time, Ruben probably saw him thirty or forty or fifty times.
David and I didn’t have a one-on-one friendship like he had with Ruben.
In fact, it’s unfortunate, but in my adult life, I haven’t had but maybe one or two really good one-on-one relationships and both of them are dead now.
You realize as you get older that they’re only silver and the old ones are gold but there just isn’t that much silver out there.
Did you hear a story on Morales—you probably haven’t—I read about it in another book.
They were down in South America and there were these Communists and for some reason David and these Communists were going to parachute out of an airplane, they’re going to parachute out together.
So David sabotages their parachutes and then they all jump out of the airplane, and as they’re all falling down, these guys pull their cord and nothing happens and David jeers at them on the way down and then pulls his parachute cord and is fine.
He had an amazing ability to rationalize that what he was doing was for the benefit of everybody.
I don’t want to beat that horse dead, but that one night we were talking was over a lot of scotch and the two or three conversations I had with him over the next two or three years where he really opened up was because he’d been drinking a lot.
He enjoyed being on the borderline of being baracho and being able to stay on his feet and stay in the conversation.
He did tell me that what he worried about was that he had the reputation on the part of some of the other people in his organization that he drank so much that someday he was going to tell stuff that he shouldn’t be telling people.
I thought these stories maybe had materialized one at a time over a period of years.
Once ina while there would be a reference back to... in my case, he talked about, I guess because he knew I had some interest in it, more about South America than Vietnam.
You talk about “I told them to chop Che Guevara’s head off, I wanted to kick it so there would be no rumors that he was still alive,” I don’t know to what extent he participated in finding Che or whether he just was summoned after they had him tied up with his hands behind his back or whether he was just there at the final moment.
You know, if Morales was in Dallas and if he was involved in all this, I mean, this brings the CIA into it all the way; not just a rogue warrior.
I never got the impression that, even on the Che Guevara thing, that it was anything he did.
He was working Asuncion and spying from behind a desk and waiting until the Bolivians were given the information of how to pick him up and then he went and witnessed the final act.
Well, the role I have for him in the Kennedy assassination in my present theory is a field director of an assassination team in Dallas.
He would be directing the team and he would be coordinating the various activities going on.
I started my book thinking the CIA was the principle force behind killing Kennedy and I went away from that over the years.
It almost developed to a firm belief that they were set up; that they really didn’t kill Kennedy.
Maybe they had one or two rogue agents that got seduced by the Mafia or some right-wing extremists who put together this plot.
Ruben says he was a brigadier general at the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon.
See, I was only back there with Ruben I think a maximum of three times.
I’ve been in his apartment over on the Arlington side, I couldn’t find it now but it was a high-rise apartment complex, well furnished.
I do remember meeting Wilson who I guess is doing a couple of late terms right now.
I do remember meeting some other people who at that time had names that I remember.
Of course, the initial one took us down to Miami as a second part of the deal.
You know it never came up, but I assumed that if we made money we were gonna give him some, but we never did.
My interview with Robert Walton provided me with considerable insight into the character of David Sanchez Morales—a portrait of a covert assassination expert.
He was seen by both Walton and Carbajal as a super patriot , serving his country, and a friend.
There is no doubt in my mind that both Carbajal and Walton were completely open and honest in their statements concerning Morales; and that they both believe that he was deeply involved in the Kennedy assassination.
Although all this evidence is not complete enough to warrant definitive conclusions, it is clear that, when combined with the ZR/RIFLE/QJWIN French connection evidence, nowhere else at this juncture do we see assembled such a cohesive body of documents and testimonies to explain the execution phase of the assassination.
We also see in David Sanchez Morales what could well be the man who directly managed the assassination of John F Kennedy.
For purposes of analysis, I constructed a model , a triangle of forces, that appeared to represent the primary forces of the assassination, exclusive of possible high government officials such as Lyndon Johnson or J Edgar Hoover, whom I assumed were background figures for cover-up purposes only, 1.e., not involved directly in the plot, but nonetheless involved.
The “right-wing extremists” would include the right wing of the Cuban exiles in Miami and right-wing extremists elsewhere.
The value of this model is that it shows possible relationships of the parties without designating a hierarchy; and it facilitates testing against the evidence.
If we accept the evidence that the professional assassins were from the CIAMafia stable recruited for the ZR/RIFLE Project, then any of the three groups designated by the sides of the triangle could have recruited the assassins, inasmuch as all three groups were aware of and had connections to them.
Also, if William Harvey were the planning genius of the JFK assassination, he could have been involved only to the extent of providing a conceptual plan, then fading out of the picture.
William Harvey: Planning Genius David Sanchez Morales: Field manager of the execution Johnny Rosselli: Mafia liaison to Harvey and Morales David Atlee Phillips: Disinformation and propaganda In this model, Oswald’s New Orleans phase could be an FBI and/or a CIA counterintelligence operation to discredit the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
William Harvey: His design concepts of ZR/RIFLE appear to have been applied directly to the JFK assassination plot.
Flaunting authority, Harvey continued his relationship with Rosselli and met with him and Morales in the Florida Keys in the spring of 1963, at a time when Harvey supposedly was in Rome, and his involvement in Mafia-CIA operations to assassinate Fidel Castro had been ended, and at a time when the JFK assassination plot would likely have been in the process of being finalized.
Telephone records and eyewitness accounts indicate that QJ/WIN was involved with Harvey in this operation in the Florida Keys.
Harvey recruited French Corsicans as professional assassins with the help of QJ/WIN who worked for Harvey, and with the help of the Mafia in Marseilles.
Harvey had the motive, the means, the opportunity, and the state of mind to become involved in the crime.
Harvey loathed the Kennedys, having been humiliated and emotionally emasculated by Robert Kennedy.
L Hunt, General Edwin Walker, and General Charles Willoughby, presently to be discussed), and visited New Orleans and Dallas in April 1963.
These same terrorists were acquainted with the French Corsicans recruited by Harvey.
Rosselli and Harvey were drinking buddies; and Rosselli and Morales were drinking buddies.
He was the natural choice to be the Mafia liaison between the CIA , and Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana; all of these four Mafiosi have revealed themselves to have been involved in the JFK assassination.
He was a top CIA officer for assassinations, a long-time partner with David Atlee Phillips, and a natural to work with him and Harvey in an assassination plot against President Kennedy.
Morales had the cold-bloodedness, the experience, and the means to direct a field operation in Dallas—either remotely or on the spot.
Jim Garrison had received an anonymous note from someone in Florida claiming that “Indio” was involved in the JFK assassination.
By his own words, Morales participated in the assassination of Allende in Chile and Che Guevara in Bolivia.
Morales was a fervent anti-Communist, and would fit naturally with the extreme right wing.
Morales telling Carbajal of the $10 million that had been provided by the United States to take care of Allende is very strong confirmation of his and Carbajal’s story because of its documentation in the Church Committee Report.
At the very least, Phillips was a handler of Oswald, having met him in Dallas in late August 1963.
Phillips went to extreme efforts to conceal the truth of Oswald’s visit to Mexico City.
He lied to the United States government concerning evidence related to audio transcripts of Oswald’s conversation with the Cuban embassy in Mexico City.
Phillips was a propaganda specialist and spent his life devising ways to mislead people and populations in sophisticated operations.
Phillips is a most likely man to have conceptualized the Oswald “sheepdipping” operations in Dallas, and the phony story of Oswald’s visiting the Cuban and Soviet consulates in Mexico City.
In conclusion, it is very plausible, although not proven beyond reasonable doubt, that the combination of Harvey, Phillips, and Morales, with help from the Mafia , planned and directed the ultimate covert political operation—the assassination of the president of the United States.
It is troublesome, however, why Phillips would have let the Mexico City blunder occur when he must have known about the elaborate photo and wire-tap surveillance at the Cuban and Russian Embassies.
KKK Epilogue In high-ranking CIA officer John Scelso’s testimony released in October 1996 (reported in part in Chapter 19), one of the most startling of his statements was that he suspected that Harvey was the one who murdered Sam Giancana.
He said, “... wonder if the government has looked into the possibility that Harvey did knock off Giancana.
When Scelso was asked if Harvey’s papers, which Harvey instructed his wife to burn, would have anything he was trying to conceal, Scelso sardonically replied, “He was too young to have assassinated McKinley and Lincoln.
Another document dated April 2, 1963 that I obtained from Gaeton Fonzi in November 1996 adds to the picture.
It corroborates, to the letter, biographical information supplied about Morales by Bradley Ayers, Ruben Carbajal, and Robert Walton.
Subject’s wife was security approved on 16 September 1949, entered on duty in October 1949 and resigned due to pregnancy on 20 January 1952.
No information of as to nature of her employment is disclosed by the files.
All of this again tends to corroborate the accuracy of the memory of Carbajal and Walton.
Another very important finding, mentioned earlier, is the fact that Christian David, when in prison in France, told Steve Rivele that he had been warned several times by Dan Mitrione that he would be killed if he talked about his knowledge of the JFK assassination.
Mitrione was a CIA officer who was murdered by the Tupamoros in Ecuador; Fonzi told me that this precipitated the slaughter of the Tupamoros in an operation led by David Sanchez Morales.
Added to this is something that I recently came across in re-reading Seymour Hersh’s book The Price of Power, published in 1983.
He wrote at length about the assassination of Allende and the $10,000,000 authorized by Nixon.
It seems beyond question that parts of the CIA had degenerated into little more than a pack of gangsters and assassins with personal greed running rampant, at least in some of their covert operations.
And, once again, Carbajal’s account of Morales’ statements rings credible.
RIGHT-WING EXTREMISTS AND POWER POLITICS I was ina taxicab when I got the news.
A half hour later I got to my apartment and the doorman told me he was dead.
OVERVIEW Initially I proceeded with the hypothesis that right-wing extremists were not the prime movers in the conspiracy; if anything, they provided money.
My reasoning was that their survival as individuals was not seriously threatened by John Kennedy; rather, it was the survival of key individuals, independent of their ideology that formed the motivation for the assassination.
But as I progressed further and saw the large number of suspects who were right-wing extremists, I began to examine more seriously the possibility that the assassination was, in fact, a right-wing coup—conceived, financed, and executed by organized rightwing extremists.
I noted, however, that such a right-wing conspiracy would not rule out the plotters having secured the cooperation of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover or help from the Mafia and extremist elements of the military in carrying out and covering up their crime.
As far as I knew then, in my limited knowledge, they were fanatical anti-Communists and people who trained in paramilitary units on weekends.
They seemed to have a natural rapport with the military and local police.
They were flag-waving proponents of “free enterprise” and “law and order” who tended to be Christian white supremacists and were violently angry that their money was being taxed and distributed to the poor.
As self-described Patriots, they distrusted and hated “big government” and, almost to a person, loathed John Kennedy.
They looked upon him as a liberal who was “soft on communism,” despite the fact that he was attempting to stop the Communist takeover of Southeast Asia, and despite the fact that he had faced down Khrushchev in the Berlin Blockade and in the Cuban missile crisis, taking the United States to the brink of nuclear war rather than yielding to Communists.
They became very alarmed when Kennedy signed the nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union and when he gave indications that he was going to make peace with Cuba and enter into disarmament talks with the Soviet Union.
Also, stories were circulating that Kennedy had begun to have second thoughts on our country’s involvement in Vietnam and was considering a phase-out by 1965, following the presidential election.
But as I did my research in 1993, I discovered that my view of right-wing extremists in 1963 was nowhere near complete.
The degree of dedication of the worldwide anti-Communist movement, and the fanaticism of the people in it, went far beyond my imagination.
Adding to the explosive mixture were extreme developments within the United States military.
Little did I know the extent to which our military had become engaged in political assassination, illegal opening of the mail of United States citizens, and any other means it considered necessary in its holy battle against communism.
Not only the CIA, but army intelligence was employing these methods, thus creating a cadre of extremist generals, retired military officers, and murderers, who later could get out of control.
Allied with the military in this fanatical war was a bewildering array of right-wing civilian organizations, with overlapping directorates including many of the most powerful and wealthy US. citizens, some of whom developed their own paramilitary organizations.
They embraced such Romanesque titles as the World Anti-Communist Congress for Freedom and Liberation, The Congress of Freedom, Inc., American Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Nations, The Tolstoy Foundation, The Nightingales, The National Alliance of Solidarists, and so on.
This is not to mention the John Birch Society and the Minutemen who were forming chapters (they called them “cells”) all over the United States and having heated discussions in homes to alert the citizenry to the menace of communism and socialism to the nation.
In fact, there were several key suspects in the plot to assassinate Kennedy who were right-wing extremists.
First and foremost was J Edgar Hoover, a right-wing extremist by definition.
He was a maniacal anti-Communist and racist and promoted himself as a super cop, fighting evil.
Hoover stood to have his whole sordid life exposed if Kennedy should live.
Then we have Carlos Marcello, Mafia chieftain in New Orleans, who was direly threatened by the Kennedys.
Marcello was a rabid antiCommunist and anti-Castro fanatic, along with his underling, the Communist-hater David Ferrie, who violently expressed hatred of John Kennedy and spoke openly in favor of his assassination.
And, as noted earlier, Lee Harvey Oswald was connected with New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw who, in addition to being a CIA contract agent, was on the board of directors of Permindex Corporation, an extreme rightwing organization incorporated in Switzerland and operating in Italy.
E Howard Hunt of the CIA was connected with this address, which was also used on the proCastro literature distributed by Oswald.
Hunt was a major contributor to extreme right-wing organizations, a friend and supporter of Lyndon Johnson, and closely associated with J Edgar Hoover.
The night before Ruby shot Oswald, Hunt ordered his security man to check out the security of Oswald in custody.
His man went to the jail and reported back that there was no security at all.
Marina Oswald visited Hunt’s office with an FBI agent about a month after the assassination.
Also, Hunt’s office was visited by Mafioso Jim Braden while he was in Dallas at the time of the assassination.
Braden was picked up by the Dallas police after the assassination at Dealey Plaza, but was immediately released.
Braden was linked to the Minutemen in Los Angeles, and had an office in New Orleans next to David Ferrie.
The “Dear Mr Hunt” Letter The handwriting of this letter has been authenticated by experts as Lee Harvey Oswald’s.
The Miami police turned the information over to the FBI, which passed the information to the Secret Service; but they did not send it to the Secret Service office in Dallas, although they sent it to other Secret Service offices.
Assassination Archives OS SE On the right, Larry Schmidt, a young right-wing extremist who was founder of Conservatism U.S.A. and was active in Dallas before the assassination.
He was one of the authors of the infamous black-border ad smearing Kennedy before he arrived in Dallas on November 22.
Schmidt was alleged to be an accomplice of Oswald in the General Edwin Walker shooting incident, according to General Walker in an interview with Dick Russell.
Schmidt was interviewed extensively by the Warren Commission, but nothing came of it.
Hunt, CIA operative, and ex-Nazi spy, who was the first person to greet Lee and Marina when they returned to Fort Worth from Russia.
De Mohrenschildt would later unexpectedly commit suicide the day after HSCA investigator Gaeton Fonzi had contacted his daughter in trying to arrange an interview.
It was Michael Paine who took Oswald to hear a speech by Major General Edwin Walker, the racist and right-wing fanatic, and organizer of radical fringe activities that prompted Robert Kennedy to have him temporarily confined to a mental institution.
It was General Walker who was allegedly shot at by Oswald months before November 22.
The story that the shooter was Oswald was based on the most spurious evidence, but it created the illusion that Oswald was a crazed Communist sympathizer with the capacity to assassinate prominent right-wing figures.
At the time of the assassination on November 22, General Walker was on a commercial airline flight to New Orleans when the pilot announced that Kennedy had been murdered.
Walker ran up the aisle of the plane exclaiming, in effect, “See—it couldn’t have been me.
The next day in New Orleans General Walker talked on the telephone with two newspapers in Germany to tell them it was Oswald who had attempted to kill him earlier that year, m3 There was no legitimate way Walker could have known this because Oswald was not yet a publicly identified suspect in the Walker shooting.
That would only come later when Marina Oswald was interrogated by the FBI after a strange letter implicating Oswald in the Walker shooting showed up in her possession.
And we should not forget General Walker’s connection with Jean Souetre, the French OAS right-wing extremist who visited him in Dallas in April 1963.
Hunt, whose son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, also sponsored the infamous black-border ads vilifying Kennedy before his trip to Dallas and who organized his own paramilitary group; and anti-Castro Cuban Eladio del Valle, who was David Ferrie’s close associate.
Del Valle was found bludgeoned and shot to death in Florida within a day or two of David Ferrie’s mysterious suicide in New Orleans, three days after the news media had revealed that Ferrie was a target of Jim Garrison’s investigation.
I went over a long list of my suspects or near suspects and found a virtually unbroken chain of individuals who were either rightwing extremists or closely allied with right-wing extremist causes.
We can say with certainty that Lyndon Johnson was not a right-wing extremist.
It is difficult to put him in that category, although he was a fellow traveler with right-wing extremists and played off of their dementia for his own political advantages.
It is interesting to note that Richard Nixon became president only after Lyndon Johnson served one term and voluntarily withdrew from the race, and after Robert Kennedy was assassinated.
It took two assassinations of Kennedys and the unexpected withdrawal of Lyndon Johnson from the race in 1968 before Nixon could become president, not to mention the attempted assassination of Governor George Wallace, who stood to siphon off Nixon’s southern right-wing vote.
He faced political oblivion if Kennedy were to stay in power; worse yet, he faced a possible sentence in the federal penitentiary if his involvement in the Bobby Baker and Billy Sol Estes crimes were not suppressed.
A possible answer is that the extremists could have concluded they had no choice but to assassinate Kennedy before the 1964 election.
Although they might have preferred Barry Goldwater or Nixon as president, from a practical standpoint it had to be Lyndon Johnson, at least for one more term.
If Kennedy stayed in power, he was going to dump Johnson before the 1964 election.
They knew that when Kennedy picked his next vice president it could very well be someone out of their realm of control.
The new vice president could turn out to be someone far more liberal than Lyndon Johnson; but, of more importance, only with Johnson as their man would the plotters be certain there would be a cover-up—absolutely indispensable for them to get away with the crime of the century.
This reasoning would apply even if Johnson were not informed in advance of the impending assassination, because of the plotters’ knowledge of Johnson’s lifetime of corruption, and because they had blackmail material on him.
My answer is a guarded “no”; the reason being that the prime conspirators, despite including a few high-level, right-wing extremists, would not necessarily have plotted to kill John Kennedy out of ideology.
In other words, it could be misleading to blame the Kennedy assassination on right-wing extremism just because many of that ideology were involved up and down the line.
Also it would only be natural for the master plotters to recruit Kennedy haters and fanatics to do their dirty work; and, one would think, almost all of the violent Kennedy haters would have been in the extreme right wing.
Nonetheless, to avoid a premature conclusion by ruling out a right-wing plot, I saw the necessity of examining the evidence for any proof of a conspiracy that was conceived purely out of right-wing ideology, even though I found myself rejecting the idea.
This would include German ex-spies, industrialists, and military personnel who became incorporated into our military industrial complex after World War II as a policy of the United States government.
This would include those elements in the Dallas-Fort Worth area who befriended Oswald and Marina when they came back from Russia.
These subjects will now be addressed, along with their accumulative effect in the formation of a climate of hate and political violence that could have given birth to the Kennedy assassination.
It was a stage trick, complete with accessories and false mirrors, and when the curtain fell the actors, and even the scenery, disappeared.
James Hepburn Farewell America 23 THE MILITARY INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX AND THE HIGH CABAL Evidence will now be examined that implicates extremist elements of the United States military in the Kennedy assassination.
In addition, I will address allegations that the assassination was sponsored by, or at least condoned by, a segment of the industrial-financial elite of the United States.
My goal continues to be to resolve the question of why John Kennedy was murdered and who were the principal plotters.
We know that when President Eisenhower was leaving office he warned of the powerful combination of weapons manufacturers, industrialists, financiers, and the military, which he called the militaryindustrial complex.
There are many who believe that such an international combination of bankers and militant barons rule the world.
Winston Churchill coined the term “high cabal” to describe such a powerful super-elite.
A favorite villain for those who believe in the high cabal is the Trilateral Commission.
In the 1960s and ’70s it was believed that the Trilateral Commission (consisting over the years of the Rockefellers and other such eastern-establishment types) determined even the selection of the president of the United States.
For example, it was believed that Dwight Eisenhower and Jimmy Carter would not have been elected president had they not been approved by the Trilateral Commission after having agreed to do their bidding, which, it is claimed, was aimed at a liberal, one-world future.
One of the more publicized of the high-cabal theories is in the book JFK by Colonel L Fletcher Prouty.
Colonel Prouty has probably had more experience with the military and the national security establishment at a high level than any person alive today who is willing to write about the Kennedy assassination.
During the Kennedy years he was chief of special operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
He worked with General Edward Lansdale, Robert McNamara, Allen Dulles, the Secret Service, and General Maxwell Taylor.
What Prouty has to say is certainly interesting and could explain major aspects of the Kennedy assassination, although one may find fault with some of his reasoning.
Then in October 1995 I had the opportunity to meet with Prouty at his home in Alexandria, Virginia, for a fascinating discussion.
What follows is a summary of the key points that I learned about Prouty’s views.
In addition, I will include an equally fascinating discussion with Robert McNamara on the same subjects, as well as both Prouty’s and McNamara’s views on the Kennedy assassination.
In his book JFK Prouty presents the appalling hypothesis that the Cold War was deliberately planned by a “power elite” to create markets for the arms industries.
Prouty postulates that when the United States and England recruited Nazis before the end of World War II , it was the conscious beginning of a plan to line up the capitalistic major powers against the inexorable forces of communism and socialism.
In other words, the United States, Great Britain, Germany, France, Japan, and Nationalist China were to be allied as a block to oppose the anticipated expansionist thrust of the Soviet Union and the eastern block countries that were ceded to the Soviet Union through World War II agreements.
The driving force behind this capitalistic plan was the powerful super-elite—the “high cabal” of bankers and industrialists 12 Prouty states that the organizing principle of the United States after World War II was, indeed, promotion of war, with the ultimate aim of creating markets for armaments manufactured by the militaryindustrial complex.
However, due to the advent of the atom bomb, and later the hydrogen bomb, all-out warfare had become obsolete and unthinkable because the power elite itself would be destroyed in the process.
The “high cabal” thus saw the necessity for wars in lesser-developed countries such as Vietnam and Korea, where the conflict could be contained so as not to escalate to nuclear weapons.
Prouty’s theory is that the Vietnam and Korean wars were consciously selected by the High Cabal at the end of World War IT as the future battlegrounds for territory and for the consumption of weapons so as to provide markets for weapons manufacturers.
Thus we had the formation of the CIA as the agency of the United States government that would conduct the Cold War through covert actions and methods of destabilization applied in the lesserdeveloped countries.
The fact that millions of people would be slaughtered was, in the theory, an integral part of their plan Jae Population growth must be controlled, so it goes.
This became evident to the military in the Bay of Pigs invasion and in the Cuban missile crisis when Kennedy refused to accept the military chiefs’ recommendations for escalation.
Decided to diminish the scope of the CIA by turning over covert activities that were in the CIA to the Department of Defense.
He then replaced the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Lyman Lemnitzer, with his favorite, General Maxwell Taylor, in a normal rotation of that position. Fired the top people in the CIA after the Bay of Pigs fiasco as part of his intention to take control. Took direct charge of arms procurement—seizing it from the generals and admirals—and used it as a pork-barrel program for his re-election.
According to Prouty, this was blatantly done in the case of the $6 billion TFX contract.
Kennedy and his inner circle ordered that this operation be taken over and supervised directly through Arthur Goldberg under Robert McNamara.
The objective was to get re-elected by a more comfortable margin than in 1960.
According to Prouty, Goldberg and McNamara’s whiz kids radically changed the basic design of the TFX airplane over military objectives.
Then they divided up the TFX contract in a master plan to influence votes from sections of the country that had previously leaned Republican. Put plans in motion to make peace with the Soviet Union and reverse the Cold War process, thus confronting the arms industry with the probability of massive cutbacks. Decided to pull out of Vietnam.
He appointed General Maxwell Taylor in charge of a study group, and through their work issued a national security memorandum on October 11, 1963, to the effect that the United States was going to begin to pull out of Vietnam in 1964 and get out completely by 1965.
In his books, Prouty admits that he cannot say who those in the “power elite” are.
He mentions the , ; , 2 S120 liberal Averell Harriman as one possible candidate for the power elite.
Prouty says this group is constantly shifting, people dying and being replaced by other powerful figures.
He seems to think of the “power elite” as a cabal of powerful liberals and conservatives, but certainly joined together in the battle against communism and socialism.
Although Prouty’s idea of a high cabal manipulating the world sounded plausible, there was no real evidence, in my view, to support the allegation that the assassination of Kennedy was sponsored by such an ill-defined group.
A more plausible explanation to me was that the acolytes of the “power elite” (in the form of right-wing elements of the CIA and threatened military leaders who were anti-Communist extremists) became aware of the desire of the Mafia and others to assassinate Kennedy and joined in the plan, perhaps even dominating it.
In this version of my hypothesis, Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover were ordered to join the conspiratorial group, or joined it voluntarily.
The “power elite” simply stood by and let it happen, looking the other way during the aftermath.
If the truth had come out about the extreme nature of the conspiracy, quite conceivably it could have devastated the credibility of the military-industrial complex, and the results—from their point of view—would have been unpredictable, possibly an economic catastrophe, and therefore to be avoided at all costs.
It was at this point in my investigation that I had a dialogue with Robert McNamara concerning the Kennedy assassination.
A Conversation with Robert S McNamara I first met Robert McNamara in a hiking group in California’s High Sierra mountains in the spring of 1994.
Our group hiked and camped out for six days during a forty-mile trek starting at Mammoth Lakes, across Donohue Pass at 11,500 feet to Touloumne Meadows.
Throughout the hike, we discussed everything under the sun, or so it seemed, but I never mentioned the Kennedy assassination.
After first saying he was not prepared to “go on the record” on that subject, he agreed, and suggested that we meet and talk over dinner at his home in Georgetown.
Needless to say, I was very pleased that someone of McNamara’s stature, who had been close to the Kennedy family and who had served as secretary of defense under both Kennedy and Johnson and as president of the World Bank, would grant me an interview.
My purpose in seeking the interview, other than the obvious, was to get a first-hand account of the feelings and opinions of McNamara concerning Lyndon Johnson—as to whether or not McNamara felt that Johnson was capable of being involved in a plot to assassinate President Kennedy.
I had begun to think of myself as being presumptuous in writing seriously about the unthinkable—that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the plot.
I had never met the man except seeing him close-up at one speech he had given.
And in discussions with a friend who knew Lyndon Johnson, I had been admonished that Johnson was not the type of man who would be involved in a plot to kill the president.
I also wanted to learn from McNamara whether there was a war crisis atmosphere in the White House on the night of the assassination when Lyndon Johnson returned from Dallas.
Two years previously I had interviewed Admiral Taswell Shepard, who was the first military officer to meet with Lyndon Johnson when Johnson arrived at the White House on the night of the assassination.
Shepard told me unequivocally that there was no such crisis that night.
He said that he knew what such a crisis was like because he had been with John Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis and there was nothing at all like that on the night of November 22.
I had always felt that this knowledge would be important because there is no question that Lyndon Johnson had used the nuclear war scare in recruiting Earl Warren and others to serve on the Warren Commission.
While in Washington, D.C., I took a taxi and arrived at McNamara’s home on the appointed date, ten minutes early.
McNamara showed up a few minutes later in jogging shoes, returning from his office.
He was in the midst of a final review of his 155,000-word manuscript Jn Retrospect, which would soon create a firestorm against him.
At about 7:10, we retired to the dining room which was set for our dinner.
We watched TV for a few more minutes , then McNamara shut it off and we began talking about my book.
I related to him how three years earlier I had become involved in Kennedy assassination research, primarily because of the Oliver Stone movie and finding it difficult to believe that the military-industrial complex or the financial elite of the United States ordered the murder of the president.
I then outlined to him the basic conclusions that I seemed to be headed toward, which were that Robert Kennedy, in attempting to drastically curtail the power of the Mafia and Jimmy Hoffa, did not realize that in so doing he was going to take everybody down in the United States government who had been associated with them in criminal activities.
I mentioned that this would have included certain elements of the CIA, along with J Edgar Hoover and Lyndon Johnson.
I told McNamara that I had just about concluded that CIA renegades were involved in the assassination and that Lyndon Johnson was involved.
I said that as far as Hoover was concerned, I was in a dilemma but I would put nothing past him.
McNamara said, however, that he could not conceive of any possibility that Johnson was behind the assassination.
I asked McNamara if it was conceivable to him that Johnson had foreknowledge.
After pausing for a moment, he replied that he could see that as a possibility, though he still didn’t believe it.
He elaborated that he could also see, only as a possibility, that renegade CIA people were involved, but he didn’t endorse that either.
It was apparent that McNamara was willing to talk about the assassination but in no way wanted me to write that he endorsed the concept of a conspiracy or any specific allegations toward individuals.
He was willing, nonetheless, to state his opinion as to “possibilities” insofar as the character of individuals was concerned and his overall knowledge of events.
McNamara did not seriously dispute that Kennedy had been killed by a conspiracy.
What surprised me was that McNamara revealed an amazing lack of knowledge of the important details of the Kennedy assassination.
For example, he did not seem to know that the HSCA had reached a conclusion that there was a conspiracy, and that it could have involved the Mafia.
He mused that he thought it was a good thing to get the files out to the public.
I reviewed with McNamara my thoughts that renegade criminal activity of the CIA, in partnership with the Mafia in drug running, could have served as a motivational base for certain CIA employees or agents to join in a plot to assassinate Kennedy, the reason being that when the Mafia was brought down by the Kennedys it would at the same time expose the CIA renegades.
I explained that it was the United States assassination capability for disposing of foreign leaders, headed by William Harvey under Project Mongoose.
McNamara then nodded that he knew what I was talking about; but it struck me as interesting that McNamara, as head of the Department of Defense, was not aware of the CIA code name for that very important secret project.
This seemed to illustrate the extent to which the ZR/RIFLE program was kept compartmentalized, and how the men at the very top of government did not know much of the details, although they knew of the program.
I pointed out that one of the most prevalent theories is that Harvey became involved with the Mafia and was possibly the mastermind of the Kennedy assassination.
But again he admonished me to remember that he certainly did not endorse the idea.
During the course of the conversation the subject of Harvey came up again as a prime example of a CIA renegade who could be suspect.
McNamara confirmed what he had been quoted in the literature as saying, that Mongoose was a stupid idea.
I asked him if Robert Kennedy knew about Mongoose, or was in charge of it.
He wouldn’t say that RFK actually “ran” Mongoose, but did confirm that RFK certainly supported it.
I pointed out that Willoughby was part of a right-wing extremist element in the retired military at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
McNamara added pointedly that General Walker was another right-wing extremist.
In our discussions about J Edgar Hoover, I described how Clint Murchison had squired Hoover and Tolson to their bungalow at the Del Charro Hotel in La Jolla, California, over the years.
I also pointed out how Robert Kennedy had confirmed this in a book of RFK interviews, Robert Kennedy in His Own Words.
He commented that he didn’t know about Murchison’s connections to the Mafia 2231 Early in our conversation, McNamara made a very specific point that in his view it was impossible that Allen Dulles and Richard Helms were behind the Kennedy assassination.
He reiterated several times that Richard Bissell, Allen Dulles, and Richard Helms had been or were still his close personal friends; that he knew them like brothers and that they were in no way involved.
He insisted that they would have had nothing to do with the assassination; that they were all patriotic, honest Americans.
McNamara was completely sincere in this, as he was in everything we discussed.
McNamara noted that John McCone may not have known what was going on in the CIA, but that Helms, McCone’s deputy director, would certainly have known if there were a CIA plot to assassinate Kennedy.
He repeated that he could “absolutely guarantee that Helms was not involved,” and that the CIA was not involved.
He replied that that would not mean Helms, Dulles, and McCone were involved because they could not have had total control over all of these renegade types.
After all, the Department of Defense had one to two million people in it.
Toward the end of the dinner, McNamara remarked that he could not believe that the government had anything to do with the assassination except possibly by renegades.
I explained my concept of “transferability of capability,” 1.e., when the United States government decides to assassinate foreign leaders, and develops the capability—assassins recruited from terrorist groups, and sophisticated knowledge to carry out the assassination—we run the grave risk of that capability being turned against our own government.
The capability to assassinate leaders of a country involves only assembling people with the mentality and skills to calculatedly commit murder, the knowledge of deception methods to control the crime, and knowledge of ways of disposing of witnesses.
I emphasized that this capability is not like a manufacturing facility or a weapons system.
It is mainly in a few people’s heads, easily transferable to the highest bidder.
I added that while I could possibly agree with the justification for getting rid of someone like Hitler or Castro, the danger to ourselves (the destruction of our own government) made it not worthwhile.
McNamara seemed to be somewhat taken aback and then pensive with this thought.
After dinner, we retired to the living room where I brought out my list of prepared questions.
My first question had to do with the book JFK in Vietnam, by John Newman.
I asked him about back channels from Lyndon Johnson to the CIA, which Newman had discussed in his book.
McNamara said he didn’t know about back channels 3241 if mentioned to McNamara that Colonel Howard Burris, Johnson’s military aide and presumably his conduit to the CIA, had gotten most of his information from USARPAC intelligence bulletins, and it seemed to me that McNamara’s staff would have had access to the same bulletins.
He elaborated that he had a large staff to make certain that he had everything.
Concerning the Honolulu conference on November 20, 1963 (in which the status of the Vietnam War was discussed with the top generals, military advisors, and cabinet members), I noted that Newman, in his ° ce book, seemed to be saying that this was the moment of McNamara’s “awakening” to the deterioration of our military position in Vietnam.
McNamara replied that he absolutely did not believe that, adding that McGeorge Bundy was above reproach and would never have allowed such a thing to take place.
I asked McNamara if Lyndon Johnson escalated the Vietnam war immediately after he assumed office.
McNamara said absolutely not; that Johnson carried out the continuing policies of Kennedy.
He did elaborate, however, that he believed Kennedy would have gotten us out of Vietnam whereas Johnson didn’t.
I responded yes, but Newman wrote that this was just a paper shuffle instead of removing actual combat helicopters along with men.
McNamara replied, “I don’t remember much about helicopters, but a thousand men were taken out.
Concerning the Bay of Pigs, I asked McNamara if John Kennedy had refused to go ahead with the air strikes when the invasion went awry.
He added that after the invasion started to go bad, the CIA asked for air strikes which had not been promised to them, and that he and John Kennedy made the decision not to provide them.
He emphasized that this was entirely different from saying that Kennedy withheld air strikes that had been promised.
McNamara replied that it was absolutely not true and “not true on its face,” because Bissell was the one who had planned the Bay of Pigs and wanted the air strikes, but Kennedy and McNamara would not go along with Bissell.
He said Bissell was his good friend, a very bright man and extremely capable, who had a great record having managed the highly successful U2 operation, but that Bissell simply blew it on the Bay of Pigs.
He said that Bissell was the last person in the world who would not have relayed Kennedy’s approval of air strikes if they had been given, but Kennedy had not given approval.
I told McNamara about my friend Jim Lance, who was one of six Navy frogmen who were sent ashore to reconnoiter the invasion site at the Bay of Pigs.
After returning to his ship, Lance observed from offshore what was happening in the invasion, and that Kennedy not only withdrew air support but also cut off all supplies to the beachhead.
McNamara again repeated that Kennedy had never promised air support in the first place.
He said that he did not know about the cutoff of supplies, though he seemed to . acknowledge that it could have happened.
McNamara said that the Bay of Pigs was supposed to have been a totally deniable project (deniable that the United States was involved) and was designed to create an uprising of the Cuban populace, which didn’t take place.
He added that, furthermore, the United States invasion plans had been penetrated by Castro’s intelligence and Castro knew about it; that Castro’s forces were there waiting for the invaders; and that all Kennedy had done was refuse to allow certain air strikes that were not in the plan.
I pointed out that Jim Lance had told me that everybody blamed and hated Kennedy (everybody being the military and CIA men involved in the Bay of Pigs operation); and that an admiral during the crisis was cursing Kennedy, blaming him for the fiasco.
McNamara responded that he could see that this possibly was true (that Kennedy was blamed for the fiasco), but implied that Kennedy did not deserve the blame.
I also told McNamara what Jim Lance had told me that he and a team were sent aboard Russian ships leaving Cuba to inspect for missiles, and were instructed to do nothing but give away Zippo lighters and not look at anything.
McNamara said that was not true because no one boarded any Russian ships to inspect for missiles.
He said that the United States did do flyovers fifty feet above the Russian ships and took photographs of the above-decks, which was the sum total of the inspection.
I asked him if it were true that no missile inspections were done in the Cuban mainland.
He replied affirmatively; part of the agreement allowed the United States to inspect for missiles in Cuba, but Castro reneged.
He added that once Castro had reneged, we were no longer held to the agreement not to invade Cuba.
We discussed whether Kennedy had actually agreed never to invade Cuba, and he seemed to hang up on that a bit.
I pointed out that it did not seem likely that we would agree never to invade Cuba because that would obviously be something that would be impossible to promise in good faith.
I questioned McNamara about Robert Morrow’s story that Morrow was a CIA operative who went on a covert expedition into Cuba for the CIA, at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, to check for evidence of the beginning of construction of offensive missile sites in Cuba.
McNamara replied that he didn’t know about covert missions, but certainly they would not have been looking for missile sites because there was no buildup of missile sites in Cuba until May 1962 at the earliest.
He said he is absolutely certain of this based on conferences he had with top military people in the Soviet Union during the last few years and a conference with Fidel Castro and Soviet top people in Cuba.
He was positive there were no missile sites under construction before May 1962.
I asked McNamara if there were nuclear warheads actually mounted on missiles in Cuba at the time of the Cuban missile crisis.
According to McNamara, the CIA had informed Kennedy that there were no nuclear warheads in Cuba at the time of the crisis.
McNamara said the CIA qualified its statement by stating “they could not be absolutely certain,” but in recent years, this was found to have been bad information.
I said it was my understanding that McNamara recommended to Kennedy that he base his decisions on the assumption that there were nuclear warheads there, since the possibility existed.
In discussing Project Mongoose, I asked McNamara if he had ever heard of William Pawley.
I asked McNamara if he had heard that Henry Luce financed private operations against Castro in the Caribbean.
McNamara reflected that he could not believe that all the honorable men in the Warren Commission would have allowed themselves to be involved in a cover-up.
He said he knew Gerald Ford personally and did not believe that Gerald Ford would have gone along with a cover-up.
He added that he also couldn’t understand how Earl Warren would have been manipulated.
I pointed out that I had transcripts of the LBJ tapes showing how Johnson browbeat people and used the nuclear war scare to break Earl Warren down until he was crying before he finally agreed to accept the chairmanship of the Warren Commission.
McNamara contended that if Johnson were orchestrating a cover-up, it did not make sense to him that such distinguished people would have been appointed to the Warren Commission.
I replied that Johnson had first proposed a Texas commission to investigate the assassination, but he quickly withdrew the idea when objections were raised against it.
I pointed out that Johnson was in a position of having to avoid a congressional investigation and had to appoint prominent people, and that some of these people who signed the report did so very reluctantly.
I also explained that Johnson appointed Hoover as a sole investigator of the assassination and that Johnson shut down the Secret Service investigation as well as the investigation of the Dallas police.
I then elaborated that there is a huge list of things Hoover did in the investigation that kept substantial information from the Warren Commission.
Concerning J Edgar Hoover, I explained that I was currently in a dilemma because Hoover’s personal paranoia and hypersensitivity could have led him to cover up anything.
My point was that Hoover could have been involved in a cover-up simply to save himself from the embarrassment that Oswald was an FBI informer, or from having known about Oswald in advance, etc.
I recounted the story of British double-agent Dusan “Dusko” Popov and Hoover’s refusal to listen to Popov because of a personal pique that Hoover had against him.
He responded that it wasn’t common talk as far as he knew, but Hoover was a homosexual and had tremendous motivation to do anything to keep that information from becoming public, and therefore was vulnerable to blackmail.
I reflected to McNamara that if you look at the JFK assassination, the RFK assassination, and the Martin Luther King assassination, there is a common thread among all of them, and that thread is J Edgar Hoover.
McNamara seemed startled by my statement, but was non responsive, so I went on to something else.
To repeat, it was quite interesting to me how little McNamara knew about the details of the Kennedy assassination.
Here was a man close to both John Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, who was practically a member of the Kennedy family, yet had not followed much of anything about conspiracy allegations or theories over the years except in the broadest sense—only what was commonly known to the general public.
It appeared that McNamara had accepted the results of the Warren Commission because it was comprised of such honorable men.
Like millions of other Americans, including myself until I wrote this book, McNamara had put the tragic event behind him, moving on to the present from the past.
He also refused to believe that officials of the federal government could have been involved.
During the course of the evening, I mentioned Robert Caro’s story that Lyndon Johnson had his campus operatives use razor blades to cut out pages of his college yearbook that were unfavorable to Johnson’s image.
I added that even at the age of twenty Johnson had his political organization in college to do this for him.
I described this incident as illuminating a basic character trait of Lyndon Johnson.
I told him I had read most of Dallek’s book and had heard this praise from others.
At one point McNamara confided that Hoover certainly had a vendetta against Martin Luther King and had great conflicts with Robert Kennedy.
He mentioned he didn’t know about Hoover’s conflicts with John Kennedy.
McNamara later raised the question about Kennedy’s womanizing as if it somehow related to the Kennedy assassination, but the conversation dropped at that point.
At about 9:00m., McNamara said he had another commitment and insisted on driving me back to the hotel, rather than my getting a taxi.
During the drive, he remarked how much he had enjoyed the evening, how much he was impressed with my knowledge, and how surprised he was about it.
He pointedly beseeched me to realize that, of the people he knew in the CIA and government, he sincerely believed they were doing what they thought was the right thing for their country.
As a final statement, when I got out of the car, McNamara commented that what I was doing was very interesting but he thought I was on the wrong tack.
Perhaps that was for the best, keeping the discussion on the broad political and motivational issues.
In my view, McNamara is certainly a most honorable man, a dedicated public servant, and an important man in history.
He seems to represent the same type of thinking that I encountered with Admiral Shepard.
Neither disputed that there was a conspiracy; neither would put anything past J Edgar Hoover; but neither could believe that “government” could have been connected to the Kennedy assassination.
I reflected that these two people, both very close to Kennedy and Johnson, perhaps represent the thinking of the Washington establishment.
Their mentality may explain why it is so difficult to penetrate this thinking.
They knew Kennedy; they knew Johnson; they knew the military and CIA people.
I could see the need for more discussions with McNamara if it could be arranged.
I telephoned McNamara once when I was in Washington, D.C., but he had just returned from a 55,000-mile trip in Asia and was on his way to Europe.
After returning to California, I turned my attention to the military itself.
Motives of the Military to Assassinate John Kennedy It is historic fact that John Kennedy was in deep conflict with the military chiefs in the years and months preceding his assassination.
It had reached the point that Kennedy would rarely speak to the chiefs.
He conducted his business with them mostly through the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, General Maxwell Taylor, whom Kennedy had appointed and trusted.
Kennedy was aghast at the crazy antics of General Curtis LeMay, commander of the Air Force.
He had come to look upon LeMay and his nuclear bombs as a threat to the human race.
Kennedy had gotten into the practice of walking out of meetings when LeMay or other generals were making presentations.
I told you to keep them away from me,” he once remarked to no one in particular as he was leaving the Cabinet room Sa Privately, Kennedy had begun to express concern about a military coup.
We were out on the “Honey Fitz’ again the next day, and the President said he had read Seven isa ie Days in May the previous night.
It could happen in this country, but the conditions would have to be just right.
If, for example, the country had a young President, and he had a Bay of Pigs, there would be a certain uneasiness.
Maybe the military would do a little criticizing behind his back, but this would be written off as the usual military dissatisfaction with civilian control.
The military chiefs’ contempt and animosity toward John Kennedy have been noted in previous chapters.
The chiefs would speak derisively of Kennedy in public in a manner that would be shocking today.
The chiefs strongly opposed Kennedy’s plans for nuclear disarmament and rapprochement with the Soviets.
One graphic instance was reported by author Richard Reeves in his recent book President Kennedy.
During the Cuban missile crisis, Robert McNamara was trying to explain to Admiral George Anderson the need to see the Cuban blockade in political terms—the communication of political signals.
McNamara asked the chief, who was sitting in his conference room with a row of his top subordinates, all in full uniform.
I have faith in my officers,” said Anderson, his face glowing with anger.
I don’t give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done,” said McNamara.
The chiefs resented the Kennedys and their whiz kids who had little or no experience in military command; the chiefs were accustomed to presidents who let them do their thing without meddlesome interference from politicians.
Another admiral with disdain for President Kennedy was Arleigh Burke, chief of naval operations.
Admiral Burke felt that Kennedy had “chickened out” in the Bay of Pigs.
Burke was the source of the leak of a special panel report on the Bay of Pigs that was authorized by Kennedy.
Suspecting General Charles Cabell (brother of the mayor of Dallas and Allen Dulles’s protégé and top man in the CIA), Kennedy mistakenly fired him, 1333 adding one more angry general to the growing list.
Perhaps the two most dangerous of all the generals were Curtis LeMay and his head of the Strategic Air Command, General Thomas Power.
Meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were alluded to by some as a three-ring circus.
There are many stories of LeMay’s crudeness in dealing with his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Petulant and often childish when he didn’t get his way, LeMay would light a cigar and blow smoke in the direction of anyone challenging his position.
To show utter disgust, he would walk into the private Joint Chiefs of Staff toilet, leave the door open, urinate or break wind loudly, and flush the commode a number of aggravating times.
He would then saunter calmly back into the meeting pretending that nothing had happened.
When angry with individual staff members, he would resort to sarcasm; if that failed, he would direct his wrath to the entire staff LeMay was in policy conflicts with the Joint Chiefs.
He battled with Admiral Arleigh Burke over the control of the nuclear Polaris submarines.
LeMay wanted them under his command and actually achieved some control in the Pacific theater.
But Burke successfully fought the Air Force every way he knew—in the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in Congress, and in the presse any way to prevent LeMay’s power grab.
LeMay was the foremost proponent of the nuclear first strike, saying that we should give the Russians the ay “Sunday punch” before they did it to us.
In the 1950s, under Eisenhower, LeMay had the authority to order a nuclear strike without presidential authorization if the president could not be contacted.
That option was extended down to General Thomas Powers, head of SAC, whom LeMay himself described as “‘not stable” and a “sadist LeMay’s proposal for a nuclear first strike and massive destruction of the Soviets was thwarted by Eisenhower, whom LeMay came to consider as indecisive.
He was even more disgusted with Kennedy, whom LeMay believed to be a coward.
LeMay talked openly about a preemptive attack in which one hundred million people would be killed.
If ever there were a mad, rogue general who would lead a coup, it would appear to have been General Curtis LeMay.
After LeMay retired from the Air Force, he teamed with Alabama governor George Wallace in an oid ; unsuccessful candidacy for the vice presidency.
In the years following his unsuccessful political race, he became somewhat of a recluse, seldom leaving his home.
A prime example of the deep conflict between John Kennedy and the military involved a study of a massive preemptive strike, in which every missile and bomb in the United States arsenal would be unloaded against the Soviet Union and China.
It is difficult now to imagine that such a doomsday option was seriously contemplated and promoted by the United States military.
The plan was presented in a National Security Council meeting on July 20, 1961.
The plan involved 1,060 bombs or warheads, 3,729 targets, and 1530 missiles and bombers on full alert.
Not a “portion of the plan,” but the whole thing 44) From the information available, the Joint Chiefs’ argument appears to have been that there would be a window of opportunity for such a strike in late 1963 without the United States having to suffer unacceptable damage from counter-attack.
The logic was that the Soviets had very few ballistic missiles in 1961, but that by the fall of 1963 their arsenal would be built to the point where the window of opportunity for a pre-emptive nuclear strike by the United States would be coming to an end, while at the same time the United States arsenal would be optimally ready to launch.
TOP SECRET—EYES ONLY Notes on National Security Council Meeting July 20, 1961 General Hickey, Chairman of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, presented the annual report of his group.
General Lemnitzer stated that the assumption of this year’s study was a surprise attack in late 1963, preceded by a period of heightened tensions.
After the presentation by General Hickey and by the various members of the Subcommittee, the President asked if there had ever been made an assessment of damage results to the U.S.S.R. which would be incurred by a preemptive attack.
General Lemnitzer stated that such studies had been made and that he would bring them over and discuss them personally with the President.
In recalling General Hickey’s opening statement that these studies have been made since 1957, the President asked for an appraisal of the trend in the effectiveness of the attack.
General Lemnitzer replied that he would also discuss this with the President.
Since the basic assumption of this year’s presentation was an attack in late 1963, the President asked about probable effects in the winter of 1962.
Mr Dulles observed that the attack would be much less effective since there would be considerably fewer missiles involved.
General Lemnitzer added a word of caution about accepting the precise findings of the Committee since these findings were based upon certain assumptions which themselves might not be valid.
The President posed the question as to the period of time necessary for citizens to remain in shelters following an attack.
The President directed that no member in attendance at the meeting disclose even the subject of the meeting.
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., later wrote, “Kennedy got up and walked out in the middle of the meeting and , 4 4 that was the end of it.
Dorff speculated that it possibly could have had something to do with the JFK assassination —perhaps the primary motive.
He noted that the surprise attack was planned, ominously, for the fall of 1963.
The generals might have thought that they could not depend on Kennedy to have the guts to push the nuclear button when we first detected the Soviets’ launch of their nuclear rockets.
After all, the reasoning would go, Kennedy had failed to act in the Bay of Pigs and had failed to act in the Cuban missile crisis—and only by assassinating Kennedy and thus freeing the chiefs would they be enabled to launch a first nuclear strike against the Soviets, thereby preserving the United States from annihilation.
After a few weeks of mild discussions, off and on, Dorff and I both agreed that the idea was so farfetched that it barely deserved thought, except as a plot for a novel, which was all Dorff had intended in the first place.
But rather than rule out the idea completely, I have included it here if only to illustrate the schism between Kennedy and the military, which it certainly does.
It is interesting to note that Lyndon Johnson was being kept up to speed on this subject by his aide, Colonel Howard Burris, who wrote the memo on the NSC meeting.
As noted earlier, John Newman, in his book JFK in Vietnam, wrote that Colonel Burris provided Lyndon Johnson with back-channel information on the status of the war in Vietnam during the months preceding the Kennedy assassination.
The information, according to Newman, revealed a very pessimistic picture of the way things were going in Vietnam, as opposed to McNamara’s relatively optimistic picture, which McNamara honestly reported to the public as he had heard it.
It did not seem to me that there was enough motivation on their part to go to the extreme act of assassinating a president.
True, there was deep conflict, but the personal survival of the military leaders was not at stake.
They had their pensions and a comfortable life ahead, no matter what Kennedy did.
Specific Evidence of Military Involvement Two actions of the military stand out as strong indications of military culpability in the plot.
First is the fact that in 1973 the Pentagon outrageously ordered destruction of all documents in its military intelligence files concerning Oswald/Hidell.
One might suspect that there was something so terrible in them that it absolutely should not see the light of day.
In a court of law, if a suspect is caught destroying evidence, it is advocated as tantamount to proof of guilt.
If a person who is highly suspected of being one of the conspirators is caught destroying evidence, a juror would be obliged to seriously consider that person as part of the conspiracy.
A second indication of military complicity in the JFK assassination were the actions of military personnel during and after the autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Yet with a few minor exceptions, all except Navy enlisted men have kept their mouths shut ever since.
There are several other items of evidence in the assassination indicating complicity of the military that deserve consideration.
One is that the first person to interview Marina Oswald after the assassination was an Army reserve intelligence officer by the name of Jack Crichton.
Five hours after the assassination, Crichton had telephoned White Russian immigrant Ilya Mamantov, an ultra-right-winger and geologist with Sun Oil Company.
Present at the incredible questioning was the supposed liberal Ruth Paine, who curiously was an acquaintance of right-winger Mamantov.
You may recall that this was typical of the strange mixture of liberals and right wingers in Dallas—the liberals being the Paines and the Oswalds, and the right wingers seemingly being everybody that they knew.
It was Marina’s later testimony to the Warren Commission that would incriminate her husband in the assassination.
Years later, she would recant and state that she believed he was framed.
But in 1963 she was a vulnerable young woman who could easily have been intimidated into saying what the United States government wanted her to say.
After all, she was a Russian Communist and unaccustomed to bucking the power structure, and she was subject to possible deportation.
Another item of utmost significance has to do with an Army private by the name of Eugene B Dinkin 2241 8351 Dinkin was a cryptographic code operator for United States Army Ordinance, stationed in Metz, France, in 1963.
He had received the required crypto clearance, the highest given by the military.
He went AWOL and left Metz, France, traveling by train to Geneva, Switzerland, where he told his story to the editor of the Geneva Diplomat.
The CIA would later confirm this in a letter to the Warren Commission written by Richard Helms on May 11, 1964 and stamped “Received” by the Warren Commission on May 19, 1964.
This letter did not appear in the Warren Commission Report or its twenty-six volumes.
It was suppressed until released in 1976, but with Dinkin’s name deleted.
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr J Les Rankin General Counsel President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy SUBJECT: Allegations of Pfc.
Eugene B DINKIN United States Army, Relative to Assassination Plot Against President Kennedy 1.
Reference is made to paragraph 2 of your memorandum, dated February 12, 1964, requesting that the Commission be furnished copies of disseminations relative to the assassination of President Kennedy that were sent to the Secret Service.
Immediately after the assassination the CIA in Geneva, Switzerland, reported allegations concerning a plot to assassinate President Kennedy that were made by Pfc.
DINKIN, United States Army, serial number RA-76710292, on 6 and 7 November 1963, in Geneva while absent without leave from his unit in Metz, France.
This dissemination was sent to the White House, Department of State and Federal Bureau of Investigation, with a copy to the Secret Service.
Since the cooperated with the United States Military Attache in assembling information on this affair, and the Military Attache reported through his channels, the Commission may have already received information of Pfc.
Because sensitive sources and methods were involved, an appropriate sensitivity indicator has been affixed to this memorandum and its attachment.
Richard Helms Richard Helms Deputy Director for Plans 11 May 1964 B24 What we see here is documented proof that the CIA, the White House, and the Warren Commission knew of Eugene B Dinkin’s prediction of President Kennedy’s assassination well before the Commission report was issued.
Moreover, the White House knew about this prediction on November 29, 1963, only one week after the assassination and at the same time that Lyndon Johnson was assembling the Warren Commission.
On December 1, 1995, the National Archives released an earlier CIA teletype that was apparently the initial source for Helms’ letter.
Your attention is called to the following series of incidents which have produced a report alleging there was advance information on the assassination of the late President Kennedy.
On 4 November 1963, a United States Army Pfc Eugene B Dinkin, serial number RA 76710292, about 24 years old, went absent without leave from his unit, Headquarters Company, United States Army General Depot, Metz, France.
He apparently entered Switzerland using a false army identification card with forged travel orders.
On 6 and 7 November 1963 he appeared in the press room of United Nations Office in Geneva and told reporters he was being persecuted.
Army reports show that he voluntarily returned to his unit in next Metz on or about 11 November 1963.
Around 26 November 1963, after President Kennedy had been assassinated, a Geneva journalist named Alex Des Fontaines, stringer for Time-Life and correspondent for Radio Canada, was reported to be filing a story to the Paris office of Time-Life recounting Private Dinkin’s visit to Geneva and quoting Dinkin as having said that “they” were plotting against President Kennedy and that “something” would happen in Texas.
Des Fontaines had been prompted to do this by an unidentified female reporter who had recalled such statements by Dinkin; Des Fontaine thought he recalled he had heard Dinkin say something like that also, and although he did not really believe that Dinkin had grounds for his statements when he made them, he filed the story just to be sure.
All aspects of this story were known, as reported above, by United States Military authorities and have been reported by military attache cable through military channels.
Declassified CIA files state that Dinkin’s warnings were known to several people before November 22, 1963.
His warnings started on October 22, 1963, when he mailed a letter to Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
I did offer in this letter a warning that an attempt to assassinate President Kennedy would occur on November 28th, 1963; that if it were to succeed, blame would then be placed upon a Communist or Negro, who would be designated the assassin; and believing that the conspiracy was being engineered by elements of the military, I did speculate that a military coup might ensue.
Also, Joseph Milteer, racist and member of the Ku Klux Klan, made similar predictions.
Predictions of Dinkin and Milteer that Actually Happened Dinkin and Milteer predicted assassination will be in November 1963.
Dinkin predicted assassination will occur in Texas Dinkin predicted assassination will be blamed on a communist.
Dinkin predicted assassination will be blamed on a Negro Dinkin and Milteer predicted right wing involved in plot.
Dinkin predicted military involved in plot Milteer predicted rifle fire from a tall building Milteer predicted someone will be picked up after the shooting Dinkin, twenty-five years old at the time, appears to have been a very astute young man.
He was concerned that his message would never get through to the proper authorities.
So, upon dispatching his letter, Dinkin set out to Luxembourg to give the same message to European embassies there with the thought that it would get through to the United States government.
But no one in Luxembourg would listen to him except the Israel ambassador who advised him how to approach the American embassy.
Dinkin subsequently took the message to the American embassy, where he was assured by a Mr Cunningham that the message would be transmitted to the ambassador, who was playing tennis at the time.
Before Dinkin completed his journey, he went to Frankfurt, Germany, and told his story to the Overseas Weekly on November 6, 1963, which advised him to return to his military base in order to avoid AWOL charges.
When he did so, he was placed under arrest by Army intelligence and on November 13, 1963, nine days before the assassination, was confined to a psychiatric hospital in a closed ward, where he remained until the evening after the assassination.
He was then approached by a Secret Service agent who asked him whether he thought the plot was from the right or left.
He was led to believe that in order to “get well” he must state that he was only looking for attention, otherwise he would be “treated” with electric shock.
It is now known that at that time the CIA and the Army Air Force were deeply involved in such mind-control experiments.
Perhaps these were the “‘sensitive methods” mentioned by Helms in his letter to the Warren Commission.
The involvement of the CIA and United States Air Force in mind-control experiments using LSD and hypnosis was confirmed to me in a taped interview with Dr.
West is a psychiatrist who was director of the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute in Los Angeles between 1969 and 1989.
He was a major in the United States Air Force Medical Corp in 1956 when he left the military.
He accepted a grant from the Geschicter Fund to experiment in the use of LSD and a grant from the Air Force to do research in brainwashing.
I did have these connections, it was never any secret and I never felt ashamed of it.
When I told the CIA about my views on LSD, they didn’t particularly want to hear or they didn’t believe it, I told them to forget it...that it was just too unreliable for any systematic use... but they kept on looking into it.
Whether it was a success or not remains uncertain, although it is one of the participating scientists’ opinion that it was useful for creating patsies.
There is a body of evidence that Oswald was subjected to hypnosis by amateur hypnotist David Ferrie; and that Sirhan Sirhan, the convicted assassin of Robert Kennedy, had been subjected to brainwashing techniques.
It is also alleged that James Earl Ray, the convicted assassin of Martin Luther King, Jr., had been subjected to hypnosis.
The MK ULTRA program was sponsored by Allen Dulles through Richard Helms.
Sidney Gottlieb, who also developed poisons and toxins for the CIA’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program.
Dec., 1963 Dear Mr Kennedy I am writing in behalf of my son, Eugene Dinkin, in hopes that you will be able to render some assistance in the situation which has arisen.
He is being held as a psychiatric case under circumstances which are highly questionable.
He has explained the events leading up to his hospitalization to me in detail in a clear and lucid manner, and I am not satisfied that he is being lawfully held.
He wrote to the Overseas Weekly and afterwards lost his crypto security clearance.
Black came into the orderly room of his company and phoned psychiatrist Col.
Hutson and gave him a direct order to find him psychologically unfit to handle security information, and to write a paranoic evaluation.
Kennedy would be assassinated in the month of November, most likely Nov., 1963.
Military had already had knowledge that he was conducting a semantics study of the “Stars and Stripes” newspaper.
He thought they knew he had already predicted the assassination of Pres.
Kennedy; therefore when he requested a fourteen day leave, they turned it down, and scheduled another psycho-evaluation, presumably to have him committed to Landstahl Hospital.
Therefore on November first he went AWOL into Switzerland to warn them about the assassination.
He tried to find Mr Kroons, Life Reporter in Geneva but he was on vacation in Portugal.
He claims Private Larry Pullen now discharged from Metz Germany mailed a letter he had written to you, which may have been intercepted by the Army.
He insists that I contact or write to you, as he knows through his semantic study how the assassination was planned.
If there is any way, or if you can arrange to send some one to talk with him, some very important information may come of this.
As a mother I believe him, and anxiously hope that you will see fit to look into this matter.
He stated that if he had desired, he could have “faked” the answers to prove he was sane even if he were, in fact, mentally disturbed.
Mr Dinkin stated he believed that the psychiatric evaluation given him by the Army psychiatrist was, in fact, an attempt on their part to cover up the military plot which he had attempted to expose Sool The United States government’s practice of suppressing important witnesses in the Kennedy assassination by declaring them to be mentally deranged has been emphasized in previous chapters.
Also, Gilberto Alvarado Ugarte was given the “ERthyroid treatment” and threatened with the possibility of being declared to require extended psychiatric confinement.
And, to be discussed later, Richard Case Nagell, a CIA agent who, in September 1963, predicted the Kennedy assassination in Dallas after he was arrested in El Paso, Texas; he was declared by government psychiatrists to be mentally unstable and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary.
Therefore, it should not be difficult to believe that Private Dinkin was confined in Walter Reed psychiatric ward for four months where he was brainwashed using “sensitive” methods.
They all had made statements about the assassination before November 22 that could have blown the case wide open had their statements been investigated thoroughly and objectively.
In all cases there is solid evidence from witnesses to verify that these predictions were actually made before the assassination.
Dick Russell wrote that as Jim Garrison’s people pieced together the Dinkin story, they saw that one of Dinkin’s duties as a code breaker had been to decipher cable traffic that originated with the French oas PO Garrison’s investigators interviewed some of Dinkin’s former Army associates which led to the conclusion that he had been hospitalized until he memorized a cover story.
The French OAS, as noted earlier, was a source for William Harvey’s stable of assassins in Europe.
The reader will recall that FBI documents show that Jean Souetre/Michel Mertz of the OAS was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and had visited General Edwin Walker in April 1963.
Dinkin was released from the hospital and the United States Army with a medical discharge.
In 1975 he filed a lawsuit against the United States government but, unbelievably, even then he professed that he had somehow been led by news stories to predict the Kennedy assassination.
If Dinkin had been brainwashed or severely Bye intimidated by threats, it appears to have worked.
People, most people, can be broken down if threatened by powerful, ruthless forces.
Although we do not know with certainty where Dinkin got the information that led to his conclusion that Kennedy would be assassinated in November by right-wing extremists and a military group, we do know that he made these predictions and that neither the FBI nor the CIA nor anybody else has ever disputed that.
It is utterly fantastic that Dinkin could have made the predictions, in detail on five major aspects of the JFK assassination plot, based on piecing together information from military newspapers.
It is vastly more likely that he obtained the information in his job as a code breaker.
Nowhere in the documents, however, have I been able to confirm that Dinkin said he obtained the information in his official duties.
If Dinkin had revealed the secret information from his code breaking, he would have been confessing guilt of violating his secret clearance and would have been subject to a severe penalty, likely imprisonment.
It is evident that Dinkin wanted to be free, to get out of the Army, and to be released from confinement in a psychiatric hospital.
Powell was seen on the sixth floor near where the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle was allegedly found.
He claimed that he had been watching the motorcade from the corner of Houston and Elm Street, the site of the assassination.
He said he immediately joined with a group of sheriff's deputies who went behind the building to the railroad yard where they thought shots had come from.
Powell recalled that he subsequently went into the building to make a phone call, whereupon he was trapped.
Very disturbing testimony implicating the Army was reported by Colonel Fletcher Prouty.
He wrote that Army units expressly trained to protect the president were told to “stand down” and not provide protection in Dallas.
Incredibly, there were no Secret Service men or other protection personnel at all in the area of the Elm Street slowdown zone.
It is documented that Secret Service men in Fort Worth were told they would not be needed in Dallas.
The commander of an army unit, specially trained in protection and based in nearby San Antonio, Texas, had been told he and his men would not be needed in Dallas.
The implication of this is that the protection of the president in Dallas was deliberately withheld upon orders from above, and that objections to those orders had been overridden; that the Army acquiesced, even though it knew Oswald was dangerous.
The material in this chapter, taken in its totality, raises extremely serious questions concerning the military.
Hunt and had met with Hunt and other military intelligence people before conducting the interrogation.
The Army ordered the destruction of all documents in its files concerning Oswald/Hidell.
High-ranking medical officers in the Navy and Army participated in the autopsy cover-up.
Army cryptographer Eugene B Dinkin predicted the approximate date of the assassination and projected that it involved the United States military and right-wing economic groups.
Moreover, he predicted that the plot would be blamed on the Communists or a Negro, and that is exactly the false evidence that was manufactured in Mexico City.
Repressive psychiatric measures were used against him to silence him, as were used against numerous other witnesses.
The Army protection unit for presidential motorcades was ordered by the Secret Service to “stand down” and not come to Dallas despite objections from the commander of that unit.
For myself, my original bias that the military was not involved in the plot has been severely weakened by analysis of the evidence.
It certainly appears that some elements of the United States military were involved in the plot.
They could have been reserve Army elements, reserve Air Force or military intelligence, or, more disturbingly, certain high-ranking officers, still on duty, working with those reservists who had aligned themselves with right-wing extremists.
But there seems to be nothing substantial that could link the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a group in the assassination.
On the contrary, because the Joint Chiefs seem to have been in such disarray, and to have had a wide range of entrenched convictions, various character traits, and idiosyncrasies, it is virtually unthinkable to me that they could all have gotten together and decided to kill the president, sitting around the table in a Joint Chiefs meeting.
I viewed these as very important questions; in fact, the central questions to be answered in understanding the conspiracy.
I saw the need to open my mind to the possibilities that Colonel Fletcher Prouty might be right, rather than reject his theory out of hand, which I was inclined to do.
I was shaken with the growing realization that the United States Army, or Army intelligence, was very likely involved in the plot.
Strangely, the thought that elements of the United States Army could have assassinated the president of the United States was more frightening to me than if Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover— or even the CI[A—were the prime conspirators.
Was it that if the Army were involved in the assassination it could well have meant military coup, likely of an ideological nature, totally at odds with the foundation of my hypothesis that the conspiracy was motivated by the self-survival of powerful individuals.
Robert McNamara had strongly agreed with me that the power elite of the military-industrial complex did not kill Kennedy.
It lasted about one hour on the telephone from 4m. to 5m. on October 24, 1995.
Prouty had to end the conversation to meet another commitment but we agreed to meet the next day for lunch at 11:45m. at Joe Theissman’s restaurant on Route 7 in Alexandria, Virginia.
I went to meet Prouty for lunch at our designated spot, but found out later that there were two Joe Theissman restaurants in Alexandria, and my cab driver, despite my having instructed him to go to Route 7, had taken me to the wrong restaurant.
I waited about an hour and a half, during which I called Prouty’s house twice but only got an answering machine.
Finally I decided to take a cab directly to his home, hoping that perhaps he would be there.
She let me in the house and said that her husband was not there and she didn’t know when he would be back.
After a discussion, we decided I should wait in the study and see what happened.
It turned out that he had waited for me for an hour in front of the other Joe Theissman restaurant and had finally gone in and had lunch, run an errand, and then come home.
Prouty is a very distinguished-looking man, tall and slender, of a very keen mind, and appears to be in good health.
On the contrary, he was every inch a mainstream, solid citizen, by appearance and demeanor.
From the beginning of our conversation, Prouty was not hesitant to say that he still believes that the “Secret Team” ordered the assassination of President Kennedy.
His main point was that only an ultra-powerful group of very wealthy individuals, controlling the levers of power in industry, the media, and the financial world, could have kept the lid on the truth about the assassination all these years.
Prouty said that when he was at the Pentagon, down the hall from him was an office which was unofficially called the “office of cover-and-deception’”—thirty times larger than his office.
The purpose of the cover-and-deception office was to create cover stories for various operations, not necessarily of a sinister nature.
Prouty said that John Kennedy’s election in 1960 was an extreme, traumatic shock to people in the Pentagon.
I suggested that John J McCloy was possibly a member of the Secret Team.
Later in our conversation, however, Prouty did say that ARAMCO was an example of forces on the Secret Team.
He also agreed that a media giant such as Henry Luce could have been on the Secret Team.
Prouty made it clear that he fully supports the belief that in 1963 the real power in this country was the power elite who told the government what to do, and who could get direct access to government assassination teams if they decided they needed it.
He said that this access could bypass the entire military and go directly to the assassination teams.
Of all I got from Prouty, this had the most impact on me and was the most difficult to believe.
Prouty agreed with me that there was no evidence to believe that the Joint Chiefs of Staff were behind the plot.
Prouty didn’t comment when I said that LeMay might be the one of the Joint Chiefs crazy enough to get involved in the plot.
Prouty agreed that JFK had frightened the power elite, across the board—banking, finance, steel, defense, oil, etc.
These people, Prouty said, rule the country—the government does not rule the country, it reports to these people.
When I came to a part where I disagreed with Prouty in his portrayal of the power elite as being evil, he objected to use of the word.
This led to a conversation in which he compared the beliefs of the power elite to religion.
I asked Prouty about the Trilateral Commission being part of the power elite.
I asked him about the beliefs of some people that the Trilateral Commission decided who was going to be president.
He elaborated that he had definitely confirmed this with his friend who had received the orders to stand down.
He said that only some entity—very, very powerful—could have ordered that.
Prouty said that he was in charge of military protection of the president in 1963 but, strangely, for his first time ever, was sent to the South Pole and was returning via New Zealand on November 22, 1963.
He discussed at length how surprised he was that only a few hours after the assassination, newspapers had complete photographs, descriptions, and histories of Oswald as the lone assassin.
He said that this could have been achieved only by an orchestrated cover story by very powerful interests.
He said that the military had hit teams and covert teams for worldwide application.
These operations were extremely well planned, with systematic cover stories making them impossible to detect.
To illustrate how the high cabal worked, Prouty told a story of a meeting he had with Allen Dulles and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles about a very important crisis involving the Soviet Union.
He said that John Foster Dulles had picked up a white phone from a bookshelf in his library, talked to a highlevel civilian in the Soviet Union, and settled the matter right then and there.
I said that this seemed to mean that Dulles was in fact part of the Secret Team.
He said that the Russian on the other end of the line and Dulles were simply carrying out a function of the Secret Team but neither of them was on the Secret Team.
The real power of the world, he repeated, is in the high cabal, above these servants.
I told Prouty about McNamara’s conviction that Dulles and Helms were not involved in a plot to assassinate the president.
He said that he too knew Dulles and Helms, they were his friends, and in no way could they have been involved in the plot.
I asked Prouty how on earth could this Secret Team have used military hit teams to kill Kennedy without Dulles and Helms having known something about it.
Prouty said that Dulles was just a lawyer and really not involved in CIA operations.
Prouty again remarked that the Pentagon was in shock and dismay when JFK was elected.
He said that many, or most, military people in the Pentagon had contempt for Kennedy, but there were also people like himself who admired him.
Prouty emphasized that the TFX contract was a major item, and that Curtis LeMay was enraged when Kennedy and McNamara took it over and awarded it to General Dynamics.
Prouty said that it was the largest single military contract ever let at that time.
We discussed how JFK and McNamara took away the generals’ control of the purse strings.
He agreed that this was a major item for consideration as to motive in the assassination.
Many times in our conversation he advised me to address adequately the cover story aspect of the assassination.
He said that only the power elite could have sustained that story over the years, that this was accomplished through their control of the media and the military-industrial-financial complex.
He commented that he had once asked a top CIA person how they influenced all of these sectors to do their bidding.
When I questioned Prouty about McNamara’s seeming lack of knowledge of the Kennedy assassination, Prouty said it did not surprise him at all.
He said McNamara was probably as shocked and in the dark and confused as anybody about it, as he himself was.
I asked him if he thought that the CIA could have known almost immediately what had happened, after the assassination occurred.
He said they probably realized immediately the full details and thus started the coverup even though they themselves were not involved.
Prouty knew a man by the name of who ran sheep-dip operations for the CIA and military intelligence.
Prouty said that military personnel were recruited from the Marines, Army, Navy, etc., and moved into the CIA as a matter of government policy.
He said that Oswald was in the CIA before he was sent to Japan and that Oswald was picked as an ideal type to be a spy.
Prouty said that he himself dispatched covert teams throughout the world.
He said that Project Mongoose had worldwide application, not just against Cuba.
He said that Mongoose operated a training camp near Lake Pontchartrain in Louisiana where assassins and covert operators were trained.
He suggested that after JFK was killed, LBJ did not get the authentic version; he got a revised version.
I told Prouty that in my discussion with McNamara I brought up the rumors that McGeorge Bundy had participated in the revision, and McNamara had strongly denied it, saying that Bundy would never do anything like that.
I also pointed out that McNamara told me there was no change in JFK policy concerning the Vietnam war after JFK was assassinated; but that JFK, in McNamara’s opinion, would have gotten us out sooner.
I later showed him my section on the first nuclear strike and read the memo by Colonel Howard Burris.
I asked Prouty if he knew where Burris was now and he said no, but that he was a wealthy oil man.
As I read aloud parts of my section on the first nuclear strike, Prouty did not seem to be completely up to date on that subject.
But he was aware of the September 1963 memo and said he had a complete copy of it.
When I described Bob Dorff’s first nuclear strike hypothesis, Prouty seemed to react strongly, as if I had hit a hot button.
Prouty said that Edward Lansdale was his friend and also a next-door neighbor.
Prouty confirmed his statement in his book JFK that it was Lansdale who was photographed in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
Prouty said that the three tramps and the policemen in Dealey Plaza were all a staged part of the cover story.
He said that Lansdale was also a part of the cover story, to provide false leads.
Prouty did comment, however, that Lansdale certainly had no idea that his picture was going to be taken at the scene of the assassination.
Everything Prouty said seemed to implicate the military, but then he said that the military wasn’t involved.
Yet he talked about Lansdale having been sent to Dealey Plaza as part of a cover story.
But this again would indicate to me the involvement of at least one general and one military covert assassination team.
Perhaps that is what Prouty meant by saying that the military was not involved, but it seemed to greatly stretch the fabric.
I showed him my Zapruder film frames and explained my theory of alteration and elimination of frames.
He said there was an innocent explanation for the limousine stopping because Secret Service agent Greer could simply have been confused, not knowing whether to go ahead or stop, thinking he may have heard shots coming from the front or a bullet through the front windshield.
At this point Prouty said that the assassination team could have been brought in from overseas.
When I told him my hypothesis of LBJ involvement in the assassination, Prouty disagreed.
He said LBJ was deathly afraid that he himself was going to be assassinated, and when bullets whizzed over his head at Dealey Plaza it shook him to his roots.
He said that later Bobby came out of it and then he was done away with.
Prouty said that at the time of the assassination, Nixon was actually in Dallas meeting with Pepsi Cola Company top executives, and that Nixon has told four different stories about where he was.
Near the end of the interview, I again presented my argument for the “bottom-up” theory, but with the caveat that the plan could have been given the nod by the Secret Team after it had been put together.
In that way, I explained, the Secret Team would have had maximum deniability, as would LBJ and Hoover.
The assassination plot started at lower levels ; the Mafia recruited CIA rogues; and then the rogues recruited their right-wing and their reserve-military friends, who in turn recruited LBJ and Hoover; and then possibly there was approval from the power elite.
Prouty insisted on driving me to Washington National Airport to catch my plane.
We continued our discussions along the way and some of the latter items were covered in that period.
I suggested that perhaps I could come back to Washington, D.C., with my wife, and he and his wife could go out to dinner with us.
Both Prouty and McNamara agree that Allen Dulles and Richard Helms were not involved in the Kennedy assassination, nor were the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
McNamara and Prouty completely disagree on the involvement of the “high cabal” in the assassination.
Nothing in my conversation with either McNamara or Prouty rules out my hypothesis of the assassination as having emanated first from Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia and then spreading upward to include Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover.
McNamara clarified who gave the order to cancel the critical air strike in the Bay of Pigs operation on D-day.
McNamara stated unequivocally that he and Kennedy made that decision and gave that order.
Plausibly, they were a result of a final distillation of the Honolulu conference of November 20, 1963.
The primary change in policy that occurred was a recommendation to step up the level of covert activity in Vietnam.
Whether the changes were made to be more compatible with Johnson’s desires is unknown.
McNamara’s view is that Lyndon Johnson continued the policies of Kennedy in Vietnam.
Although Kennedy’s policies were continued, they were calculatedly ratcheted upward by Johnson to a major war, the process beginning in one small step four days after the assassination.
Whether this was a conscious objective in the plot to kill Kennedy, or the result of Johnson’s decisions based on conviction, or his politics to get re-elected, remains an open question.
I can think of no reason why McNamara would not be telling me the truth.
After all, he takes personal responsibility for the decision along with President Kennedy.
The United States military, or at least the right-wing elements in the Army Reserve and their allies in the Pentagon, was involved in the assassination plot.
The Eugene B Dinkin story, in particular, is disturbing and cannot be rationalized other than that Dinkin is telling the truth.
Prouty’s “high cabal” hypothesis is not yet sufficiently convincing to me, although it is possible to believe in a modified and diminished form.
The Kennedy assassination appears more and more to me to have been a plot involving the extreme right wing, even though the best available evidence indicates that it began with Hoffa and the Mafia.
But the developing evidence indicates that right-wing extremists in the military reserve, or in the military itself, could ultimately have become allied with civilian right-wing extremists as the prime conspirators behind the plot when it matured full-blown.
To repeat, this does not preclude Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover from having been made aware in advance that Kennedy was going to be assassinated.
Hunt and his associates, who include an amazing range of unsavory, weird, and mad characters.
In many of these undertakings, including the fabrication of “legends” and the manipulation of operatives, the murderer himself may be unaware that he is being maneuvered.
HUNT AND ASSOCIATES In 1963, hatred and fear of John Kennedy were palpable in Dallas, Texas.
In that third year of the Kennedy Presidency a kind of fever lay over Dallas County.
Radical Right polemics were distributed in public schools; Kennedy’s name was booed in class-rooms; junior executives were required to attend radical seminars.
Time and again, Hunt’s name keeps popping up as being a friend of, or connected with, or a financial contributor to virtually every prominent person or right-wing organization that could be linked to the JFK assassination.
Hunt and his associates, a pattern of something very important might emerge.
Harroldson Lafayette Hunt was seventy-four years old at the time of the JFK assassination.
When he died in 1974 at the age of eighty-five, he was reputed to be probably the richest man in the world and left a fortune estimated at $5 billion.
In addition, Hunt was a major contributor to Senator Joseph McCarthy , and other extreme right-wing organizations in the United States and Europe.
Hunt was one of three people who sponsored the black-border ad vilifying Kennedy on his trip to Dallas.
Although it is difficult to imagine today, many right-wing extremists at that time believed John Kennedy was a Communist.
They believed, further, that the CIA was a Communist organization, that Allen Dulles was a Communist, as was the Supreme Court of the United States and its chief justice, Earl Warren.
These right-wing extremists also believed that President Eisenhower and the State Department were all “domestic enemies,” either Communists or under the control of an international Communist conspiracy.
A fascinating illustration of what the John Birch Society thought of John Kennedy and his assassination is found in an American Opinion article, published in March 1964 and reprinted in the Warren Commission Report, written by Revilo P Oliver, a member of the John Birch Society.
This article, as well as others published by Oliver and the John Birch Society, are significant because they illustrate how the John Birch Society used its journal to spread disinformation linking the assassination plot to a Communist conspiracy which, interestingly, was in concert with J Edgar Hoover’s initial reports following the assassination, as well as the elaborate disinformation scheme in Mexico City, Dallas, and New Orleans, described in Chapters 17, 18, and 19.
Rational men will understand that, far from sobbing over the deceased or lying to placate his vengeful ghost, it behooves us to speak of him with complete candor and historical objectivity.
The departed Kennedy is the John F Kennedy who procured his election by peddling boob-bait to the suckers, including a cynical pledge to destroy the Communist base in Cuba.
He is the John F Kennedy with whose blessing and support the Central Intelligence Agency staged a fake “invasion” of Cuba designed to strengthen our mortal enemies there and to disgrace us—disgrace us not merely by ignominious failure, but by the inhuman crime of having lured brave men into a trap and sent them to suffering and death.
He is the John F Kennedy who, in close collaboration with Khrushchev, staged the phony “embargo” that was improvised both to befuddle the suckers on election day in 1962 and to provide for several months a cover for the steady and rapid transfer of Soviet troops and Soviet weapons to Cuba for eventual use against us.
He is the John F Kennedy who installed and maintained in power the unspeakable Yarmolinsky-McNamara gang in the Pentagon to demoralize and subvert our armed forces and to sabotage our military installations and equipment.
I have mentioned but a few of the hundred reasons why we shall never forget John F Kennedy.
So long as there are Americans, his memory will be cherished with distaste.
If the United States is saved by the desperate exertions of patriots, we may have a future of true greatness and glory—but we shall never forget how near we were to total destruction in the year 1963.
And if the international vermin succeed in completing their occupation of our country, Americans will remember Kennedy while they live, and will curse him as they face the firing squads or toil in a brutish degradation that leaves no hope for anything but a speedy death PA Oliver’s article continued in a diatribe in which he spewed a variety of assassination plot scenarios, all attributable to Communists.
He declared that Oswald was a Communist agent who assassinated President Kennedy in a conspiracy between the “Communist controlled” CIA and the Soviet Union.
He wrote that Kennedy was part of a Communist faction including Nikita Khrushchev that was going to replace Fidel Castro with another Communist of its choosing.
He said the plot had been covered up by the president’s commission, headed by the “Communist” Earl Warren, who diluted the report of the FBI investigation of the assassination, which would have revealed the truth.
He wrote that Jack Ruby (whom he Jew-baited by identifying him as Jakob Leon Rubenstein—Ruby’s real name) was a Communist agent and was involved with Oswald in activities in Cuba.
Oliver was one of the thirty founding members of the John Birch Society.
During this meeting, plans to assassinate political leaders were openly discussed.
The circle becomes complete when we find that Capell published under the masthead of then-retired General Willoughby’s Foreign Intelligence Digest.
This fact was reported by Dick Russell, 2 who wrote that he had received copies of extensive correspondence between Willoughby and the Hunt family from the Douglas MacArthur Archive in Norfolk, Virginia.
As such, Mr Hunt knew a lot of his top generals—Albert Wedemeyer, Courtney Whitney, Charles Willoughby; several people from whom we had access to their information and data 13801 Russell wrote that by mid 1966, Willoughby had gone to work directly for H L Hunt’s son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, helping arrange the acquisition of all offshore oil rights in the Portuguese colony of Mozambique.
Biographer Harry Hurt III, in his book Texas Rich, wrote that Hunt was a child prodigy, known to read the financial pages of the newspaper fluently at age three.
With his mother’s encouragement, Hunt breastfed until the age of seven, often standing on a small crate in front of her while she kneaded bread dough in the kitchen.
Finally his concerned father put a stop to 28H Hunt was a bigamist with three separate families.
When he died at the age of eighty-five, he left seventy living direct descendants, including ten children, twenty-one grandchildren, and twelve greatgrandchildren, accounting for forty-three members of the flock.
Hunt lived in Dallas in an exact replica of George Washington’s home at Mount Vernon.
He gleefully admitted to being the world’s richest human, but insisted on carrying his lunch to work in a brown paper bag.
Hunt was a high-stakes risk taker, both in the oil fields and at the poker table.
Hunt’s wives, Frania Tye Lee, described him as a bigamist and philanderer, a professional gambler, a hypocrite, a con man, and a liar.
Mr Hunt and I parked our cars in the same lot, and three days before the assassination, H L. called me over and said he wanted to give me something.
It was that “Wanted for Treason” poster with Kennedy’s face on it, which got circulated all over Dallas.
And he said, “I’m the richest man in the world and nobody’s going to do anything to 387] me.
Hunt and Clint Murchison Sr. were the chief Texas organizers of the MacArthur for President bid.
Hunt reportedly put up $150,000 for the campaign P38 although he denied doing so.
As noted earlier, Hunt gave General Curtis LeMay $1 million for personal use , ostensibly to induce LeMay to run as vice president with George Wallace.
Yet, Harry Hurt III wrote that Hunt was normally not a big spender when it came to campaign contributions.
Hunt was a supporter of Lyndon Johnson in his bid for the presidential nomination against John Kennedy.
He secretly paid for 200,000 copies of an anti-Catholic sermon to be distributed during the 1960 Democratic Convention in Los Angeles.
Hunt also supported General Edwin Walker in his unsuccessful bid for governor of Texas S21 As mentioned earlier, Hunt was closely affiliated with right wingers General Charles Willoughby; evangelist preacher Billy James Hargis; oil man J Howard Pew; founder of the John Birch Society Robert Welch; chairman of Sears & Roebuck General Robert A Wood; and arch-conservative, retired general Albert C Wedemeyer, also a participant in the John Birch Society.
It is noteworthy that General Willoughby was in the extremis of the military extreme right-wing.
He was involved in the worst of criminal covert operations and was composed a military-religious-industrial complex of extreme conservatism. capable of planning an operation similar to the JFK assassination.
Hunt was an oil wildcatter—an independent, not associated with big oil.
Or perhaps he was arrogantly confident that he had nothing to fear, with his friend LBJ succeeding in the presidency and his and LBJ’s friend J Edgar Hoover heading the FBI—that he could do anything he wished.
Hunt had another of his security men, John Curington, check out the Dallas police station for the status of security provisions to protect Oswald.
Curington completed this assignment on the evening of November 23, 1963 and reported back to Hunt that security for Oswald in the Dallas jail was nonexistent.
Curington remembered: “About five-thirty or six o’clock on the Saturday afternoon after the assassination , Mr Hunt called me and asked that I go down and see what kind of security they had surrounding Oswald in police custody.
I had no more than hung up the phone when a lady called who did ironing for my family.
She said her husband was in jail on a DWI charge and asked if I could go down and get him out.
Mr Hunt had told me, regardless of what time it was, to come by the house and tell him what I witnessed.
It was a little bit after midnight when I reported to him that, in my opinion, there was no security whatsoever around the jailhouse.
Hunt, stated on national television and to numerous interviewers that Johnson told her on the evening before the assassination that JFK would “never embarrass him again” and later, after the assassination, he told her that people she knew in the oil business and in the CIA were behind the Kennedy assassination.
Hunt had extremely close ties with General Edwin Walker who, you will recall, was allegedly shot at by Oswald in 1963.
Hunt through the John Birch Society and other right-wing organizations.
Hunt and General Walker. Marina Oswald visited Hunt’s office in Dallas with an FBI agent shortly after the assassination. Mafia-connected Eugene Hale Brading visited Nelson Bunker Hunt’s office in Dallas twice—shortly before and after the assassination, ostensibly to discuss business dealings.
You will recall that Braden was arrested at Dealey Plaza immediately after the assassination.
Braden claimed that he just happened to be walking through Dealey Plaza attempting to make a phone call, and had gone into the Dal-Tex building looking for a phone.
Braden was arrested as he got off an elevator coming down from an upper floor of the building; he claimed that he was on the third floor making a phone call.
In October 1962, the Kennedy Act removed the distinction between repatriated oil profits and profits from overseas investments, making both subject to United States taxation.
In addition, in January 1963 the president discussed a plan to eliminate or reduce the oil depletion allowance which permitted 27. percent of oil profits on new wells to be tax free.
World Petroleum Magazine predicted that the Kennedy reforms, if passed, could cost United States oil as much as $280 million in annual profits.
Hunt may have been the sponsor of an incredible flyer distributed around Miami among Cuban exiles in the spring of 1963.
This blessing would come to pass if an inspired Act of God should place in the White House within weeks a Texan known to be a friend of all Latin Americans...though he must under present conditions bow to the Zionists who since 1905 came into control of the United States, and for whom Jack Kennedy and Nelson Rockefeller and other members of the Council of Foreign Relations and allied agencies are only stooges and pawns.
I am suggesting that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else.
The letter first turned up when a copy was mailed to Penn Jones, Jr., an assassination researcher in Texas, on August 18, 1975, with a transmittal letter written in Spanish.
The anonymous writer said that he had previously sent a copy to FBI director Clarence Kelley in late 1974 but had never received a reply.
Since Mr Kelley hadn’t responded, he said he was sending the letter to Jones, hoping it would be of help.
The handwriting has been authenticated as Oswald’s by an eminent Canadian expert on handwriting, plus two other experts contracted by the Dallas Morning News.
The full implications of the Oswald note remain a mystery, but it is clear that it is of great significance.
Hunt was associated with Sergio Arcacha-Smith, head of the radical Cuban Revolutionary Council, with links to Alpha 66 and Guy Banister in New Orleans.
Hunt met with Jack Crichton of Army intelligence, along with other Army intelligence officers, to discuss the first interrogation of Marina Oswald.
Hunt left Dallas to reside temporarily at the Mayflower Hotet222 in Washington, D.C., upon the insistence of the FBI, which feared for his safety.
Hunt and the Minutemen Of all the militant, extreme right-wing groups in 1963, none has had more evidence accumulated against it as a participant in the Kennedy assassination than the Minutemen.
CBS news reporter Peter Noyes, in his excellent book Legacy of Doubt , did a masterful job of investigating extreme right-wing linkages with the Mafia in the Kennedy assassination.
I obtained Noyes’ research notes for his book from the Assassination Archives and a copy of his book from Bob Dorff.
Noyes’ investigation turned up a group called AVG which was a spinoff from the Minutemen.
The topic of AVG was first mentioned to me in a conversation with former FBI agent Bill Turner in February of 1970.
Turner said he had interviewed Robert DePugh, national leader of the Minutemen, at Leavenworth where DePugh was imprisoned on conspiracy charges.
DePugh claimed he tried to start AVG as a front organization but others took it away from him.
He apparently implied to Turner that AVG was a dangerous, paramilitary organization.
What we see in all of this is a pattern of right-wing groups—such as the John Birch Society—not being extreme enough for some of their more violence-prone members, thereby spawning splinter groups such as the Minutemen, who in turn spawned even more extreme groups such as the avg 40 In April 1970, Noyes opened discussions with Connie Crawford of the California attorney general’s staff concerning Mafioso Jim Braden.
Noyes had become very interested in Braden through his studies of the Warren Commission volumes.
Crawford became so interested in Noyes’ material that she assigned the case to Joel Taylor, the attorney general’s special agent for the San Diego area.
The reason for selecting the San Diego area was Braden’s membership in the La Costa Country Club, the Mafia/Teamsters mecca in north San Diego County.
He advised that the FBI had been investigating Braden, but had suddenly stopped several weeks earlier.
In a subsequent conversation Taylor advised me that he had ways of developing information concerning Braden, apparently checking all his phone calls.
Mederick Johnson, USMC, Retired) who had mysteriously died of gunshot wounds several years earlier.
During the conversation, the presence of Jim Braden at the La Costa Country Club was discussed.
On Wednesday, August 19th, I received a collect phone call from Paul Rothermel in Dallas.
He said he was calling me froma phone booth because he was frightened for his life and had to be extremely careful.
He said some years ago, when he was in Nelson Hunt’s confidence, a most unusual conversation took place.
He said Nelson announced his intention of forming a group known as AVG and intended to draw on the ranks of General Edwin Walker’s cell of the John Birch Society in Dallas.
He said Nelson planned to form a paramilitary group for political purposes, and hoped to obtain a certain type of gas gun from Europe which would kill people and make their deaths appear to be heart attacks.
He said that Nelson proceeded with his plans to set up AVG and bought a ranch through a real estate broker named William H Cies.
Rothermel described the ranch as Nelson Hunt’s West Coast base for paramilitary operations, maneuvers, etc.
Rothermel did not state the exact date of his initial conversation with Nelson Hunt in California 40H Rothermel also discussed the meeting at the Hunt Oil Company, November 21, 1963.
To see Nelson and Lamar Hunt: Morgan Brown, Claud Duval, Roger Bauman and party.
He denied emphatically that the Hunt family was close to FBI director J Edgar Hoover.
Rothermel repeatedly emphasized his fear of something happening to him.
Noyes wrote that according to California intelligence, which infiltrated meetings of the Minutemen in the early 1960s, “the rhetoric more often than not dealt with assassinating the ‘three K’s’— John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Dr.
Hunt’s security man, told Dick Russell that he had purchased the original copy of the Zapruder film from Abraham Zapruder on the night after the assassination.
Also, another Hunt employee, John Curington, told Dick Russell that Hunt had sent him to check out the security for Oswald at the Dallas jail and that he reported back to Hunt that there was none.
Hunt’s “Texas High Cabal” comprised of the fascist General Willoughby and his right-wing clique in military intelligence.
It is difficult for me to imagine how the totality of this could not be of great importance in solving the mystery of the JFK assassination.
Hunt was somehow involved—at the very least he knew about the plot—knew who masterminded it and who the major players were.
It is also clear that he had the resources, connections, and capability to be a major player in the plot.
With his Mafia contacts and his financing of terrorist organizations in Europe such as Der Burd and the OAS, he indeed had the capability—with Willoughby’s covert operations expertise—to put together an assassination team and to orchestrate the cover-up through his friends Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover.
Hunt was not directly involved in the plot, although he knew that a plot was underway, but like Johnson and Hoover may not have been not privy to the details.
Later, fearful that he might have been set up, he instigated his own investigations immediately after the assassination to protect himself.
With sufficient imagination one could thus explain his purchase of the copy of the Zapruder film, his involvement in Marina’s interviews, and his curiosity about Oswald’s safety in the Dallas jail.
Hunt could thereby, with a stretch of the imagination, be dismissed as coincidence; but it’s too much of a stretch for me.
Hunt could have been one of several powerful right-wing extremists—civilian and military—who were remote sponsors of the plot (which at a lower level included two or three Mafia chieftains and a few CIA rogues), but with Hunt and his close associates so removed from its execution that it would be impossible to implicate them with legal proof.
Hunt conceivably could have planned and ordered the murder of Oswald, only LBJ and Hoover would become implicated because of their direct actions in the cover-up, which were not anticipated,e., it was not planned that forgery of the Zapruder film or manipulation of the autopsy results would be required to the extent that they were, and under the uncontrolled conditions that ensued when things went wrong.
Here one sees the extent of the corruption of American ideals that has taken place in the name of fighting communism.
No one, it seems, not even Adolf Eichmann’s personal staff, was too tainted to be rejected by the CIA’s recruiters, at least as long as his relationship with the United States government could be kept secret.
Christopher Simpson, Blowback 25 FASCISTS AND WAR CRIMINALS In 1992, while attending a symposium on the JFK assassination in Dallas, I met a medical doctor and another man attending with his son, who was perhaps sixteen years of age, and very bright.
At dinner we all talked at length about the assassination, during which I expressed my views, then strongly held, that the Mafia was the prime mover behind the conspiracy.
The dinner ended soon after and I thought that would be the last of it.
But two days later, in the final hour of the conference, the bright young man came up to me and handed me a paper that he thought I should read.
It was an article entitled “The Nazi Connection to the JFK Assassination” by Mae Brussell, of whom I had never heard.
Nonetheless, Brussell’s article would be my introduction to how ex-Nazi spies and Nazi collaborators in Eastern Europe and the Ukraine, many of whom were involved in mass extermination of Jews, had become an integral part of the United States intelligence network after World War II, and how they had played a major, perhaps decisive, role in shaping United States foreign policy, particularly with regard to the Cold War and our anti-Communist policies.
As I contemplate this study I anticipate that there will not be enough substantial evidence to conclusively implicate this array of heinous characters in the JFK assassination.
This is, however, yet another example of the seemingly endless avenues of investigation that should not be overlooked.
General Reinhard Gehlen In the closing months of World War II, master Nazi spy General Reinhard Gehlen, along with his extensive organization of German spies and murderers, developed a secret plan to defect, en masse, to the United States.
Through the actions of Allen Dulles they negotiated a secret treaty to implement the mass defection.
This malodorous apparatus thus became the foundation of United States intelligence for espionage activities against the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe.
Recruited along with these Nazis and killers were rocket engineer Wernher von Braun (a member of Hitler’s infamous SS) and about 1800 other Nazi scientists in a race against the Russians at the end of the war.
Also recruited were Nazi psychiatrists who had experimented in mind control through hypnosis and drugs.
These fiendish experimenters would later become part of the CIA’s massive mind-control program to attempt to create robot assassins.
The rationale was, of course, realpolitik—no room for sentimental morality—the enemy was now the Soviet Union and we should use any tool available in the upcoming battle for survival against the Communists.
But he also had extraordinary powers of concentration and a jeweler’s attention to detail, both of which served him well in his remarkable thirty-seven-year career as a spy master A031 According to generally accepted estimates, Gehlen was furnished with $200 million by the United States to finance his spy organization operating against the Soviets.
During the first decade following the war, the United States provided those funds and employed about 4,000 of Gehlen’s intelligence operatives full time, plucking Gehlen’s organization intact from the wreckage of World War II, complete with their secret files on microfilm #24 Gehlen developed a remarkably close rapport and friendship with Allen Dulles.
When Gehlen finally retired in 1968, Dulles gave him an expensive Swiss chalet.
One of the many speculations surrounding the Kennedy assassination is that the Gehlen organization actually carried out the assassination through South American Nazis in exile.
Although this is one of the more bizarre scenarios, it is worth keeping in mind as we continue.
I start with Reinhard Gehlen in this story because his incorporation into United States intelligence brought with him many characters from Eastern Europe—Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Ukraine, as well as Latvian countries—and allowed the Odessa to flourish over the years.
The Odessa, you may remember, is the secret Nazi organization formed in the waning years of Hitler’s regime, designed to relocate and conceal tens of thousands of SS, war criminals, and mass murderers—to Argentina, Paraguay, South Africa, Madrid, and Egypt.
This final element of the Odessa was the so-called Gehlen Organization , the Nazi intelligence system that sold itself to the United States at the end of the war.
The military intelligence historian Colonel William Corson put it most succinctly, “Gehlen’s organization was designed to protect the Odessa Nazis.
The only intelligence provided by the Gehlen net to the United States was intelligence selected specifically to worsen East-West tensions and increase the possibility of Se . military conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The reach of Gehlen’s Org extended all over Eastern Europe to encompass anti-Communists, proNazis, and quislings.
Like many topics we touch in this book, we would need to write another book to cover this subject adequately.
But my objective is to focus as sharply and succinctly as possible on the JFK assassination and how to relate this material directly to it.
One person under the influence, or a part of, the Gehlen network—who stands out as being important—is Ferenc Nagy, a fascist from Hungary.
What makes Nagy of importance in our analysis is that his name is linked, by unimpeachable documents, to Clay Shaw, now undoubted former CIA contract agent, and the man whom Jim Garrison accused of being part of the conspiracy to assassinate John Kennedy.
As an anchor point for our discussions, refer to Exhibit 25-1 which is a copy of a United States State Department document dated November 27, 1958, showing unequivocally that Clay Shaw was on the board of directors of an affiliate of an entity called Permindex Corporation.
Permindex and CMC are widely alleged to have been a CIA front company that participated with the French OAS in its assassination attempts on French president Charles , de Gaulle.
Moreover, a major shareholder in Permindex, and CMC as well, was a man by the name of Major Louis M Bloomfield é of Montreal, Canada, who was allegedly visited by Clay Shaw and David Ferrie in Montreal one day in late 1961 or early 1962.
This was reported by Jim Garrison in his book, Trail of the Communist political party.
United States State Department document dated November 7, 1958 showing that Ferenc Nagy and Clay Shaw are, respectively, president and director of Centro Mondiale Commerciale (an affiliate of Permindex) in Rome, Italy.
Both Nagy and Shaw were also president and director of Permindex, based in Basel, Switzerland.
It is noteworthy that Ferenc Nagy resided in Dallas, Texas, at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
ASS oy General Charles Willoughby, right-wing extremist and General MacArthur’s chief of intelligence.
Hunt and active in anti-Communist activities in Europe and Asia after his retirement.
He is suspected of being a key figure in the Kennedy assassination and the link between right-wing extremists in Dallas and military intelligence.
Walker was ousted from the Army by President Kennedy for distributing John Birch Society literature in Germany.
Walker was allegedly shot at by Oswald in 1963 before the Kennedy assassination.
Strangely, Walker knew that Oswald was suspected of shooting him before it seems possible he should have known.
When the war ended, he was brought over to the United States by the OSS and Allen Dulles.
Gehlen was later financed by the United States with $200 million and sent back to Europe where he operated his organization under the direction of the CIA as the United States Soviet eastern block spy agency.
Some believe he infiltrated back into the United States with a Nazi spy apparatus and was instrumental in the Kennedy assassination.
When Gehlen retired, Dulles gifted him with a retirement home in Switzerland.
They are the couple who befriended the Oswalds when they returned from Russia.
De Mohrenschildt is a very interesting figure, having been an ex-Nazi spy, an oil man, and in right-wing circles in Dallas.
De Mohrenschildt committed suicide the day after Gaeton Fonzi, investigator for the HSCA, contacted his daughter to arrange an interview.
AP/Wide World Photos We shall now proceed to other linkages of fascists, war criminals, and extreme right-wing organizations in the JFK assassination.
The welfare department called Oswald’s brother Robert, who immediately sent $200 to pay for transportation to Fort Worth.
It turns out that Raikin was more than a mere representative of the Travelers Aid Society.
He was secretary general of the American Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations , an extreme right-wing, anti-Communist organization with Nazi and fascist roots in the Ukraine of the Soviet Union 2 How strange it is that a man in Raikin’s position would be greeting the poor unfortunate Oswalds to give his kindly help, out of the goodness of his heart.
It should be noted that the ABN was an organization formed to lobby the Congress of the United States on behalf of captive nations under the Soviet Communist yoke.
Willoughby was also very active in anti-Communist extremist organizations in Europe, Japan, and Korea, and had access to the OAS, the French terrorist organization intent on assassinating Charles de Gaulle.
Walker met with Jean Souetre, the French terrorist, in Dallas in April 1963.
Souetre, or someone using his name, later showed up in the Dallas area at the time of the JFK assassination; and Souetre was in a meeting with the CIA’s E Howard Hunt in Spain in 1963.
Willoughby was seventy-one years old at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
He was born in 1892 in Heidelberg, Germany, and migrated with his parents to the United States when he was eighteen.
His name first came to my attention in an anonymous letter, a response to the first article I wrote in 1975 about the assassination.
If I wanted to “solve” the great mystery, I was advised to examine the career of someone identified only as “Tscheppe-Weidenbach,” born in Heidelberg, Germany, in 1892.
It was only recently that I discovered that Adolf Tscheppe-Weidenbach was the original name 42 of Charles Willoughby “2+ Willoughby has been described as a bull of a man who spoke with a German accent and affected a monocle.
General MacArthur, who referred to him as “my little fascist 2H Willoughby had received decorations from Benito Mussolini while serving as a military attaché in Ecuador.
In a final gesture to Spain’s fascism in 1952, Willoughby lobbied Congress to authorize $100 million for 2 |. at wf , Spain’s dictator, Francisco Franco.
Russell wrote that it is not stretching the point to say that Willoughby was a racist and an anti-Semite. being autocratic and arrogant.
His “intelligence digest’ recommended all through the 1960s that various “weapons of mass destruction,” unspecified, be used against the Vietnamese people.
Willoughby was a thoroughly loathsome person whose entire world view consisted of piles of ethnic stereotypes; he was apparently capable of anything S321 (It is important to keep in mind that Joseph Milteer, who predicted the Kennedy assassination, was also associated with white supremacist organizations and extreme anti-Communist right-wing organizations that were part of Willoughby’s network.
During the Occupation of Japan and the Korean War Willoughby maintained clandestine ties to Japanese militarists, including the bacteriological warfare criminal General Ishii; in the 1950s and 1960s he claimed to have close ties to Reinhard Gehlen and other former Nazi officers then being used by United States intelligence in the cold war.
After MacArthur’s sacking, Willoughby frequently visited Spain, and claimed to have been involved in the American military base negotiations with Franco.
He set up a kind of right-wing internationale called the “international comité,” using money from the Hunt brothers in Texas, linking Spain and Portugal together with German right-wingers, the Hargis Crusade, and others.
During World War II, as Willoughby ran MacArthur’s intelligence in the Pacific, he became a rival of OSS head William Donovan; this rivalry lasted for many years.
If, in fact, there were a faction of retired United States military intelligence that set up the CIA as a false sponsor in the JFK assassination, Willoughby would be a logical suspect.
Of particular importance in the Hunt/Willoughby story is their shared opposition to the eastern establishment internationalists as represented by the “old boy network,” recruited from Ivy-League universities to run the CIA and the Department of State.
Hunt was a venomous opponent of “world government,” which he considered to be a Communist plot, backed by international firms, bankers, and stateless people—especially Jews.
If it is difficult to imagine that a man of Harriman’s great wealth and cold war temperament might be a hidden communist sympathizer, it is also important to remember that James Angleton, long the head of CIA Counter-Intelligence, launched his “Project DINOSAUR” to smoke Harriman out as the long-sought Soviet mole within the intelligence “community.
He blamed them, not totally without foundation, for the premature end of his military intelligence career.
The CIA managed to shape information to place the full blame on Willoughby for the intelligence failure in not predicting the entry of the Chinese across the Yalu River, resulting in a humiliating retreat and temporary defeat of American forces in Korea.
An hypothesis that one aim of the plot to kill Kennedy was to destroy the CIA has increasing merit the more it is examined.
The Texas High Cabal, by one fell swoop, would have struck a fatal blow to the Kennedys, the CIA, and the one-worlders, ridding the nation of its mortal threats—or so they might have obsessed.
Willoughby became involved in postwar anti-Communist activities in Japan.
Yoshio Kodama, future leader of the Yakuza crime syndicate (as well as CIA contract agent and Lockheed lobbyist) bargained his way out of jail as a “Class A” war criminal.
Hunt, the rabid Kennedy hater and fanatical anti-Communist from Dallas.
This device was for use in assassinations to induce apparent heart attacks that were untraceable.
The relevancy of the gas gun is that Nelson Bunker Hunt, according to Paul Rothermel, Jr. (via CBS reporter Peter Noyes), was very much interested in this weapon for use in Hunt’s paramilitary operation in California.
Moreover, the weapon takes us to the Ukraine of the old Soviet Union, the origin of the ABN represented by Raikin, who met the Oswalds when they got off the boat returning from Russia.
There is also a Ukrainian connection of White Russians in the Dallas-Fort Worth area who befriended the Oswalds when they returned there.
For the benefit of readers who have an appetite for fiendish mechanisms, I have included a drawing of the gas gun.
A double-barreled version of this weapon was used by Bogdan Stashinsky to kill Stefan Bandera, the anti-Soviet leader of OUN, on orders of the KGB on October 15, 1959.
TRIGGER GS SAFETY CATCH POISON YD) our 2 g Reconstruction sketch of the poison-spray weapon issued by the Soviet’s KGB to Bogdan Stashinsky and used by him to kill Dr.
The assassin also inhaled some of the gas, which would have killed him had he not taken an antidote thirty minutes before the murder, followed by an antidote shortly after the murder.
Ina later trial in Germany, Stashinsky, guilt-ridden, confessed to the crime.
As will be discussed later, this weapon was of keen interest to Army intelligence.
Richard Case Nagell mentioned to Dick Russell that it was one of several exotic weapons that United States intelligence had acquired.
Nagell was part of Army intelligence in Korea under General Willoughby, although it has not been established that Nagell knew him directly.
Nagell was only a captain at the time, so he may not have known the general.
Willoughby and Ukrainian-American Lev Dobrionsky were the two leading supporters of the ABN in the United States.
Dobrionsky was an OSS officer in Germany in World War II, working under Bill Donovan.
Dobrionsky was linked to David Atlee Phillips in Mexico City through Cuba’s Salvador Diaz Verson, who sat on the same board of directors for the World Anti-Communist Congress for Freedom and Liberation.
But what we have already described should be enough to support the allegation that there are practically no blank spaces insofar as Willoughby/Hunt and the Texas High Cabal having the capability to plot and carry out the assassination of John Kennedy.
All of this, of course, does not prove that the Texas High Cabal actually did mastermind the plot to kill Kennedy.
What we see here is a worldwide, right-wing network of Fascists, militarists, and radical anti-Communists; yet only a relative few of these people, three or four, need to have been involved in the full scope of the plot.
Hunt need only to have been involved as sponsors, in a plan using cutouts whereby the dirty work and exposure to being caught could have been delegated to a small number of professionals and lower-level operators with no traceable linkage to the top.
Of course, the existence of parts of the plot could become known to people like Milteer and the others who would brag about inside knowledge of the impending assassination.
As earlier quoted, it is impossible to keep an assassination plot a secret.
Even David Sanchez Morales could well have been part of the right-wing clique in United States intelligence and the military, yet he himself not known the full nature of the plot.
David Atlee Phillips, likewise, could have been one of the Kennedy haters who were swept into the crime of the century, even unwittingly.
Hunt to have been part of the “committee of patriots” shown on the chart.
Somewhere along the way in writing this book, I began to see the Kennedy assassination as a phenomenon that arose spontaneously, culminating in a few people out of the legions of Kennedy haters, paranoid anti-Communists, criminals, and crazies that seem always to exist in the world.
The facts that the survival of Hoffa and certain Mafia chiefs was threatened and Hoovers and Johnson’s power and freedom were in jeopardy unless Kennedy were to die, were all part of the perfect concomitance to allow the plotters to sponsor the crime, see that it got carried out, and go scot-free, even though a few things went wrong.
This will take us from activities in Miami which involved gun-running and boat raids against the Cuban mainland; to Dallas, involving theft of arms from the Army for delivery to anti-Castro Cubans, linked to Jack Ruby and Oswald. ...for some years the control of Washington was consolidated in the sexual and other blackmail deposited in Hoover’s personal files.
This appears to have been part of a program sponsored as a policy of the United States government through the CIA, in cooperation with anti-Castro Cubans, and involving the Minutemen in their combined efforts to unseat Fidel Castro.
This will include a discussion of an Oswald “look-alike” in Dallas who might have—wittingly or unwittingly—been John Thomas Masen.
John Thomas Masen was a weapons dealer and operated a gun shop in Dallas in 1963.
What makes his story important is, first, there is no question that he furnished illegal weapons to the CIA-financed DRE/Alpha 66/SNFE in Dallas through Manuel Rodriguez Orcarberro, who was violently anti-Kennedy and leader of that anti-Castro group.
Second, he may have been the “Oswald” seen at the anti-Castro Cuban safehouse on Harlendale Street in Dallas.
Third, there is new evidence suggesting that he was involved with Jack Ruby in the above-mentioned gun-running activity in Dallas in November 1963 just before the assassination.
Moreover, ATF undercover agent Frank Ellsworth suspected that Masen was a member of the Minutemen and associated with General Edwin Walker, providing one more link to the Dallas right wing in the plot.
Masen was one of only two dealers in Dallas selling 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano ammunition, the type used in the alleged Oswald rifle, and he may have been the “Oswald” who was shooting at the rifle range in Dallas.
In addition, he conceivably could have been the “Oswald” who visited Silvia Odio in late September 1963 and the “Oswald” who met with David Atlee Phillips and Antonio Veciana in Dallas in early September 1963.
Of all the evidence suppressed by the federal government in the John Kennedy assassination, the evidence of Masen stands out as one of the most egregious examples.
There were at least fifty major documents on Masen that were not released until 1993.
In addition, a large number of critical documents have not been released as of this writing.
The evidence shows that a massive investigation was made of Masen but virtually nothing of importance was revealed in the Warren Commission Report or the HSCA Report.
He knew Masen well, having been involved as an undercover agent in a planned major sting operation against Masen, who was trafficking in illegal, stolen weapons.
Masen escaped the major sting that had been set for him, apparently due to FBI interference that blew the ATF operation.
Ellsworth then arrested Masen on a minor charge; Masen was released on bail.
When Ellsworth was in the Dallas police station after Oswald’s arrest on November 22, he looked at Oswald and thought that he had just turned loose the man who had killed the president.
I happened to arrest him personally very shortly before and then when I saw Oswald a few days later, I thought—that’s my neck.
The guy was out on bond, and very closely connected with the extreme right.
We had reason to believe he was with the Minutemen. “99% of the people we did investigate had no significant political connection,” he adds as an inside.
I bring the subject back to this “second Oswald’— “I personally talked to some individuals who thought they saw Oswald, subsequently saw this guy and said—that’s him.
My immediate reaction with Oswald was, that’s who he was and the first time I saw Oswald was from here to the door.
I mention a rifle range, whether the look-alike might’ve been the one identified as Oswald there.
I remember two instances in which he was at someone’s house in North Dallas, that I was able to ascertain the look-alike was at.
I’d read in the paper or somebody would say, he had been in X’s house on X night.
And I’d find the look-alike knew these people and had been there at that approximate time.
There were two instances where witnesses saw him in the company of several other Minutemen.
One of these deals did involve a group of Minutemen at a rifle range, I remember, and he knew all these people.
Masen also stated that he frequently used the Trinity river bottom to test-fire rifles.
Mr Masen stated people in the gun repair business in the vicinity of Love Field, Dallas, normally use the Trinity river bottom as a place to test fire rifles.
He advised the river levee is sufficiently high to provide ample safety.
Mr Masen stated he frequently used the Trinity river bottom to test fire guns.
He described this place as being approximately two miles west of his gun shop.
This area was checked and no cartridge cases or live ammunition was found “421 Masen, in 1996 fifty-six years old, operates a gun parts manufacturing business in Dallas, Texas.
By many measures, he appears to have been an important figure in the fringes of the Kennedy assassination, but not necessarily involved in the plot.
A strange thing about Masen is that despite his having been arrested, apparently three times between November 20 and November 22, 1963 (according to the records—and arrested at least once, apparently concerning the JFK assassination), no photographs have been found of him in the public records circa 1963.
His fingerprints were taken and a large amount of information developed about him, but no photographs.
According to Carol Hewett, criminal attorney and JFK assassination researcher in Florida, this is virtually unheard of.
Hewett and Anna Marie worked together in research on Masen over a period of two years and obtained virtually every available document concerning his arrest and trials, but nowhere did they find a photograph of Masen.
The only photograph they could find was in his high school yearbook, which showed some resemblance to Oswald.
What is needed is a photograph circa 1963 to make a comparison with the real Oswald.
In Frank Ellsworth’s investigation of Masen for firearms violations, he learned that Masen was involved in a large-scale operation stealing weapons by the truckload from the Army at Fort Hood in San Antonio; this was done with the cooperation of Captain George Nonte, the chief ordnance officer in charge of the Ford Hood arsenal.
We think he got away with a medium tank supposed to have gone to the Minutemen.
But some things that happened scared the wits out of these people and brought the whole thing to a halt.
Masen was subsequently charged and convicted with some violations stemming from this violation.
Army Intelligence, San Antonio, Texas, on 10/24/63 advised that subject, Dallas, Texas, sporting goods store operator, had asked Captain George Charles Nonte, Fort Hood, Texas, an acquaintance, if he knew anyone who might be interested in buying information concerning large-scale military operations in Caribbean.
Subsequent meeting between subject and Nonte was arranged for evening of 10/24/63.
In view of possible espionage activity, San Antonio Office was telephonically instructed to closely follow and develop full details.
On 10/25/63 Nonte, who is cooperating, advised he met subject as scheduled.
Subject implied Martinez had previously been involved in attack on Cuba reportedly carried out by Alpha 66, anti-Castro organization.
Subject did not know date operation would take place, but indicated it would be directed against Cuba by large rebel forces allegedly staging at unknown Caribbean bases.
Subject asked Nonte if he knew anyone who would pay for such information implying considerable money could be made on stock market by person having such data.
Nonte plans to recontact subject on 10/31/63 in effort to obtain additional data.
Nonte characterized subject as opportunist who would avail himself of any opportunity to make money.
Foregoing information appears to pertain to plan of anti-Castro exiles to attack Cuba from Caribbean area.
Since crackdown by United States authorities on such raids from U.S., reports have been received indicating exiles are using Caribbean area for attacks on Cuba.
With reference to indication a large-scale attack being planned, consideration was given to possibility this might be Central Intelligence Agency operation; however, CIA on 9/28/63 in discussing anti-Castro activities in Nicaragua, advised that it was not organizing any Cuban invasion forces. . , George Nonte wrote books on guns and was considered worldwide to be an expert.
He once worked with Masen in attempting to obtain a permit to import a “fine deer rifle” from Russia, successfully used in international target shooting events.
Agent Ellsworth states that during his association with Masen, Masen had mentioned Rodriguez as being a Cuban who was attempting to buy arms—machine guns, bazookas, and other heavy equipment—from Masen.
Masen also mentioned a George F Parrel, a Cuban National who was an associate of Rodriguez and who was also attempting to buy arms from him.
Masen informed Agent Ellsworth, while Ellsworth was undercover, that Rodriguez and Parrel were leaders of the local organization of the Cuban Student Directorate ; also, that they were members of the Segundo Frente del Escambray which is known in America as Alpha 66.
Alpha 66 is known as an active commando type organization which has recently made raids on Cuba.
John Elrod, Jack Ruby, and Oswald John Elrod’s story, as carefully pieced together by Mary and Ray La Fontaine in their book Oswald Talked, is that Elrod was arrested at 2:45m. on November 22, 1963 and placed ina cell in the Dallas city jail for a period of four hours following Elrod’s arrest.
According to the La Fontaines’ analysis of the evidence, Oswald told Elrod that he had been in a motel a few days preceding with four other men, including Jack Ruby, during which money had changed hands for a gunrunning transaction What had precipitated Oswald’s remarks was that a man with a smashed face had been brought into the cell block by the Dallas police for Oswald to identify.
The man with the smashed face was Laurence Reginald Miller, who had been arrested on the night of November 18, 1963, along with Donnell Darius Whitter, in a stakeout by the FBI and the Dallas police that was related to an illegal transfer of weapons stolen from the Texas National Guard armory in Terrell, twenty miles from Dallas.
The Dallas police had pursued the receivers of the illegal weapons, Whitter and Miller, and, curiously, had let the purveyors of the weapon leave the scene unscathed.
In a 60-mph chase through the streets of Dallas, the automobile driven by Whitter, with Miller as a passenger, crashed against a telephone pole and the two were arrested.
The automobile was a 1962 Thunderbira #4) Whitter was taken to the Dallas Parkland Hospital where he was treated for severe abdominal injuries, remaining there for five days when he was brought to the Dallas City jail.
But Miller, the one with the smashed face, although taken to Parkland Hospital for superficial treatment, was released the same day and sent to the Dallas city j ai) MOU The Dallas police apparently had some reason to suspect a connection between the man in Elrod’s cell block and Miller.
They brought Miller into the corridor of the cell block to see if Oswald could identify him.
Elrod was retained in the Dallas jail over the weekend, put in lineups related to the JFK assassination, and then released after Jack Ruby shot Oswald.
He then left town ina hurry 4021 About eight months later, Elrod walked into a police station in Memphis, Tennessee, and told the officer there that he had information concerning Lee Harvey Oswald 49 the Memphis police called the local FBI, which questioned Elrod.
The FBI dismissed Elrod’s statement—that he had been incarcerated in the Dallas City jail—based on their curious claim that their search of Elrod’s records did not reveal such an arrest.
There is no question, however, that there was such an arrest record which did not see the light of day until 1994 when it was obtained by Mary La Fontaine in a search of newly released Dallas police records.
The arrest record clearly shows that Elrod was arrested on November 22, 1963 at 2:45m.
The fact that the FBI did not report Elrod’s arrest or his complete story is one more example of suppression of what appears to be extremely critical evidence that could have unraveled an important part of the JFK assassination mystery.
John Franklin Elrod, an inmate of the Shelby County, Tennessee, Jail, as of August 11, 1964, furnished the following information.
Elrod currently lives at Memphis, Tennessee, and has been staying at the Harbor House....a home for alcoholics, and Elrod stated that he, himself, is an alcoholic.
Elrod had come to the Shelby County Sheriff's Office during the early morning hours of August 11, 1964, after having consumed some beer and vodka.
He was at that time in possession of a sawed-off 12 gauge shotgun which had a pistol grip.
He stated that he had begun to think of the possibilities of killing his wife from whom he is now separated.
Inasmuch as he had the sawed-off shotgun and the desire to kill her was known to him, he decided he should come to the Sheriff's Office and talk, which he did.
He further advised that he had been somewhat troubled by events which occurred immediately following the assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy at Dallas, Texas, on November 11, 1963.
Shortly after the assassination of the President, Elrod, who had been about two and one half miles from the scene of the assassination at Lemon and Oaklawn Streets in Dallas, was arrested by the Dallas Police Department and placed in the City Jail.
His arrest had nothing to do with the assassination of the President, and he knew nothing concerning the assassination of the President.
At the City Jail in Dallas, he was placed in Cell 10 on the fifth floor, and at that time his cellmate was a man whose identity he could not recall.
An individual, whose face was smashed up, was brought into the hallway of the jail where Elrod and his cellmate could observe him.
At that time the unknown cellmate made some mention that he had known this man with the injured face as a result of meeting him at a motel.
The cellmate stated that five men had met at a motel, and they had been advanced some money under some type contract.
The man with the injured face had received some money, and he was reported to have been driving a Thunderbird automobile with a large quantity of guns contained therein.
Elrod advised he was confined in the Dallas City Jail for a period of 72 hours, and he was confused at this time concerning the events which occurred.
He stated he could not recall whether Jack Ruby’s name had been mentioned prior to the time of the killing of Lee Harvey Oswald, but that this cellmate at some time had told him that one of the men who had been at the motel referred to above, name and location unknown, had been Jack Ruby.
He stated that on several occasions he has had difficulty remembering due to his extreme use of alcohol.
What makes Elrod’s story ring authentic is that it is very unlikely that he would have known about the Thunderbird automobile and the meeting in the motel room with the five men including Jack Ruby, guns, and money changing hands.
The information concerning the Thunderbird car had come out in a small article on page 19 of a Dallas newspaper while Elrod was in jail, and knowledge of gun running and Jack Ruby was not yet public.
It seems reasonable to conclude that Elrod did, in fact, get this information from someone in the cell block with him and it could have been Oswald or an Oswald look-alike.
The La Fontaine book was lauded in the assassination research community as a major breakthrough in the JFK assassination, although some of the authors’ broad conclusions were challenged.
Their story that it was Oswald who had talked to Elrod in the four-hour period on November 22 was challenged by critics who allege that the person talking with Elrod was more likely to have been the Oswald look-alike, John Thomas Masen.
There are reasonable arguments that Elrod talked to Masen instead of Oswald.
Second, Masen was arrested on November 22, 1963, according to fingerprint records and a Texas Department of Safety arrest record, and could well have been in the jail at the same time as Elrod.
Inasmuch as it seemed likely that the controversy as to whether it was Masen or Oswald in the cell block could go on for an extended time, and with my publishing deadline approaching, I decided to confine myself to the broader aspects of the evidence on the logic that it must have been either Oswald or Masen.
Using this premise, I would determine how it fitted in my quest for the identity of the people at the top of the conspiracy hierarchy.
In the last analysis, it does not really matter whether it was Masen or Oswald who met with Jack Ruby days before the assassination, at least in so far as we are concerned about Ruby’s activities.
Either way we now have independent evidence corroborating the much maligned Nancy Perrin Rich story that Ruby was running guns in 1961.
And we have independent corroboration for the much ridiculed Marita Lorenz story that she (along with other individuals whose names crop up in assassination research) met with Jack Ruby the week of the assassination in a motel room loaded with weapons which had been stolen from military armories.
Lorenz, Rich, and Elrod most definitely did not know one another and thus their statements, however farfetched they sound independently, now have the ring of truth when assembled together, and give us more insight into Jack Ruby than the Warren Commission ever did AOS phasic added) I have mentioned Marita Lorenz only briefly in a photo caption in Chapter 16.
But now I thought perhaps, in my caution, I’d thrown out the baby with the bath water.
Marita Lorenz was another CIA operative who told her story involving anti-Castro Cubans and CIA renegades in the plot to kill Kennedy.
This now brings the number of CIA agents who revealed their stories, or parts of their stories, to five—not counting David Sanchez Morales.
Marita Lorenz was recruited into the CIA by Frank Sturgis while she was Fidel Castro’s mistress in Havana.
She left Cuba to participate in CIA activities in the United States and was brought into the lawsuit by Mark Lane for her extraordinary testimony.
The basis for the lawsuit was an article asserting that E Howard Hunt may have been implicated in the assassination of President Kennedy.
Published fifteen years after the murder of the president, it was written by a former CIA officer, Victor Marchetti.
In December 1981, Hunt had won an initial judgment in the amount of $650,000, an award that would have forced Liberty Lobby into bankruptcy.
Liberty Lobby retained attorney Mark Lane for the second trial HOO, February 1985, the jury found Liberty Lobby not guilty of libel.
In his book Plausible Denial, Mark Lane stated, “There is no legal precedent for Hunt Liberty Lobby.
Her testimony was taken in a January 11, 1985 deposition with Hunt’s legal counsel, Kevin A Dunne, in attendance.
Weberman and Joseph Opaku’s publication, Third Press), but I had filed them away because I had decided to abandon telling her story.
In one fell swoop, Marita Lorenz’s testimony 22) if we can believe it, establishes guilt of the CIA at a high level , and identifies a team of CIA operatives that traveled with Lorenz from Miami to Dallas in a caravan of two cars in late November 1963.
According to Lorenz, the people traveling in the cars included Frank Sturgis, Gerald Patrick Hemming, two Cuban brothers named Novis, a pilot named Pedro Diaz Lanz, anti-Castro exile Orlando Bosch, and Lee Harvey Oswald.
She testified in 1978 that it must have been on a weekend before the assassination.
Lorenz identified E Howard Hunt as passing money to this group of people in a motel room in Dallas on November 21, and said that Jack Ruby visited the motel after E Howard Hunt had left.
She had Sturgis take her to the Dallas airport on November 21, and took a flight back to Miami.
Whether this was the actual team that assassinated Kennedy is not certain, but Lorenz has emphatically stated that she understood from Sturgis that they were involved in the operation.
In addition to peer pressure, I had discarded Lorenz’s story partly because she swore that Lee Harvey Oswald was in the group in the second car that traveled to Dallas.
Unless this was another Oswald lookalike, this could not be true because Oswald was working at the Texas Schoolbook Depository during the period in question.
I attempted to contact Marita Lorenz through a friend who knew her family in Philadelphia, but to no avail, so I deleted Lorenz’s story from my manuscript except for the photo caption.
Now [have reinserted it, although it still has some problems, such as Oswald being in the caravan as well as Gerald Patrick Hemming, who has denied it, and her vagueness as to the date of departure from Miami.
It was at this point that Bob Dorff became very interested in the Masen/Elrod story and organized a small conference to be held in San Francisco on July 4-6, 1996.
The agenda for the conference was a review of the La Fontaine book, primarily the part on John Elrod.
Also included on the agenda was an update on the latest evidence about Oswald in Mexico City.
The San Francisco Conference Our discussion group met at the Golden Gate Holiday Inn on the evening of July 4, 1996.
Marathon sessions continued until noon on July 6, with time out for sleep, food, and drinks, and for watching a spectacular display of fireworks from Mary Ferrell’s suite on the twenty-sixth floor of the hotel.
As I anticipated, we were unable to reach a consensus on the viability of the evidence concerning whether it was Oswald or Masen who was in the cell block with Elrod.
Carol Hewett presented her arguments and documents that the person could have been the Oswald look-alike Masen.
Mary Ferrell presented Warren Commission documents showing that Oswald could not have been in the cell block at that time.
Bill Adams argued his and the La Fontaines’ strong position that it was in fact Oswald in the cell block.
However, there was no disagreement that the arrest of Whitter and Miller in the gun-running operation was conclusively linked to the Oswald look-alike, John Thomas Masen.
There was also no disagreement that the gun running from Fort Hood was to provide weapons for the DRE/Alpha 66 headquarters at the house on Harlendale Street in Dallas.
Being unable to tie down the John Elrod evidence connecting Oswald to the Whitter-Miller arrest and Jack Ruby to my satisfaction, I reaffirmed my decision not to place evidentiary credence on it in this book; not that the La Fontaines had failed to uncover important evidence, but that I did not have time and space to address the Oswald vs.
It did seem to be essential, however, to address the issue of Jack Ruby’s gun running in Dallas and his connections to anti-Castro Cubans and John Thomas Masen.
As Carol Hewett wrote, regardless of whether it was Masen or Oswald in the cell block with Elrod, there was a linkage of the arms trafficking to Jack Ruby.
The FBI report in Memphis has Elrod telling about Ruby in a motel room in Dallas with Miller and others, and money and guns changing hands.
The Nancy Perrin Rich story om in the Warren Commission documents about Ruby and gun running in Dallas, long ignored, now has credence.
Independent of the Elrod story, there was another possible link of Jack Ruby to the gun running of Whitter, Miller, and Masen.
Additional evidence of Ruby’s deep involvement in gun running for the anti-Castro Cubans is in a tape of Gaeton Fonzi’s HSCA interview of Wally Weston.
Weston was a nightclub comedian who worked for Jack Ruby in the Carousel Club.
Russell went to Masen’s gun shop in Dallas early one evening and dropped in unannounced.
According to Ellsworth, the Oswald look-alike had put on about thirty pounds over the years.
In 1976 he was a stocky, brown-haired thirty-six-year-old, about the same height as Oswald.
When I mentioned the name of Frank Ellsworth, Masen’s eyes flashed and his reply was acrid.
They finally dropped all charges except failure to keep proper records.
And this has cost me an enormous amount of money, not being able to deal in firearms.
This has cost me $20,000 or $30,000 over the past twelve or thirteen years.
He gave me a long, probing look, as if he knew precisely what I was driving at.
Going around asking people about the Cubans, the Kennedy assassination.
What may be a living to you’—he paused, giving me another long look—‘“‘can be a life to them.
This implicates Ruby as being deeper into the plot than just a low-level hood who was ordered by the mob to kill Oswald. These gun-running activities link Ruby to John Thomas Masen who was described by ATF agent Frank Ellsworth as a remarkable Oswald look-alike.
Masen may have been the second Oswald seen around Dallas in the weeks preceding the Kennedy assassination, but there is no conclusive evidence that Masen consciously posed as Oswald; he may simply have been mistaken for Oswald. The weapons for the gun-running operation through the anti-Castro Cubans were obtained in large part from United States Army’s Fort Hood in San Antonio, Texas.
Headquarters for the 112th division of Army intelligence was also in San Antonio.
This may have been part of a larger postmissile crisis program involving killing Castro, possibly sponsored by the Kennedys. The FBI thwarted the ATF operation to arrest John Thomas Masen in the gun-running operations, thus shutting it down and keeping the story underground.
The FBI then systematically suppressed evidence of John Thomas Masen and the gun-running operations until it was finally revealed in documents released by the National Archives.
This suggests that the gun-running operation could have been closely associated with the JFK assassination.
The common elements are Cuban exiles, the Mafia, the CIA, and right-wing extremists—both civilian and in the military.
James Hepburn, Farewell America 27 CONVERGING LINES OF EVIDENCE In reviewing the material in the previous chapters, there are four repeating patterns of evidence that, over and over again, strongly define the broad structure of the execution phase of the plot to kill John F Kennedy.
The Mafia, including Jimmy Hoffa; Right-wing extremists in the CIA and/or the military; Extremists in the anti-Castro Cuban movement; and Civilian right-wing extremists/racists.
An important pattern that has emerged is the large number of people who had foreknowledge of the plot.
Among these people, there seems to be a disproportionate number connected with anti-Castro Cuban groups or others linked closely to them.
My objective in this chapter is to bring these disparate elements into a simplified account supported by the evidence.
It was useful in previous chapters to focus on a single group of suspects and to explore their linkages with other suspects.
By focusing on the anti-Castro Cubans and evidence of their foreknowledge of the assassination, I anticipate that a more definitive pattern will become apparent.
Hunt, everywhere we turn we see evidence of involvement of the anti-Castro Cubans, at least in the disinformation phase of the plot, and perhaps also in the execution phase.
This chapter is long and detailed, and so is the chapter that follows on Gerald Patrick Hemming.
But these two chapters are perhaps the most important insofar as revealing intricacies of the substructure of the plot, and thereby evidentiary linkages to the identities of the master plotters.
In 1963, there was a bewildering array of anti-Castro Cuban organizations in the United States—more than one hundred of them.
We will concentrate on a few of the more important ones where there is some known or suspected connection with the assassination.
Key Anti-Castro Cuban Organizations i Group: Alpha 66—Segundo Frente Key Individuals: Sergio Arcacha-Smith; Antonio Veciana; del Escambray Rolando Masferrer; Tony Cuesta; Felipe Vidal Santiago; Manuel Rodriguez Orcarberro; Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo Group: SNFE-Alpha-66-MRP Key Individuals: Manuel Rodriguez Orcarberro Group: CRC — Cuban Revolutionary Council Key Individuals: Sergio Arcacha-Smith; Carlos Prio Socarras; Manuel Artime; Manuel Rodriguez ; Manuel Gil; Luis Rabel; Arnesto Rodriguez, Sr.
FRD — Frente Revolucionario Democratico Key Individuals: Sergio Arcacha-Smith; Dr.
Echevarria was a member of the 30th of November group, which was dissolved shortly after the assassination.
Another member of this same group was Rolando Masferrer, who was also a money conduit between Carlos Marcello and Alpha 66.
Alpha 66, the radical exile group, had a house in Dallas at the time of the assassination.
The Secret Service memorandum about Echevarria was sent to the FBI, but no action was taken.
Shortly thereafter, Lyndon Johnson gave the FBI sole jurisdiction over the entire JFK investigation, and the FBI made it clear that it wanted the Secret Service to terminate its investigation Once again we have the FBI, under the control of LBJ, suppressing vital evidence, and the Secret Service complying.
The HSCA found that the 30th of November group was backed financially by the JGCE, a Chicagobased organization run by Paulino Sierra Martinez that backed the more militant groups including Alpha 66 and the DRE, through which Carlos Bringuier was involved in the street scuffle with Oswald in New Orleans.
The JGCE financial support allegedly came from individuals connected to organized crime; the group was dissolved shortly after President Kennedy’s assassination.
XIX, 534, Decker Exhibit 5323 This report clearly highlighted the possibility of a serious connection between Oswald and Cubans in Dallas shortly before the assassination.
It suggested the possibility of asafe house in Dallas to accommodate assassins.
Later it would be revealed that the house on Harlendale Street was for the use of Alpha 66.
So here we have, surfacing within a few days after November 22, a network including militant Cubans and Mafiosi with connections to Lee Harvey Oswald, involvement in gun running to Cuba, and one of the Cubans bragging about “taking care of Kennedy” occurring just before the assassination took place.
As we see, over and over, leads were there which could possibly have cracked the case wide open.
Another example of foreknowledge of the assassination linked to Cuban exiles were the statements of Joseph Milteer which have been mentioned briefly in previous chapters.
Milteer was a right-wing extremist active in supporting the Cuban exiles.
The evidence has to do with a Miami police informant , who notified the FBI that he had tape recorded a threat against Kennedy made by Joseph Milteer on November 9, 1963 in Miami.
Somersett asked if Milteer actually had known of the assassination before it occurred or if he had just been guessing.
Milteer asserted that he had been certain beforehand about the inevitability of the assassination ot He said, “Everything ran true to form.
The right-wing is in the clear...the patriots have outsmarted the communist group in order that the communists would carry out the plan without the right-wing becoming involved. lB) The FBI had received this information about Milteer but did not pass it on to the Warren Commission until two weeks before its work was to be concluded, which as a practical matter was too late for the commission to use it effectively and still meet its deadline for getting the finished report to Lyndon Johnson.
Again, we have the FBI stalling and maneuvering to suppress evidence that it could not destroy because the reporting entity was out of its control.
She told the attending physician that Kennedy was going to be killed during his forthcoming trip to Dallas.
Victor Weiss, who was employed as a resident physician at the hospital in 1963.
Victor Weiss...recalled that on Monday, November 25, 1963, he was asked by another physician, Dr.
Bowers allegedly told Weiss that the patient, Rose Cheramie, had stated before the assassination that President Kennedy was going to be killed.
She did not have any specific details of a particular assassination plot against Kennedy, but had stated the “word in the underworld” was that Kennedy would be assassinated.
She further stated that she had been traveling from Florida to her home in Texas when the man traveling with her threw her from the automobile in which they were riding.
During the oneor two-hour ride to the hospital, Fruge asked Cheramie routine questions.
They had stopped at this lounge...and they’d had a few drinks and had gotten into an argument or something.
Fruge said the lounge was a house of prostitution called the Silver Slipper.
Fruge claimed during these intervals that Cheramie related the story she appeared to be quite lucid.
On November 22, when he heard the President had been assassinated, Fruge said he immediately called the hospital and told them not to release Cheramie until he had spoken to her.
The hospital administrators assented but said Fruge would have to wait until the following Monday before Cheramie would be well enough to speak to anyone.
Under questioning, Cheramie told Fruge that the two men traveling with her from Miami were going to Dallas to kill the President.
The bar owner, a Mr Mac Manual since deceased, told Fruge that Cheramie had come in with two men who the owner knew as pimps engaged in the business of hauling prostitutes in from Florida.
When Cheramie became intoxicated and rowdy, one of the men “slapped her around” and threw her outside.
First we shall examine the story of Richard Case Nagell, who was assigned by the CIA to infiltrate and investigate Cuban exile groups that the CIA suspected were getting out of control, perhaps plotting to assassinate the president.
Nagell was also assigned the mission of investigating Oswald, and journeyed to Mexico City where he says he met Oswald in 1963.
Moreover, Nagell revealed that he was a double agent between the CIA and Soviet intelligence and was ordered by the Soviets to murder Oswald to prevent Oswald from participating in the assassination of Kennedy.
Nagell, while under arrest in El Paso, Texas, predicted the assassination of Kennedy.
The story of Robert Morrow, who claims that he knew about Richard Case Nagell’s assignment by the CIA, and who was given the assignment to purchase four Mannlicher-Carcano rifles along with walkie-talkies for delivery to David Ferrie in 1963—all of which, or their equivalent, showed up at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963.
Morrow also claims that he knew Cuban exile Eladio del Valle, who told Morrow in advance that Kennedy was going to be assassinated.
This added one more member to the list of people who had advance knowledge of the assassination.
Information concerning anti-Castro Cuban involvement in the assassination was provided at the Nassau conference that I attended in December 1995.
During this conference, the Cubans flatly declared that Eladio del Valle was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
The story of John Martino, who revealed before he died that he was involved with Cuban exiles in the Kennedy assassination plot.
This section will include a discussion of the activities of William Pawley, Henry Luce, and Clare Boothe Luce in promoting privately financed, covert operations against Cuba.
These associations could prove to be important linkages between Pawley and General Charles Willoughby and other right-wing extremist elements.
By examining these lines of evidence separately and then consolidating them, a more coherent picture perhaps will emerge—not only of the Cuban exiles but a much larger view of the master plot.
These accounts, by necessity, will be greatly condensed and simplified.
A method that will be used is to look for corroboration of the truthfulness in the attestations of Nagell, Morrow, Bishop, and Martino.
They all claimed to have been involved in the fringes of the JFK assassination, but not in the plot itself.
If we can believe their individual statements in the main, then their combined accounts become invaluable, particularly their versions of the composition of a master plot.
Double Agent A major source for my work on Nagell was discussions with Dick Russell and information from Russell’s book The Man Who Knew Too Much.
In addition, I commissioned Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko to search the National Archives for any further material.
Finally, I was fortunate to contact Nagell personally and engage him in telephone conversations and correspondence about himself and the Kennedy assassination.
At the time of his death, Nagell was sixty-five years old and a broken man.
After Nagell’s death, I was contacted by one of his relatives, the executor of his estate, who had found my letters in Nagell’s footlocker.
Nagell had talked with his estate executor about me shortly before he died.
The executor provided me with additional information of considerable interest.
Much of the material in this chapter was written before Nagell’s death and was reviewed by him.
Richard Case Nagell is considered by many to be the most important witness in the JFK assassination, and, for reasons that follow, I am inclined to agree.
On September 20, 1963, Nagell, then thirty-three years old, was arrested in El Paso, Texas, for firing two harmless shots into the ceiling of the State National Bank.
Nagell would later claim that prior to this incident he had sent a warning letter to J Edgar Hoover and to the CIA in which he had revealed a conspiracy to assassinate John Kennedy that he believed would take place in late September 1963.
He claimed that his letter provided information on Oswald and two of his associates, Angel and Leopoldo.
He’s got that look that’s unusual, the penetrating eyes, that scar down one side of his face.
It is a complex tale of a tragic spy who tried to come in from the cold.
As punishment for shooting two harmless shots into the ceiling of a bank and then waiting outside to be arrested, Nagell was sentenced to ten years in the federal penitentiary.
The federal judge assigned to the case was Homer Thornberry, Lyndon Johnsons personal friend, whom he had just appointed.
This is a strong indication that powers in government were aware of Nagell’s importance, and extraordinary measures were necessary to silence him.
Aside from this remarkable confirmation of Nagell’s story by a respected police officer in El Paso, there are several other substantial reasons to believe Nagell.
First, he was indeed a contract agent for the CIA and was given the assignment of investigating Oswald in 1963.
From 14 December 1959 through 22 June 1962, subject was employed as a special investigator for the State of California, Fraud Section, Department of Employment, and the Department of Alcoholic Control.
On 8 June 1962, subject was suspended for unauthorized release of information to the newspapers and the Los Angeles Police Department.
During July, August, September, and on one occasion prior to this, subject conducted an inquiry into the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald, and the allegation that he had established a Fair Play For Cuba Committee in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Of special significance is that the above document does not state that Nagell claimed these facts.
It was at this point that I sent a letter to Dick Russell, asking him if he would prepare a list of reasons why I should believe Nagell’s story.
I will address the significance of some of these items as this chapter progresses.
He enlisted in the Army in 1948 on his eighteenth birthday and was assigned to paratrooper school at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
Shortly after that, at the age of nineteen, he went into Army intelligence at a beginning level.
He studied Russian at Fort Bragg and took an extension course in Mandarin Chinese.
In the fall of 1951, Nagell was shipped to Korea to serve in the Korean War where he was assigned as a rifle platoon leader.
He had the reputation of being a top-notch lieutenant who commanded forty men in his platoon.
Even after being wounded he requested reassignment to Korea and was sent back to active combat where he was again wounded and again returned to the front lines after five days in the hospital.
Nagell described himself as a young idealist who went to Korea voluntarily.
Nagell was the youngest American to receive a battlefield commission to captain during the course of the war.
When the war ended in 1953, he was just nine days short of his twenty-third birthday.
Nagell was the recipient of three Purple Hearts, a Bronze Star, the Korean Service Medal, and the United Nations Service Ribbon.
Richard Case Nagell , handcuffed and being led into federal custody in El Paso after being arrested outside the State National Bank.
Robert Morrow, CIA contract agent, holding one of four 7.35-mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifles that he purchased shortly before the Kennedy assassination for delivery to a group in New Orleans.
During this period he suffered injuries in a military plane crash near Andrews Air Force Base in Washington, D.C., on November 28, 1954.
He was the only soldier of five to live through the ordeal; he survived by parachuting from the plane.
He suffered a severe concussion and was unconscious for twenty-seven days after the crash.
When he was discharged from the Army’s Walter Reed Hospital, he was given a thorough psychiatric examination which cleared him of any obvious personality changes related to his injuries.
Despite Nagell’s clean bill of health, the FBI, the CIA, and others would later use the fact of his injuries in the plane crash to trash his entire story.
While still hospitalized, Nagell was assigned to duty with the Army’s Counter Intelligence Corps school at Fort Holabird, Maryland, and in May 1955 he reported to duty at the CIC’s intelligence training center.
Nagell graduated with honors; on August 12, 1955 he was designated a counterintelligence officer.
In September 1955 he was granted a top-secret security clearance and was assigned to CIC duty in Los Angeles.
It was of this experience that Nagell recounted, “we opened the mail of civilians with a postal inspector standing right next to us.
Hunt and involved in ultra-right-wing, anti-Communist/white supremacist organizations worldwide.
The FOI was a top-secret division considered sacrosanct by military intelligence.
Nagell wrote about his indoctrination in the FOI concerning the various tools of the trade.
These devices also included miniature cameras , radio transmitters and receivers, code books, etc.
It also included an assassination device, a short metal tube, which Nagell was told he might come across in his work.
This sophistication in assassinations had begun to reach its mature form in the late 1950s.
At that point, it seems clear that the CIA and military intelligence were heavily involved in the “pure science” of assassinations mentioned by James Jesus Angleton, head of CIA’s counter intelligence, to Dick Russell.
In the autumn of 1957 Nagell was given a new assignment in the Japanese capital, after he had expressed moral and ethical dissatisfaction with the operations of Team 26.
Nagell had complained that in the course of his FOI duties he had participated in practically every major crime.
It was on this assignment that Nagell would become privy to a vast amount of sensitive information, much of which he would copy for safekeeping to protect himself later if the need should arise.
And it was during this phase of his spy career that Nagell learned of the name Joseph Kramer, which he would use later in connection with the JFK assassination.
In 1957, a curious parallel path between Nagell and Oswald began to become apparent.
Nagell’s assignment was to assist in the defection of Soviet Colonel Nikolai Eroshkin from the Soviet embassy; Eroshkin was suspected of being among the top of Soviet military intelligence in Japan.
Sometime in late 1957 or early 1958, Nagell and Oswald met in Tokyo with Dr.
Fujisawa had been a propagandist for the Japanese during World War II and was acquainted with the alleged Soviet spy Mark Gayn.
Fujisawa also may have attempted to recruit Oswald in Japan, thus launching Oswald’s career as a spy.
It was during this period in Japan that both Nagell and Oswald had girlfriends at the expensive nightclub in Tokyo, The Queen Bee, where Oswald was passing along fake information to a KGB contact.
Other parallels between Nagell and Oswald would continue to emerge over the years 8H Nagell married a Japanese woman; Oswald later had an affair in Dallas with a Japanese woman.
Both had connections with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in the United States.
Both purportedly attempted to renounce their United States citizenship in what seem to be staged events.
Both attempted to reinstate their military discharges and were turned down on the same day.
Nagell, like Oswald, may have been targeted as a patsy in the JFK assassination.
In each of their military careers there was a strange pattern of insubordination and troublemaking in what appear to have been staged episodes to create their bonafides as defectors, while at the same time their dossiers showed excellent performance records.
Both had a trail of supposed pro-Communist leanings which fit into a defector image.
Both supposedly had histories of mental instabilities—fitting into an assassin profile.
This may have been just a waiting period for Nagell before being used on his next assignment.
It was at this juncture in my writing that Nagell died, much to my shock and dismay.
I lamented that if only I had acted sooner to meet with Nagell, or had followed up more aggressively, I would have learned much more.
Nagell’s specific involvement in the Kennedy assassination apparently began with his assignment to penetrate the Cuban exile group Alpha 66 and to investigate Oswald.
It has been postulated by Dick Russell that Nagell himself became an alternate patsy to Oswald for the Kennedy assassination.
Rather, I will focus on Nagell’s version of the assassination plot and see how it compares to versions of the plot recounted by other CIA agents.
It is important to note that Nagell was probably involved in only one of the compartmentalized phases of the plot and, therefore, would not have known the complete story; so what he has told could be in part from first-hand experience, and in part his own theory of the assassination that he developed over the years.
In a nutshell, Nagell claimed that the plot was a “domestic inspired, domestic-formulated, domestic conspiracy” to assassinate the president.
This could be a very significant statement and evidence of what many have long believed—that the CIA, as an organization, was not involved in the Kennedy assassination except in the cover-up.
What is important is that Nagell emphatically stated that the FBI had a major role in the assassination.
He also said that Communist powers inside or outside the United States were not involved.
He said that Lee Harvey Oswald was “‘in it up to his ears,” and that the reason Garrison and assassination buffs had “not wanted him in” was because he would ny not go along their idea of Oswald’s innocence.
To my knowledge, at no time did Nagell ever implicate Lyndon Johnson in the conspiracy.
Over the years, Nagell claimed that he had stashed away photographs and a tape recording which would be revealed in the event of his death.
To this date, this material has not surfaced, despite attempts by his estate executor to find it.
It is noteworthy that at least one of Nagell’s footlockers has not been located.
Hunt/ Willoughby group working with their right-wing extremist allies in the military and anti-Castro Cubans.
An important aspect of the Nagell story is his relationship with the Mafia.
As noted earlier, Nagell told Dick Russell that he had met Johnny Rosselli at the Friars Club in Los Angeles.
Nagell’s strong early allegation that the FBI played a major part in the assassination is very significant in light of evidence later uncovered concerning the FBI’s complicity in the forgery of the Zapruder film; the FBI’s suppression of evidence in Dallas, New Orleans, and Mexico City; and widespread manipulations of statements of witnesses.
Of additional interest is Nagell’s story that Oswald visited Mexico City twice.
This fits with the evidence that Oswald visited the Cuban embassy twice in 1963.
In the material that follows, I will outline several significant items concerning Nagell that shed considerable light on the mystery of the JFK assassination.
Nagell’s investigation of the anti-Castro Cubans is of primary importance.
In 1963 the CIA had begun to get very worried that one of its covert operations had gone out of control.
Engineer and CIA Special Problem Solver Robert Morrow relates his first-hand experience in the fringes of the JFK assassination when he was a senior agent for the CIA during the period leading up to November 22, 1963 and in the months following.
What follows is excerpted primarily from Morrow’s book First Hand Knowledge.
Barnes reported to Richard Bissell and General Charles Cabell, brother of the mayor of Dallas.
Morrow’s story takes on significance in that it corroborates major aspects of Nagell’s story and confirms involvement of anti-Castro Cubans and the Mafia in the plot.
I had the opportunity to meet him in 1992 at a symposium in Chicago, and believe that he is generally credible.
This was confirmed to me by respected author John Davis, who gave Morrow high marks in those parts of his writings that dealt with Morrow’s first-hand experience 1 Morrow started his career as an electronics contractor and then had a two-year stint as an engineer for the military contractor, Martin Aircraft Company.
He left Martin in 1958 and went into private consulting engineering and inventing.
This resulted in contacts which brought his expertise in electronics and special technical projects to the notice of the CIA; they soon recruited him for special projects.
Morrow wrote that at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion he and David Ferrie flew from Florida on a clandestine CIA operation to take measurements of high-performance electronic signals that the CIA suspected were emanating from a Soviet installation for launching ballistic missiles against the United States.
Despite a harrowing experience, Morrow and Ferrie returned with the data which, according to Morrow, established the existence of offensive missile sites under preliminary construction long before it became official knowledge in the fall of 1962.
Recall that Robert McNamara disputes that there was any such construction of missiles in Cuba at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
It is also plausible that the Kennedy administration simply did not believe the information if it had, in fact, been presented to them.
Morrow wrote that while on this Cuban mission with Ferrie, he first met Eladio del Valle, who was part of the CIA operation.
As earlier noted, del Valle was murdered within a day or two after David Ferrie mysteriously “committed suicide” when he was accused by New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison of being involved in the Kennedy assassination.
A most interesting part of Morrow’s story is that on July 1, 1963241 he was given an assignment by Tracy Barnes to purchase four 7.35mm Mannlicher-Carcano rifles from a surplus store located in Maryland.
Morrow complied with his request by modifying four Motorola-made units that required an antenna several feet high.
Morrow solved the problem by strapping a wire to the intended user’s leg, concealed under the trousers.
This combination of walkie-talkies and a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle suspiciously appeared at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963.
Morrow wrote that after the assassination he was looking at photographs taken at Dealey Plaza and saw one of his walkie-talkies in the pocket of a man standing on Elm Street near the spot where Kennedy was shot.
Three of the rifles that Morrow purchased, along with the walkie-talkies, were picked up by David Ferrie and flown to New Orleans.
Writer Gus Russo told me that Morrow’s story about David Ferrie receiving the rifles and the walkie-talkies was corroborated by Lou Krieger, radio talk-show host.
Krieger told Russo that he was very skeptical of Morrow’s story and, in order to check it out, visited the private airstrip near Baltimore where Morrow said he had turned over the equipment to Ferrie.
Krieger said that he talked with a man at the airstrip who confirmed that a man with David Ferrie’s red wig and Southern accent had arrived in a private plane and picked up some weapons, returning to New Orleans during the period that Morrow had said it occurred, the first week of August 1963425) Morrow was told by Cuban exile leader Mario Garcia Kohly that the rifles were to be used in an operation against Juan Bosch, who was the head of the Dominican Republic.
Morrow wrote that Barnes sent another CIA operative to New Orleans and Miami to infiltrate Ferrie’s connections to see what was going on; the operative used the name “Joseph Kramer,” which is the fictitious name that Nagell said he used on this mission.
It is also an indication that we have at least one of the CIA’s top people, Tracy Barnes, getting concerned that bad things were underway in one of their covert operations.
Barnes may have suspected that the operation was spinning out of control.
This can be partially explained by the fact that the manufacturer had re-barreled the 7.35mm model with a 6.5mm barrel because there was a plentiful supply of 6.5mm ammunition.
My interest at this point is whether or not Morrow’s writing about 7.35mm rifles discredits his story.
The purchase of 7.35mm rifles has made his story suspect to some, but to me it provides credence.
He was a CIA contact to Mario Garcia Kohly who is prominent in Morrow’s story.
Kohly was slated by a right-wing faction of the CIA to be the next president of Cuba, once Castro was eliminated.
Kohly was close to Vice President Nixon and had been picked by him to take over Cuba after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The story of Kohly is very interesting in that it explains much about the Bay of Pigs disaster and the political infighting that to some extent brought it about.
Kohly was a prominent Cuban businessman and financier under the Batista regime.
He was a “distinguished statesman and diplomat,” spoke flawless English, and was highly regarded in international circles for his reputation in finance, having been one of Cuba’s banking elite.
He had put together a number of heavy engineering ventures in Cuba, one an eighty-million-dollar project he was working on when Castro rose to power 8 Kohly was a big-time operator.
All of this property and enterprise was seized by Castro, devastating the economy, in the conversion of Cuba to communism.
After Castro’s revolution, Kohly came to the United States and started to organize resistance groups and make plans for the overthrow of Castro.
He allegedly had put together a large number of anti-Castro Cubans in an underground network in Cuba that was supported by militant groups in the United States.
According to Morrow, Kohly had drafted the initial plans for an invasion of Cuba late in the Eisenhower administration, under Richard Nixon’s responsibility.
The plans were adopted by the CIA with Richard Bissell designated to implement them.
Kohly was introduced to Vice President Nixon, who was impressed and gave the go-ahead POL In October 1960, Nixon, Kohly, and CIA Deputy Charles Cabell met on the golf course at Burning Tree Club in Washington, D.C., and decided on a plan known as “Operation Forty,” which would later become what we now call the Bay of Pigs.
The plan was to take the leftist Cuban leaders to a location at Opa-Locka, at a deserted military base in southern Florida, and place them under house arrest.
If the invasion proved to be successful, they would be taken to a beach in Cuba and killed.
The transfer took place in Piraeus, Greece, where the arms were stored in a Permindex warehouse.
This was the arms cache that would later be seized by the FBI on orders from the Kennedys.
It was throughout the period from 1960 to late 1963 that Morrow describes himself as having contacts with Mafia figures and conversations with CIA’s Tracy Barnes and Washington, D.C., lawyer Marshall Diggs, that link Mafia chieftains Marcello, Giancana, and Trafficante.
Barnes also told Morrow about Oswald being a CIA agent just back from Russia.
Barnes expressed his fear that this group might try to assassinate President Kennedy when aoe ca ae. a the Cuban missile crisis broke loose.
Barnes gave Morrow the mission of determining the extent of Kohly’s role in Banister’s group in New Orleans.
It was on July 1, 1963 that Tracy Barnes contacted Morrow telling him to buy the four MannlicherCarcano rifles PAH On July 2, 1963, Eladio del Valle called Barnes and asked for the four walkietalkies.
By August 1, 1963, Morrow had completed his assignment of procuring the rifles and preparing the walkie-talkies.
During the first week of August 1963, three of the rifles and the walkie-talkies were picked up by David Ferrie at a private airstrip in Maryland.
Morrow relayed this information to attorney Marshall Diggs, who worked with Tracy Barnes.
The day after Kennedy was assassinated, Morrow contacted Barnes when he realized that del Valle’s talk of hitting Kennedy had been real.
Barnes told Morrow not to worry, that everything had been taken care of.
The incredible story of the panic that rocked Langley immediately after JFK’s assassination was told to me by Marshall Diggs almost a year later.
Diggs explained that, in order to cover up some monumental errors, a massive governmental conspiracy was instituted almost immediately.
This resulted in one of the greatest smokescreens in history; one that would prevent anyone from discovering the President’s real assassins.
The central thesis of Morrow’s writings is that the Kennedy assassination was the work of the Mafia, elements of the CIA, and right-wing Cuban exiles aligned with Guy Banister, Clay Shaw, and David Ferrie, all of whom were ClA-connected.
This is consistent with Richard Case Nagell’s version of the assassination that he revealed over the years, except that Morrow goes further in implicating the CIA than did Nagell.
In the spring of 1992, Morrow told Dick Russell that he should get in touch with Colonel William Bishop, who knew about Nagell and his activities in the Kennedy assassination plot.
Morrow had first met Colonel Bishop in the early 1960s; Bishop was training a group of anti-Castro Cubans at a CIA camp in No Name Key in the Florida Keys.
He had contacted Morrow after reading Morrow’s first book Betrayal, published in 1976.
Morrow said that Colonel Bishop was dying of cancer and wanted to get his conscience clear by talking about the Kennedy assassination.
Morrow suggested that Russell contact Colonel Bishop through Gary Shaw, who lived in the same town as Bishop, and had heard from him.
Hunt and the “Texas High Cabal” in the plot; Confirms that Jimmy Hoffa, through Carlos Marcello, provided money to anti-Castro Cubans for the assassination. Further links William Harvey to the plot.
Among the many important things learned at the 1995 Nassau conference with General Fabian Escalante and his Cuban study group was a statement by General Escalante concerning Colonel William Bishop.
General Escalante said that in March 1964 the Cubans arrested a man by the name of Felipe Vidal Santiago when he was in a boat raid on the Cuban coast for a sabotage operation.
Felipe Vidal Santiago 2 told his Cuban interrogators that in early November 1963 Colonel William Bishop picked him up in a car in Miami and drove him to Dallas where he gave him a room in a secondclass hotel.
While in Dallas, he said he attended a meeting with a few wealthy people in the Dallas Petroleum Club.
General Escalante told our group that this conversation was recorded on tape by Cuban intelligence because it was seen as being very important.
According to Escalante, Vidal had been running operations for the CIA since 1962—as a CIA agent.
Years later, General Escalante found Vidal’s name in Dick Russell’s book, and that prompted him to tell us the story of Vidal’s obviously important statement.
Dick Russell had written in 1992 that Gerald Patrick Hemming had earlier told him a similar story about Vidal.
I’d heard of other meetings, where the conversation got steered around toward hitting JFK instead of Fidel.
I’m talking about some friends of Somoza, and about some people in Dallas.
There was a third force—pretty much outside CIA channels, outside our own private operation down in the Keys—that was doing all kinds of shit, and had been all through 63,514 The difference between Escalante’s story of Vidal and Hemming’s story is that Vidal placed himself in Dallas in early November, whereas Hemming placed Vidal in Dallas the week before the assassination.
If both Hemming and Escalante were telling their stories accurately, Vidal had taken two trips from Miami to Dallas in November 1963 during the three weeks before the assassination.
So, out of the blue at the Nassau conference in 1995, we have confirmation of elements of Hemming’s story about Vidal, and evidence linking Vidal to Colonel Bishop.
It is important to note that it was Escalante, not Hemming, who linked Vidal to Colonel Bishop.
Also, Hemming’s stories, which have been scorned by some writers because Hemming himself was at one time a suspect in the Kennedy assassination and seemed to be such an unreliable character, now had some genuine credence.
I determined that I should make an effort to interview Hemming; I had avoided him for too long.
Earlier, when I was in Dallas in 1994, I had met with Gary Shaw to discuss some of the forensic evidence.
I told him of my interest in Colonel William Bishop, because I was seeking confirmation of Nagell’s story.
Soon after that Gary decided to drop out of research in the Kennedy assassination, having had enough of it in many years of effort while maintaining his architectural practice in Dallas.
I telephoned Gary a couple of times to try to set up an appointment with him, but all I got was his answering machine.
I could understand, because that was exactly what I intended to do when my book was published.
This subject can consume one’s life 1f one doesn’t know how to bring the endeavor to an end.
With this new information from the Nassau conference, I knew I had to find more on Colonel Bishop.
So while in Washington, D.C., I went to the Assassination Archives to see what might be uncovered.
It appeared that CIA hit man John Adrian O’ Hare had been made to disappear, then to reappear in Dallas with his old name, William Bishop.
But when Bishop knew he was going to die he was compelled by his conscience to say something.
The story related to a Rotary Club meeting on January 27, 1983, at which the principal speaker was Henry Hurt of Reader's Digest, who is authoring a large update on the JFK assassination, to be published by Reader’s Digest Press for the 20th anniversary of the President’s death.
The story prominently mentioned Gary Shaw, Hurt’s sponsor, who is a local architect and well-known assassination researcher.
On the day that the story was published, Shaw received a telephone call from a man who introduced himself as “Col.
He said that he had “been close to” the President, and was a “friend” of Senator Ted Kennedy.
He related that he had been in Dallas on November 22, 1963, helped put JFK’s remains in a body bag, and was involved in the pushing incident with the Dallas J.P. who wished to retain the body for a Texas autopsy.
Colonel Bishop asked Shaw if the name Charles Bennett meant anything to him.
Bishop was then asked about the name Maurice Bishop, the code name for a CIA employee who allegedly met Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas prior to the assassination.
Bishop suggested that Shaw assure himself of Bishop’s credibility by “checking with the Senator.” 1963 records show a Capt.
Shaw has no physical description of Bishop, as he has only talked with him on the phone.
Bishop and estimates from this that Bishop is probably in his 60s or early 70s.
Bishop is suffering from bone cancer and is commuting from Cleburne to Dallas for treatment.
I telephoned Shaw on June 6, 1996 and began my conversation, telling him about the information that General Escalante had revealed about Felipe Vidal Santiago.
Inasmuch as Dick Russell had not linked Vidal with Colonel William Bishop in his book, this was corroboration of General Escalante’s statement, and, by simple logic, corroboration of Colonel Bishop’s and Hemming’s statements about Vidal.
I asked Shaw if he believed Colonel Bishop’s story about placing Kennedy’s body in a body bag and being involved in the pushing contest at Parkland Hospital on November 22.
But later in our conversation Shaw mentioned that there was a document showing that there was in fact a CIA man, identity unknown, at Parkland Hospital in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
He also remembered a discussion in correspondence with Bud Fensterwald in which an FBI man had told Fensterwald that John Adrian O’ Hare had traveled to Dallas on November 21, 1963.
Colonel Bishop had told Dick Russell that he had traveled to Dallas on that same date; this was more corroboration of Colonel Bishop’s credibility.
I then asked Shaw how important, in his view, is the story of John Adrian O’ Hare.
He said that Bishop had, in fact, told him that he used the name O’ Hare because he was at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport when it was decided that he needed another pseudonym.
Shaw added that he and Bernard Fensterwald had pressed Colonel Bishop on the O’Hare matter and that Bishop became very upset, refusing to talk more about it.
I asked Shaw if Bishop had ever mentioned once working for General Charles Willoughby.
Shaw said ' , ions ect soa “No,” ols but added that Bishop did mention working in military intelligence under General Douglas MacArthur.
Shaw agreed with me that, by inference, Bishop probably would have worked for Willoughby because Willoughby was chief of MacArthur’s military intelligence. ae reeu-t co i ore Colonel William C Bishop, CIA assassin, worked closely with Cuban exile groups and said he ordered surveillance on Richard Case Nagell in New Orleans in 1963.
Colonel Bishop told writer Gary Shaw that General Edwin Walker met with Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago in 1963 with two others.
Also, Bishop said he had attended meetings with General Edwin Walker and retired General Charles Willoughby in Dallas.
Se ak a eg John Adrian O’Hare, CIA mercenary and assassin, thought to be responsible for the murder of Manuel Rodriguez Quesada and Gilberto Rodriguez Hernandez in 1964.
Washington attorney Bernard Fensterwald lifted fingerprints belonging to Bishop from a drinking glass and discovered that they matched the fingerprints of O’ Hare.
Shaw said that at one point, to prove that he knew Veciana, Colonel Bishop called Veciana on the telephone while in Shaw’s office.
I asked Shaw if Colonel Bishop had ever indicated that he was looking for money.
Shaw said he once loaned Bishop $250 and kept one of Bishop’s pistols as collateral.
Bishop never paid back the money, but Shaw eventually sold the pistol and recovered his $250.
Shaw said this was the only indication that Bishop was exploiting his information for money and that it was not a very significant thing.
Shaw added that during his long series of interviews with Bishop, Bishop was arrested in Dallas by the Secret Service for carrying an automatic weapon.
Bishop was put on trial and, with the aid of a high-priced lawyer, got off.
Shaw said that once when Bishop was in his office, he suddenly pulled out a gun because he thought someone was coming in the back door.
Shaw said it shocked him because he didn’t know that Bishop was carrying a gun.
Shaw said that he had attempted to obtain Colonel Bishop’s military record through a friend in the Pentagon, and the friend instigated a search and found that there was no record of him.
But, Shaw said, Bishop had a green military identification card similar to that found in Oswald’s possessions that could get him into any military base at any time.
He said that he could get in Carswell Air Force Base, or any other military place.
This reminded me of Bob Walton’s story about David Sanchez Morales, who had a mysterious little black card that could get him in anywhere and that, also, Morales was buried as a sergeant when, according to Reuben Carbajal, he was a major general in the Army.
I mentioned to Shaw that, from my reading of Dick Russell, Bishop was very emphatic that he had been subjected to the MK ULTRA mind-control program.
Shaw said yes, that was true, and that Bishop claimed it had made him impotent.
Shaw said that Bishop did not actually use the name MK ULTRA, but instead described it as mind control using drugs and hypnosis.
He added that he was certain there were probably more things of interest, but he wouldn’t be able to get to it for a few days because he had an architectural project to complete.
I asked him if he would provide a complete copy of his files on Bishop, and he replied that he would be glad to.
When I hung up the phone, I reflected that things were really falling into place.
The combination of Nagell’s, Morrow’s, and Bishop’s stories seemed to be an outline of a major compartment of the assassination plot, and the stories seemed to corroborate each other, fitting together very well indeed— and also were in complete harmony with the reports of General Escalante’s group.
While waiting for Shaw’s files on Bishop to arrive, I decided to go into the John Martino story, then come back to Colonel Bishop and incorporate what I would learn from Shaw’s files.
Mafia/CIA Operative John Martino is one more CIA-Mafia operative who had foreknowledge of the JFK assassination.
An important aspect of Martino’s story is that it was confirmed by his wife and in part by his son; and also told to a Newsday reporter; and Martino had instructed that it not be revealed until after his death.
In 1994 Anthony Summers and his wife Robbyn interviewed Martino’s widow Florence, age eighty, and her son Edward.
Martino said she was with her husband at their home in Miami Beach on November 22, 1963.
He asked me not to write it while he was still alive aU Martino told Cummings that anti-Castro Cubans were involved, that there had been two guns and two people involved.
The last time he met reporter Cummings, John Martino made an astonishing claim.
He said an FBI. agent named Connors asked him to come to a boat docked in Biscayne Bay, and introduced him to Oswald by name.
The impression John got was that Oswald didn’t know his ass from his elbow, didn’t know what he was involved in.
We have not been able to trace a Miami agent called Connors answering the description provided by Cummings.
F.B.I. files show Martino did have contacts after the assassination with an agent named James J O’Connor, whom we tracked down in retirement.
O’Connor said he cannot recall whether he was in touch with Martino before the assassination.
Cummings, an investigative reporter for more than 30 years, does not think the Martino allegation was just a crook’s slur against a law-enforcement officer.
I was told that Connors, the agent he named, was in Counter-Intelligence.
Florence Martino died one month after Summers’ interview in 199415241 (John Martino died on August 3, 1975 at the age of sixty-four.
John Martino’s story takes on even more significance in that he was associated with Santo Trafficante.
Moreover, Martino was closely associated with William Pawley, a co-founder of the Flying Tigers, ex-ambassador to Peru and Brazil, and right-wing multi-millionaire.
Pawley was a CIA contract agent, close to Allen Dulles. p25] In 1963, John Martino was deeply involved with William Pawley in a controversial plot to discredit JFK by proving that Soviet missiles were still in Cuba.
The plot included the use of Pawley’s boat Flying Tiger to tow a small boat that would be used in a covert operation to land a group of Cuban exiles in Cuba.
It was thought that they would be able to bring back witnesses to verify that offensive missiles were still in Cuba, thus embarrassing the Kennedy administration.
William Pawley’s involvement in anti-Castro activities began to surface in the late 1970s.
Around that time Pawley contracted a nervous ailment and—one week after his name was added to the list— committed suicide with a gunshot wound in the chest.
This was one more key person dying suddenly when investigators were zeroing in on him.
The list includes David Ferrie, Johnny Rosselli, Sam Giancana, David Sanchez Morales, and George de Mohrenschildt.
Pawley has emerged as potentially a very important person in the Kennedy assassination.
Like Willoughby, Pawley was a virulent, high-level antiCommunist; he had financial motives to see John F Kennedy eliminated, having lost considerable properties in Cuba when Castro took over.
He was a long-time friend of Richard Nixon and one of the planners of the Bay of Pigs.
Pawley was involved over the years with David Atlee Phillips, Tracy Barnes, and E Howard Hunt—all characters who show up in the evidence surrounding the Kennedy assassination.
These CIA operatives were the leaders in the successful 1954 coup in Guatemala in which President Jacobo Arbenz was deposed and replaced with a government that had the blessings of the United Fruit Company, which had large banana holdings in Guatemala.
President Eisenhower approved the coup as part of the Cold War effort to stop the spread of communism using covert means as found to be necessary.
Its success led to a similar plan—the Bay of Pigs—to overthrow Castro’s Cuba using Guatemala as a staging ground.
He communicated directly with Allen Dulles and had numerous connections to both the Eastern High Cabal and the Texas High Cabal 228) Pawley is one person who could have been used by a powerful civilian group to bypass Allen Dulles, the CIA hierarchy, the Executive Branch, and the entire United States government to attain direct access to a CIA-military assassination team, as suggested to me by Colonel Fletcher Prouty, although Prouty didn’t mention Pawley’s name.
To divert for a moment, let us examine this incredible ménage of millionaires, industrialists, extremists, and corrupt politicians—bringing into the scene their various secret transgressions and liaisons.
For example, Clare Boothe Luce was at one time the mistress of Allen Dulles and another time bedded with the anti-Communist fanatic General Charles Willoughby.
Meanwhile, Allen Dulles’s ex-mistress, Mary Bancroft, had an affair with Henry Luce, husband of Clare Boothe Luce and owner of Life magazine.
Hunt with his three wives simultaneously; now adding in the crackpot General Edwin Walker, who turned out to be a closet homosexual; and J Edgar Hoover and Clyde Tolson and lackey Roy Cohn all in the same category.
Mix this with John F Kennedy and his multiple adulterous affairs, including one with Marilyn Monroe, and Robert Kennedy and his affair with Marilyn Monroe; plus the mendacious, criminally minded Lyndon Johnson and his mistresses, and Johnson buying every election he ever won; and the Kennedys’ involvement with the Mafia in buying the 1960 presidential election.
Out of this mise en scene exotique emerged the decision to assassinate John F Kennedy.
But to get back to more salient evidence, let’s conclude our discussion concerning the very important John Martino.
The HSCA became very interested in Martino in 1977 when an anonymous informant called “Fred from Fort Worth” telephoned the committee several times and indicated a close relationship with John Martino, who had recently died.
Fred” said that Martino told him he “worked for the CIA” and that Kennedy was killed by anti-Castro Cubans.
Martino said the assassins knew the motorcade route before they went to Dallas.
Fred said that Martino’s widow would have knowledge of such information.
Fred also suggested that a former employer of Martino, Alan Roth, would provide information.
John Martino denied her husband ever had any association with the CIA, but produced names of her husband’s associates who were involved in CIA operations.
She said her husband was arrested by Castro in Cuba because he was mistaken for a Navy Commander with the same name.
They said they believe Martino was related to Mafia boss Angelo Bruno of Philadelphia.
They provided information of possible Martino involvement in gun dealing.
They could provide no information of Martino’s involvement in or knowledge of the Kennedy assassination.
It was nineteen years later that Anthony and Robbyn Summers interviewed Mrs.
The HSCA had been hot on the trail of one more suspect who could have led to the solution of the crime, but the committee was prematurely shut down before the investigation led to agencies of the United States government.
Alan Roth said: “I knew Johnny from back in ’32 when he was sent from Atlantic City.
I represented a strip of South Beach real estate and I leased a few places for bingo and slot machines, which were legal then.
Alan Roth said that Martino “was around me doing odd and end jobs” when he was building the Deauville Hotel in Havana.
Roth said Martino got in trouble with Castro because he “was doing things” for a couple of Cuban brothers, contractors whose names he couldn’t recall, who were involved in anti-Castro activity.
Kenneth Roth said Martino told him he had gone on operations with the CIA to Cuba, but provided no details.
The Roths said Martino was sent to Guatemala to “look after” their accounts receivable from their real estate interests there.
Martino became very friendly with Jorge Maldanado, the secretary to the vice president of Guatemala, and was involved in several deals, including the sale of bulletproof vests and guns.
The Roths said that Martino tried once to make a deal involving “some kind of machine guns” in Guatemala and that his contact was someone in Fort Lauderdale, but they could recall no additional details.
John Martino would prove to be even more important as the evidence accumulated.
It was a package about four inches thick, and was absolutely astounding, representing interviews of Colonel Bishop by Shaw and others over a nine-year period, plus the results of research by attorney Bernard Fensterwald and others concerning Colonel Bishop.
I initially spent six hours rapidly poring over the information, during which I listed what appeared to be the most relevant points of evidence applicable in this book.
Shaw’s notes, neat and succinct, confirmed all that he had told me when I interviewed him on the telephone, and more.
Also of great importance in Shaw’s package was an FBI document stating that Vidal had been very close to John Martino.
In fact, Martino had used Vidal as his source on anti-Castro Cuban affairs.
In a taped conversation on February 8, 1983, Colonel William Bishop told Gary Shaw that Felipe Vidal Santiago was executed in March or April of 1964.
This agrees with the information given by General Fabian Escalante at the Nassau conference in 1995.
This seemed to be confirmation of Bishop’s knowledge of Vidal and anti-Castro Cuban operations, at least insofar as his statements about Vidal.
This occurred about one week after the Walker sniper incident in April I 963, P34 To my surprise, Gary Shaw’s memory about Colonel Bishop’s failure to mention General Willoughby had not been correct.
On June 23, 1992, Bishop told Shaw that he had gone to see Walker a few times and, during their meetings, General Charles Willoughby was present.
When Bishop revealed that information to Gary Shaw, he had just had two heart attacks.
He died within a few days, and his funeral services were held on July 5, 1992.
He described the vehicle as a 1957 Chevrolet, bearing 1963 Florida license 1.33002. the car appeared to be driven by a mediumsized Cuban with a prominent black mustache.
When the Dallas Police were questioned by the Warren Commission about the photograph of the 1957 Chevrolet, they said that the hole was in it when it was found in Oswald’s possessions.
This person told Shaw that several days before the attempt on the general, he observed a Cuban or dark-complexioned man in a 1957 Chevrolet cruising slowly back and forth in front of the Walker residence.
As I went through Shaw’s notes, more and more pieces of the puzzle came together confirming what I had previously written.
In one of the notes, Shaw had written that when Colonel William Bishop was shown a photograph of David Morales, he said that it was a very familiar name and face and thought he was one of the CIA men he knew and saw in Dallas on the day of the assassination.
Ht is important to note that this was three years before Gaeton Fonzi’s book was published revealing the evidence about Morales for the first time.
This photograph, from the Appendix of the Warren Commission Report, was found among Oswald’s possessions.
It was taken outside the home of General Edwin Walker, presumably by Oswald.
The automobile is a white 1957 Chevrolet, the same make, color, and model that Colonel William Bishop told Gary Shaw was driven to take Felipe Vidal Santiago from Florida to Dallas.
Colonel Bishop told Shaw that Rolando Masferrer was given $500,000 by Jimmy Hoffa exactly seventeen days before JFK was killed.
Bishop said that the transaction took place in a Miami hotel “man to man” and the money was in a briefcase.
Bishop said that Masferrer had become deeply involved with the Mafia and had told him in October 1963 that he would kill Kennedy if he got the chance.
He said that Masferrer was in Trenton, New Jersey, at the time of the assassination.
Bishop also said that Vidal was a member of Alpha 66 PAu Another item of interest that ties in with gun running in Dallas is that Bishop told Shaw that he had just read the story of Nancy Perrin Rich in Fensterwald’s book, and that he had attended the meeting in which Nancy Perrin Rich claimed she had met with a colonel, Jack Ruby, and others, discussing gun-running activities.
Bishop said he was at that meeting but did not know Jack Ruby, and had never connected him to the incident.
Bishop also said that he didn’t remember that the son of Genovese was present; but, most important, Bishop said that Felipe Vidal Santiago was present at the meeting.
On February 17, 1983, Bishop told Gary Shaw that Richard Helms gave the order for the assassination.
One of the two gunmen, according to Bishop, was an expert rifleman whom a4) Bishop said that he personally killed Rodriguez by shooting him in the back of the head while on a fishing boat at sea, then dumped him overboard. a5 Also, on February 11, 1983, Bishop called Antonio Veciana from Gary Shaw’s office; the ’ . conversation was taped.
Bishop told Shaw that he once ran for senator in the state of Georgia against Sam Nunn, and that he knew Ted Kennedy.
Bernard Fensterwald later telephoned Senator Nunn who did remember Bishop.
Fensterwald also called Ted Kennedy, but Kennedy couldn’t remember Bishop, saying that thousands of people pass through his activities.
Gary Shaw obtained copies of certificates from Colonel Bishop showing that he was discharged from the Army as a colonel and that he had a large number of other credentials such as credit cards, ID cards, etc., in the name of Colonel William C Bishop Of particular note is that Colonel Bishop told Shaw he had been a member of the ZR/RIFLE program Bishop knew as Emmanuel Rodriguez. and knew William K Harvey as William K Smith.
In Shaw’s notes were two envelopes filled with copies of Colonel Bishop’s card files from the early 1960s.
I went through the cards and there were addresses and phone numbers of an amazing array of characters and political figures.
This included Eladio del Valle; Rolando Masferrer; Robert Hargraves ; names of members of Rolando Masferrer’s Tiger group; Mario Garcia Kohly Sr.’s address, apartment number, phone number, places where he could be reached; and the home address and home phone number of CIA director John McCone.
This incredible list of contacts of Colonel William Bishop deserves a detailed research project beyond the scope of this book in order to assess its complete significance.
I can see why Gary Shaw described Colonel Bishop as the most amazing person he had ever met in his life.
However, at first reading, there were parts of Colonel Bishop’s statements to Gary Shaw that troubled me.
For example, Bishop told Shaw that he had corresponded directly with President Kennedy, and that his letters had been ordered by President Johnson to be sealed for fifty years.
Bishop said that he was instrumental in getting Kennedy to delay the Bay of Pigs invasion for seven days; apparently Bishop had arranged a meeting with Kennedy and told him that the Cubans who had been chosen by the Kennedy administration to head the new government in Cuba were in fact hard-line Communists, worse than Castro himself, and that Kennedy was being set up by the Soviets to induce the United States to invade Cuba so that Castro could be replaced by Communists more favorable to Krushchev.
When I read this in Shaw’s notes, my first impulse was that it diminished Colonel Bishop’s credibility, but upon further reflection I decided that it did not.
Second, although Bishop’s alleged contacts with President Kennedy were incredible, they were not without plausible foundation.
I recalled the story recounted by Captain Bradley Ayers about Robert Kennedy visiting anti-Castro Cuban exiles in the Florida Keys in the early 1960s, and I recalled that John Kennedy had in fact brought Cuban exiles from Opa-Locka where they were being held pending the Bay of Pigs invasion, and had personally discussed their plight with them.
I also recalled President Kennedy’s inclination to make first-hand contact with top spies and CIA operatives.
And I recalled that Robert Kennedy had invited Green Berets to his home at Hyannis Port for first-hand contact with them.
From this I concluded that it was not out of the realm of possibility that Colonel Bishop was telling the truth in this matter.
In addition, supporting Bishop’s statements of personal contacts with Kennedy, I noted in Bishop’s address cards what appeared to be an appointment date of March 19, 1962 at 5m. at the northwest gate of the White House.
In any event, Bishop’s claim of personal contact with President Kennedy did not discredit the extreme importance of the Felipe Vidal Santiago evidence.
There was one more item in Shaw’s notes on Colonel Bishop that took me aback.
It has long been alleged that Hoffa was killed by the CIA because of his knowledge of the JFK assassination and the ZR/RIFLE program.
It was noted in Chapter 15 that Tony Provenzano was involved in the Hoffa murder—Hoffa had been picked up and taken somewhere never to be seen again.
It did not seem unreasonable to me that the CIA, knowing that Hoffa, Giancana, and Rosselli were involved in the JFK assassination, may have decided that they were about to tell all and systematically proceeded to silence them, with the help of Marcello and Trafficante.
This would apply even if the CIA were largely innocent of involvement in the JFK assassination.
National security was at stake, you know, and anything goes to protect national security.
Going through Shaw’s notes, I did not find reference to Dick Russell’s interview of Colonel William Bishop in which Bishop had confirmed the existence of Richard Case Nagell as a CIA operative involved in penetration of Alpha 66 and anti-Castro Cuban activities.
I presumed that this was because Russell had taken his own notes and Shaw had been only a bystander in that interview.
The interview was conducted at the home of Gary Shaw in Cleburne, Texas.
It was about two years before Russell’s book about Nagell was published.
In this interview, Colonel Bishop told Russell that he had made the hit on Dominican Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo because both the CIA and the Pentagon had wanted Trujillo dead.
Bishop said it was more effective to kill one man than it was to lose a thousand with an all-out invasion.
He told Russell that he could still hit a playing card at five hundred yards with a rifle or a machine gun—that it was a professional challenge, no more and no less.
Bishop said that the reason he was talking was because he felt an obligation, within reason, to bring about some realistic approach to United States history.
He said that he firmly believed that in “our system of government, if you don’t like the man, then vote him out of office.
He added that he was still governed by the National Security Act, implying that there were other things that he could not tell.
Bishop said he did not look into Oswald’s background, had never met him, but had seen him in a training film in New Orleans.
Bishop said that he just happened to be in the group out there at the Pontchartrain camp.
Russell displayed a photocopy of a 1962 passport of Richard Case Nagell, and, without offering his name, passed it across the table.
Bishop replied no, that they all used code names back in those days, but that the man was with Alpha 66.
Russell replied that he knew Nagell had some cognizance at least of the Alpha 66 group in 1962 and 1963.
Russell responded that he had read about Operation Forty, the then-ultrasecret CIA assassination plan set up before the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Bishop then brought out a series of photographs of Latin-looking individuals.
Russell asked whether this meant that these particular people had operated out of Mexico.
Russell wrote that Bishop conceded that he had been in Mexico City “two or three times in 1963,” but when Russell asked about the purpose, Bishop replied that he would rather make no comment on that.
Russell wrote that much later in the interview Bishop claimed to have met Nagell when he was an associate of Rolando Masferrer.
Russell recalled in his book that Nagell had told him that one of his original assigned targets was to kill Rolando Masferrer.
Nagell had made another reference to Masferrer in a letter to Russell not long after Masferrer was blown to bits by a dynamite bomb planted in his car.
Colonel Bishop told Russell that he finally realized that Nagell was with intelligence under CIA contract and it was safe to assume that Nagell was involved in Alpha 66.
Bishop said it was when he was in New Orleans that Nagell’s presence came up.
Nagell had been there several times and was trying to get into the inner workings of the anti-Castro movement.
He said Nagell was asking too many pointed questions about things he had no business knowing.
He said he called Bill Colby at the CIA, with whom he had participated in paratrooper training at Fort Benning in 1940.
Bishop said that it was several months after that when he heard about the Nagell shooting at the bank.
Bishop said he did know that there was a Cuban after Nagell and that Antonio Veciana had told him that.
He said there were rumors that Nagell had stumbled onto the fact that there was an assassination being seriously planned.
So, in Bishop’s opinion, the reason for the bank shoot-up in El Paso was for Nagell to get himself picked up and protected.
Bishop told Russell that he was in New Orleans that summer to obtain additional funding from the New Orleans crime syndicate for Alpha 66.
Primarily the funding came through the syndicate because of Masferrer’s connections with them back in Cuba.
He said that Masferrer had ties with Santo Trafficante, Jr., and other criminal elements.
He said he thought that Masferrer also had different ties with Jimmy Hoffa as far back as 1962.
He said Masferrer was killed because he had sticky fingers and kept some of the money for himself; it was either that reason or because he knew about the Kennedy assassination.
We shall see that Hemming’s presence intertwines with almost all of the characters and episodes that have been related in this book, and his story adds important new material.
But by now I had reached the conclusion that too many key witnesses, who later turned out to have been telling the truth, had been trashed because they were, variously, ex-convicts, prostitutes, drug addicts, mistresses, strip-tease dancers, embellishers, or whatever labels they might have —my thought was that we shouldn’t expect to find many Eagle Scouts, choirboys, or vestal virgins in the circles of the men who killed Kennedy.
John Le Carré, The Looking Glass Wars 28 GERALD PATRICK HEMMING AND INTERPEN I asked Fonzi if he would contact Hemming and arrange for him to receive my call.
I hoped for no more than confirmation of what Hemming had told Dick Russell—that Vidal had gone to Dallas for a “big meeting” the week before the assassination, and in addition, had dealt directly with the Hunts in Dallas prior to that meeting.
What follows are the most relevant excerpts condensed from a series of long interviews with Gerald “Gerry” Patrick Hemming over a nine to ten-month period, starting in late August 1996.
This information is from an alleged CIA operative who was on the fringes of the JFK plot, if not in the plot itself.
Hemming not only knew Oswald but was deeply involved in the CIA’s assassination operations and tradecraft, and was willing to talk about it.
Hemming was also known to have been in Los Angeles in 1963 with Loran Hall when they hocked a 30.06 rifle at a detective agency whose partners were Richard Hathcock and Roy B Payne.
With Hemming and Hall in this episode was a man who was described as having a Mohawk haircut, which matched the description that Silvia Odio had given of one of the two visitors with Oswald in that strange incident.
This led the HSCA to be very curious about Hemming. between Annapolis and the CIA, August 1958.
On the left, according to Hemming, is Frank Sturgis’s right-hand man Larry De Joseph.
Jnterpen So-called mercenaries in 1962, part of a group allegedly sponsored by United States intelligence at No Name Key in Florida for the purpose of overthrowing Castro’s Cuba or assassinating Castro.
The man at the bottom-center is the leader of the group, Gerald Patrick Hemming, who knew Oswald when Oswald was in the Marine Corps.
Hemming has been linked in various ways to the assassination of John F Kennedy.
Others in the photo were identified by Hemming as Steve Wilson, Roy Hargraves, Lawrence Howard, Little Joe Cavendish Garman, William Seymour, Bill Dempsey, and Ronald Ponce de Leon.
It was Jim Garrison, district attorney of New Orleans, who first alleged that the above men were the team that assassinated John F Kennedy.
He was a close associate of Gerald Patrick Hemming and was in Dallas the day Kennedy was killed.
Be CENTRODEESTIN SORRE ASUNTOS DE SEGURIDAD NACHO General Fabian Escalante in Cuba, January 1996.
In December 1995, he told our study group in Nassau that before Felipe Vidal Santiago’s execution by Cuba in April 1964, Vidal told him that he had been driven by CIA’s Colonel William Bishop from Miami to Dallas in November 1963, and he met with wealthy Texans at the Dallas Petroleum Club.
This was independently confirmed in a similar story that Gerald Patrick Hemming had told Dick Russell, but Hemming did not mention Colonel William Bishop.
Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw a similar story of driving Vidal from Miami to Dallas in April 1963 to meet with General Edwin Walker and others, where discussions of killing President Kennedy occurred.
Eladio del Valle, named by General Fabian Escalante as involved in the JFK assassination.
Escalante obtained his information from Tony Cuesta, a leading Cuban exile involved deeply in antiCastro activities.
Del Valle was murdered within a few days after David Ferrie’s suicide in New Orleans.
Tony Cuesta also named Herminio Diaz, an associate of Hemming, as being involved in the plot.
National Archives On the left, Loran Hall, member of Hemming’s Interpen group, was in Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination.
It was Hall, William Seymour, and Lawrence Howard who were first reported by the FBI to be the trio that visited Silvia Odio in Dallas in late September 1963.
Hall provided the FBI with the story, saying that Seymour could have been mistaken for Oswald by Odio.
According to an interview memorandum in Jim Garrison’s files dated June 5, 1968, Aguilar said that he was an agent working with Luis Balbueno in United States Naval Intelligence in plots against Castro in 1959-1961.
Both Seymour and De Torres were closely associated with Gerald Patrick Hemming at various times in the early 1960s.
De Torres was a CIA agent involved in violent anti-Castro activities, including the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Seymour was linked to Oswald with Loran Hall, and both Hall and Seymour were part of Hemming’s Interpen group.
National Archives According to an HSCA report, Loran Hall had retrieved the 30.06 rifle about ten days before the assassination.
Then, the day after the assassination an FBI agent came to the detective agency’s office to ask Roy Payne questions about himself and Loran Hall.
Hathcock and Payne speculated that the reason the FBI had come to their office so quickly was that the fingerprints of Payne, who had handled the rifle while it was in hock at the agency, had been found on the rifle and somehow had linked it to the JFK assassination.
But, as it turned out, the FBI’s visit to Hathcock’s office was probably precipitated by a gun theft report that Hemming had made to the Miami police in November 1963 when he discovered that Loran Hall had retrieved the rifle on his own.
Hemming told me he that he feared Hall was going to use the rifle to frame him in Dallas in the JFK assassination, after which it would be “paper-trailed” back to his purchase in 1961 in Miami, but Hemming later found that the rifle was in Miami at the time of the assassination >> Hemming has stated to others, and confirmed to me in my interviews, that he met Oswald at the Cuban consulate in Monterey Park, California, when Oswald appeared unannounced from the Marine Corps Auxiliary Air Station in Santa Ana, California, where Oswald was stationed at the time.
Oswald requested assistance from Hemming in defecting to Cuba to help Castro in the revolution.
By that time Hemming had been discharged from the Marine Corps and had volunteered to join the Castro revolution to fight on Castro’s side.
Hemming told me that Oswald had come back to the Cuban consulate three times after his first visit and had become a pest, insisting that he wanted to infiltrate Cuba.
Hemming said that Oswald was always walking when he arrived at the consulate, so Hemming had a friend who was a barber in a shop down the street use binoculars to watch Oswald after he left the consulate.
The barber saw that Oswald returned to a four-door car with military or police-type antennas and entered on the passenger side.
Hemming said that Oswald seemed to know a lot about him that he shouldn’t have known unless he had been provided the information.
So, on his own volition, Hemming went to the Marine Corps Air Station in Santa Ana and managed to finagle himself inside, where he located and confronted Oswald.
They then went outside the station to a pizza parlor, where Hemming provided Oswald with paperwork and instructions about how to infiltrate Cuba.
He said that Oswald later showed up in Cuba to see him, but the contact was never made because the Cubans wouldn’t let Oswald stay in the country.
Hemming said that he again encountered Oswald briefly in Miami on December 6, 1962 and that was the last time he ever saw him.
There is some corroborative testimony to support, in part, Hemming’s story.
Nelson Delgado, also a Marine at the Marine Corps Station in Santa Ana, California, told the Warren Commission that Oswald had told him that he had been in contact with the Cuban Consul in Los Angeles.
Delgado said that he had heard that Oswald was seen talking for about two hours with a visitor outside the gate at the base.
Delgado also testified that he had seen an official-looking envelope in Oswald’s wall locker, with a big impressive seal, Latin-looking, that he assumed was from the Cuban Consulate.
He said that Oswald had told him before that he was receiving mail from them.
We shall see that Hemming voluntarily joined the Castro revolution and he claims that Angleton knew about it in advance.
Hemming also claims that he ultimately made direct contacts with Angleton at his home in Washington, D.C., concerning Cuban matters and anti-Castro activities.
Evidence will show that Hemming was very likely a CIA covert asset, or could be perhaps more accurately described as a “singleton” CIA agent reporting back to Angleton at infrequent intervals when Hemming could get out of Cuba.
He joined the Marine Corps at the age of sixteen in April 1953 (using a false birth certificate) but was soon discharged in late summer 1953, then enlisted legally of age in April, 1954 and was finally discharged in 1958.
During part of that time he was running an air base in Castro’s rebel air force until 1960.
After being arrested twice by Castro’s forces under suspicion of counter-revolutionary activity, he was jailed, somehow got out, and lived in Havana where he was “underground” with both Major William Morgan’s group and with anti-Somoza Nicaraguans for three months.
Morgan was ultimately executed by Castro forces for being a United States intelligence agent plotting against Castro’s life.
It was in a Havana safehouse that Hemming met the anti-Somoza Nicaraguans, who later switched to backing Somoza.
Hemming left Cuba in 1960 for Mexico City, spent two weeks there, and returned to California where he contacted a CIA “Double 0” in Los Angeles and reported to him what he had learned thus far in Cuba.
He told me that as a youth he read an English/German version of Hitler’s Mein Kampf, thus learning to read German.
And amazingly, as reported in The Los Angeles Times, at the age of fourteen Hemming had formed his own paramilitary operation consisting of a gang of five teenagers who accumulated an arsenal of twentynine rifles and handguns and three thousand rounds of ammunition by burglarizing three sporting goods stores in Los Angeles.
They practiced guerrilla warfare in the Mojave Desert near Los Angeles, planning to become a young “John Dillinger gang” and commit a “blitz of robberies” in the San Marino and Alhambra areas.
Fortunately the youthful gang was rounded up by the police and their adventure was ended.
In May 1961, after returning to Miami from Cuba, Hemming took over a group called the AntiCommunist Legionnaires.
This group included Frank Sturgis , with whom Hemming said he parted company and took part of the group with him.
According to Hemming, the purpose of Interpen was “long range penetration and reconnaissance intelligence work,” mainly in Latin America.
Additionally, Interpen offered protection services to Latin American officials (one service was for these officials to use Interpen as a threatening force to keep political foes in line), and trained guerrilla warriors.
It was Hemming’s group that was first suspected by Jim Garrison of being the assassination team that killed President Kennedy, but Garrison later dropped his suspicion for reasons not understood.
One reason may have been that when Garrison started his investigation Hemming showed up in work boots and work clothes with his associate, Roy Hargraves, and volunteered to help Garrison conduct his investigation.
Newspapers in Miami and New Orleans described Hemming as a handsome giant who looked like Errol Flynn, sporting a neat beard and an Australian bush hat.
He was reported as being capable of firing two heavy machine guns from the hips at the same time, cowboy style.
He told me that he missed qualifying by two points for the Presidents One Hundred, the elite, top military rifle marksmen in the United States He said that as part of his basic training for qualifying in Special Forces he could fly almost all types of aircraft, maintain the aircraft; operate and maintain power boats; handle explosives, electronic communications, and underwater demolition; was an expert parachutist; an expert in assassination weapons and devices, and all the other things required to be top in his profession.
He had an impressive knowledge of United States political history, the politics of Latin America, the anti-Castro Cuban community in the U.S., and the tradecraft, as it is known in the intelligence community.
I sensed that he possessed an enormous inner drive to do daring deeds, to be larger than life.
Hemming had a capacity for double-talk and cunning beyond anyone I had ever encountered.
He also had a wide range of powerful emotions, from tears of anguish, to humor, to ferocious rage.
Hemming talked about his participation in the planning and direction of assassinations.
His conversation ranged from refined to such profanity as to make a seasoned sailor a piker; it seemed to vary as his mood and purposes required.
He could speak articulately with perfect grammar, or lapse into street talk at will.
He could be charming and witty, or studied and calm, and then suddenly become frighteningly intimidating, towering over me and thrusting his face into mine with loud, angry outbursts.
Hemming remarked that he was still alive because others considered him to be a dangerous person, “a real bad ass,” but he had never promoted that image.
In 1982 Hemming was convicted of smuggling marijuana from the Colombian Cartel into Florida and was sentenced to incarceration in the Florida State Penitentiary for thirty years plus five, to be served consecutively.
He said that he served eight-and-a-half years on the chain gang before his release.
During his trial Hemming, having been denied a private attorney, acted in his own defense, claiming that he was working for the FBI and the federal Drug Enforcement Agency , explaining that the only way he could penetrate major drug-smuggling networks was to act as a smuggler himself.
I went into this for several hours with Hemming and am inclined to believe that he indeed had gotten himself entangled as an undercover agent in DEA operations in which the concept was that “to beat them you have to join them’—making what Hemming called “controlled deliveries from Colombia to United States networks for bust at street wholesale levels,” the result being that some of the people who were involved got caught and were sometimes abandoned by the government.
My interviews with Hemming consisted of several telephone calls and meetings in San Diego, Fort Lauderdale, and Dallas.
Keep in mind that these interviews are an evolving discovery process, all of Hemming’s words not to be taken as Gospel.
August 28, 1996; Telephone After a few perfunctory comments we got down to business: Twyman: Gary Shaw sent me all of his original notes of interviews with Colonel Bishop and Bishop’s telephone cards.
According to Bishop’s statements in Shaw’s notes, there was a meeting between Vidal, Hargraves, and two others at General Edwin Walker’s house at about the time that Walker was shot at in Dallas.
That was the car that was loaned to Felipe by one of his brothers-in-law.
Bishop also mentioned meeting once with General Willoughby and General Walker.
Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw about this Willoughby meeting about a week before he died.
I seem to be coming to the conclusion of a conspiracy involving anti-Castro Cubans, the Texas right wing, and LBJ and Hoover.
The first thing was that they were trying to use us to do the job because we’d already been on the payroll for a couple of Latin American dictators for the same kind of work.
I inherited the people from Frank Sturgis and then severed relations with him in 1961.
And from that time forward Harvey was running ZR/RIFLE and General Lansdale was running Mongoose.
So in 1962 we were approached by some very serious people to forget all of the paramilitary or special-operations-type plans and go for terminating the leadership in Cuba.
Later in the spring of 1962 Guy Banister approached us when we were in New Orleans working with Larry LaBorde2 on the training page camp at Pontchartrain, and he made the same approaches, the same offers, and he was turned down.
Most of these people expected to be turned down because we didn't know whether they were wearing a wire or not.
It was just a formality to turn them down and then make preparations for cash transfers and what have you to make sure that the cutouts between the sponsor and the operators were completely severed at the a appropriate time.
And of course we didn’t discover that until we were given information by Senator Keating.
We brought in the governor of Florida and the governors of a couple of other southeastern states and we used Israeli contacts and others to determine that there were people in government such as Curtis LeMay and others that felt there was a possibility something was happening.
But they were keeping JFK completely cut off from it, and their attitude was we can take ’em without suffering damage, that is, taking Cuba and the Soviet Union without suffering excessive damage in the United States, with a pre-emptive strike.
The meeting in Dallas was with Robert Morris at the Adolphus Towers, and this was preparatory to meeting with Bunker Hunt and Lester Logue and other people.
Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Oh, yes.
I was the first one to establish contact for Cuba vis 4 vis the petroleum industry people and that came through my uncle who was a personal friend and former associate of John McCone.
My uncle said to go out and see Bob Morris...well first I saw the president of Doctor Ross dog food in Los Angeles and he steered me to Morris.
At that time I was dealing with Congressman Rousselot and he also steered me to Morris, and Morris was the cutout for meetings with Hunt and Logue and a number of other oil people.
It also involved touching bases with de Mohrenschildt and some of the other people.
First of May of 1963 I was in a meeting at John Martino’s house where money changed hands.
I passed on $15,000 directly to Felipe Vidal that night and another $15,000 was given to Felipe directly by ; Martino the next day.
The way a team is placed in position, you could put them in Mexico City and they’d think they were in Havana; you could put ‘em in Kansas City and they’d think they were in Havana, or on the outskirts.
Well, they’re taken in at night and they have absolutely no idea where they are.
They are put in a couple of safehouses, near the scene of the killing zone, and they do the job and get the hell out.
They’re not allowed to know where they’re at, in case they had friends or if they tried to E&E...escape and evade...they would suddenly resort to their own knowledge of the real estate rather than going to the proper safehouses when the thing starts coming apart.
Plus they would feel insecure if things start coming apart—that they were going to be eliminated.
Then the next money came from Micky Cohen on the West Coast and Jack Dragna, representing the LA mob; Willie Bioff.
Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Of course they did.
We had a French team that worked in the Dominican Republic and Montreal.
A team organized by Ramfis Trujillo, the son of the dictator assassinated by Kennedy’s people, as he believed it.
There were a number of people out there, including people in Lisbon that supported the OAS, who saw Kennedy as the same threat as far as the Algerian problem as de Gaulle was.
So you have a number of teams, well financed, and the big thing is that if you’re in the business and you have a target, you find out if there are other paying enemies that could be brought in and it increases your venture capital.
This models up the MOs and also their people that are linked directly to powerful people, like LBJ and others who are intentionally put there so there will be a cover-up...there will be a confusion as to who the assassins and sponsors were, what they were doing.
So many leads are given that are decoys and strays that when they finally get to somebody who could be proven to be a principal, an aider and abettor, they bypass them because they think there’s just more decoys or strangers or loners.
They were car bomb specialists and they had a vehicle laden with explosives on the other side of the underpass.
Then there are the FBI documents that Souetre or somebody using his name was in the Dallas area then.
And I said you can put a smile on the shooter’s face because then he realizes that it’s a superpro job and there are backup and decoy teams and that’s where those shots are coming from.
If you want a shot that gives you a pristine bullet, that gives it to you.
I’ve talked to a guy that’s down in Vegas right now that was a cellmate with Christian David.
So these people were busy and known before, and have kept up the good work since then.
I can’t discount it completely, but at that point in time he was working under Jake Esterline and JM/WAVE, and it’s very possible that they were monitoring, just as Richard Case Nagell.
He was a Soviet agent, and the Soviets were trying to use Nagell and others to stop the assassination.
Russell could never really get out the fact that the guy had betrayed his country.
When Oswald showed up at the Cuban consulate in Monterey Park, I called my contact number for Angleton.
I didn’t talk to Angleton until I flew out to Anacostia about a week later, after I'd already dealt with Oswald two or three times and visited him at the base, LTA in Santa Ana.
And then when I got to Anacostia I dealt directly with Angleton, and I said you put in a counterpart on me and I don’t want you putting a counterpart on me.
I don’t need some clown that I’ve never dealt with regardless of the fact that he’s had similar training as me and all that.
Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: warned me once again about the federal statutes I was violating and that I was on my Own...as a singleton.
I think Magruder and Hoover and others got together and decided he had to go.
He worked in direct contact with Sullivan and Hoover, and while he was on the CIA payroll.
A lot of these people had different loyalties because back in World War II they’d excluded OSS from the western hemisphere, so it was the FBI guys that had all the intell for the western hemisphere when CIA and INR and the State Department picked ’em up.
Siragusa was the top agent in the Federal Bureau of Narcotics who did this kind of work.
The only agency in the federal government, even to this date, that maintains an assassination capability is the narcotics people.
Narcotics is the only way to be on top of intell around the world because you’ve got everybody on your payroll and anything that moves you know about it.
And most people cooperate with the dopers because they don’t see them as being political or anything, or even being a security threat.
But I don’t see them sitting around with a tableful of snacks discussing this kind of business.
Hoover’s biggest problem was he kind of took some things personal against me.
He had attempted to blackmail Bobby Kennedy and our liaison (we had a liaison with Bobby Kennedy)...and we proceeded to get photographs and information that compromised Hoover, delivered them to Bobby Kennedy, and he turned the tables on Hoover.
Right now we’re in the process of going back in to see what can be done with the confidential files that were seized.
All of these confidential files were seized and then sealed by people that I worked with.
We were supposed to go down under the gun in Miami International Airport because that was one of the primary sites for the assassination.
Researcher Gordon Winslow says research of photos at the airport do not show Hemming or his group at the event.
I worked to get blackmailers off a number of the Texas people’s back that were being blackmailed by people that actually believe that they participated.
Some of the assassins that were in the area at the time and were in Chicago and were in Miami attempted to get more money because they were promised more money, they were blackmailing people that had put up money for the job, and it was my job in the late ’60s and ’70s to prove that these people didn t do the job and didn’t have the money coming.
Well, I can see where the anti-Castro Cubans could have people in your Interpen group who could have felt they had been set up.
Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: That’s what he called it.
The prime financiers were the weapons manufacturers, Hanford and Rocky Flat’s people.
They financed the movement of people, the equipment, the setting up of teams, so that if it went down in Miami it would be a particular team that was unknown to the other teams.
If it went down in Chicago or in Tampa or in San Antonio or in Dallas, these were totally separate financed teams, financed by different sponsors.
But one of the problems is that what you talk about is so fantastic that it becomes unbelievable.
If you’re a gunrunner, you have an in at the palace level throughout the planet.
If you’re a doper, you have control of the palace level in every country throughout the planet.
He’d been convinced that his participation had gone awry and that he’d become a traitor to his own country.
You attempt to assassinate a president, you’re a traitor to your country.
I don’t think I got it clear yet what you believe the purpose of these meetings were.
But we always treated them as a genuine operation when they were going down.
So here’s Walker getting himself to doing the Old Miss situation which tended to alienate the Cubans from him.
We had a number of former first Special Service force people in the loop, and of course Walker had a bad reputation while he was in the Devil’s Brigade as being a homosexual, and then in some of these meetings a couple of my people made rather frank comments in his living room about his boyfriends coming down the staircase and all that.
So it was a situation where Walker would be the military guy that stood in front of the John Birchers (very few of the John Birchers would put their money where their mouth was), and Walker could be utilized to head up a special campaign and that the funding would come from the right wing and they would accomplish certain goals, and that was it.
But as far as participation in operations, Walker excluded himself from that.
But to that point in time we were kind of loosening our contacts with him.
Our last contact with Walker was July 4, 1963 when we flew out there for a meeting.
And we were somewhat chagrined that Walker would be so careless when we talked to the wee hours of the morning, ’til 5:00 in the morning, and this was after a shot has been fired through his window and he doesn’t even draw the drapes.
And we thought, well, this is piss-poor tradecraft here because he’s either a total nut and he’s not keeping his cover up, because we figured he engineered the thing him-self...and that if ever important people had heard by a chance remark that he spent hours, in the wee hours of the morning, with his blinds open, it would cause suspicions to go back against him as having himself engineered the attempt.
And that kind of turned us off too, because he wasn’t even conscious of the fact that whether you’re brave or not you always draw your curtains, especially after you’ ve been shot at.
Yes, these things...the code word at that point in time, post-missile crisis, seemed to be to hit on Fidel, don’t bother about commando operations or any of this kind of business.
Yes, I was going to do a book two years ago, spent months with an author, just to have threats made to various publishers.
Throughout the interview, Hemming talked unhesitatingly and naturally, indicating to me that he was either very candid or had carefully outlined everything he was going to say.
He used none of the profanity for which he is renowned, and was generally very articulate and responsive.
But I would report other relevant material and let the reader use his or her own judgment as to what to do with it.
Hemming’s confirmation of the white 1957 Chevrolet in which Vidal was driven to Dallas, thus further substantiating Vidal’s visit with Walker and bringing Vidal into the Walker shooting incident.
Hemming’s statements concerning General Walker’s staging of the shooting incident in April 1963, adding believability to the suspicion that it was staged.
Hemming’s acknowledgment that he himself attended some of these meetings in Dallas mentioned by Colonel Bishop, and also attended a meeting with John Martino, Vidal, Sam Giancana, Chuck Nicoletti, and Santo Trafficante in Miami in which Hoffa money was exchanged.
This is consistent with Florence Martino’s statements and FBI reports in the preceding chapter, as well as the evidence of Giancana’s and Trafficante’s involvement in the assassination.
As the interview came to an end, I invited him to visit San Diego for an extended face-to-face interview.
I offered him the option of my going to Florida or paying the expenses for him to come to San Diego.
He chose to come to San Diego, saying that he hadn’t seen two of his brothers (who lived in Pomona, California) for many years and would take advantage of being in California to visit them.
I offered to rent him a hotel room or have him stay as a guest at my home.
Hemming chose to be a house guest, saying it would give us time to talk over more extended periods.
He was only twentythree years old at the time of the JFK assassination.
More arrests and/or incarcerations continued through 1958 to 1963, for burglary, grand theft, shoplifting, vagrancy, and violation of United States Neutrality Act and violation of National Firearms Act.
The grand theft arrests resulted in sentencing to prison in Arizona for 2 to 3 years.
The arrests for violation of United States Neutrality Act and National Firearms Act were in 1962 and 1963 after he became associated with Hemming in a patriotic crusade, CIA sanctioned, to topple Castro.
In 1968/’69, Hargraves became known as the “Mad Bomber” for bombing both the SDS Peace Center and the Black Panther Headquarters in Los Angeles as part of Operation CHAOS which, according to Hemming, was an illegal CIA covert program to disrupt ’ ae radical, subversive elements in Los Angeles.
The following is a brief resume of this Agency’s relationship with Felipe Carlos VIDAL Santiago: In October 1959 VIDAL arrived in Caracas, Venezuela as the Cuban Naval Attache.
In January 1960 a representative of this Agency contacted VIDAL when it became known he was disaffected with the CASTRO regime.
VIDAL defected from his position on 7 March 1960 and fled to Bogota, Colombia.
A POA was granted to VIDAL on 15 March 1960 and this was later superseded by a CSA granted on 27 October 1960.
This Agency planned to utilize VIDAL as Chief of the FRD Maritime Force.
It was later learned VIDAL was an opportunist and associated with people whom this Agency frowned upon.
He was considered a security risk and interest in him was terminated in August 1961.
VIDAL appeared before the INS on numerous occasions for violations committed while engaging in antt CASTRO activities with the various exile groups.
On one occasion he related to the INS and the FBI that he was at one time a CIA agent and furnished them some background information regarding his activities while working for us.
There is no record that this Agency ever utilized the services of Roy Emory Hargraves.
He may well have infiltrated Cuba on 22 October 1962 as he claims and also trained some men in VIDAL’s organization, but this was neither a CIA mission nor CIA men that he claims to have trained.
The foregoing indicates that Vidal was recruited by the CIA and became a CIA agent after he had defected from the Cuban Navy.
The FLN, a radical anti-Castro Cuban organization, was created by Vidal, according to Hemming, against the CIA’s wishes.
We may be seeing some distancing here by the CIA from that radical group, in contemplation of future black operations.
Based on what I had heard about him, I expected to see a very rough character, 4 la Hells Angels bikers.
He also lugged a stack of newspaper clippings about the JFK assassination and about himself.
None of the government documents tended to exonerate him; on the contrary, they tended to implicate him in the JFK conspiracy.
Fonzi had told me that Weberman had written a gigantic, unpublished book on the JFK assassination, focusing primarily on Hemming, in which he claimed that Hemming and his Interpen group were heavily involved in the JFK assassination.
So Hemming brought with him the Weberman material that he had been able to obtain.
In addition, Weberman indirectly involved Hemming in the assassination of Martin Luther King through Hemming’s Interpen group, and much more—if one can imagine it.
Weberman’s audacious act of putting this database on the World Wide Web must have been a shock.
Hemming said that the number of hits on this Web site was an all-time high.
I wondered if perhaps Hemming was exercising damage control in meeting with me.
I had decided ahead of time that this would be a long interview with no organization to it—just rambling conversations, getting acquainted, exchanging ideas, and seeing what came of it as we focused on the Kennedy assassination.
But as time went by Hemming got on an emotional roller coaster and would express extreme anger at those who had “set him up”; he said his mission in life was to get even with them and expose the plot and the cover-up so as to prevent it from repeating.
I admonished him to stop thinking about revenge, but he said he had to do it.
I must state that at this point I did not seriously consider Hemming to be a prime suspect in the Kennedy assassination, notwithstanding Weberman’s allegations.
But over the weekend, my suspicion that Hemming was involved in the assassination grew from nil until finally, when he left, I had become halfconvinced that Weberman was right.
However, I had developed a compassion for Hemming; he was a very human and likable person.
I experienced the beginning of a sympathetic understanding of how he got where he now is, ina horrible dilemma.
The conversation over the three-day weekend was partly taped, partly recorded in handwritten notes, and very voluminous; therefore far too much to relate in detail.
But first we will examine the essence of the documents that Hemming brought with him, which form an evidentiary foundation for Hemming’s statements concerning his and Vidal’s trips to Dallas in 1963, and their peripheral involvement in the JFK assassination, if not deeper.
We will begin by focusing on a handwritten document summarizing CIA and FBI documents.
The document consisted of forty-seven pages with a cover sheet entitled Select Committee on Assassinations, United States House of Representatives.
It is a chronology prepared about Hemming and his interrelated activities, cross-referencing to Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymor.
The document cites sources in a variety of secret or confidential FBI and CIA documents pertaining to Vidal, Hargraves, and others.
Obviously there was extensive material that the HSCA deliberately kept from Fonzi and filed away in secrecy.
This only served to reinforce my growing feeling that Hemming was indeed a very important character in the JFK assassination.
Claims press & left in United States supports Manuel Ray Rivero & Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo.
Claims CIA responsible for commandos L raid in March 1963 which attacked and sunk Russian ship BAKU off the north shore of Cuba.
CIA used raid as an excuse to stop all further attacks against Cuba by anti-Communist Cubans in the United States Vidal visited Dallas 2 weeks before the assassination, stayed 5 days, and spoke with General Walker to get his views on the Cuban situation.
Walker was not interested in involving himself with Cuban revolutionary activities as he was running for governor.
Arrested 10/21/63 with 21 members of anti-Castro group headed for Cuba.
Hemming said to have been instigator of 1/5/64 attempt to land on Cuba.
What we have here is precise confirmation of Vidal’s visit to Dallas in early November 1963 as described by General Escalante, the only difference being that Escalante said Vidal stayed four days, whereas the document says five days.
We also have confirmation of Vidal’s relationship with Roy Hargraves, Edward Collins, and Hemming, as well as Vidal’s heroic exploits.
Lauchli escorted by Hemming, Sturgis to meet different Cuban exile leaders in Miami.
This entry links Hemming to Richard Lauchli, who was national cofounder of the Minutemen.
It also shows Hemming’s involvement in supplying weapons to Cuban exiles and his continuing contact with Frank Sturgis as late as June 14, 1963.
This seems to belie Hemming ’s statement to me that he “severed the relationship” with Sturgis in 1961.
Hemming left with me a copy of a letter to him from Richard Lauchli, obviously a friendly letter indicating a long-term relationship; also he left a letter written to him from Mitchell WerBell, the infamous assassination weapons specialist and arms dealer.
We shall see that there is no question that Hemming was very closely linked with the entire gamut of right-wing extremists in the United States in 1963.
Lewis; the Hunt family in Dallas; General Walker and Lester Logue in Dallas ; extending to Guy Banister in New Orleans and the extreme right-wing factions of the Cuban exiles in Miami.
We shall also see that Hemming’s contacts included high-level officials in the State Department and a United States Marine Corps general stationed in the White House, not to mention James Angleton, head of CIA counter-intelligence.
Also, Hemming later told me that he had numerous contacts with William Harvey.
And, as previously noted, Hemming had contacts with Sam Giancana, Chuck Nicoletti, Santo Trafficante, John Martino, and William Pawley.
Nowhere in the JFK assassination literature have I found one person with all of these associations that link to the JFK assassination plot, either directly or indirectly.
Boat owned by 3 young Americans—Jack LNU and 2 others who live and work on it.
LaBorde staying with Hemming at 2753 N.W. 13th St., Miami, and constantly traveling between Miami and New Orleans.
We will not make any check into this matter but will furnish attached data to the Attorney General for his information.
According to Hemming, this was the same Jack Lawrence who worked at the downtown Lincoln-Mercury agency in Dallas from which an Oswald impersonator test-drove an expensive automobile two weeks before the assassination, first mentioned in Chapter 17.
In my attempts at brevity in Chapter 17, I had discounted the significance of Jack Lawrence.
He was a temporarily employed car salesman at the Downtown Lincoln-Mercury Agency who called the Dallas police after the assassination to tell them about the Oswald driving incident that had occurred earlier in the month at the agency.
It was later reported that Lawrence had hurriedly come into the agency about thirty minutes after the assassination, pale, sweating profusely, out of breath, and with mud on his clothes, and had run into the restroom and vomited.
His car reportedly was found parked behind the picket fence on the grassy knot 0 It was later discovered that Jack Lawrence stayed at the same YMCA in Dallas at which Oswald had stayed , and had worked at an auto agency in New Orleans before coming to Dallas HU This document confirms Hemming’s close relationship with Larry LaBorde.
The document reports that this meeting included Hemming, Hargraves, LaBorde, Eduardo Perez , Tony Cuesta, Ramon Font, Tony Farinas, Hal Hendrix, Theodore Racoosin, and others.
Later dismissed by United States District ET Judge, Miami, FL, because Justice failed to go ahead with prosecution.
This illustrates Hemming’s continued anti-Castro activities and his association with Roy Hargraves.
This tends to support Hemming’s claim that he was operating under United States government approval.
Accompanied them to Walker’s home, talked in general terms about international situation.
As Hemming had told me, Wallace Welch was one of his contacts in Dallas; Welch appears to be an FBI informant.
Hemming was apparently being tracked very closely in every step he took.
This fits with Hemming’s statements to me concerning his visit to Walker’s house at a later date in 1963.
Also it shows the relationship of Hemming to Loran Hall, which, as we have noted, figures prominently in this story.
During my interviews, Hemming was consistently adamant that Loran Hall was instrumental in trying to “set him up” in the JFK assassination.
While in Washington reportedly helped by Sterling Cottrell, Undersecretary of State for Cuban Affairs—and Marine Corps general stationed at White House.
Report that Hemming in Washington, D.C., from approx Feb 6 to March 7 or 8—Allegedly visited a great number of people in State Department, Pentagon,e., Sterling Cottrell.
Hemming heard plan to control movements of go between local Latin American gov’ ts. and United States Plan to have Mexican government photograph and fingerprint everyone going to and from Cuba.
Hemming called, saying he was returning from California where his father had died; needed a place to stay.
Welch says he remained in Dallas 3/24 & 3/25 but didn’t know where he stayed.
This indicates that Hemming knew in early 1963 that the Mexican government was going to photograph everyone going to and from Cuba.
It is interesting that in early 1963 Hemming was variously in Los Angeles with Loran Hall; in Dallas with Hall visiting General Walker on two occasions ; and with top military brass in the White House and with other government officials.
Interpen down to about 6 members—difficult to get money— worked part time as gardener.
What we see here is that despite the reports that Hemming was broke and hocking his rifle, he was doing all of this travel, managed to get to Dallas and Washington, D.C., talk to high officials, and then ended up back in Miami working as a gardener.
This is only one month after meeting with top brass in Washington, D.C., and Dallas.
Walker reportedly told him he wasn’t interested in participating in Cuban affairs.
Hemming also conferred with Lester Logue of Logue & Patterson—geologists, oil man, rich.
Logue has 6-8 man group interested in fighting communism but can’t participate with Hemming at that time—afraid of offending government officials.
Will be going to Washington for briefing—will return, then can assist Logue in some way.
An FBI contact report confirms in part the foregoing two paragraphs from Patricia Orr’s notes, but with a twist.
The informant to the FBI was named as Dick Whatley, one of Hemming’s cohorts.
Edwin A WALKER would not back any specific cause as he wanted to remain free to fight Communism all over the United States.
Logue further states that working with a Colonel and a Major in the United States Army Reserve, both of whom were due for future promotion, and that shortly they would be attending a Government Intelligence briefing in Washington, D.C. and that when they returned and briefed LOGUE then be in a position to help HEMMING in some way.
LOGUE said that he would visit Miami, Florida in about 10 days and set-up an intelligence unit, send men to handle the funds and also personnally see some people about donating boats to HEMMING’s Anti-Castro movement in Miami.
In my second and third interviews with Hemming, he elaborated on what took place at the July 4, 1963 meeting at General Walker’s house and the subsequent meeting on July 5 at the Petroleum Club in Dallas, which is where he says he was offered a contract to assassinate President Kennedy.
November 1961—Report that Hargraves associating with Rolando Masferrer Rojas; also active with Hemming.
As noted in previous chapters, Masferrer has appeared in numerous accounts as a prime suspect in the Cuban connection to the JFK assassination and as a link to, if not a part of, the Mafia.
These (and other documents) link Masferrer to the Hemming group through Hargraves, completing the circle back to the meetings in Dallas of Vidal and Hargraves with General Walker and Colonel William Bishop in which assassination of JFK was discussed.
We now have a series of notations as the Patricia Orr summary nears the end.
November 11—Vidal reportedly just returned from Dallas where he visited Walker; now interested in moving to Guatemala or Nicaragua.
Hargraves stopped by United States customs agents; Vidal infiltrated Cuba— captured and executed.
November —Hemming furnished the Miami office with information in November 1963 which resulted in location and apprehension of a bureau UFAP subject.
December 17 —Vidal says he is loosely associated with Roy Emory Hargraves.
In spring or summer ... meetings for Cuban Committee for Liberation—Carlos Prio took over association.
January 1964—1/5 Dickey Chapell, Edward Collins, Roy Hargraves on boat that sunk off Miami.
We see in the above notations more confirmation of General Escalante’s statement of Vidal’s trip to Dallas in early November 1963.
Then Vidal being in bad financial condition and his interest in moving to Guatemala or Nicaragua We also see Vidal and Hargraves being closely associated between November 1963 and March 1964.
Recall that, according to Colonel William Bishop, Roy Hargraves and Vidal visited right-wing businessmen and retired military officers in Dallas in 1963, during which the assassination of JFK was discussed.
And General Walker seems to be an FBI informant, as well as Hemming’s contact in Dallas, Wallace Welch.
Note that Vidal has now concluded that the United States government is “standing in the way” of his operations to free Cuba.
This fits with the generally accepted theory that it was the right-wing faction of the Cuban exiles that became disillusioned with the Kennedys when they started cracking down on their operations and taking control of the anti-Castro movement, shutting down various radical Cuban activities that the Kennedys could not control.
And we see Felipe Vidal Santiago, the heroic Cuban freedom fighter, rescuing his comrades and going on dangerous raids into Cuba, then being captured by Castro’s forces and executed in April 1964, as was also reported by General Fabian Escalante at the 1995 Nassau Conference.
From November, 1963, through March, 1964, HARGRAVES was closely associated with, and worked for, FELIPE VIDAL SANTIAGO, a Cuban revolutionist in Miami.
He transported the boat and military equipment between Miami and the Florida Keys.
When HARGRAVES was stopped by United States Customs Agents, VIDAL clandestinely left the United States and infiltrated Cuba.
VIDAL was captured and executed by a firing squad in Cuba in April, 1964.
Note that Hargraves was closely associated with Vidal and worked for him.
In 1963 he was in Miami, Florida, employed at the Royal Castle, Number Two, Flagler and Second, and met one Art Silva.
Silva at that time was living with one Phyllis at a small hotel across the street from Royal Castle Number Two.
They later moved to an apartment in a court near LaJune Road and Eighth Street which was behind a fruit stand.
One of their neighbors in the court was one Roy who was living with some woman, name unrecalled, in the court next door to Art.
Roy, according to Art, had several telescopic sight rifles, grenades, mortars, dynamite, etc., in his room.
Also Roy had made a trip to Dallas, Texas, in late 1963 and was reported by Art to have Secret Service credentials.
Roy was also associated with various Cuban resistance movements and was an ex-Marine.
Acker notes that instant article he read says a policeman stopped a man in Dallas who showed Secret Service credentials.
Acker says at a Christmas party in 1963 he was arguing with Roy and almost came to blows as Roy blamed former President Kennedy personally for the death of one of his close friends who was in the invasion at the Bay of Pigs.
Acker says that late in 1963 he met Art in an open air sandwich shop in Miami to have a beer and Art talked of his next door neighbor Roy and said Roy was working with the Cubans and would help Acker get in with the Movement if he wanted to help out in winning Cuba back from Castro.
Acker says that he thought Art was talking about a robbery or something of that nature as he suspected Art as being mixed up with various underworld characters.
At this time, Acker believes it was the assassination of President Kennedy after reading the article in the Post of January 14.
He confirmed that the “Roy” was Roy Hargraves but said, in effect, without further comment, that the document did not tell the whole truth.
The portrayal of Acker as having a “diseased mind” was in another FBI report dated January 11, 1967 be) The document described Acker, age 45, as a veteran of World War II who had served in North Africa, Italy, France, Germany, and Austria, and had been admitted to a veterans’ hospital in Tennessee for a mental condition.
He was then discharged and advised by his doctor to go to Miami and get a new start in life, as he had separated from his wife.
Here we have the suppression of evidence possibly at the heart of the crime.
The evidence is trashed in superficial, flimsy reports with no questioning of Roy Hargraves.
Have some government psychiatrist declare the person to be mentally ill.
Another FBI document, dated July 18, 1967, is an FBI report about Jim Garrison’s trial in which Roy Hargraves is reported as having met David Ferrie.
This was in an interview at Garrison’s office of Michael W LaBorde, son of Larry LaBorde.
After identifying a photo of Roy Hargraves, Michael LaBorde said that he had been told by a Pete , a hotdog vendor who worked in the French Quarter in New Orleans, that “Roy had called David Ferrie a week, two weeks, or a couple of days before the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963,” but Pete didn’t know what the conversation was about.
Colonel William Bishop said that he, Vidal, and Hargraves met with General Edwin Walker and two others in or about April 1963, and in this meeting assassination of JFK was discussed.
Hemming says that he himself was at meetings with Walker, Willoughby, and others, but not in the same meetings.
Before his execution in Cuba on about April 1964, Vidal told General Escalante that he went to Dallas in early November 1963 and met with wealthy Texas businessmen at the Petroleum Club.
This is confirmed by an HSCA document showing Vidal in Dallas November 6 to 11.
Independently of this, Colonel Bishop told Gary Shaw of a similar trip by Vidal to Dallas, but in April 1963.
Hemming independently told Dick Russell of a trip to Dallas by Vidal, but in the week before the assassination.
And we see above that Hargraves was with Vidal on an April trip in which assassination was discussed.
According to FBI documents , Hargraves could also have been with Vidal on the trip the week before the assassination.
Witness William Blanton Acker, Jr., said that Hargraves was living in one of a group of cottages in Miami, Florida, in 1963.
Acker quoted Art Silva, saying that Hargraves had telescopic-sight rifles in his cottage.
In an argument with Acker at a Christmas party in 1963, Hargraves blamed President Kennedy personally for the death of one of his personal friends who was killed at the Bay of Pigs.
Hargraves and Vidal were closely associated with Rolando Masferrer, who has been closely linked to the JFK assassination and, according to Colonel William Bishop, received $500,000 from Jimmy Hoffa for a contract to assassinate President Kennedy.
Masferrer at one time was training assassination squads in the Florida Keys.
Vidal was linked to the staged shooting at General Walker by virtue of the 1957 black-andwhite Chevrolet at Walker’s house at the time of the shooting.
Reinforcing this is that Colonel William Bishop said that he had driven Vidal to Dallas in that same make and model of car in April 1963.
Hemming told me that Vidal borrowed this car on occasion from one of his relatives.
Hargraves was part of Hemming’s Interpen group and involved with Hemming in numerous operations.
Considering all of the foregoing about Hargraves, it seems to entangle him and Felipe Vidal Santiago in the Kennedy assassination in a big way.
Another FBI document of great interest, dated April 18, 1975, and released by the National Archives on June 14, 1995, provides evidence that links Lawrence Howard to Oswald.
As noted several times, Lawrence Howard was in Hemming’s Interpen group.
To: Director, FBI From: Buffalo Assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy, November 22, 1963, Dallas, Texas On April 18, 1975 Sheriff Allen L Capwell Wyoming County, N.Y., personally appeared at the Buffalo office of the FBI and related the following info which he had obtained from Richard Monroe Margeson, DOB June 16, 1927, Rochester, N.Y., residing Webster Road, Wyoming County, N.Y., on April 14, 1975 whom Capwell has personally known for past five years.
Howard was engaged in collecting funds to support the antiCastro forces.
Howard went to Florida Key in 1962 for six months for purpose of training troops to invade Cuba and thereafter in late 1962 returned to Los Angeles accompanied by Rudy Hernandez, Mexican, in his 20s, 5’2"", heavy build and un-sub AKA “Slim,” no other name known, white male, 5’6"", also in his 20s.
Howard’s specific address unknown but lived in East or Northeast Los Angeles.
All were employed by a Jack Casey, not further described, painting and refurbishing the old Union Temple bldg. located behind the Los Angeles Greyhound Bus station.
This building reportedly housed the Marquade Printing Shop in the basement, which at that time was engaged in printing the original draft of Richard M Nixon’s book after he lost the presidential election.
Through these individuals, Margeson met a man called “Tex” who arrived from New Orleans in late 1962 or early 1963.
Margeson said Tex visited Margeson’s house on Trigg St. in East Los Angeles and furnished his name as Harvey Lee.
Following President Kennedy’s assassination and pictures of Lee Harvey Oswald appeared in news media, Margeson realized that Tex and Oswald were identical.
Margeson said Howard was later subpoenaed by former District Attorney Garrison, New Orleans, Louisiana during course of Garrison’s investigation of this matter.
Margeson decided to come forth after viewing a recent TV documentary on the Warren Commission investigations wherein it was depicted Oswald was in Russia while in fact Oswald was in California.
This caused Margeson to believe that a conspiracy could possibly have existed in that Oswald may not have acted alone.
Bureau is requested to assess the above info and furnish Buffalo with pertinent info to assist Buffalo with interview of Margeson in event Bureau so desires.
Margeson thought that Oswald was still in Russia in late 1962 or early 1963 when the incident occurred with him in Los Angeles.
But Oswald had returned from Russia in June 1962; therefore, it could have been Oswald, using the name Harvey Lee, in Los Angeles.
Source mentioned as an aside that during the build-up of 1963, a number of volunteer civilians was making their way across the United States into Florida.
Source, at a later date, confronted with the question concerning his part in the alleged connection with the Kennedy assassination. “clammed up” and became nervous concerning the matter and avoided the subject completely.
Additionally, due to Sources’ long involvement with military civilian movements against Cuba, a man by the name of who presently resides at came to Source’s home while he was living in California, following the Robert Kennedy assassination and displayed photographs of Sirhan B Sirhan in efforts to make identification.
Source was unable to make identification but stated that Burton was in the employ of Jerry Hemming at the time.
Source was completely cooperative during the interview and provided names, addresses, and telephone numbers from a small address book in his possession.
As a spotcheck for accuracy of information concerning individuals, the name and address of listed above, was checked through the Los Angeles Field Office of the 115th MI Group.
It was Hemming who displayed photos of Sirhan B Sirhan; Burton was in the employ of Jim Garrison, not Hemming; the North Hollywood telephone listing was for Dick Hathcock’s detective agency where Payne worked.
A CIA document released from the National Archives on March 3, 1995, brings William Harvey into the LaBorde story.
We are inclined to agree with your paragraph 3 in reference that the best thing to do at the moment is not to dignify the article with any additional comment or any effort to “correct” the record.
We would appreciate, however, receiving your views on what might possibly be done to make life difficult for Laborde.
Any proposal you might have, including possible use of the will most certainly receive favorable consideration, and will probably be approved.
Our aim obviously would be to ensure that Laborde does not continue to be a source of misinformation and to be a general nuisance to all of us.
This document could either be genuine, or false to show LaBorde being purged when in fact he was being distanced from the CIA in preparation for a future operation involving him.
KKK When Hemming and I settled down for our discussions on Friday afternoon in my home in San Diego, it was apparent that he was a troubled man who wanted to get many things off his chest.
One personal moment occurred on Sunday afternoon in my upstairs office.
At my request, Hemming had brought photographs of himself for inclusion in my book.
As I sat at my desk looking at the photographs, I was struck by what a handsome, all-American specimen he was when he was in the Marine Corps and afterward when he was running a parachutist school in Florida.
All three had been patriotic young Americans who joined the armed services to serve their country.
All three were inducted into intelligence—they became spies—and later became sucked into the JFK assassination quagmire and used.
They were trained to violate the law; to become criminals; to murder, lie, and cheat as part of their patriotic duty.
Then, when the intelligence agencies were through with them, they were written off—tossed on the human scrap heap and, in Oswald’s case, murdered.
But the next morning at breakfast (we had stayed up until 1:30m. the night before in a wild discussion of the JFK assassination and Hemming’s role), Hemming came down from the upstairs bedroom, sat down across from me, and immediately said, “I want to apologize for being so rough on you.
Then Hemming lowered his face onto his arms on the breakfast table and started to sob, “Kennedy was our last chance.
His anguish went on for I don’t know how long —a minute or a half minute perhaps.
My wife was in the kitchen and I waved her to leave the scene, which she quickly did.
Hemming then said, “I’ve decided that I’m going to have you tell my story.
Hemming had told me earlier that he was going up to Pomona to meet his brothers and their families.
I found myself replying, “Gerry, you listen to your brothers—you do what they say.
I didn’t ask any more questions of importance; we spoke only in generalities.
That night, and in the days following, I was severely shaken by my long encounter with Hemming.
I had the surreal feeling that I had been with either one of President Kennedy’s assassins or one of the prime players that were caught up in the plot.
Probably the most important information that Hemming gave to me over that weekend was on Sunday afternoon.
I asked him again to go over the details of the contracts that he had been offered in New Orleans and Dallas to assassinate President Kennedy.
As he talked, I made notes which I later converted to a list that I mailed to him for his review and comments.
It turned out that we went over this list in our first interview in Fort Lauderdale, in which Hemming made some changes in detail.
The only exception is de Mohrenschildt, who is not mentioned in the documents.
In March—April 1962 Gerald Patrick Hemming was approached by Guy Banister to assassinate John Kennedy.
This meeting took place at Luis Rabel’s home in Metairie, Louisiana, a suburb of New Orleans.
Present at the home but not privy to the offer by Banister to Hemming were Frank Bartes, Luis Rabel’s son-in-law, and Larry LaBorde.
Also present was Howard K Davis, whom Hemming thinks may have overheard the proposal.
Hemming said it appeared to him that Larry LaBorde was working for Guy Banister at the time.
This offer took place after Banister took Hemming aside by the fireplace out of earshot.
On July 4, 1963 Hemming and Howard K Davis met with General Walker at his home in Dallas.
They first met in a park, after which Hemming and Davis, without Walker, went to Wally Welch’s office to arrange lodging for the night.
Hemming and Davis then went to Walker’s home and talked with him until about 5:00m.
It was at this meeting that Walker left the window curtains open, which Hemming had mentioned in our first interview.
The next day, July 5, 1963, Hemming and Howard K Davis had lunch at the Texas Club in Dallas with George de Mohrenschildt, Lester Logue, and others.
Hemming and Davis then went with Logue to the Petroleum Club that afternoon and met with a group ina large conference room.
There were several clusters of people and two large, long tables in this room; and at one end of the room Hemming and Davis were approached by one man; four others were within hearing distance.
Nelson Bunker Hunt was in the room but at the other end from the man who made the proposal.
On November 18, 1963, Vidal left for Dallas from Miami; he was driven there.
He returned by plane on the evening of November 22, getting into Miami at nighttime.
Vidal did not have a driver’s license, thus explaining why he did not drive.
This fits with General Escalante’s statement that Vidal told the Cubans he was driven by Colonel Bishop from Miami to Dallas in early November, 1963, where he met with wealthy Texans.
All of the above items are consistent with the statements of Colonel William Bishop and the documents that Hemming gave to me.
Recall that Colonel Bishop spoke of meetings in Dallas with Vidal, General Walker, and others, in which assassination of JFK was discussed.
For the first time we have direct evidence that strongly tends to implicate the Dallas right wing in the JFK assassination.
It is tied together by independent statements of General Fabian Escalante, Colonel William Bishop, FBI and CIA documents, and the statements of Hemming.
Recall once more that Hemming had told Dick Russell in 1992 about Vidal going to Dallas in the week before the assassination and meeting with wealthy Texans.
Hemming made this statement before Escalante’s statement in Nassau, and not knowing of Colonel Bishop’s statements to Gary Shaw.
All of this must certainly be considered a major breakthrough in the JFK assassination mystery.
When we get to the first interview in Fort Lauderdale, we will go into more detail on the above five items to illustrate Hemming’s intricacy and specificity in making sure that I got this evidence correctly as he had stated it.
A question that remains is whether Hemming did, in fact, accept the contract offers to kill Kennedy, after initially turning them down—as he had described tradecraft practice.
But we must consider that either, or both, or part of these contracts could have later been consummated with Hemming indirectly through cutouts.
Another important disclosure in this interview concerned David Sanchez Morales.
Hemming told Fonzi and me that he had met Morales once in a coffee shop in Little Havana.
He said that in this encounter Morales was with the infamous “Carlos,” first written about in Fonzi’s book The Last Investigation.
Hemming said that Reboso intervened and told him that he was way out of line.
Recall that Hemming was seemingly unaware of Morales’s relationship with Bill Harvey and Johnny Rosselli.
Hemming was in partnership with Carlos in a weapons export group named Parabellum Corporation in Miami.
This is revealed in a letter on Parabellum letterhead that Hemming gave to me, dated April 26, 1972, to the Office of Munitions Control, Department of State, Washington D.C., requesting a permit to export certain arms.
The letter, with an attached application form, shows the resignation of Carlos from the corporation, along with the resignation of Rolando Pedro Masferrer, nephew of Rolando Masferrer , the man who allegedly received $500,000 from Jimmy Hoffa as payment to assassinate President Kennedy.
Hemming was noted in the application as being vice president and operations director of Parabellum Corporation.
I questioned Hemming about this in a telephone conversation in May 1997, and he confirmed that he was in fact in partnership with Carlos and Rolando “Rolandito” Pedro Masferrer at that time in 1972.
Recall that WerBell’s specialty was assassination weapons, including his area of expertise, gun silencers.
Gordon Winslow, researcher in Miami, told me that Lucien Conein was also with Carlos at WerBell’s operation in Georgia.
Conein was with the OSS in 1941 in France and fought with the Corsican Brotherhood.
Later in his career he was a high official in the Drug Enforcement Administration.
It was Conein who personally gave the green light to go ahead with the coup against President Ngo Dinh Diem on November 2, 1963, in which Diem and his brother were murdered > CIA documents show that Carlos was at one time a high official in Brigade 2506, the embittered antiCastro Cubans who survived the Bay of Pigs debacle.
Carlos, along with Hemming and Roy Hargraves, managed to insert himself into Jim Garrison’s investigation of the JFK assassination.
Carlos has the reputation of being a cold-blooded assassin who would kill you if you went after him.
The associations of Carlos extended to “intimate links ood with Nazar Haro, the chief of the Mexican government’s police force, who, as earlier noted, was deeply corrupted in drug trafficking and other criminal activities with Sam Giancana and his electronic specialist and triggerman, Richard Cain.
I asked Hemming about Carlos’ association with Haro, and he confirmed that it was true.
Completing the circle, Richard Case Nagell told Dick Russell that two of his assignments by the Soviets when he was a double agent was to kill Masferrer and Oswald, because the Soviets suspected that the two were plotting to assassinate President Kennedy.
The Soviets wanted it stopped, presumably fearing that the plot was to precipitate a war with Cuba, which would entangle them.
As we examine Hemming’s seemingly endless linkages with virtually every suspect in the JFK assassination, it is not surprising that he told me he seldom went to sleep at night with confidence that he would wake up in the morning.
First Interview in Fort Lauderdale, Florida Seeing that I needed help to deal with Gerald Patrick Hemming, I called Fonzi and proposed that I retain him as a consultant for the meeting with Hemming in Fort Lauderdale.
After some hesitation, Fonzi agreed, and I called Hemming to set up the meeting.
My major objectives in this meeting were first, to review with Hemming the accuracy of the list of five major points just described.
Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Fonzi: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: for coffee.
She’s still writing in her book about a guy named Gerry with her in the caravan.
It would be kind of hard if I’m sitting with Bill Baggs in his office—you know, Miami time.
Being at the airport on November 18th I thought that Felipe was going in the caravan when he left for Dallas Monday night.
He’s going to see Lester Logue, Bob Morris, and the whole crew, that he’s not even supposed to know about.
I mean, without even hearing from these people, this guy’s showing up on their doorstep.
If anybody even set up a meeting with me and comes back solo, everything is off.
Yeah, and I figured it was to burn my contacts, which is what Hall had been doing all year.
No, I didn’t know what it was for and to this day I don’t know what it is.
Had none of the tradecraft skills, knew none of the language, couldn’t remember when he took a shit last.
He called me over whenever he interviews, used me as his memory bank for interviews time and again.
So you’re the first to hear that Marcos Diaz Lanz went along with them.
I have heard nothing, seen anything, or even asked Sturgis or anybody what it was about.
To think that Sturgis, other than as a patsy— somebody that you’d throw away, some Oswald-type asshole... that somebody would actually use this guy Sturgis for something is unbelievable.
What I want to do now is read them off and get your approval to put them—these five items—in my book.
In March-April 1962 Gerald P Hemming and Larry LaBorde were approached by Guy Banister to assassinate John Kennedy.
I got nothing to do with Frank Bartes, who used to run the railroads in Cuba.
Banister takes me aside by the fireplace, out of the hearing of Bartes, Rabel, his gringo son-in-law, Howard Davis, and LaBorde.
Now I can sit and it would take me awhile and work myself back into almost the language that he used.
I didn’t like the looks of some of this. ’d seen him with Bill Harvey in Miami at Agustin Capo’s house, one of Aureliano Sanchez Arrango’s bad-ass commanders.
Capo, the guy that hid out Orlando Bosch in Costa Rica at his gold mine.
This is where the plot originated to kill Kissinger in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Well, I’d stayed at that gold mine in ’79 when I was doing some operations down there.
Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: people and dealt with Banister in Miami.
Because some weapons and equipment were needed off of some ships in storage.
I figured initially that these guys are mob people, it’s got to be mob people.
They go to where the stuff is mothballed, cut their way in, put it in an armored car, and off they go.
Luis Rabel, his American son-in-law, Frank Bartes, Larry LaBorde, Howard Davis, and Banister.
Well, LaBorde started to move with Banister over to talk to me, and Banister waved him off.
And that told me right away, who’s running who, that it was a setup deal.
I wanted to discuss an offer with him basically, is what the guy is saying, let’s step over here.
On July 4, 1963, Hemming and Howard K Davis met General Walker with Lester Logue in Dallas.
You first met in a park, then went to Walker’s house, and talked with him until 5:00 m.
We went to Wally Welch’s office to arrange for a place to stay that night.
W Welch, Sturgis’s buddy. ...to arrange lodging, then you went to Walker’s house.
Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Fonzi: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: welcome there.
Probably February 1963, during the return trip from Los Angeles with Loran Hall.
The discussion was about Cubans—who the Cubans were, who to deal with, etc.
Because there had been a list, that came out in the press [The Miami Herald and The Washington Post in February 1963], of who the new Cuban leadership was, who were being recognized by the White House, in February.
Well, Walker had since been to Miami, had dealt with a number of people.
You see, we had figured we wouldn’t have Walker in direct contact with any Cubans at all since this racial shit at Old Miss in September the year before...a few months before.
The next day, July 5, 1963, Hemming and Howard Davis had lunch at the Texas Club in Dallas with Lester Logue.
And George de Mohrenschildt stopped by the table to chat 2831 And others.
The maitre ’d always is this Cuban, that they want to hear me talk Spanish and raise his morale because he gets these $100 tips and shit and rarely is a Cuban allowed in this establishment.
So this guy, he really gets his jollies every time I come by and we talk Cuban shit.
Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: Twyman: Hemming: people.
I won’t have these fucks sit at my table and dirty my god-damned shoes.
After you’ve gone out the door with me on a Cuban drop zone, when we jump into Cuba.
Logue was the only one there at the Petroleum Club that we knew or had ever seen before.
You went with Logue, and Davis was there, to the Petroleum Club that afternoon, and met with a group ina large conference room.
Once you’re up from the table you go to the conference room, talk to people.
We sat at the end of the long table, entrance door to the right, over at the other side.
We deliberately walked to the opposite side of the room before we even shook hands.
They’re hard to deal with, them right-wing Americans, John Birchers, and all.
There were three standing, within hearing, that appeared to be participating in the statements.
We’re discussing operational aspects and budgeting, what things would cost, and it took a long time to do it.
And towards the end of the conversation, finalizing budgetary considerations and equipment purchases and proprietary corporations and all the shit that’s our business, the cocksucker blurts that shit out.
And I told them, don’t open no money and attache cases with money around me.
Why use this money for these operational aspects when we can go to the heart of the problem and take out Fidel’s boss with the money.
We’ve already covered these things having to do with Fidel Castro and his brother and the whole thing.
Indicating that, “Hey, don’t dirty me up so somebody comes after me because I know too much.
Better hope JFK lives a long life, because if he has an accident you’re going first because you tried to hang a target on my ass.
We started this conversation in ’62 before the missile crisis, with these kind of people.
No, to support Tony Cuesta and Felipe and the rest of the operational people.
And now a year later you’re coming back with this same horseshit you brought up a year ago.
Well, let’s say that I was breathing on the top of his head real quick when I stood up.
Now, I have here that Bunker Hunt was in the room but at the other end of the room.
We talked about that yesterday, about when you were in his office previously.
In the week before November 22, 1963, Felipe Vidal Santiago met with wealthy Texans in Dallas.
You’re going on an operation right now, that’s what you’re together for, it’s not a coffee klatch.
We’d done rode off his ass back in ’61 and told him to stay the fuck away.
You’re in an office, rich Texans, and there’s about 10 people in the room.
That’s why I spent a considerable amount of time proving who didn’t do it, and who had been extorted, so they could take severe action against their blackmailers.
It is too bad these guys didn’t use the money for what they got the money for.
When you’re in the business, when somebody tells you it’s time, it’s time.
The people you financed went out and did some shit they weren’t supposed to do.
That’s an important thing to say, because a lot of people think he was.
Okay, General Fabian Escalante said that Vidal told the Cubans when he was captured that Colonel William Bishop had picked him up in Miami and driven him to Dallas in November 1963 where he met with wealthy Texans.
But to me it’s interesting, at least, that Vidal referred to the man who was going to take him to Dallas as his case officer.
We had seen him meeting with his case officer at his house and just turned around and walked out back to the car.
You’re dealing with snitches who are going to betray their own religion and their own country.
At this point in the interview I was reasonably satisfied that my first and second major objectives in going to Fort Lauderdale had been accomplished.
Hemming took a law book out of his briefcase and had me turn to the section that included the federal statutes regarding treason.
He said that I should buy a copy of the book inasmuch as the title of my book is Bloody Treason.
The federal statute that he pointed out defined treason in a variety of forms, one of which is participation in a discussion of a plot to assassinate any officer of the United States government.
I surmised from this that Hemming felt that he might be guilty of treason by simply being present in discussions about killing Kennedy.
When Hemming was in San Diego he had mentioned this statute to me after he had made his intriguing statement about “getting off the train,” indicating that he felt that he was guilty of treason for becoming involved in the Kennedy assassination and then bailing out somewhere along the way before its culmination.
I hesitated to bring up the subject in front of Fonzi because I felt that it might inhibit Hemming from telling me more.
I had the distinct feeling that Hemming had decided after leaving San Diego to tell me no more.
It was later in the day when Hemming revealed that Felipe Vidal had gone to Dallas on November 18 and returned on the night of the 22nd.
It showed a chain of evidence, not just of the Texas right wing making an offer to have President Kennedy assassinated, but also a follow-through to have Vidal in Dallas with his CIA handler, Colonel Bishop, at the time of the murder.
Moreover, Colonel Bishop had attended meetings with the Texas right wing and Vidal in the weeks preceding the assassination.
Also, Vidal had expressed bitterness toward the United States and was making plans to leave the United States for Guatemala at the time of the assassination.
I thought that perhaps Hemming was at least giving to me that important information, realizing that he had promised me something for the expense and trouble of the trip.
But I still felt that he had decided to close the door on revelations of any deeper activity on his part in the Kennedy assassination.
After all, I had advised him not to tell me anything that went against his brother’s advice.
I was satisfied concerning the intense dialogue about the two different offers of contracts to Hemming to assassinate John Kennedy made by Guy Banister in New Orleans and wealthy Texans in Dallas.
In particular, I felt that Hemming came off as being extremely truthful in his detailed and pointed correction of the items in the five-point statement that I had sent him to review.
He was very specific, very certain, and very detailed in his criticism of what I had written from my notes in San Diego.
If he had made it up as he went along, he was a world-class actor and had missed his calling.
For myself, I believed him about the contract offers, and his and Vidal’s trips to Dallas.
The credibility of his statements in context was, of course, reinforced by the previous statements of Colonel William Bishop and General Fabian Escalante.
Weberman’s Allegations In the Fort Lauderdale interview, I decided to put the “$64,000 question” to Hemming—to ask him, point blank, if he had anything to do with killing Kennedy.
Hemming then answered by saying that the last time he saw Oswald was a brief encounter at a motel in Miami on December 6, 1962.
After meeting with Hemming again in Dallas and then returning to California, I contacted Weberman in mid-December by telephone, the first time that I had ever talked with him.
He quickly summarized, in eight flat statements, his conclusions about Hemming.
What follows is my discussion of Weberman’s conclusions, combined with subsequent telephone conversations with Hemming in which I asked him about them.
These telephone conversations took place on December 23, 1996, January 10, 1997, and January 18, 1997.
In an attempt to make a coherent story out of all this, I will use the vehicle of Weberman’s eight allegations and interweave this with Hemming’s responses, plus information from past interviews with Hemming, Weberman’s database, government documents, and add my own comments.
Note that in my first interview with Hemming he intimated that he had introduced Oswald to Angleton, although not saying so directly.
In Weberman’s database he concludes that Angleton sent Oswald to Russia, after Hemming had introduced him to Oswald, with only Angleton’s closest confidants in CIA’s counterintelligence knowing about it; 1.e., the CIA hierarchy was totally ignorant of Oswald’s trip to Russia.
This explains much about the mystery, including the lack of documentation in the CIA’s files about Oswald.
Then he said, “What I told him, I said, how about citing to some authority instead of citing to CIA documents and then putting your own story in there and not even going according to the text of the document.
Weberman doesn’t seem to have any evidence of this, other than intuitive inferences.
Hemming set up the fake shooting at General Walker’s, actually fired the shot himself.
He then added, “There is one possibility—I told him there’s a possibility that Hargraves knew something about that.
I can spend hours going over material and data and say, this is it—this is the basic information.
He just wants to go off on tangents and speculate to this, speculate to that, and it’s just meaningless to me.
Nothing of what he says can be traced back to any form of logic, any legal theory, anything that a prosecutor or historian would do.
Nowhere in Weberman’s vast database had I found anything to directly support this allegation.
Hemming responded, “‘No, one or two have already been released...but these are speculations...and what interests me most is the documentation that I know exists that they leave out, that would give some credence, actually would give more credence to the theory, but they leave the good stuff out.
As before, nowhere in Weberman’s database did I find documents to substantiate this allegation.
Also, ina later telephone conversation with Weberman, he admitted that he didn’t have concrete evidence to support his allegation that Hemming flew Oswald around Louisiana and Texas, but Weberman indicated that the circumstantial evidence supported his statements.
This question never did get adequately answered by Hemming because of an apparent confusion in understanding between him and Weberman.
This has to do with a Secret Service document that I had received from Anna Marie in December, 1996, and had sent to Hemming.
Weberman had the wording in his database, but he did not have the actual document.
His attention was called, by HATHAWAY, to a man walking in the opposite direction on the same side of the street, whom HATHAWAY said was carrying a rifle.
This man was in his 30’s and was wearing a light colored business suit and white business shirt.
At this point in Hemming’s and my telephone conversation, Weberman had only heard about this document and had been talking with Hemming about it.
Apparently, Hemming had thought that John Stevens Rutter Lawrence was the Jack Lawrence that had worked at the Lincoln-Mercury agency, and that the men walking with Lawrence were employees of that agency.
It gives a dead-ringer description of Hemming in 1963 except that he is apparently clean-shaven and has cut his hair.
When I asked Hemming about this description, he said that this man was his “doppelganger,” German for double or look-alike.
I wondered if it could have been Hemming, and that he had gotten back to Miami from Dallas in time to create a semblance of an alibi.
After hesitating, he responded that he had met with him about 2:00 to 2:30m.
This would be one and one-half hours, after the sighting of the man in Dallas, for Hemming to have gone to an airport in Dallas and been flown by supersonic jet from Dallas to Miami and gotten to the Miami News.
I discussed the possibility of this with a friend who is an ex-marine fighter pilot and a seasoned pilot for a major airline.
He got out his flight planning charts and a compass and scaled off the distance from Miami to Dallas.
He said that with even a Korean War-vintage jet fighter it would have been easily feasible to make the flight from Dallas to Miami in less than one hour, flying at high altitude where the speed is greatly increased compared to sea level.
Counting time to travel to and from airports it would have been barely feasible for Hemming to have returned to Miami to make the meeting with Bill Baggs.
But then, Hemming was only roughly estimating the time he says he was at Bagg’s office.
We must realize that there is no documentation known to be available that substantiates Hemming’s alibi.
Hemming did tell me that Baggs wrote a memorandum about Hemming’s presence at the Miami News on November 22, and sent it to Bobby Kennedy.
Recall the CIA document describing the meeting in Miami on behalf of the White House in which Hemming, Hargraves, and Baggs were present, among others.
Hemming added that after meeting with Baggs, he had gone over to Little Joe Garman’s house to talk with him and others about things.
This seemed very curious inasmuch as Vidal had just returned from a trip to Dallas that Hemming had warned him against.
One would think that Hemming would be able to clearly answer whether or not his close friend Vidal was there at Little Joe’s on that historic evening of November 22, 1963.
Another thing to keep in mind is that at the meeting in Fort Lauderdale, Hemming at length went into how easy it was to fake an alibi.
He also started to say, “Who’s going to check it if you have the F...” and then he stopped his sentence.
I went out on my own and ran into situations, and was introduced to Frank Wisner, and then later, through my uncle, to Angleton.
Hemming had gone over this with me several times in previous interviews.
It seems beyond question that he was brought into the Marine Corps with the intention that, after looking him over for a period of years, he would be moved into United States intelligence work.
Hemming described the amazing degree of freedom he had while in the Marine Corps.
He described “accidentally inviting himself’ to go on United States training flights from the airbase in Olathe, Kansas.
At the Fort Lauderdale meeting I suggested to Hemming that he had been brought into United States intelligence without him even knowing it had happened.
Weberman cites the Warren Commission describing a big man with a reddish beard shooting with Oswald at the rifle range.
Supporting the idea that Angleton sent Oswald to the Soviet Union is John Newman’s recent book, Oswald and the CIA, in which Newman shows a pattern of CIA documents that lead to an Angleton counter-intelligence operation in Russia using Oswald.
Analysis of Hemming’s Guilt or Innocence To approach the analysis of the evidence concerning Hemming’s degree of involvement in the JFK assassination plot, I decided to develop scenarios varying from the most extreme involvement of Hemming that I could imagine, to the least involvement; then develop scenarios between these extremes.
After that, I would eliminate the extremes if they were beyond common sense, then work from both ends of the spectrum of scenarios to narrow down to the fewest that were reasonably plausible based on the evidence.
Hemming saw a business opportunity in 1961 or 1962—a need among powerful, wealthy people to have JFK assassinated—and he personally planned and promoted the assassination, sold the idea to his financial sponsors, raised the necessary capital, and personally managed the Dealey Plaza operation, with his Interpen group doing the setting-up of Oswald and the actual shooting of Kennedy.
The least extreme scenario, Hemming’s lowest degree of involvement that I could imagine, was that Hemming had nothing at all to do with the assassination and that everything he had told me was a fabrication and a con job to make himself famous and get a book publishing contract after I had published my book.
The reasoning that I used to rule out the worst extreme was that, for Hemming to have conceived of the assassination, masterminded it, promoted it, and carried it out, and kept it secret for thirty-four years was just too much for a wild, twenty-six-year-old renegade ex-Marine and his renegade, rag-tag group.
I ruled out the extreme of Hemming’s least involvement in the plot because I believed Hemming in that he, at the least, did receive and turn down the contract offers in New Orleans and Dallas, and that he knew that Kennedy might be killed but said nothing about it.
Hemming displayed too much remorse to me, and gave too much specific testimony, in repeated questioning by me and Fonzi over many days, for me to believe that he was making that all up.
And I believed Hemming about Vidal’s trip to Dallas on November 18, 1963, returning on the evening of the assassination, because Hemming had told that story, essentially, to Dick Russell in 1992, and it had been corroborated by General Escalante, although with a date at an earlier part of the month , and also by Colonel William Bishop.
Moreover, I believed Hemming’s corroboration of Colonel William Bishop’s story of Hargraves’ and Vidal’s visit to General Walker in the spring of 1963 in which the assassination was discussed.
By looking at the totality of all of these documents and corroborated statements, and even the uncorroborated statements, we see a very persuasive body of evidence that points to Hemming’ Interpen group as being deeply involved in the Kennedy assassination.
Scenario #1—Hemming told me the truth about all of the key issues: That is, he was offered a contract to kill Kennedy by a right-wing group in Dallas and another right-wing group in New Orleans, and turned them both down, but some of his men and associates, Vidal and Hargraves, went ahead anyway, leaving Hemming out of it.
Vidal and Hargraves were in Dallas at the time of the assassination ; Vidal and possibly Hargraves participated in the General Walker incident.
That is, he did turn down the contract offers, but later accepted one of them, or both, through a cutout, received money in advance, started the ball rolling in maneuvering Oswald around New Orleans, Texas, and Mexico City, setting him up; but when the crunch came, Hemming’s better and wiser instincts took over and he bailed out, leaving the actual shooting of President Kennedy to others.
In this scenario, Hemming also might have become suspicious that he himself was being set up as a fall guy, but Vidal and some of the Interpen group (perhaps Hargraves) went ahead anyway, ignoring Hemming’s advice.
This is in line with Hemming’s many statements to me that he had become suspicious that he was being set up.
In this scenario, Hemming carried his role to completion with his Interpen group, including Vidal and Hargraves, but only Vidal and Hargraves went to Dallas at the time of the assassination.
In this scenario it seems plausible to me that the major plotters may have deliberately excluded Hemming from going to Dallas and participating because they felt he was too wild, reckless, or unreliable.
Based on the way Hemming described his behavior toward the New Orleans and Texas people who made the contract offers, and toward David Sanchez Morales, I can believe that they may have made the decision to keep Hemming in the plot in a limited role (if for nothing more than to implicate him so that he would keep his mouth shut), but to use his men for other roles, including the main event.
This scenario does not preclude Hemming and his men having been considered as potential fall guys to be eliminated if ever things came apart.
After all, Hemming and Howard K Davis were ostensibly on Castro’s side—they both had volunteered to help Castro in the revolution and could have been painted as Communist agents, as Oswald was painted.
Also, Vidal was a Cuban who easily could have been portrayed as a Castro spy, who had doubled to the United States and acted as Castro’s man to direct the shooting in Dealey Plaza.
In all three scenarios, it was not necessary that Hemming be in Dallas on the day of the assassination, or even in the days preceding.
In all three scenarios, Hemming and his crew were primarily motivated by patriotism (however tragic and misguided) and a need for adventure, fame, and noble purpose.
Like many others, they were caught up in the anti-Communist movement of the extreme right wing of that era, and felt that they were working for the best interests of the United States, sanctioned by their superiors.
On Saturday night, about midnight, we were expressing our views on who it was that killed President Kennedy and the way he was killed.
I persisted with my feelings that the extreme right wing either was behind the assassination or a major part of it.
Thus far my investigation of the anti-Castro Cubans and Hemming had borne results.
I now had substantial evidence, if not courtroom proof, of complicity of the Dallas right wing and the CIA (Colonel William Bishop, Felipe Vidal, and possibly Roy Hargraves) in the plot to assassinate President Kennedy.
And direct linkages among Colonel William Bishop, Larry LaBorde, and Hemming to the CIA’s William Harvey and his ZR/RIFLE program; and linkages to John Martino, to Mafia leaders, and Jimmy Hoffa.
A definitive structure of the plot at the operational and planning levels was taking form.
In this, Rolando Masferrer and his associations with Hemming, Vidal, Hargraves, Jimmy Hoffa, and organized crime loomed importantly.
And Hemming’s associates Loran Hall, Lawrence Howard, and William Seymour were an important part of the picture, at least insofar as their relationship with Oswald.
As to Hemming’s specific involvement, a modified scenario somewhere between scenarios 2 and 3 seemed to be the most accurate description, with Hemming having a key role in framing Oswald that he had not yet revealed to me.
I felt that there was too much important information in the book to delay getting it out to the public.
I decided to go to Fort Lauderdale one more time for another marathon session with Hemming and Fonzi.
Weberman for the first time to see if he had more to say about Hemming than was in his massive data base.
Weberman confirmed everything that he had told me on the telephone, and more.
He said he has now changed his mind about Hemming not being in the Marita Lorenz/Frank Sturgis car caravan to Dallas; he now believes that Hemming was in the caravan, and moreover, Hemming’s story of the November 18 incident at the Miami airport is a fabrication, a cover story to hide the fact that he was in the caravan.
He also said that although most of what Hemming has told him over the years is true, Hemming embellishes his stories and is beginning to recant on some of them.
He said that he had befriended him and helped him financially over the years.
Only recently, Hemming sent him a copy of the document that I had sent to Hemming about a Hemming look-alike carrying a rifle in Dallas on the day of the assassination.
One significant point came out in my discussions with Weberman when I was telling him about Colonel William Bishop and Felipe Vidal.
I mentioned that Colonel Bishop had told Gary Shaw that the pseudonym “Maurice Bishop” was a composite of Colonel Bishop himself, E Howard Hunt, and David Atlee Phillips—all three had used that pseudonym on occasion.
Weberman remembered that, a few years ago, Hemming had told him the same story.
Weberman admitted that he had put his theory together about Hemming from circumstantial evidence and intuition.
He said that everywhere you look in the JFK assassination evidence you find Hemming.
And he mentioned the large number of members of Hemming’s Interpen group who were linked to the assassination.
I agreed with Weberman on all of this, but still couldn’t bring myself to reach such absolutely positive conclusions as had Weberman.
Second Interview in Fort Lauderdale In Fort Lauderdale, Fonzi, Hemming, and I met in the Ocean Hacienda Inn for two days, April 28 and 29, 1997.
We had a frustrating, exhausting, but revealing discussion in the marathon sessions.
One of the most important points was Hemming’s admission, earlier noted, that his Interpen member Ronald Ponce De Leon was the “‘young, good-looking Cuban kid” who John Martino had told his wife was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
Accumulative with this was something Fonzi brought up about the 1995 conference with Cuban intelligence in Nassau.
Fonzi reminded me that General Escalante had told our group that when the Cubans captured Tony Cuesta (earlier noted as an active radical anti-Castro Cuban closely associated with Vidal), Cuesta had told Escalante that a Cuban exile by the name of Herminio Diaz was involved in the JFK assassination.
Tony Cuesta was eventually Shab ; a ; . , released by the Cubans and returned to Florida, incapacitated by a missing leg and virtually blind.
Revolutionary forces surprised them and a battle ensued in which artillery pieces began to fire on the enemy transport that had brought them.
Consequently, Antonio Cuesta Valle , chief of the infiltration group and Eugenio Enrique Saldivar, both residents of Miami, were arrested and seriously wounded.
Agents Armando Romero Martinez and Sandallo Heminio Diaz Garcia were killed while attempting to invade our territory.
They were involved in smuggling in weapons to assassinate Commander Fidel Castro.
Herminio Diaz was a known gangster linked to Mafia types such as Santos Trafficante, with whom he had shared the same table at the Riviera Hotel in Havana in 1959.
The CIA admitted to the Senate Committee that it had used Santos Trafficante and other underworld figures in the assassination attempts on Castro.
However, the Agency has made numerous attempts to demonstrate that those plans in which the Mafia and Trafficante were involved, never went beyond the planning stage.
Herminio Diaz, a Mafia type hired by Trafficante and recruited by him to work in the CIA, carried this plan to the stage of execution when he landed in Cuban territory with powerful arms to try to kill Fidel Castro.
And so we have the growing list of Hemming’s associates, with substantial evidence indicating their involvement in the assassination or its periphery.
In addition we have Larry LaBorde and the New Orleans Jack Lawrence, who Hemming claims were involved, and both were associated with him.
And Hemming says he knew Oswald and was involved with him in assisting him in trying to infiltrate Cuba.
Yet Hemming himself claimed innocence to me of everything except being given offers to kill Kennedy, which he turned down.
When we met in Fort Lauderdale, I showed Hemming the passage in Weberman’s book in which Hemming had told him about helping set up Oswald.
He studied it carefully, and handed the book back to me without comment.
This follows a general pattern of Hemming’s not denying unequivocally any of the accusations that Weberman has made about him, leaving the degree of his involvement an open question.
Before I left for Fort Lauderdale for the second interview, Hemming had made an astounding statement to me on the telephone.
It was apparently triggered by his review of an earlier draft of my chapter about him, in which I had written that I could not imagine monied people giving a wild, young, rag-tag group like Interpen a contract to kill the president of the United States.
Hemming said that I should realize that Interpen was modeled after United States Special Forces “A” teams.
The first things Hemming showed Fonzi and me at Ford Lauderdale were photographs of handsome, clean-cut Green Berets.
I said, “Your telling me that Interpen was composed of Green Berets puts a whole new light on things.
Hemming nodded in agreement, but did not go further, except to say that they were one of several quasi-“A” teams that had been created.
Hemming was noncommittal when I suggested that the United States military or CIA supplied Interpen with finances.
Hemming qualified his statement that Interpen was partially staffed with ex-Green Berets, saying that they brought in ex-GIs and less qualified people to perform duties such as building campfires or maintaining the bush camps.
The more we learn about James Angleton, the more it seems that he was in some way central to the JFK assassination plot.
Angleton was very close to J Edgar Hoover, according to CIA’s John Scelso.
But Harvey has long been suspected of having been planted as a mole in the CIA by J Edgar Hoover.
According to Hemming, Angleton acted as his handler and formed Interpen teams in 1960 as quasi-“A” teams, drawing on former United States Special Forces.
According to John Scelso, Angleton took over the JFK assassination investigation, forcing Scelso out of the picture.
According to Anthony Summers, quoting Gordon Novel , Angleton was one of those, along with the Mafia, who had compromising photographs of J Edgar Hoover in a homosexual act with Clyde Tolson.
Angleton himself has been accused by a fellow CIA officer, Clare Petty, of being a Soviet mole.
Petty had made an exhaustive, highly praised investigation of Angleton over a period of years.
William Colby fired Angleton from the CIA when Colby was appointed as director, because he felt that Angleton had almost destroyed the CIA in his mole hunts.
Curiously, he overlooked British double agent Kim Philby, who was very close to Angleton and ultimately was found to be a Soviet mole by William Harvey.
The number of scenarios that can be created around Angleton are endless.
Angleton did have the Israel desk at CIA, and Israel’s Mossad has been linked to Meyer Lansky, who, along with Trafficante, had lost millions in Cuba when Castro took over.
President Kennedy was killed by a few of his political enemies in the United States (civilian and military), in partnership with the Mafia, with the blessings of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover.
The United States government had created several special assassination teams having world-wide applications; and powerful civilian forces (the elusive High Cabal) had direct access to these teams for their own purposes, bypassing the entire United States defense and intelligence apparatus, including Allen Dulles himself, and the Joint Chiefs.
At the end of the second day in Fort Lauderdale, we were waiting for Hemming’s daughter Delores to bring his notes on my chapter.
Finally, at about 5:00 pm, not only did his daughter arrive, but also his wife Patti.
Hemming spoke with obvious sincerity, “Gerry and I were at our home on Just Island.
We were listening to the radio commentary about the motorcade when I heard about firecrackers going off.
Right away we went over to Alan Kennedy’s house, about one or two hundred yards away, to watch television—we didn’t have a television set.
She said, “Gerry went to the airport in Miami on November 18 with Little Joe after calling Steve Wilson.
She added that she and Gerry were with “the guys” at Little Joe’s house that evening.
She at first hesitated, but after some prodding from Gerry, she went through a reconstruction of events that I didn’t understand, and concluded that Gerry must have been in Miami during that time.
Then she went back to November 22, remembering that Little Joe was so happy that Kennedy had been killed that he was “dancing in the street” with yells of delight.
At this point my briefcase was packed, so I borrowed a pen from Delores and wrote down a list of notes from which I later composed the above conversation.
Fonzi and I then left to return to my hotel, where my wife was waiting.
When Hemming was handing out documents to me on that Sunday in San Diego, he gave me a copy of his application to the CIA, which had been left in the CIA files with no action taken.
Hemming said, “That’s right, I worked for Kleins for a short period in the late 50s.
At the time, this bit of evidence was overwhelmed by everything else he was telling me.
Hemming had told me that he had available to him blank identification cards for the Air Force and Navy.
I thought of the witness who said that Hargraves had false Secret Service credentials before he went to Dallas in late 1963.
And Hemming giving me a short course on how to forge identification cards.
Before setting up the meeting in Fort Lauderdale, I had asked Hemming to try to arrange for Roy Hargraves to participate for four hours.
Hemming said that Hargraves was due in Miami, and had previously received requests for interviews with Weberman but couldn’t reach an agreement on a price.
This was the first time that anyone had requested money from me for an interview.
After much agonizing, I decided to offer Hargraves $500 for four hours, with the condition that all he had to do was review what I had written about him, and give his comments, yes or no.
He would not be asked to add any new material unless he wanted to do so.
Hemming told me before I left San Diego that he would pass this message on to Hargraves.
Hemming said that he had left the message, and it was up to Hargraves, and he wasn’t going to pursue him.
The most compelling evidence of all are the nine people who predicted the assassination, in particular how Eugene B Dinkin and Joseph Milteer described in advance the basic concept and composition of the plot.
By examining the backgrounds of these nine people and John Martino, we see a Skeletal outline of the complete plot.
Richard Case Nagell has been proven a very truthful witness in virtually everything he said.
The people who have attempted to discredit him over the years should take second thought.
His story has been corroborated in various parts by Colonel William Bishop, Robert Morrow, Gerald Patrick Hemming, General Fabian Escalante, and by all other evidence and information that I have been able to accumulate.
Recall that Nagell was adamant that the FBI was behind the Kennedy assassination, and that it was a domestic plot.
Morrow seems to have been involved in a different group of Cuban exiles than that which was ultimately active in the assassination.
Morrow himself has quoted Kohly as denying to his deathbed that he was involved in the plot, and that seems to be supported by the facts.
There are still loose ends as to how Morrow’s story of Eladio del Valle overlaps into the Hemming/Interpen story.
The Marita Lorenz story of the car caravan to Dallas remains a conundrum.
It boils down to her word against Hemming’s, or neither telling the full truth.
The John Martino story and his confession are of utmost importance, particularly when the material in this chapter is added.
They link together the Mafia, Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago, Gerald Patrick Hemming, his man Ronald Ponce De Leon, and William Pawley into a cohesive picture of a vital phase of the JFK assassination.
Hemming’s claim that he lost control of his people and they went ahead without him is not totally implausible.
According to Hemming, he found himself after the JFK assassination amidst some of the people who he thought were involved, but no one was talking to anybody about anything.
But we are getting very close to understanding the broad structure of the master plot.
We must realize that assassination of the president of the United States in a crossfire operation requires more than two people.
As noted in Chapter 15, Mafia hits sometimes employed up to twenty people in the total operation.
Researchers generally estimate somewhere around ten people were required, just at Dealey Plaza, to staff the operation.
Except for the primary shooters, it is unlikely that foreigners would be brought in, unless they had a good command of the English language and could blend in as Americans.
Most likely, based on the evidence presented, it would seem that Hemming’s Interpen group and their English-speaking associates, along with a few Cuban exiles, would be prime candidates to make up the team that was necessary in both Dealey Plaza and Mexico City for performance of the ancillary functions.
Although the available evidence does not prove this beyond a reasonable doubt, it is the best scenario that I have seen, and could well pass a preponderance of evidence test before a jury, in my opinion.
The operational-execution phase of the plot was carried out with less sophisticated planning than I originally hypothesized.
Only by having extremely powerful sponsors with the capacity to cover up the crime for decades did the plot succeed, and everybody go free.
When I first suggested to Hemming that the Dealey Plaza and Mexico City operations in the plot were amateurish, he seemed startled, even offended.
None of the above precludes Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover from having been informed in advance that President Kennedy would be assassinated when he came to Dallas; nor are the French Corsican/OAS assassination teams, recruited by the Mafia (or William Harvey or the Texas right wing), excluded as the primary shooters.
KKK In the course of my conversations with Hemming over the months, there were several areas that he brought out that require further investigation beyond the scope of my time now available.
Hemming suspects that this automobile was owned by his associate and Interpen member Howard K Davis, but had been seized by the Mexican police when Davis had loaned the car to Dick Whatley and Bob Willis, who were arrested in Mexico in 1962 in a gun-running operation to Guatemala.
They were held in jail for six months and then set free through Hemming’s efforts in obtaining assistance from General Edwin Walker.
Hemming said he suspects that this car showed up on November 22 at Dealey Plaza.
Richard Bartholomew in Pfleurgerville, Texas, is doing research on this subject.
First, Patricia Orr’s notes, on which I based a large part of this chapter, were included in final typewritten form, verifying their validity as official documents.
Apparently, Vidal was required by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to notify them when leaving Miami.
The trip to Dallas by auto, combined with Vidal not notifying the INS, looked like an attempt to keep the trip secret.
Vidal’s return to Dallas by plane on November 22 (arriving at his home in Miami by 5:30m.
Miami time, as Hemming told me) would very likely have been by private or military jet to have been accomplished within the four hours from the time of the assassination, considering time to and from airports on both ends.
Hemming agreed that the return flight by private plane was an indication of a secret trip.
But he disagreed that leaving Miami without INS permission was an indication of secrecy—Vidal did that all the time.
Mike Epstein of the Senate Intelligence Committee called to relay information that he had received from Jerry Treanor, attorney in Washington, DC, for Jorge Antonio Zimeri-Safie, a Cuban wanted for extradition to Guatemala on a murder charge.
Epstein said Treanor had told him that Zimeri had information pertinent to the Kennedy assassination.
He said his client has known Gerry Patrick Hemming for several years, perhaps since 1971.
Hemming told Zimeri that he met Oswald in Atsugi, Japan, when they were both stationed there with the United States Marines.
Hemming also reportedly told Zimeri in bragadaccio manner that he, Hemming, had been part of the third back-up team in the Kennedy assassination and was in a building somewhere behind the TSBD at the time of the shooting.
Treanor said the information was first revealed to a Washington, D.C. homicide detective who questioned Zimeri regarding the Orlando Letelier case.
Treanor said this predated the allegations made publicly by Marita Lorenz in September 1976.
He said that he had learned from an “unimpeachable source” that Hemming had served with the United States Marines from April 1954 until October 1958 and in the United States Navy & Navy Reserve from October 1963 until October 1969.
Our records indicate Hemming only served in the Marines during the same period of time Treanor claims.
Treanor also know other details of Hemming’s Marine Corps training including his experience as a link trainer instructor and aircraft instructor.
This reminded me of repeated conversations in San Diego with Hemming about the origin of the shots.
Hemming was adamant, seeming to be absolutely certain, almost as if he had been there, that some of the shots came from the Dal-Tex building on the fourth floor—the offices of Abraham Zapruder.
After some hesitation, he said that Jorge Zimeri had been told this story by John Martino to protect him from being murdered in Guatemala by Zimeri, with whom Hemming was involved in a plot to overthrow the government of Guatemala.
The idea, Hemming explained, was that if Zimeri believed that Hemming had been part of the JFK assassination, he would fear he would create such a ruckus in the United States that he wouldn’t get away with it.
What Hemming didn’t explain was why the document made no mention of John Martino.
Also, note that Hemming could have been part of the third back-up team, but still have been in Miami on November 22.
In a later telephone conversation on July 12, 1997, Hemming denied that he had ever made such a statement to Zimeri.
As to Hemming having been in the United States Navy from October 1963 to October 1969, he explained to me that this was probably something Angleton did for him—that Angleton had promised him he “would take care of him’—presumably for retirement pay.
Hemming met Jack Ruby, in September or October, 1959, at William Morgan’s house in Cuba.
Ruby sold inferior jeeps in the Cuban Air force, and Hemming had a few choice words about them.
This was disturbing to me because I had asked Hemming in San Diego if he had known Jack Ruby, and he replied that he had not.
Now I was learning that, under oath, he had testified that he met Ruby in 1959.
In the telephone conversation, Hemming admitted to another item in the summary that quoted him saying he had met Jack Ruby briefly at the Carousel Club for about sixty seconds in 1963.
He said that he had been introduced to Ruby by Wally Welch; “...we were having a couple of beers, Davis was with me, and he was sitting there banging on some bongos or something and he came over...and said that he was brought over by Wally Welch.
Upon leaving Cuba in September, 1960, he stayed in Mexico City for two weeks and had contact with Silvia Duran.
Interview with Gerald Patrick Hemming, 2668 Hoyt Ave., El Monte, Calif., in the company of Lawrence Howard.
PATRICK said that he recalls that a pilot named BILL BURCHETTE flew him, FRANK BARTES, LUIS RABEL, RICARDO DAVIS, and others to the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain to scout the area for a possible training camp.
He said that BURCHETTE knew BARTES well and lived at that time in Metairie.
Edgar Eugene Bradley was one of Jim Garrison’s prime suspects whom he tried to extradite from California.
In an interview oud with Lawrence Howard by Steven Burton, Howard said that he once met Gene Bradley at a house where a paramilitary organization held meetings and prepared ammunition.
Jim Braden has also been reported as associated with radical right-wing groups in Los Angeles.
I told him I would have to refer to the document to get the year, and the conversation then shifted to another subject.
In a later telephone conversation, Hemming told me that this flight did occur, but passengers on the flight were Howard K Davis, Larry LaBorde, and himself.
PATRICK said that he had met CLINT MURCHISON, GORDON McLENDON, and NELSON HUNT at various meetings in Dallas.
Often at these meetings, there was talk of killing KENNEDY, but he can recall no specific instance where MURCHISON, McLENDON, or HUNT participated in this talk.
Hemming had never told me about meeting Clint Murchison or Gordon McLendon in Dallas, but he had mentioned meeting with Nelson Bunker Hunt.
I asked him about this in the telephone conversation, and he responded, “Well, these were the people who were standing around in the July 5, 1963 meeting at the Petroleum Club.
A number of these people who were running their mouths off to us, I guess McLendon was there.
PATRICK also advised that ED COLLINS and ENRIQUE MOLINA were in Dallas during November, 1963.
Recall that Ed Collins is the one whom Weberman accused Hemming of murdering, and it was Ed Collins that Mrs.
No doubt, PATRICK did not provide anything near the total of information known by him.
His knowledge of anti-Castro activities in the early 1960s is extensive, to say the least.
His contacts in Miami, New Orleans, Dallas, and to a lesser extent, Los Angeles, are considerable.
But it was obvious that he was determined not to help the investigation in any way.
He would constantly begin a long description of some raid or preparations that I had not asked about and that was obviously irrelevant.
As HOWARD had warned me, I only got that information that PATRICK was willing to give me.
It was obvious while questioning him further that he was referring to OSWALD’S trip in late September, 1963 although he was uncertain of the time.
Weberman’s accusation that Hemming had been the one who handled Oswald in Mexico City, which Hemming had ducked answering when I questioned him about it in an earlier interview.
Another item noted that Hemming testified that he was approached by the mob in the Fontainbleu Hotel to kill Castro.
Among them are applications by Hemming for the CIA and documents which show Hemming did work as a contract agent.
His FBI case officer, when he was working for the Bureau, was James O’Connor, who, says Hemming, is now in San Diego.
It made me wonder about Hemming’s claim that Hoover was trying to set him up, if he had been an FBI recruit.
And I thought it could explain the FBI’s not going after him with all the evidence they had against him in the JFK assassination.
Perhaps their number-one rule of “not embarrassing the Bureau” was in full effect, or Hoover simply didn’t know that Hemming and Oswald were FBI informants.
In reviewing all of the documents in the package, it was apparent that Hemming had been telling his story, in general, going back to 1967, about right wingers in Texas and New Orleans suggesting that JFK be killed and seeking someone to do it, but not nearly in as much detail as he told me and Fonzi.
I had thought months earlier after interviewing Hemming that he was a master of obfuscation and cover stories.
Fonzi’s “Carlos,” an undoubted CIA agent, had done the same thing and has been suspected of injecting himself into the Garrison case as a “consultant” with the objective of undermining Garrison’s investigation.
Of the 95 documents I requested from the ARRB, many were not available, having been referred to other agencies.
The more documents I get and the more I talk with Hemming, the more I become convinced that he was involved more deeply in the JFK assassination than he is willing to admit.
He told me that he had inadvertently helped in the planning of Oswald’s trip to Mexico City, but he claimed innocence of knowing that the planning involved Oswald.
He said that Rorke, along with pilot Geoffrey Sullivan, left Florida in a light, twinengine, five-passenger Beechcraft airplane.
They flew to New Orleans and picked up Oswald, then flew him to Austin for the Selective Service meeting, then to Dallas for the Odio incident, then to Harlinger, Texas, for plane refueling, then on to Mirada, Mexico, where Oswald stayed while someone else was posing as him in Mexico City.
The Oswald impersonator attempted to obtain a visa for Oswald to get into Cuba from Mirada.
Hemming said the operation in Mexico City was bungled by Winston Scott; Oswald, unable to enter Cuba, was returned to Dallas.
Hemming said Oswald was never in Mexico City and the appearance of trips to and from there was fabricated.
This is another subject that requires more research before conclusions can be reached.
However, a document , about the search party for Rorke and Sullivan, headed by Hemming in a DC-3, does show that the timing of the Rorke flight and its layover in Mirada is consistent with Oswald’s trip to Mexico City and Hemming’s story.
It is another example of Hemming seeming to be in the plot but claiming innocence of direct involvement.
This could be Hemming’s cover story for having told Weberman in a confessional moment that he helped set up Oswald; or it could be a valid explanation of that statement.
William Shakespeare Julius Caesar 29 THE SECRET SERVICE It staggers the mind even to contemplate that the entire Secret Service contingency in Dallas and high officials of the Secret Service in Washington, D.C., were involved in an orchestrated conspiracy to kill the president.
Plausible scenarios to enable us to grapple with these questions are, first, any participation from the Secret Service may have involved only a few key agents with limited knowledge of the plot who manipulated other agents; and, second, those key agents could have been susceptible to bribery.
After all, the potential for bribery of government employees is enormous, particularly those who are close to the seats of power and are witness to its frequent hypocrisy and sham.
Many of these people are of modest means, draw a meager salary, and are subject to being servants to the personal whims of the powerful.
It is small wonder that some of them might be tempted by the promise of protection from prosecution and large sums of money in untraceable bills.
In this regard, it seems reasonable to assume that there were a few key people in the Secret Service who could have been approached by others in the conspiracy and brought into it through the persuasion of bribery Soo These people were well aware of John Kennedy’s flagrant philandering and probably knew much more about him that could have led to disdain for him.
There are stories of John Kennedy using the Secret Service to arrange for his liaisons with women—inside and outside the White House—and of using agents to do menial chores, act as “go-fers” and “lookouts,” and perform other demeaning tasks eo It is worth remembering that until Kennedy came along, the Secret Service was protecting Dwight Eisenhower and before that Harry Truman and before that Franklin D Roosevelt.
All of these men, even with their individual transgressions, were paragons of virtue who commanded great personal respect compared to the reckless Jack Kennedy.
In addition to the possibility of bribery combined with loss of respect, there is some evidence of conflict between the Secret Service and Kennedy.
But having said that, we still need substantial evidence of the Secret Service’s complicity in the JFK assassination before reaching such conclusions.
Much of this evidence has been reported in previous chapters in this book, the most salient of which I will outline briefly in the paragraphs that follow, along with new material.
First, we will examine the evidence of the selection of the fatal motorcade route.
Two locations were considered, one at the Dallas Trade Mart and the other at the Women’s Building auditorium at the state fairgrounds.
Bruno disagreed with Connally and protested to the Secret Service in Washington, D.C., advising them that security be used as the reason not to go to the Trade Mart; but Connally prevailed, traveling directly to the White House over Bruno’s head, adamantly insisting on the Trade Mart site.
We’re going to let Connally have the Trade Mart site OW The die was now cast.
Kennedy would be passing through Dealey Plaza down Elm Street at a very slow speed, in a perfect spot to conceal assassins at several possible locations—in surrounding tall buildings and behind fences, walls, and shrubs along Elm Street.
The following Secret Service personnel returned on Air Force One from Dallas to Andrews AFB: Robert Steward; Glenn Bennett; Rufus Youngblood; Clinton P Hill; William Greer; Roy Kellerman; Paul Landis; Thomas John; Jerry Kivett Kellerman, Landis, O’ Leary, and Greer accompanied the bronze casket from Air Force One to Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Kellerman summoned Clinton Hill to make final examinations of JFK wounds after completion of autopsy.
Kellerman, Greer, Hill, and Landis accompanied JFK body to White House after embalming at Bethesda.
Another option that would have avoided Elm Street would have been to proceed straight down Main Street and beyond Dealey Plaza, thereby reaching the Trade Mart on Industrial Boulevard.
Hunt in his election bid for the Democratic nomination against John Kennedy.
Only by concerted pressure from John Connally did the Trade Mart get selected for the luncheon, making it possible to have the motorcade pass through the crossfire ambush.
I want to make it clear that I have not seriously considered that John Connally was a conscious part of the plot.
First, Connally would not likely have been so stupid as to allow himself to be used to set up the death trap if he were a knowing part of the plot; the finger of accusation inevitably would have pointed directly to him, and he certainly would have known that.
Second, he was most stalwart in contending over the years, until his death, that he was hit by a second bullet, which undermined the Warren Commission’s thesis of one gunman.
Lastly, it would not seem owned by wealthy Texas oil man David Howard Bird. reasonable that a well-planned plot would have a key high official in its conspiratorial group aggressively arranging a parade route that was so patently perfect for an assassination.
Another reason to suspect that the selection of the Trade Mart for the luncheon site was part of a plot was that it would be a backup assassination site to Dealey Plaza if that plan had to be aborted for some reason.
Evidence supporting the reasoning that the Trade Mart was a back-up site is that John Adrian O’Hare (a.k.a.
Colonel William Bishop, a professional sniper assigned to the CIA from Army intelligence) was stationed at the Trade Mart on November 22.
Also, the Trade Mart was a difficult building in which to protect the president due to its architecture, having a large number of entrances and exits and multiple catwalks above the floor, whereas the Women’s Auditorium was a single-floor building with only two entrances at either eng 12161 The Trade Mart would have been a very good spot for an assassin to conceal himself and escape afterwards.
The final step fell into place on November 18 when Ken O’Donnell yielded to Connally.
Researchers over the years have tried to break down the Ruth Paine story, but to no avail.
He confirmed that there was an opening and Oswald was hired the next day.
We have discussed in previous chapters that there were plots to kill Kennedy in Miami, Chicago, and Los Angeles that did not materialize for one reason or another.
Similarly, the plot in Dallas could have been planned for several locations depending on how everything came together.
In this scenario, Oswald would be maneuvered to any of the assassination sites found necessary—the Trade Mart as an example.
But in any case, we must conclude from the foregoing evidence that it does not appear that the Secret Service was the primary instrument for arranging the fatal motorcade route.
This does not imply, however, that key persons in the Secret Service were not aware of the importance of the motorcade route to the plot.
In point of fact, they did go along with it without serious resistance, later using the excuse that they had yielded to the politicians in the selection of the route.
The crimes of the Secret Service were crimes of omission; their role was not to do certain critical things.
As Colonel Fletcher Prouty wrote, all that is needed to get a president assassinated is to compromise the Secret Service—get them to let down their guard—and someone, fanatic or conspirator, will come forth to do the deed.
From the day that John Kennedy was murdered, it has been widely accepted that the performance of the Secret Service was unbelievably lax, before and after the shooting.
No effort was made to see that windows were closed in tall buildings along the parade route, even at Dealey Plaza where the president would be most vulnerable.
Moreover, no effort was made to secure the area behind the picket fence and wall on the grassy knoll.
No effort was made to check that area or station a Secret Service agent or a Dallas policeman there.
A single Secret Service agent located there could have prevented the assassination.
But there were none, only some people who had bogus Secret Service identifications.
As discussed in Chapters 11 and 12, the failure of the Secret Service agents, with the one exception of agent Clint Hill, to respond at all when the first round of gunfire occurred defies explanation other than in sinister terms.
According to the Zapruder film, six to seven seconds elapsed after the first sound of gunfire before the presidential limousine sped up.
And for that entire time all of the agents’ feet were glued to the running boards of the cars behind the presidential limousine, with the one exception of Agent Hill.
The first duty of a Secret Service agent is to protect the president by shielding him (using the agent’s body) at the instant of hearing gunfire.
But Special Agent Kellerman sat on the passenger side of the presidential limousine looking straight ahead as if transfixed until after the fatal shot.
He made no effort to vault over the back of the seat to shield either John Connally or the president or their wives as was his duty.
The fact that the limousine slowed almost to a halt at the point of the fatal shot similarly defies credible explanation.
And the fact that Secret Service agent William Greer told the Warren Commission that he was not looking at the president at the time of the fatal shot (Zapruder frames clearly show that he was) leads one to suspect that the Secret Service was aware that Kennedy was scheduled to be shot and that it deliberately cooperated in placing him in a deadly crossfire.
He postulates that a “security stripping test” was put into effect during the Dallas trip.
Palamara bases this on statements by Secret Service Chief Rowley that studies were under way before the assassination about presidential security protection.
In this scenario, many of the agents may have been led to believe that there was going to be a staged, fake assassination attempt, possibly as part of a covert operation to precipitate an invasion of Cuba, and that they were not to respond.
It does make some sense to explain how so many people could have been involved in the disinformation phase of the plot.
But even if this scenario is true, there would still probably have to be one or two in the Secret Service who would be aware of the real plot and have the power to get all the other agents to keep their mouths shut.
It seems entirely plausible that once the assassination had taken place, the Secret Service agents who were in the presidential protection contingency realized immediately that their agency had been set up and became very frightened for their careers and of the powerful forces that were behind the plot.
And, they all did keep their mouths shut, at least enough to keep it from the news media.
In that regard, both Special Agent Kellerman and Chief Rowley immediately commented after the shooting that it was a conspiracy.
At one point in my studies this confused me because I thought that if they were that candid about believing it was conspiracy it was an indication that they were not involved in it.
But after studying the Mexico City evidence, the Zapruder film, the testimonies of eyewitnesses, and thinking much more about the disinformation phase (for which it was obviously not planned that the shooting would appear to be the act of one person), it occurred to me that it would not be unreasonable to explain Kellerman’s and Rowley’s statements about a conspiracy as being no more than a continuation of the original intention of the plot—that it was supposed to look like a conspiracy involving Communists.
Only after Oswald was captured and other things went wrong did the leaders of the plot decide pragmatically to switch to the lone-gunman story.
This, as we know, gave the plotters grave problems because the evidence clearly showed more than one gunman.
Added to the foregoing evidence of Secret Service complicity is their failure to send to their Dallas office information obtained on November 12, 1963 from Miami police informant William Somersett in a recording of a conversation between Somersett and Joseph Milteer, indicating that a plot was underway to assassinate the president with a high-powered rifle from a tall building.
This information was sent to other Secret Service field offices but not to the Dallas office. ae ; Additionally, according to Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden, the Chicago Secret Service office received a teletype from the FBI shortly before Kennedy’s November 2 visit to Chicago warning that an assassination attempt would be carried out in that city by a four-man Cuban hit squad armed with high-powered rifles.
Bolden said that the entire office was involved in this, but that it was kept top secret.
Kennedy’s trip to Chicago was canceled, but, again, that information was not transmitted to the Dallas office.
After Kennedy’s death, Bolden discovered that the information about the Chicago threat was being kept from the Warren Commission, and he made a trip to Washington to tell them what he knew.
But before he could tell his story, he was taken back to Chicago where he was charged with discussing a bribe with two counterfeiters, was brought to trial and convicted—even after one of the two counterfeiters admitted perjury.
The Secret Service admitted that the Chicago threat occurred but refused to clarify the matter.
The fact was, however, that two threats to assassinate President Kennedy with high-powered : . rifles, both of which occurred in early November 1963, were not relayed to the Dallas region.
When the HSCA became involved in the investigation, it decided to take a closer look at Secret Service files to see if they contained what could have been recognized as significant threats in connection with the Dallas trip.
The committee discovered that the 1963 Protective Research Section files had since been summarized and computerized, and the original files then destroyed.
It was a small, tightly controlled group with only one hundred people in its Washington, D.C., contingency, and only about thirty of them worked directly on presidential protection.
The primary assignment of the Secret Service is the protection of the president.
Several witnesses at the scene of the assassination reported encountering unexplained civilians who had Secret Service identification or Treasury Department identification.
Other witnesses reported Secret Service agents leaving the motorcade and running to various locations in Dealey Plaza.
Warren Commission critics have alleged that these Secret Service agents either participated in the assassination itself or were involved in a cover-up of the evidence.
The problem with this information about other Secret Service agents in Dealey Plaza is that, according to the Warren Commission, they were not supposed to be there.
Committee interviews or depositions with 11 of the 16 agents who were on duty with the motorcade and with their supervisors produced evidence that only one agent had left the motorcade at any time prior to the arrival at Parkland Hospital.
This agent, Thomas “Lem” Johns, had been riding in Vice President Johnson’s follow-up car.
In an attempt to reach Johnson’s limousine, he had left the car at the sound of shots and was momentarily on his own in Dealey Plaza, though he was picked up almost immediately and taken to Parkland Hospital.
In every instance, therefore, the committee was able to establish the movement and the activities of Secret Service agents.
One witness who did not base his Secret Service agent identification merely upon observing a plainclothesman in the presence of uniformed police officers was Dallas police officer Joseph M Smith.
Smith, who had been riding as a motorcycle escort in the motorcade, ran up the grassy knoll immediately after the shooting occurred.
He testified to the Warren Commission that at that time he encountered a man who stated that he was a Secret Service agent and offered supporting credentials.
Smith indicated that he did not examine these credentials closely, and he then proceeded to search the area unsuccessfully for suspicious individuals.
The committee did obtain evidence that military intelligence personnel may have identified themselves as Secret Service agents or that they might have been misidentified as such.
Robert E Jones, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who in 1963 was commanding officer of the military intelligence region that encompassed Texas, told the committee that from 8 to 12 military intelligence personnel in plainclothes were assigned to Dallas to provide supplemental security for the President’s visit.
He indicated that these agents had identification credentials and, if questioned, would most likely have stated that they were on detail to the Secret Service.
The Committee sought to identify these agents so that they could be questioned.
Here we have possible suppression of evidence by Army intelligence, which we have seen became a habit with them, and the possible involvement of Army intelligence personnel in the assassination.
Recall from Chapter 23 Colonel Fletcher Prouty’s reporting that the 112th Military Intelligence Division was told to “stand down” that day rather than report for duty in Dallas, over the protests of the unit commander.
Now, in Dealey Plaza, we have indications of Army intelligence involvement in the form of bogus Secret Service agents.
Another witness who encountered unexplained personnel flashing badges was Jean Hill, a school teacher in Dallas, who witnessed the Kennedy assassination from a position almost directly opposite the grassy knoll on Elm Street.
She said she then ran toward the picket fence and when she got behind it she saw a uniformed policeman who seemed to be guarding something.
Confused, she turned around and encountered a man in plain clothes who flashed a badge, taking a firm grip on her shoulder.
She said she told the man she had to catch the man who was running away.
But before she could take more than two or three running steps, she was restrained by a second plainclothesman, whose grip on her other shoulder was even stronger than the first’s.
Unceremoniously, the second man jammed his hand into her coat pocket and deftly withdrew the handful of still-damp Polaroid prints she had deposited there a few minutes before.
That’s what we’re going to find out, so just start walking and keep smiling—just like we were all real good friends.
She never found the man with the gun either, but she can close her eyes today and see him with the same distressing clarity as she could see him then.
Jean Hill testified before the Warren Commission on March 24, 1964 in lengthy testimony in which she told of seeing the man in the brown coat running away but she did not tell of seeing the muzzle flash or seeing the policeman with the rifle.
Also, in her testimony, she said that she was embarrassed because before her testimony she had told others that she had seen a dog sitting between Mr and Mrs.
She said she found out after she had made this statement that it couldn’t have been true because there was no dog there.
She postulated that possibly she had seen a bunch of flowers instead of a . . dog.
Despite her disbelievers, Jean Hill has generally been considered to be a credible witness over the years.
In person, Hill appears to be a very bright person and still teaches school in Dallas.
To further illustrate the circuitous reporting of the HSCA, there is more testimony about Secret Service agents who shouldn’t have been at Dealey Plaza.
He must have been embarrassed that he didn’t ask them for their identification.
Of course it was speeding away and somebody said the shots or the firecrackers, whatever it was at that time, we still didn’t know the President was shot, came from the wall.
Yes, sir; I scaled the wall and, apparently, my hands rubbed steam pipes.
We noticed numerous kinds of footprints that did not make sense because they were going different directions.
And it strongly suggests that the men may have been Army intelligence agents.
Even if not, it is difficult to believe that the Secret Service would not have known of their presence.
It seems inescapable that the Secret Service deliberately left the area behind the picket fence open for the shooters.
It just happened that the Trade Mart site for the luncheon was selected on November 18 against the adamant recommendations of advance man Jerry Bruno.
It just happened that there was no effort made whatsoever to station security agents on the tall buildings around Dealey Plaza, or to see to it that all windows were closed, or to station an agent behind the shrubs and walls in Dealey Plaza.
It just happened that there were no Secret Service agents on the rear portion of the limousine to shield the president.
It just happened that there were no motorcycle escorts on either side of the limousine to shield the president.
It just happened that not one of the agents reacted to shield the president after the first shot rang out.
Jt just happened that reports and evidence of two different plots to kill the president were not transmitted to the Dallas field office by the Secret Service even though that information was transmitted to other field offices.
It just happened that the limousine slowed down to almost a complete halt in the perfect position for the shot from the grassy knoll and remained there until the fatal shot, while Secret Service agent Greer watched the back of the president’s head get blown out.
On its face, without a statistical calculation, it is ridiculously improbable that all of this is coincidental.
The involvement of the Secret Service in the assassination is a central piece of the puzzle.
But even so, the evidence concerning the Secret Service supports the conclusion of a conspiracy involving persons in the federal government planning the assassination before the fact.
Indeed, it makes sense that the first thought of any conspiratorial group would be to neutralize the protection of the president.
In the Kennedy case, the evidence shows a complex plan involving a sophisticated group who hired professional assassins.
If we could discover who it was that compromised the Secret Service and who was giving them their orders, many other pieces of the puzzle would quite probably fall into place.
One clue is that Chief Rowley, according to Vincent Palamara, was a good friend of J Edgar Hoover, who 630][631 was his former boss.
It is perhaps not coincidental that other key suspects in the assassination were former FBI employees—namely William Harvey and Guy Banister.
There has been much speculation on the subject of J Edgar Hoover’s using infiltration agents in other government departments and private groups.
After all, Hoover had a pathological need to know everything and control everything, as shall now be discussed.
What is most disturbing to me is that two agencies of the government—the CIA and FBI—that were supposed to be loyal and faithful to us, deliberately misled us.
The assassination of President Kennedy brought out the Hoover-Johnson team at its precision best.
As Congress cranked up to investigate the momentous crime, Johnson took over with the announcement that he was forming his own blue-ribbon commission of inquiry and had asked the FBI to investigate.
Less than three weeks after the assassination, far too little time to cover all the ground, Hoover handed the president a confidential summary report that concluded there was not a conspiracy.
Thus was the public inculcated with the “no conspiracy” theory, and the Warren Commission was handed it as a fait . accompli.
Even after Hoover’s death in 1972, the stonewalling by the FBI and the Department of Justice continued.
After completing its inquiry report in 1978, the HSCA recommended that the Justice Department should continue the investigation.
All the Justice Department did was hire consultants to attempt to undermine the acoustical evidence developed in the investigation whereby the HSCA had concluded there were at least two gunmen.
As recently as 1992, the Justice Department continued to stonewall, issuing an eight-page, single-spaced letter to the House of Representatives citing executive privilege as the basis for not opening all the Kennedy assassination files to the public.
As noted earlier, it is now known with certainty that Hoover’s FBI knew about the Joseph Milteer tape predicting Kennedy’s murder“ and failed to inform Kennedy that there were two very serious plans underway to assassinate him.
Hoover did inform the Secret Service, which bureaucratically was his duty.
But then the Secret Service failed to inform Kennedy, and also failed to inform its Dallas office of the threats.
Even more damning against Hoover is the fact that the FBI did nothing to pursue the Milteer matter after the assassination except to interview him on November 27, 1963, whereupon he denied involvement.
This interview had the effect of tipping off Milteer that Somersett was informing on him, thus destroying Somersett’s ability to get additional information from Milteer.33 What the FBI should have done, of course, was to have Somersett wired and once again engage Milteer to record what else could be obtained from him.
Adding to this, the FBI never told the Commission that it had received another message concerning a threat against Kennedy told to another of its informants, José Aleman, by Santo Trafficante in a private conversation that took place sometime in September 1962.
This information was not passed on by Hoover’s FBI to either President Kennedy or the Secret Service before the assassination and, later, the Warren Commission was not informed at at 38loni explosive evidence, tying the assassination directly to a Mafioso chieftain in Miami, was kept secret by Hoover.
In fact, J Edgar Hoover systematically kept from the Warren Commission any significant information or evidence whatsoever that the Mafia could have been involved in the assassination conspiracy.
This evidence was concealed despite the fact that Hoover and the FBI clearly knew there were major connections between Carlos Marcello, David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald, and the assassination.
For example, the FBI failed to inform the Warren Commission that FBI informant Eugene De Lapara had told the FBI about Marcello associate Ben Tregle’s foreknowledge of the assassination (Tregle had stated that “there is a price on the president’s head and other members of the Kennedy family.
Someone will kill Kennedy when he comes to the south’), even though FBI reports showed that De Lapara had furnished reliable information to the FBI in the past oo Within five days after the assassination there was a team of FBI agents in New Orleans that uncovered all of the foregoing evidence of a Mafia connection in a conspiracy to assassinate the president; this team was in a position to crack the case wide open if it had only pursued the evidence.
No mention of David Ferrie or Carlos Marcello was made to the Warren Commission in its supplemental report of January 13, 1964 L038) Another egregious example of proof that Hoover’s FBI engaged in suppression of potentially important evidence involves information received from FBI informant Gene Sumner.
Sumner was a respected FBI informant who later became mayor of Darien, Georgia.
On November 26, 1963, only four days after the assassination, Sumner informed the FBI that in March or April 1963 he saw someone resembling Lee Harvey Oswald accepting a payment from Joseph Poretto, the owner of the Town and Country Restaurant in New Orleans.
The Town and Country Restaurant was a known hangout for hoodlums and was owned in part by Carlos Marcello and managed by Poretto, who had a criminal record.
When Sumner was shown a photograph of Oswald, he reiterated his original allegation.
He asserted that the photograph resembled the individual he saw accepting the payment in New Orleans.
The FBI did not inform the Warren Commission of this obviously critical connection of Oswald to Carlos Marcello.
This was all documented in a series of teletypes from the FBI’s Savannah and New Orleans offices.
The FBI was in possession of the Zapruder film and the Nix film when they were altered.
It follows inescapably that the FBI altered these films themselves or cooperated with others to have it done.
Tippit solely on Oswald, when ballistic and testimonial evidence showed overwhelmingly that at least two people and two guns were involved.
J Edgar Hoover knew very soon after the assassination that separate shots had hit John Connally and Kennedy, therefore there had to be a conspiracy.
Hoover s knowledge of this fact was revealed in tapes of a conversation between Hoover and Lyndon Johnson on November 29, 1963.
The FBI cooperated with the CIA to suppress evidence of an Oswald impersonator in Mexico City, although tapes of a conversation between Hoover and Johnson reveal that Hoover knew there was an Oswald impersonator there.
Hunt because Hoover did not provide them with any of the material leading to Hunt that he had in his possession.
Hunt was the number-one suspect whose investigation would have exposed the Texas right wing’s involvement in the JFK plot and led to Hoover himself.
The FBI concealed the record of John Elrod’ arrest on November 22, 1963, thereby concealing the gun-running operation in Dallas involving John Thomas Masen, militant Cuban exiles, the Minutemen, and Jack Ruby.
The FBI did not reveal information in its possession shortly after the assassination about the French OAS terrorist Jean Souetre being in the Dallas-Fort Worth area on November 22, 1963, until forced to do so after notification from French intelligence.
On November 22, 1963, the FBI had in its possession numerous documents that would have provided the basis for the indictment of Gerry Patrick Hemming and his Interpen crew for the assassination of John F; Kennedy.
The FBI suppressed these documents and the evidence, or information, was never presented to the Warren Commission.
If this information had been made available, it would have revealed meetings between the Dallas right wing and Hemmings Interpen associates, and Hemming.
Based on investigations by the Justice Department after Hoover's death, Hoover had received financial favors from organized crime in the form of racetrack tips, information on fixed races, and hundreds of thousands of dollars of free rent for his annual vacations in La Jolla, through Clint Murchison, partner of organized crime in business ventures.
Hoover also had received “safe’”’ oil deal SAA through Clint Murchison.
KKK Of all the major participants in the assassination, Hoover stands out singularly as one person lacking redeeming human qualities.
Lyndon Johnson had redeeming human qualities, even the mobsters had likable qualities, but not J Edgar Hoover.
I searched the literature and found nothing good about his character except that he was devoted to his mother and Clyde Tolson and loved his dog.
Hoover was thoroughly despicable; he was a tyrant, a sadist, and a criminal.
Hoover was sixty-nine years old at the time of John Kennedy’s assassination.
He died of “a hypertensive condition” on May 2, 1972 at the age of seventy-seven, nine years after the assassination oe He died in his bed at home in an upper-class neighborhood in Washington.
Hoover had been head of the FBI for forty-six years—the only director since its inception.
He lived with his mother until her death, at which time he was forty-six years of age.
Except on rare occasions, he did not date a member of the opposite sex.
Many people in Washington, D.C., believed that Hoover was a closet homosexual.
This, if true, would leave him even more subject to blackmail and to a total loss of power if his secret were revealed to the general public.
Rumors were so prevalent and consistent that it became widely accepted as fact.
One basis for this suspicion was that he and his assistant director, Clyde Tolson, were inseparable intimates who saw each other seven days a week and took month long vacations together in La Jolla every year, where they shared a bungalow.
When in Washington, they dined together every Sunday night at Hoover’s home and every Monday night at Tolson’s apartment.
In 1993, when a major story on PBS television Frontline was aired, these rumors took on a reality supported by witnesses.
The television program was based on the book Official and Confidential by Anthony Summers.
Summers interviewed witnesses who personally observed Hoover in homosexual encounters with young men; witnesses who observed Hoover dressed as a woman; and a witness who had seen a photograph that was in the possession of the Mafia and the CIA showing Hoover in a homosexual act O44 Cartha DeLoach, a retired FBI official and one of Hoover’s principal agents involved in wiretapping and spreading of salacious material on Martin Luther King, Jr., appeared on Larry King Live on February 12, 1993 in a face-off with Anthony Summers.
As might be expected, DeLoach called Summers’ book slime and garbage and vigorously defended Hoover’s sexual status.
But the evidence is extremely convincing that Hoover was, in fact, a homosexual.
I had been somewhat reluctant to believe this, having been advised by one of my psychoanalyst consultants that Hoover could have been just an example of sexual repression, and that his relationship with Clyde Tolson could have been asexual.
However, in my discussions with people who should know, I could not find one person who did not take it for granted that Hoover was a homosexual.
But even if Hoover were not a homosexual and transvestite, it can be said without fear of exaggeration that he was pathologically preoccupied with the subject of sex.
When Hoover wanted to get something on his enemies, he almost invariably looked for a sex angle.
The irrevocable harm he did to people, illegally using United States government funds and exploiting his agents, bears telling in some detail because it reveals the depths of his depravity.
Hoover and the FBI had taped bedroom activities involving King and a variety of women.
Hoover sought to have this information leaked through various newspapers and magazines, but no one would touch it.
When it was officially announced that King had been given the Nobel Peace Prize, Hoover became enraged and the bureau went into serious action.
He sent transcriptions of the King tapes to the White House in the form of a thirteen-page printed booklet which ended up going to various department heads, including the secretary of state.
Then the idea emerged in the FBI to send this material directly to Mrs.
An anonymous letter was composed and a package was delivered to King’s office in Atlanta at a time when they knew he would be away and the package would be opened by Mrs.
The accompanying letter, sent sometime in mid November 1964, was composed in an effort, however ridiculous, to get Mr King to commit suicide.
You better take it before your filthy, abnormal fraudulent self is bared to the nation.
What we see here is the head of the nation’s police force attempting to wreck a man’s marriage or induce him to suicide using intimate material obtained from wiretaps by his federal agents—the workings of a deformed mind.
The obsessive hatred that Hoover had for Martin Luther King, Jr., is almost beyond understanding, let alone description.
Hunt that, according to Hunt’s top aide John Curington, took place in 1967 concerning King.
Curington revealed to Pepper that a much closer relationship between Hoover and Hunt existed than had heretofore been known—that their relationship went back to the 1950s when they were poker-playing friends who shared right-wing views.
Hunt that the only way to stop King was to “completely silence him’—the “final solution” as Pepper described it.
Curington was present at various meetings between the two men when Martin Luther King was discussed.
King, Hoover’s animosity was more passionate and obsessive, more personal.
Hoover regularly provided Hunt with a considerable amount of documentation and material to be used as ammunition against Dr.
King in the oil baron’s extreme right-wing, daily nationally syndicated Life Line radio broadcasts.
King was a favorite and a regular target of Life Line venom, and Hoover provided the poison.
At that meeting in Hunt’s hotel room, he recalled Hunt telling Hoover that he could finish King by constantly attacking him on his daily radio broadcasts.
He said the only way to stop King would be to “completely silence” him.
After King’s murder, Hunt acknowledged to Curington that Hoover had won that argument.
He also said that the old man had a private telephone that he kept in his desk drawer.
It was on this phone that he would receive and occasionally place phone calls about sensitive matters.
Other political allies of Hunt, and the beneficiaries of his largess, across the nation, included John Connally in Texas and Senator James Eastland of Mississippi, who headed the right-wing Senate Internal Security Subcommittee.
Curington said that all these people received payoffs or unrecorded contributions from Hunt, delivered in a variety of ways.
Connally or Eastland, for example, might sell cattle to Hunt, who would vastly overpay them.
He said that a Louisiana state official was the conduit for cash payments to Jimmy Hoffa and the Teamsters Union, whose assistance was bought for the purpose of dealing with labor problems at any of the Hunt operations.
In one instance, Hoffa actually pulled the union out of a Hunt operation in Muncie, Indiana.
The Teamsters connections were often used to beat up or kill people who created problems at any of the Hunt operations.
Hunt’s daily liaison with President Lyndon Johnson on political matters was former FBI agent Booth Mooney, who was personally close to the president.
Mooney not only delivered communications back and forth between Johnson and Hunt but also wrote over ; . half of the Life Line broadcast tracts, including many of those attacking Dr.
O46 Emphasis added) I have avoided getting into the Martin Luther King, Jr., assassination in this book except briefly where I felt compelled to bring certain aspects into the context of the JFK assassination.
I have not been a student of the King assassination but the evidence of Hoover’s involvement is very compelling.
Pepper, a barrister from England, has long been an attorney for James Earl Ray and spent many years researching and writing his book.
Pepper’s book presents convincing evidence and documentation that the King assassination was a joint effort of the FBI and Army intelligence with cooperation from the Memphis police.
As Pepper describes the King assassination, I see it as almost a mirror image of the JFK assassination—that is, a patsy , a planted rifle, military intelligence involvement, and the Mafia in the form of Carlos Marcello in New Orleans.
AP/Wide World Photos Hoover fed Richard Nixon material on Alger Hiss that led directly to Hiss’s conviction.
This propelled the young Nixon into the national spotlight and launched his career to the presidency.
UPI/Bettmann The FBI director kept massive files on the Kennedys from the time JFK was a young officer in the Navy when Hoover’s FBI recorded an affair with a woman alleged to have been a Nazi spy.
Hoover is the one who blew the whistle on JFK’s affair with Judith Exner.
AP/Wide World Photos President Johnson reaches up to put his arm around J Edgar Hoover, Director of the FBI, as they met in the Speaker’s Office after the Chief Executive’s speech to a night Joint Session of Congress on March 15, 1965.
The President appealed to Congress to enact without delay legislation guaranteeing Negro voting rights.
UPI/Corbis-Bettmann An important aspect of Pepper’s interview with John Curington is the close relationship between H L Hunt and Hoover that Curington revealed.
Hunt’s organization, which included retired Army intelligence General Charles Willoughby (another man “capable of anything”) and his worldwide right-wing anti-Communist apparatus.
Think of Hunt’s own paramilitary groups and his connections to the Minutemen and their splinter groups of even more extreme persuasion.
Hunt’s control of the city of Dallas and his linkages with organized crime in Dallas and elsewhere.
Then think of J Edgar Hoover and his secret files and his having been compromised by organized crime, and Hoover’s vast organization of agents, wire-tappers, expert snipers, crime laboratories, and photographic laboratories.
Think of Lyndon Johnson, who would become president upon Kennedy’s assassination, and who had the power and political cunning to manipulate Congress, the Supreme Court, the Executive Branch, and the military.
Think of Lyndon Johnson’s documented history of utter ruthlessness to seize power using any means necessary—legal or illegal.
And all three of these men hated John F Kennedy, were pathologically extreme personalities, were driven by obsessive needs for power, and wanted Kennedy gone.
Getting back to Hoover’s obsession with protecting his image, we have another example that occurred when he learned that a magazine publisher was considering an exposé of the FBI and Hoover.
Hoover obtained and selectively distributed compromising photographs showing the publisher’s wife engaged in fellatio with her black chauffeur while parked in Washington’s Rock Creek Park.
The identity of the woman was very clear and her name could be identified through the car’s distinctive license plates.
The publisher quickly capitulated and sent his personal representative to the FBI to beg Hoover, through Hoover’s representative, Louis Nichols , to back off.
Unfortunately, this episode did not remain confidential, and the bureau chief was humiliated by the stories being bandied about the capital.
Once Franklin Roosevelt was dead, Hoover went to work on attacking his new “enemy,” Eleanor, by leaking outlandish stories about her alleged love affairs with various men and women.
Hoover’s use of scurrilous material and lies to smear anyone who crossed him continued unabated.
Another victim was Representative Cornelius E Gallagher, Democrat from New Jersey.
Mr Speaker, this is corruption at its worst and its central figure is J Edgar Hoover.
It is he whose unchecked reign of absolute power has intimidated this Congress to the extent that a serious question has not been asked about his management of the FBI for 10 years—maybe longer.
Hoover, knowing the congressman’s interest in this matter, had maneuvered to involve him in bureaucratic infighting that would embarrass former Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who had authorized the installation of FBI wiretaps.
In 1967 a mysterious burglary at Gallagher’s house involved theft only of documents; police told the congressman it was “an FBI job 22 In August 1968 Hoover planted a story with Life magazine that Gallagher had connections with organized crime.
Hoover then leaked a story around town that a minor mob figure had died of a seizure while making love to the congressman’s wife.
The threat of attack apparently worked, because the scurrilous material was never published and the spreading of the rumor about Gallagher’s wife stopped.
The congressman never carried out his threat to make the speech, but the rumors about his wife were never fully cleared.
But before Hoover was through, Gallagher was obliged to plead guilty to one count of tax evasion and was sentenced to two years in jail.
Hoover’s FBI had destroyed the congressman’s credibility and his political future even before he rose to give the speech which accused Hoover of being the American Beria.
In 1986, when Roy Cohn was dying of complications from AIDS, he signed a statement which affirmed that Gallagher’s statements concerning the entire slander episode were truthful 42°21 Another episode occurred following the Kennedy assassination when a certain writer was becoming famous for his book which criticized the findings of the Warren Commission.
At the time, Hoover was investigating authors of several books that were critical of the Warren Commission Report.
Hoover obtained photographs of this author with some prostitutes in an apparent sado-masochistic session in which one of the prostitutes was sticking pins into the head of the author’s erect penis.
As noted earlier, Hoover’s destruction of anyone who crossed him, or anyone whom he perceived as a political enemy, extended beyond the sex realm into the “Communist smear,” which reached its zenith during the reign of Joseph McCarthy and Richard Nixon.
Hoover was the source of McCarthy’s material, which McCarthy waved in front of TV cameras, smearing anyone he could identify as being a proCommunist or Communist sympathizer, irrespective of the facts and the truth; and Hoover provided Nixon with his Communist smear material which eventually catapulted him to the presidency.
Hunt, and Willoughby, was still alive in 1963 when John Kennedy was assassinated +4 Hoover looked upon Kennedy as a soft-headed liberal dilettante who was selling out to the Communists and who was an adulterer and a playboy.
Kennedy thus came under the double-headed attack of being soft on communism and having loose morals.
The extent of Hoover’s abuse of his power and position—his illegal use of public funds for his personal life and his use of the public treasury to blackmail major public figures in the United States—is so extensive and so widely documented that it would take hundreds of pages to cover it in its hideous detail.
He even investigated the sex life of actor Rock Hudson when there was no reason at all to believe that Rock Hudson was a menace to this country.
Hoover’s secret files on government officials, celebrities, and powerful people were widely known to exist among knowledgeable circles in Washington, many from having been subjected to the brunt of them.
His files on the personal matters of powerful people were sequestered in one of his eight offices in his personal suite in the FBI building.
Hoover’s secretary of thirty-six years, Helen Gandy, claims she destroyed only those files that were related to his personal business and personal matters and then turned all other files over to Attorney General Edward Levi.
There is also reason to believe that the most secret files were removed from Hoover’s home in Washington, D.C., and taken to the Blue Ridge Club near Harper’s Ferry, West Virginia, where John Mohr, an FBI official, and his cronies held poker parties.
When Senate investigators decided to inspect the club, it burned down the night before their scheduled visit.
One they identified as James Crawford [an FBI employee], another as John Mohr.
Angleton occasionally played poker with Mohr and his group at the Blue Ridge Chup “28H Mohr denied under oath that he took any of the files from Hoover’s 30th Street residence, but he made one exception.
It was an interesting clue, if Angleton meant it as that, because most of Hoover’s files on Donovan are missing.
Only a few hundred pages remain of what must have been thousands, and they do not include most of the derogatory material that aides say Hoover amassed on his longtime nemesis.
Some believe that Hoover’s most secret files still exist somewhere and are being used as tools of power.
William Sullivan, Hoover’s assistant director, gave an example when he implied that the files on Senator Sam Ervin kept him from inquiring too deeply into the FBI’s role during the Watergate hearings.
The evidence is overwhelming that J Edgar Hoover illegally participated in a massive effort to pin the crime of President Kennedy’s assassination on a lone assassin and to conceal the involvement of the Mafia and the Dallas police in the conspiracy.
It is true beyond a reasonable doubt that Hoover was an accessory to the crime of assassinating the president of the United States, before and after the fact, and should have been sent to prison.
He knew the assassination was going to happen and did nothing to stop it.
He knew that there was a conspiracy and did everything in his power to conceal it, including tampering with and destruction of evidence.
Hoover hated Robert Kennedy, had utter disrespect for John Kennedy, and was on his way out of his cherished position as director of the FBI and knew it.
Once Kennedy was reelected in 1964, Hoover faced the very likely prospect of being dismissed before the end of Kennedy’s second term.
They undoubtedly knew of Hoover’s homosexuality and knew that they had this over his head, and that it would keep Hoover’s mouth shut about Kennedy’s womanizing.
Hoover therefore had powerful personal motivations to see Kennedy gone.
It seems very plausible, even inescapable, that Hoover realized that if he were removed as the head of the FBI he would lose his power to conceal his own personal secrets and would be finished.
Hoover also knew that the financial favors he had received from the Mafia over the years would ultimately be exposed if Robert Kennedy were left to his maniacal drive to put Jimmy Hoffa and Mafia chieftains in prison.
Also, perhaps most critical of all, the plotters logically would not have proceeded with the assassination of the president of the United States had they not been confident that Hoover’s response would be thoroughly protective of their role as perpetrators.
They had him fully compromised, if for no other reason than the free bungalow in La Jolla used by Hoover and Tolson over the years, and the race track fixes that Frank Costello had arranged for Hoover.
And it is very compelling to me that Anthony Summers is right about Hoover, that the Mafia and the CIA had a photograph of Hoover and Tolson in a homosexual act.
Hoover and Tolson stayed in the same bungalow in La Jolla every year; a bungalow provided by Clint Murchison, who was a business partner of Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia.
It would have been a simple matter for the Mafia to get such a photograph.
All they had to do was hire a private detective to take care of it for them.
It was their standard practice to compromise law-enforcement officials and politicians.
I have concluded that the evidence clearly and convincingly shows that Hoover was a part of the plot to murder John F Kennedy almost from the beginning—a plot designed, of course, with ultimate care to provide Hoover with perfect, plausible deniability.
Perhaps he didn’t know the complete details of the plot, but, again, that is an integral part of plausible deniability.
At an absolute minimum, I believe that Hoover knew that John Kennedy was going to be assassinated and was aware of the general outline of the plot.
It would not surprise me at all to learn someday that Hoover was in the master plan up to his eyeballs, the archfiend behind it.
Those who would like to exonerate Hoover from being part of the plot and participating in the coverup solely to protect his image are, of course, free to do so; but I for one would not bet one dollar on it.
After years of meeting first-rate minds in and out of universities, I am sure I have never met a more intelligent person than Lyndon Johnson—intelligent in terms of sheer IQ, a clear, swift, penetrating mind, with an abundance of its own type of imagination and subtleties.
Eric F Goldman, The Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson (Special consultant to President Lyndon B Johnson from December 1963 until September 1966) 31 LYNDON JOHNSON Reasons for suspecting that Lyndon Johnson was part of the conspiracy begin with the fact that Johnson stood to gain the most from the death of President Kennedy.
It is not being asked by the Warren Commission, for all one knows at this time.
Joesten went on to say that never bothering to ask that all-important question alone stamped the Warren Commission’s seemingly painstaking investigation as a fraud.
Find the person who stands to benefit the most from any given crime and you have found the most likely suspect.
Find the person who stands to /ose everything if the crime is not committed and you have found the most likely suspect.
First, we must take into account that Johnson was deeply involved in the planning and knew the details of Kennedy’s trip to Dallas.
Hunt and J Edgar Hoover formed the most powerful and ruthless combination in United States history.
This was simply a matter of insuring that the site for the luncheon speech was the Trade Mart, which provided an excuse for the motorcade to go down Elm Street into an ideal crossfire setting, passing by Oswald’s workplace.
Hunt and powerful rightwing Democrats in Dallas and with a little help from the Secret Service, the arrangements could have been made.
Also, of no small consequence, Johnson despised Kennedy and apart from that had a personal obsession, bordering on the pathological, to become president of the United States L051 In criminal investigations, if a person actively attempts to cover up a crime and is a prime suspect in terms of motive, means, and opportunity, it is considered tantamount to proof of guilt.
Since Johnson had the motive and, above all others, the means and opportunity, it follows that the first place to look is the evidence concerning his cover-up actions immediately after Kennedy was assassinated.
In so doing, we can keep in mind that Johnson did not have Hoover’s reason to cover up.
Unlike Hoover, no one would have blamed Johnson’s incompetence for the president’s death.
Within seventy-two hours, the limousine was shipped to Cincinnati where it was completely re-built—clearly a destruction of material evidence.
This was all done through someone who had the power to issue sweeping orders and to have them obeyed without question.
This type of commandeering of evidence was a violation of the laws of Texas and was a federal crime.
By federal and state law, JFK’s autopsy should have been performed in Dallas, and the case should have been prosecuted and tried in the state of Texas.
The unprecedented seizure of evidence could perhaps be benignly explained by Lyndon Johnson’s deep suspicion that the conspiracy originated in Texas and therefore he had to seize all the evidence to get it out of the hands of the culprits.
But a more sinister and believable explanation is that the evidence was seized so that it could be totally under the control of Lyndon Johnson and he could be certain that there would not be a real investigation.
A good example of how the case was influenced involves Dallas District Attorney Henry Wade, who would have been in charge of the investigation and prosecution in Dallas had he not been stopped on the orders of Lyndon Johnson.
On November 23, 1963 the Dallas Morning News carried a story quoting Wade as saying that preliminary reports indicated more than one person was involved in the shooting.
But Wade’s story changed after he received a telephone call from Johnson’s aide, Cliff Carter.
Cliff Carter, President Johnson’s aide, called me three times from the White House that Friday night.
He said that President Johnson felt any word of a conspiracy—some plot by foreign nations— to kill President Kennedy would shake our nation to its foundation.
President Johnson was worried about some conspiracy on the part of the Russians.
Oswald had all sorts of connections and affections toward Castro’s Cuba.
Washington’s word to me was that it would hurt foreign relations if I alleged a conspiracy—whether I could prove it or not.
I would just charge Oswald with plain murder and go for the death penalty.
So, I went down to the Police Department at City Hall to see Captain Fritz—to make sure the Dallas police didn’t involve any foreign country in the assassination.
The day after the Zapruder film of the assassination had been shown on national television for the first time , retired police captain Will Fritz and a small circle of old political cronies and businessmen were conversing over lunch when the discussion turned to the TV presentation of the Zapruder film and the renewed interest in the JFK murder.
Fritz began to reminisce about his role in the events of that terrible weekend.
The captain though, continued to conduct the investigation until late Saturday, when he received a person-to-person telephone call from the new President.
As Fritz put it to his circle of friends, “But when the President of the United States called me and ordered the investigation stopped, what could I doy t808l Gary Shaw noted that more research should be done to confirm the above.
She responded by giving me two names of retired Dallas police officers to call.
He remembered the lunch and confirmed that Captain Fritz had told that story, that Lyndon Johnson had called and ordered Captain Fritz to pull off questioning Oswald.
He said that in “a couple of more hours he’d have broken Oswald, but they pulled Oswald out.
He said that he didn’t remember being at that lunch, but that he had attended luncheons with Fritz and other officers and that subject hadn’t come up.
Now I did ask him one time—I say think I asked him—he was not one to volunteer a lot of information.
So I asked him one time, I can’t remember just about how I put it to him, just he and I were sitting in the office one day talking about something else and this came up.
He never indicated to me for sure that—he didn’t tell me outright —that the president had called him.
But I feel like that he did, but I have no way of proving that; I don’t have any personal knowledge that he did.
Leavelle said that Frank Harrell and Captain Fritz did get together once in awhile, but as to what Fritz may have said to Frank he had no way of knowing.
Leavelle remembered that when Chief Curry told Captain Fritz that the FBI was going to take over, “the captain put up quite a bit of argument’; that he “fought furiously about it,” but the chief said, “Cap, this is a direct order.
Its implication as to Johnson’s involvement in the assassination conspiracy scarcely requires explanation.
Lyndon Johnson also got directly in the act when he made an astonishing call from Washington, D.C., to Parkland Hospital and asked to talk with one of the doctors working on Oswald after he had been shot.
As I was turning around, a nurse tapped me on the shoulder and asked if I would take a telephone call in the supervisor’s office.
She had chosen me to take the call because I was the head of Surgical “B,” the team that began the operation.
Then, more questions followed, inquiries that had frightening, inconceivable answers“ It is indeed strange that Johnson should be making such a call personally.
It seems that he must have been extremely anxious and in a state of desperation about something.
An obvious explanation is not that he was genuinely trying to seek a confession from Oswald.
After all, he had called the Dallas Police to stop the interrogation of Oswald, obviously to keep him from talking.
It seems more likely that Johnson’s strange telephone call was to create an image of himself as a man who believed in Oswald’s guilt; an image that he, Johnson, believed that Oswald’s dying words would be that he, Oswald, had acted alone.
One would think that Johnson would have known that fact, if, as he said, he had a man there in the room who could have taken a confession.
Common sense tells us that Johnson probably knew that there was little possibility of Oswald saying anything to anybody, and made the call to create history favorable to himself.
On the other hand, Johnson could have been paranoid, fearful that if Oswald survived, or could say anything, he would provide evidence for a conspiracy, with some details.
Perhaps Johnson’s anxiety became unbearable as he pondered the possibility, no matter how slight, that Oswald would regain consciousness and start talking, and Johnson wanted his man there to control the situation, who was privy to the information.
So in his inimitable fashion, Johnson grabbed the telephone to call the emergency room at Parkland Hospital.
Add to this the fact that Johnson lied to Jacqueline Kennedy when he told her that Robert Kennedy had suggested he take the oath of office in Dallas.
Robert Kennedy was surprised when he heard this and said that he had made no such suggestion.
Johnson lied again on this subject in his deposition to the Warren Commission when he stated that Robert Kennedy had asked him to take the oath immediately in Dallas.
Johnson had proposed the idea on the telephone to Robert Kennedy, who was taken aback.
He agreed only to call Johnson back to answer his question “Who could swear me in’ Loft Johnson again lied in his Warren Commission affidavit when he said that Ken O’ Donnell, Kennedy’s aide, had twice urged him to take the presidential plane back to Washington—because it had better communications equipment.
Johnson said that “he consented, with the stipulation that he would wait there until Mrs.
O’Donnell denied this, telling author William Manchester that he had no conversation regarding Air Force One, and adding that if the Kennedy party had known that Johnson was going on Air Force One they would have taken Air Force Two.
He said Air Force Two was an exact duplicate of Air Force One in all respects <1 Johnson’s insistence on taking the oath in Dallas and delaying the flight back to Washington raises the suspicion that he wanted to take control of Kennedy’s body, which was also placed on Air Force One.
Also, by having the photo opportunity of standing beside Jacqueline Kennedy for the swearing-in ceremony, Johnson achieved an initial statement of succession in office that appeared, at least on the surface, to be in harmony with the Kennedy family.
Better to have them in his dominion than in another plane flying back to Washington where they could get their heads together and possibly start asking serious questions.
One would think that it would be all-important for Johnson to get back to the White House and assume the complex duties of governing the nation in its time of shock, confusion, and grief.
Johnson, however, held up the flight for over an hour and a half until Kennedy’s body was aboard Air Force One and Oswald had been captured; and, not insignificantly, Johnson had been formally sworn in—perhaps to eliminate any possibility of a revolt on the part of the Kennedy camp had they gotten organized and had they had an opportunity to confer with Robert Kennedy back in Washington before a formal swearing-in.
There was no need whatsoever for Johnson to delay the flight and subject Jacqueline Kennedy to the agony of his presence in the formal succession.
Immediately after the assassination, Johnson ordered that the entire investigation be conducted by the FBI under the supervision of J Edgar Hoover.
Furthermore, he ordered all other investigations by federal government or local government to be stopped.
This placed Johnson in virtual control of the investigation through J Edgar Hoover, who detested the Kennedys and had everything to gain by John Kennedy’s death, and everything to lose if Kennedy lived.
One of Johnson’s first acts after the assassination was to float the idea of creating a Texas Commission consisting solely of Texans to investigate the assassination.
When this created objections, Johnson backed off and formed the Warren Commission, appointing all the members himself under the guidance of J Edgar Hoover.
Thus, we have the commission investigating the crime but the evidence supplied to them completely under the control of Lyndon Johnson.
How unbelievable, when Johnson should have been a prime suspect, by all standards and precedence in criminology.
Thus, by having a medical team who knew nothing or next to nothing about conducting autopsies and having this medical team consisting of government employees who were under oath to do what they were told by their superiors, Johnson’s control of the autopsy was, he must have thought, assured.
It defies common sense that all of this could have gone on without his knowing about it.
Lyndon Johnson’s Strange and Venal Character In a court of law, evidence to establish proof of other crimes committed by the accused, if in context, or in a conspiracy, is considered admissible if it sheds light on the person’s capability and motive to commit the crime at issue.
For years, men came into Lyndon Johnson’s office and handed him envelopes stuffed with cash.
They didn’t stop coming even when the office in which he sat was the office of the Vice President of the United States.
Halfen revealed that his Mafia franchise network had given Johnson $500,000 in cash contributions over a ten-year period while Johnson was in the Senate.
For that, Johnson used his considerable influence to kill anti-racket bills and thwart investigations of organized crime.
Halfen substantiated his accusations against Johnson with a letter from Johnson to the Texas Board of Parole on Halfen’s behalf, with photographs showing Johnson and Halfen and other Texas politicians on a private hunting trip L821 There is another sinister series of events that points to the possibility that Lyndon Johnson was capable of participating in a plot to murder.
This involved a Texan named Billie Sol Estes, who along with Lyndon Johnson was being implicated in a major scandal— “the most gigantic swindle and scandal in the history of Texas,” as described by Johnson biographer J Evetts Haley L831 Among other things, the scandal involved Estes’ acquiring millions in federal cotton allotment payments on land which was under water or was actually owned by the government.
Estes was also implicated in a scheme involving fraudulent borrowings on thousands of nonexistent fertilizer tanks—15,000 alleged tanks in one county alone— with chattel mortgages of more than $34 million in the several Texas counties involved, most of which was fictitiously financed with false mortgage papers.
John Down, conducted an investigation on his own and, with an associate, purchased a newspaper, the Pecos Independent and Enterprise, to expose the scandal in a series of three articles Sth. articles brought a Pulitzer Prize to Oscar Griffen, the editor of the newspaper.
The Estes scandals were being investigated by Henry Marshall, a Department of Agriculture official who was interested in Estes’ connections with Lyndon Johnson.
But before any official action could be taken, Marshall was shot dead and found in a remote section of his farm near Franklin, Texas.
He had been shot five times in the stomach by a bolt-action, .22 caliber rifle that lay near the body.
In what was common Texas justice at the time, a local justice of the peace ruled that Marshall’s death was a suicide— without the benefit of an autopsy.
Later, after Marshall’s widow violently protested and after public complaints, Marshall’s body was exhumed.
New tests showed that in addition to the five bullets to the stomach, Marshall had also received—before his death—a severe blow to his head and was asphyxiated with carbon monoxide 32 Estes ultimately went to prison (although he was never charged with the murder of Marshall), and one year after his release from prison testified before a grand jury concerning the death of Marshall.
Estes linked Vice President Johnson and two other men to the execution of Henry Marshall.
Two years ago this month, convicted swindler Billie Sol Estes told a startling tale to a grand jury in rural Robertson County.
The legendary con man claimed Lyndon B Johnson, about to become vice president, had ordered the 1961 murder of United States Agriculture Department agent Henry H Marshall.
Estes said the future president was fearful Marshall, of Bryan, could link Johnson aide Clifton Carter—and thus Johnson —to Estes’ fraudulent activities.
Wallace had been convicted of murder with malice in the 1951 killing of Austin golf pro J Doug Kinser.
But back in Austin, Kinser, the thirty-three-year-old golf professional, was going with Lyndon’s sister Josefa.
In what was apparently a jealous rage, the thirty-year-old Wallace drove up to the Pitch and Putt golf course where Kinser worked and shot him dead.
The jury found Wallace guilty “of murder with malice aforethought” but, incredibly, “after one of the briefest and most perfunctory trials of a prominent murder case on record, even in Texas,” the jury decided on a penalty of 5 only a five-year suspended sentence—for murder in the first degree.
According to the Dallas Times Herald article, the prosecuting attorney in the case was also an LBJ ally.
The Austin Statesman commented that this case was “marked from the start to finish by the unusual...and had left the people of Austin shocked and quizzical -to8H The extreme nature of Lyndon Johnson’s obsession for power and his willingness to do anything to achieve it went back to his days at Southwest State Teachers College in San Marcos, Texas.
A ruthless use thereafter of political power in San Marcos made faculty members and classmates reluctant to discuss those aspects of his career.
This bizarre image of Johnson as a young man, arranging to have pages cut out of his college yearbook to protect his reputation, strikes one as being highly apropos to what occurred in the Kennedy assassination—extraordinary, fantastic manipulations of people and evidence—all fitting a weird pattern of criminality that Johnson began to exhibit as a young man in college.
Another example of Johnson’s pattern of peculiar behavior was described by President Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, in her book Kennedy and Johnson.
Mr Johnson, on the other hand, started out, from the very beginning, to spend as much time as he possibly could around the White House.
There were two doors in my office that opened out on the colonnade that led to the South Lawn.
Mr Johnson chose to enter the West Wing through one of the doors of my office.
Nearly every morning he would open that door, grunt and pause for a moment to look around to see what was going on.
He would look into the President’s office to see if Mr Kennedy was there, or pause to talk to people who came in and out of my office.
One morning he was a little late coming through the door and when he arrived Mr Kennedy was standing near my desk.
They exchanged greetings and Mr Johnson proceeded on his way to the hall.
I checked and learned that Mr Johnson’s driver let him out near the sidewalk leading to the President’s office on the South Lawn.
He would then walk up that sidewalk past the President’s office to the door of my office.
From my office he went out into the hall which led to the reception room.
It was only a short distance from that room to his office in the Executive Office Building across the street.
By coming into my office, Mr Johnson was creating the image of working closely with Mr Kennedy at all times, especially if he was in the outer office when any of the Cabinet men or other officials came in.
Also, when he came out into the reception room from the area of the President’s office the press would obviously get the same impression.
With these examples of Johnson’s Machiavellian nature, it becomes easier to believe that his holding Air Force One on the ground in Dallas until his image as president was broadcast to the world, with Jacqueline Kennedy’s tacit consent and approval, was not a spontaneous act, but rather was part of a carefully crafted plan.
Stories of Lyndon Johnson’s viciousness and cruelty prevail among virtually all who knew him.
In all instances this cruelty was directed at subordinates who were in Johnson’s thrall; or hapless, powerless victims.
What’s more, Johnson was openly proud of his ability to “break” people.
He would deliberately set out to destroy a rival, or someone who threatened him, or simply an unfortunate person, just for the fun of it; and nothing would stop him, no act was too gross or inhuman, until he had succeeded in whipping his target into abject submission or humiliation.
At the same time, Johnson would indulge in obsequious flattering and attentiveness to those who had power over him or could help him in his pursuit of power and control.
Robert Caro describes Johnson’s pattern of ingratiating himself with those in power, attaching himself to them until he could rise above or succeed them.
At San Marcos College he became the favorite of the college’s president, Cecil E Evans, who was LBJ’s protector and promoter in campus politics, while at the same time Johnson was loathed and ridiculed by the student body.
His list of mentors grew to include President Franklin D ; Roosevelt, who became another admirer and promoter of Johnson.
People in power were spared the wrath and cruelty that Johnson heaped with incredible venom on those who were dependent on him for security or emotional needs.
Johnson’s jealousy and contempt for John and Robert Kennedy were commonly known in 1963.
Johnson was offered the vice presidential nomination after he was defeated in his run for the presidency in the Democratic Convention in 1960.
After Johnson first feigned reluctance to accept the vice presidential position and the Kennedys had second thoughts, Robert Kennedy tried to withdraw the offer, but LBJ reportedly begged and cried for it until Robert reluctantly gave in after a phone call to John Kennedy.
By the fall of 1963, rumors were rife that Johnson would be dumped from the 1964 Democratic national ticket.
In fact, on the day he left for Dallas President Kennedy told his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, that Johnson would not be the vice president during Kennedy’s second term.
Robert Kennedy confirmed this in an interview with historian Arthur Schlesinger, in which he said that President Kennedy told him on November 21, 1963—the night before the assassination—that Johnson was incapable of telling the truth.
Robert Kennedy went on to say, “And my experience with him since then is that he lies all the time.
And by 1941, also the major patterns of his entire life are established and clear.
In attaining this influence, he has displayed a genius for discerning a path to power, an utter ruthlessness in destroying obstacles in that path, and a seemingly bottomless capacity for deceit, deception and betrayal in moving along it, -rO28 The pattern of Johnson’s predilection for corruption would continue into his presidency, as exemplified by the Bobby Baker affair.
It was partly because of this scandal that Johnson was expected to be dumped by President Kennedy from the second spot on the 1964 Democratic ticket.
Bobby Baker’s corruption resulted in Baker ultimately being sent to prison on seven counts of tax evasion, theft, and fraud involving nearly $100,000 in political payoff money.
Bobby Baker was in position, with influence to peddle, and he believed in peddling it at a profit.
On a $19,600 job, he had ina relatively few years parlayed his influence into a two million dollar estate.
Meanwhile, the calculating Kennedy brothers, the cold and ruthless Attorney General and the President, adept themselves at midnight maneuver, knew what was going on.
They, their ivy leaguers and their Irish mafia, had never trusted Lyndon and had never been happy with the political shotgun wedding that had dictated his choice as running mate.
Who’s that?”— ”’Where’s he?”’....the evidence seems conclusive that the Kennedys had decided to ditch him as their running mate in the coming election—despite all the usual disclaimers to the contrary.
The sharpest political observers in Washington were dead convinced of their design, to be effected probably in January.
The Kennedys calculated the way in which to make him a thorough political liability, even beyond Democratic redemption, was to expose his close friend whom he had made Secretary to the Democratic Majority—this free-wheeling peddler of everything from favors for organized gamblers to the ardor of the fairest and youngest in public prostitution.
In a press conference on November 14, 1963, President Kennedy was asked about the Bobby Baker scandal.
Mr Baker is now being investigated, and I think we will have a good deal more about Mr Baker before we are through.
We just try to do the best we can OO Evelyn Lincoln wrote that the day President Kennedy left for Dallas they discussed the Bobby Baker case and the effects of the scandal on the campaign.
I was fascinated by this conversation and wrote it down verbatim in my diary.
I was also glad that I could be a part of the goals and ambitions he was striving for in the future.
He looked straight ahead, and without hesitating he replied, “At this time I am thinking about Governor Terry Sanford of North Carolina.
It had been my feeling for quite a while that Lyndon Johnson would not be the Vice-Presidential candidate in the next campaign.
The hush on Baker may be explained by a conversation between Johnson and House Speaker John McCormack as reported in The Washington Payoff by ex-Washington lobbyist Robert WinterBerger.
On February 4, 1964, Winter-Berger was discussing public relations with McCormack in McCormack’s Washington office.
President Johnson then barged in and began ranting hysterically, Winter-Berger reported, oblivious to the lobbyist’s presence.
I practically raised that motherfucker, and now he’s gonna make me the first President of the United States to spend the last days of his life behind bars.
When Johnson finally noticed Winter-Berger’s presence, McCormack explained that the visiting lobbyist was a close friend of Nat Voloshen, who was a Mob fixer of enormous influence.
Tell Nat that I want him to get in touch with Bobby Baker as soon as possible—tomorrow if he can.
Tell Nat to tell Bobby that I will give hima million dollars if he takes this rap.
Johnson seems to have believed that even as president of the United States he would have been sent to the penitentiary had his role in the scandal been uncovered.
Imagine how he must have felt before the assassination when he was only the vice president and was about to be dropped from the ticket.
It certainly appears that he considered his very survival to be at stake unless the Bobby Baker scandal was squelched.
For the roots of the drama undoubtedly go back to the 1960 Convention, as I have already set forth, what the Baker affair did was to crystallize the more or less vague plans to eliminate Kennedy which had already been in existence.
The murder of a president is hazardous business under the best of circumstance.
The threat of complete exposure which faced Johnson in the Baker scandal provided that final impulse.
He now was forced by the instinct of self-preservation to give the go-ahead signal to the plotters who had long been waiting for the right opportunity.
Counter Arguments In light of the damning activities of Lyndon Johnson immediately following the assassination, we should ask ourselves if there is possibly some explanation for Johnson’s actions, other than that he was part of the conspiracy from beginning to end.
So let us look at several possible levels of involvement or scenarios in the conspiracy that could explain Johnson’s behavior after the assassination.
First, we can examine the hypothesis that Johnson did not know about the assassination in advance.
To do this, we have to arbitrarily, without any reason to do so, set aside Madeleine Brown’s incriminating statement concerning Johnson’s advanced knowledge of the plot and his description of the plotters—that is, United States intelligence and Texas oil men.
We then could conceivably explain his behavior as a fearful reaction that the American people could not deal with the truth; that there were real possibilities of foreign conspirators that could lead to a nuclear war; and that Johnson, in his presidential role, should embark on a cover-up to support the lone-assassin hoax.
Shepard had been one of John Kennedy’s top military aides at the time of the assassination; he was one of the first persons to brief Johnson when he returned from Dallas on November 22, 1963.
I had written to the admiral in preparation for the interview and asked him several questions, one of which was whether or not there was a palpable sense of fear in the White House of an imminent nuclear war because of the assassination.
He went on to say, “The reason that I can say this is that I know what that feeling is like.
Admiral Shepard, who was in a position to know, also told me that, contrary to any accounts, Kennedy had always treated Lyndon Johnson very well and with respect.
When I questioned the admiral about the autopsy and casket switch, he knew nothing of any decoy ambulance or casket switches.
He said that Admiral Burkley was the one to talk to about the autopsy; but Burkley was dead.
The evidence in this book shows that Johnson knew very well that the Soviets were not involved i and that he should have seen through the obviously false evidence of Cuban involvement.
In fact, on November 30, 1963 we know he was informed by John McCone, head of the CIA, that its investigation had shown that the evidence in Mexico City of Cuban involvement was false.
Also, as noted earlier, recently released HSCA testimony of CIA’s high-ranking officer John Scelso reveals that his initial report within two days after the assassination informed Richard Helms that Cuba and the Soviet Union were not involved in the assassination, and that Helms forwarded the report to President Johnson.
This demolishes any argument that Johnson’s actions in the cover-up were sincerely to prevent nuclear war.
It is therefore virtually certain that Johnson used the war scare for his own sinister reasons to manipulate the Dallas police, Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Congress, government employees, and military personnel, for the purpose of orchestrating the cover-up.
Manchester wrote that Earl Warren first refused and then accepted the assignment to head the presidential commission.
He took me in, and the President told me how serious the situation was.
He said there had been wild rumors, and that there was the international situation to think of.
He said he had just talked to Dean Rusk, who was concerned, and he also mentioned the head of the Atomic Energy Commission, who had told him how many millions of people would be killed in an atomic war.
The only way to dispel these rumors, he said, was to have an independent and responsible commission, and that there was no one to head it except the highest judicial officer in the country.
He said that if the public became aroused against Castro and Khrushchev there might be war.
One of Johnson’s first acts as president was to extend the FBI’s mandatory retirement age so that Hoover could continue in power.
AP/Wide World Photos o — y at Vice President Richard Nixon visiting Senator Lyndon Johnson (shown with his mother, Mrs.
Sam E Johnson, of Austin, Texas) at the hospital after Johnson’s heart attack in 1955.
Also, both had close comnections to organized crime and wealthy, powerful right-wing extremists.
Further confirmation of Johnson’s use of the false war scare to intimidate influential political figures to serve on the Warren Commission was revealed in telephone transcripts released by the Lyndon B Johnson Library in September 1993.
In a conversation with Senator Richard Russell on November 29, 1963 at 8:55m., Johnson informed Russell that he had announced the formation of the commission and Russell would be a member.
The reader should keep in mind that Johnson, the master of deception 2) had control of the recording with a switch at his desk, so again he could be manufacturing his own image, as was his pattern for his entire adult life, laying down for history what he wanted people to believe.
The President announced that he is appointing a Special Commission to study and report upon all the facts and circumstances relating to the assassination of the late President John F Kennedy and the subsequent violent death of the man charged with the assassination.
Chief Earl Warren, Chairman; Senator Richard Russell, Georgia; Senator John Sherman Cooper, Kentucky; Rep.
The President stated the Special Commission is to be instructed to evaluate all available information concerning the subject inquiry.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation, pursuant to an earlier directive of the President is making complete investigations of the facts.
An inquiry is scheduled by the Texas Court of Inquiry convened by the Attorney General of Texas under Texas law.
The Special Commission will have before it all the evidence uncovered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and all the information available to any agencies of the Federal Government.
All Federal agencies and offices are being directed to furnish services in cooperation to the Special Commission.
The Commission will also be empowered to conduct any further investigation as deemed desirable.
The President is instructing the Special Commission to satisfy itself that the truth is known as far as it can be discovered and to report its findings and conclusions to him to the American people and to the world.
Dick...it has already been announced and you can serve with anybody for the good of America and this is a question that has a good many more ramifications than on the surface and we’ve got to take this out of the arena where they’re testifying that Khrushchev and Castro did this and did that and check us into a war that can kill 40 million Americans in an hour and you would put on your uniform in a minute and the reason I’ve asked Warren is because he is the Chief Justice of this country and we’ve got to have the highest Judicial people we can have.
The reason I ask you is because you have that same kind of temperament...and you can do anything for your country and don’t go giving me that kind of stuff about you can’t serve with any-body...you’ll do anything.
Well, Mr President, you ought to have told me you were going to name me.
You did not...you talked about getting somebody from the Supreme Court...you didn’t tell me you were going to name him.
I told you I was going to name Warren and you said it would be better to name Harlan Clark.
He’s deeply concerned, Dick, about the idea that they’re spreading throughout the communist world that Khrushchev has killed Kennedy ...now he didn’t.
I talked to Tom Dodd...’ve talked to everybody...and not a damned one of them...all these folks are going to be a part of this.
Well you damned sure going to be at my command...you’re going to be at my command as long as I’m here.
I’m going to do it and go through with it...and say I think it is a wonderful idea.
I have deleted a portion here related to the previously deleted portion that I considered irrelevant.
Two hours later I called him and ordered him down here and he didn’t want to come.
Johnson’s extraordinary ability to persuade politicians and officials in Washington to do his bidding, no matter how repugnant to them; and the weakness of seemingly strong and important men to be browbeaten and manipulated by Johnson.
Johnson’s use of the nuclear war scare when in fact he himself did not believe it.
Johnson’s revelation that the only purpose of the commission was to evaluate the Hoover report, which placed Johnson in control of the results via Hoover.
The use of the “Mexico City incident,” alluding to Oswald’s trip to Mexico City, which as earlier discussed was set up by the conspirators for the very purpose that Johnson is now using on Russell.
And the White House had already received information from the CIA that discounted it.
The CIA had informed the White House that the Soviets and Cuba were not involved.
Johnson’s crude and insensitive pleasure in telling how Earl Warren cried and broke down under Johnson’s brow-beating—typical of Johnson’s renowned grossness and disregard for the dignity of others.
These transcripts tell a remarkable story of a man who appeared to know exactly what he had planned to do and went into action immediately on the night of the assassination, calling dozens of influential people throughout the United States to sweet-talk them and appeal to their vanity and their need to be connected to the seat of power.
It seems as though Johnson had cleverly thought through every contingency related to how he would take over the government and cover up the crime.
And it clearly, in my opinion, shows his use of the false nuclear war scare to orchestrate the cover-up.
It seems reasonable to ask how all of this could have gone on so swiftly and smoothly if Johnson had not been brought into the conspiracy before the fact.
And, again, it should be emphasized that the elaborate forgery and manipulation of the evidence, on a grand scale, is without plausible explanation other than for sinister purposes related to Lyndon Johnson’s culpability.
We shall now examine another counter-argument that might seem plausible, but on scrutiny falls apart for the same reasons as above.
Johnson did not know about the assassination in advance, but immediately after the shooting he was contacted by the conspirators and told, suddenly, that he would have to cover up the crime because things had gone wrong.
This makes some sense because the right-wing Texas interests had Johnson in their pockets due to his corruption.
But, again, this scenario is of dubious believability because of the intricacy of the steps to be taken in the cover-up that would have required advanced planning, and because of Johnson’s steady performance immediately after the assassination, which bordered on the eerie.
He was totally calm and composed, at least on the surface and in public.
While almost everyone else was in disarray, Johnson appeared to be in complete control of himself and seemed to know exactly what he was doing.
If he suddenly had been confronted by others to conduct the cover-up, it would seem likely it would have thrown him into a state of confusion.
Also, as mentioned before, it does not make sense that a group of conspirators would assassinate the president and depend on the vice president to react and behave appropriately if he had not been warned in advance of what was going to happen.
The conspirators would certainly have known that they would be heavily dependent on him for the success of the cover-up and would therefore have insisted that he be in the plot from the beginning.
This leads to a scenario that I believe makes the most sense. /t is that Johnson knew about the assassination in advance but was not involved in its original conception.
As noted earlier, the allegation that Johnson had foreknowledge is supported by his mistress of twenty years, Madeleine Brown 12 who has stated on national television that Johnson implied to her that the assassination was going to take place.
She also said that he told her after the assassination that United States intelligence people and right-wing oil men were behind it.
In this scenario, Johnson could have been exempt from initial planning of the conspiracy, but was told about it before the event and told what he was to do in the cover-up.
In other words, he could have been persuaded, before the fact, by the Texas right wing because of the incriminating evidence they had on him concerning other crimes.
And, as earlier noted, Johnson could have been strongly influenced by the threat of the Bobby Baker and Billie Sol Estes cases that were unfolding.
And, of course, there is Johnson’s obsession to become president of the United States; this would be his last and only chance— and his golden opportunity.
It seems very plausible that Johnson would have been too fearful to resist the blackmail, and, after knowing about the plot, his crafty, brilliant mind went to work with gusto to plan what he would do to fulfill his role.
And we must also consider that blackmail was not even necessary—that only a suggestion by the “Texas High Cabal” was all that was needed to bring him aboard.
Johnson’s motive to orchestrate the cover-up was not for patriotic reasons, and Johnson was not out of the loop.
Johnson’s cover-up actions began within one and one-half hours of the fatal shot at Kennedy, when Kennedy’s body was removed from the casket on Air Force One at Love Field in Dallas.
This, combined with Johnson’s motive, means, and opportunity— and taking into account Johnson’s history of venality and his history of deviousness and political jujitsu—all fit together to make it highly conceivable that Johnson was involved in the conspiracy, probably very deeply, but at the very least knew about it in advance.
Perhaps more evidence will be forthcoming that will fill in some of the gaps in comprehending Johnson’s role in the assassination.
I am inclined to believe that the assassination grew out of a general revolt among Kennedy’s enemies and that Johnson was brought in as a necessary part of the plot.
Only by grasping the totality of the man Johnson as an extremely complex person capable of horrendously ruthless, self-serving, and despicable behavior—compulsively driven by his obsession for control, power, and renown—can one appreciate how central and pivotal he was as part of the conspiracy to assassinate the president.
The assassination enabled Johnson to become president and save himself from political oblivion and disgrace.
Lyndon Johnson Viewed as Tragic Character in History Lyndon Johnson’s presidency became a tragedy.
By the time Johnson left office, the reverence of the American people for the presidency was shattered, undermined by his lies and duplicity.
The Vietnam war was drastically escalated under Johnson to became one of the darkest stains on the history of the United States.
Over 58,000 United States soldiers were killed and over 500,000 wounded.
The faith of the American people in their government has not recovered fully to the present day.
Recognizing that Lyndon Johnson was part of the conspiracy to assassinate John F Kennedy is something that I have come to reluctantly.
Only in the course of writing this book has the realization fully penetrated.
When I interviewed Robert McNamara in Washington, D.C., in 1994, I asked him whether or not he believed that Johnson was part of a conspiracy.
He said it was impossible for him to believe that Johnson was behind a plot to kill Kennedy.
Lyndon Johnson will live in infamy for all of history for his role in Vietnamt 2 and the suspicion that he plotted to assassinate his president, John Fitzgerald Kennedy.
I believe that it can be said with certainty that Johnson deserves this dark place in history most especially because of his role in the cover-up of the Kennedy assassination.
If he were innocent, or hadn’t been so corrupted, he would have gone after the killers.
There is no doubt that after he became president Johnson set out to create a liberal revolution in the United States.
Using his enormous energies, manipulative powers, and legislative prowess, he pushed through Medicare and Medicaid to provide health care for the aged and poor; he pushed through the Head Start program for underprivileged children—which has been a major success; he articulated affirmative action rights and used the presidency as a pulpit to dramatize the blight of poverty in contrast to unprecedented wealth; he created the John F Kennedy Center for Performing Arts; and he pushed through a massive housing bill and consumer protection laws.
But even Johnson’s admirers, those who worked with him closely over the years during his presidency, considered him to be an extremely complex and crude person.
The Lyndon Johnson I worked with was brave and brutal, compassionate and cruel, incredibly intelligent and infuriatingly insensitive, with a shrewd and uncanny instinct for the jugular of his allies and adversaries.
He could be altruistic and petty, caring and crude, generous and petulant, bluntly honest and calculatingly devious all within the same few minutes.
Once he made up his mind, his determination to succeed usually ran over or around whoever and whatever got in his way.
He used his prodigious energy—which produced second, third, and fourth winds, as others, allies and adversaries alike, slumped in exhaustion—to mount a social revolution and to control everyone and everything around him.
We shall never know L241 This complex mixture of good and evil, of good deeds following evil doings, is one of the great paradoxes of human existence.
While pursuing the legal research for this book, I came across a court case that struck me as being not only pertinent to the murderers of John Kennedy but also poetry of an almost Shakespearian quality.
It is a pleading by Daniel Webster before the Supreme Court of Massachusetts in 1830 concerning a trial in which Webster was using hearsay evidence of a remarkable kind.
It bears reading to shed light on Lyndon Johnson’s torment after the assassination. gave new meaning to the word Machiavellian, as he gave new hope to the disadvantaged.
The prosecution, headed by Daniel Webster, claimed that Knapp aided and abetted one Crowninshield, who actually struck the fatal blows.
It was therefore crucial to the prosecution to show Crowninshield’s guilt— even though Crowninshield himself had committed suicide before the trial.
In his closing argument, Daniel Webster discussed the probative value of the suicide on the issue of Crowninshield’s guilt.
Webster first describes the murder, then goes on:] He has done the murder—no eye has seen him, no ear has heard him.
The whole creation of God has neither nook nor corner, where the guilty can bestow it, and say it is safe.
Not to speak of that eye which glances through all disguises, and beholds everything, as in the splendor of noon, such secrets of guilt are never safe from detection, even by men.
True it is, that Providence hath so ordained, and doth so govern things, that those who break the great law of heaven, by shedding man’s blood, seldom succeed in avoiding discovery.
Especially, in a case exciting so much attention as this, discovery must come, and will come, sooner or later.
A thousand eyes turn at once to explore every man, every thing, every circumstance, connected with the time and place; a thousand ears catch every whisper; a thousand excited minds intensely dwell on the scene, shedding all their light, and ready to kindle the slightest circumstance into a blaze of discovery.
It is false to itself; or rather it feels an irresistible impulse of conscience to be true to itself.
It labors under its guilty possession, and knows not what to do with it.
It finds itself preyed on by a torment which it does not acknowledge to God nor man.
A vulture is devouring it, and it can ask no sympathy or assistance, either from heaven or earth.
The secret which the murderer possesses soon comes to possess him; and, like the evil spirits of which we read, it overcomes him, and leads him whithersoever it will.
He feels it beating at his heart, rising to his throat, and demanding disclosure.
He thinks the whole world sees it in his face, reads it in his eyes, and almost hears its workings in the very silence of his thoughts.
It betrays his discretion, it breaks down his courage, it conquers his prudence.
When suspicions, from without, begin to embarrass him, and the net of circumstance to entangle him, the fatal secret struggles with still greater violence to burst forth. /t must be confessed, it will be confessed; there is no refuge from confession but suicide, and suicide is confession.
Johnson was afraid of being alone at night and always wanted someone near him before he went to sleep; he would ask aides to sit outside his room until he could go to sleep.
On January 22, 1973 Johnson died as he was taking an afternoon rest at his Texas ranch.
His heart gave out just as he was picking up the phone to call the ranch switchboard for help from the Secret Service.
He died at the young age of sixty-four, appearing to be a broken old man with hippie-like long white hair, four years after he voluntarily left the presidency without seeking a second term.
Doris Kearns Goodwin was persuaded by Johnson to write his memoirs with him in the final months of his life at the LBJ Ranch.
But Goodwin wrote that Johnson could never concentrate his attention on the memoirs.
In her book Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream, she wrote of Johnson’s mental deterioration near the end of his term as president and after he withdrew from the 1968 presidential race and returned to his ranch.
He granted only one interview, attended a few public meetings, and rarely left the ranch.
He talked obsessively of conspiracy—those out to get him—the news media, the Harvard eastern establishment, etc.
He had once expressed to her, after he became president, feelings that his authority had been wrongfully acquired and would be taken away when its illegitimacy was discovered +21 Doris Goodwin interpreted this as largely having to do with his having become president only because of the assassination of Kennedy, and remorse about the Vietnam war.
But I suggest that it may have been his remorse about having participated in murder, and in particular, the assassination of his president.
Doris Goodwin only hinted once any possibility of a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
She quoted literary critic Irving Howe describing the national mood 1321 Two assassinations, each ghastly in its own right, and each uncovering still another side of our social pathology; callousness, maybe planned negligence on the part of the Dallas police; fourthgrade children in the South cheering the news that a “nigger loving” President had been murdered; subversion of the processes of law enforcement to the demands of television...it is all too much.
Bobby Baker was mentioned on only one page, with nothing about his scandals and crimes and their connection to Johnson.
She was attempting to look at the human and psychological side of Johnson based on her close relationship with him as a White House aide and while working with him at the LBJ Ranch.
I presume that she felt that if she delved deeply into the possibility of his involvement in the JFK assassination conspiracy, it would have derailed the entire book.
The same can possibly be said of all of Johnson’s major biographers—Robert Caro (thus far in his first two volumes; a third volume is supposed to be forthcoming); Robert Dalleck; even J Evetts Haley, who hated LBJ with a passion.
These authors did not look into the abyss; or it they did, they soon looked away.
Doris Goodwin, in a recent television interview, commented that Johnson had tried to will his own death in his latter years at the LBJ Ranch.
I suggest that the reader compare Johnson’s deep depression and obsessions with Daniel Webster’s earlier noted eloquent portrait of Crowninshield.
Johnson had told several people during and after his term in office that he believed John Kennedy had been murdered by a conspiracy.
Lyndon Johnson said to Pierre Salinger that he wasn’t sure but that the assassination of President Kennedy didn’t take place in retribution for his participation in the assassinations of Trujillo and President Diem.
Then he went on and said that, when he was growing up, somebody he knew—who had misbehaved—was on a sled or something, ran into a tree, hit his head, and became cross-eyed.
So you should be careful of cross-eyed people because God put his mark on them.
And that this might very well be God’ retribution to President Kennedy for his participation in the assassination of these two people.
If so, it would not have been the first time that he sought to design his own image in history contrary to the truth.
If this is true, and I believe that the evidence shows that it is, Johnson’s story is an extraordinary American tragedy. oR As this book went to press, I received from author John Davis a copy of a letter by Evelyn Lincoln, President Kennedy’s secretary for twelve years before he was assassinated, and then the Kennedy family’s representative at the National Archives.
It was a pleasure to receive your kind letter concerning your desire to obtain my assessment of President Kennedy’s administration and assassination to pass along to your students.
I am sending along to you an article which was written by Muriel Pressman for the “Lady’s Circle” October 1964, and was recently reprinted in a current issue of that magazine, which will give you an insight into my impression of the man.
As for the assassination is concerned it is my belief that there was a conspiracy because there were those that disliked him and felt the only way to get rid of him was to assassinate him.
These five conspirators, in my opinion, were Lyndon B Johnson, J Edgar Hoover, the Mafia, the CIA and the Cubans in Florida.
The House Intelligence Committee investigation, also, came to the conclusion that there was a conspiracy.
Lincoln died on May 11, 1995, at the age of 86, seven months after writing this historic letter.
The seeds of the plot to kill John Kennedy began to grow because he and his brother were determined to seize control of the power structure in the United States.
Also, President Kennedy had reached a decision to drop Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover from government roles.
Because of their corrupt and bizarre backgrounds, which would have been exposed, this would have been a personal catastrophe for both Johnson and Hoover.
But the Kennedys tragically underestimated the reaction and power of those whom they threatened.
The Mafia joined forces with a few Kennedy haters from the CIA, radical anti-Castro Cuban exiles, and others in the extreme right wing, both civilian and military.
The plan included tactics to make it appear that the assassination was the work of a deranged Communist linked to Fidel Castro or the Soviet Union.
The resulting combination of forces became unstoppable because Johnson and Hoover controlled the law itself.
First, those who were being directly threatened by the Kennedys were saved from imprisonment or disgrace; second, the political power center of the United States shifted from the liberal Northeast to the conservative Southwest; and third, the nation’s anti-Communist paranoia was accommodated.
Hunt, and Lyndon Johnson—all in the plot—had the blackmail, the money, and the political power to see to it that the crime would never be seriously investigated.
Although the plot seemingly involved a large number of people, most were on the fringes and did not know what they were involved in.
Many were deceived into believing that they were in anti-Castro operations.
Very likely hundreds of powerful people were glad to see it happen; some even expected it.
But only three or four key people needed to know the full nature of the plot.
Even Johnson and Hoover did not need to know the details—yust their roles in a cover-up if required of them.
By the use of cut-outs the money providers did not need to know who did the job and the assassins didn’t need to know the source of the money.
The assassination was a mystery even to some of those who financed it and almost certainly to those who did the shooting.
Action had to be taken in Dallas despite the fact that Dallas right wingers would be the first suspects.
Earlier plans to assassinate Kennedy in Miami, Chicago, and Los Angeles had fallen through.
With all of the leaks, it was bound to be picked up by the Kennedy family or the news media unless Johnson and Hoover took over the government very soon and permitted ruthless silencing, by murder if necessary, of those who were talking to set an example of what would happen to others.
The conspirators were already guilty of treason, having met and conspired to kill the president.
So the detailed logistics of the shooting had to be finalized within the last few weeks before the fatal event, perhaps explaining some of the things that went wrong.
Solid evidence shows that no fewer than nine people told others, before November 22, 1963, that Kennedy would be assassinated.
Joseph Milteer, Homer Eschevarria, Rose Cheramie, Richard Case Nagell, Eugene Dinkin, one of the visitors to Silvia Odio, Jimmy Hoffa, Santo Trafficante, and Carlos Marcello.
This evidence was not acted upon because all of it went through J Edgar Hoover or the Secret Service, who either buried it or failed to take action to protect the president when he went to Dallas.
The assassination was a right-wing plot, did occur in November 1963, did include individuals in CIA/military intelligence, and there was fabricated evidence of a meeting in the Cuban Consulate in Mexico City, in which it was falsely reported that Castro’s Cubans handed to Oswald and a “Negro,” $6,500 to assassinate President Kennedy.
And Joseph Milteer predicted that it would be a plot by the “patriots,” would be blamed on the Communists, would be by rifle fire from a tall building, and someone would be picked up to throw the public off the track.
The prime scientific evidence tying the conspiracy to government officials in Washington is the alteration of the Zapruder film and the alteration of the autopsy x-rays.
There is no way that all of these actions could have been accomplished without the active involvement of the Secret Service, the FBI, and government officials—going all the way to Lyndon Johnson.
Other crucial evidence that ties the crime to high officials involves the incredible vanishing brain; and the theft of Kennedy’s body followed by surgery on the head to remove ballistic evidence of a second gunman.
Nevertheless, the evidence of the switching of Kennedy’s body from the bronze ceremonial casket to a shipping casket; the evidence that the body was delivered secretly to the rear of Bethesda Naval Hospital; and the evidence that photographs of the brain in the National Archives are not of Kennedy’s brain, leave no other tenable conclusion.
A trial by an impartial and discerning jury, in my opinion, would have found this evidence to meet reasonable doubt standards.
It is virtually inconceivable that Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover would have orchestrated or permitted these frantic, dangerous, last-minute criminal actions in the cover-up unless they themselves were part of the master conspiracy.
Extensive evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion that a combination of United States government intelligence operatives, radical Cuban exiles, and Texas right-wing extremists played a major role in the assassination.
Hunt, retired General Edwin Walker, and retired General Charles Willoughby.
These men met at different times with CIA assassination specialist Colonel William Bishop.
Attending at least one of the meetings with Walker and Bishop were Cuban exile Felipe Vidal Santiago, who was a CIA agent, and Roy Hargraves.
Hargraves was a member of Gerald Patrick Hemming’s paramilitary group, Interpen, in Florida, which was sponsored by United States intelligence.
Vidal and Hargraves were closely linked to Cuban exile leader Rolando Masferrer, who was closely linked to Jimmy Hoffa and the Mafia.
According to Colonel Bishop, Masferrer was handed $500,000 of Hoffa money for the purpose of killing John F Kennedy.
Despite the fact that there is a large body of evidence virtually encircling Gerald Patrick Hemming, indicating his deep involvement in the assassination, he has denied his direct participation.
He was closely associated with Felipe Vidal, Roy Hargraves, and at least three others, all of whom were to various degrees entwined in the plot at an operational level.
Hemming was also closely associated with John Martino, who confessed to his involvement in the assassination before his death to news reporter John Cummings, and also confessed to his wife.
Hemming has admitted that he once lived ina safe house for a short time with Herminio Diaz, who, according to Cuban exile leader Tony Cuesta, was involved in the assassination.
In addition, Hemming’s man, Ronald Ponce de Leon, according to Hemming, was involved with John Martino in the assassination.
In extensive taped interviews, Hemming told me that he was offered a contract by Guy Banister in New Orleans in June, 1962, to kill Kennedy.
He also said that he was again offered a contract to kill Kennedy by wealthy Texans and retired military men in the Dallas Petroleum Club in July 1963.
Hemming claims that he lost control of his Interpen group and that some of them, and his other associates, went to Dallas on November 22, 1963, against his advice, while he stayed in Miami.
In any event, it is apparent that some of his associates, if not Hemming himself, played ancillary roles in the assassination.
A full release by the government of all documents pertaining to Hemming will likely reveal the extent of this involvement.
In addition, there is substantial evidence, including statements from Colonel Bishop and Hemming, that Felipe Vidal was involved with Oswald in the staged shooting at General Edwin Walker in April 1963.
Colonel Bishop stated in a taped interview with writer Gary Shaw (when Bishop knew that he was going to die) that he picked up Vidal in Miami in April 1963 and drove him to Dallas.
Also, according to Hemming , Vidal was picked up in Miami by his CIA case officer and driven to Dallas four days before the assassination, and returned by plane to Miami on the evening of November 22, 1963.
According to General Escalante, Vidal told Cuban intelligence in a taped interview shortly before he was executed in April 1964 that he had been picked up in Miami in early November 1963 by Colonel Bishop and driven to Dallas, where he met with wealthy Texans in the Petroleum Club.
Thus we have independently corroborated evidence of three separate trips wherein Vidal was picked up in Miami by a CIA assassination specialist and driven to Dallas, and met with Texas oil men and a retired military officer, General Walker.
And during some of these meetings with Walker, General Willoughby was present.
One of the paradoxes of the Kennedy assassination is that the plotters and sponsors at the top of the conspiracy are more accurately identifiable than the shooters and helpers at Dealey Plaza.
Hunt, Mafia chieftains—were required to personally intervene in the cover-up when things went wrong.
Hunt’s purchase on November 22 or 23 of a first copy of the Zapruder film and his inquiries as to the security of Oswald in the Dallas jail the night before Oswald was shot.
And, of course, only this unique combination of conspirators had the cumulative power to make the assassination happen and orchestrate the cover-up.
The shooters and the men at Dealey Plaza were, in effect, only ciphers—hired guns.
However, piecing all the evidence together, it can reasonably be concluded that there were probably three assassination teams in Dallas on November 22.
But Oswald slipped away, later was captured, and had to be shot by Jack Ruby on the orders of the Mafia.
A second team of assassins was behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll.
Extensive statements of French assassin Christian David, supported by a witness considered to be reliable, and also supported by corroborative circumstances, indicates that this team was recruited by Mafia chieftain Santo Trafficante, Jr. through the Guerini family in Marseilles, France.
This team was composed of French Mafia Corsicans led by Lucien Sarti, who performed the final, fatal shooting.
A third team, French OAS terrorists, was in Dallas at the time of the shooting.
It was a backup team in case the Dealey Plaza operation had to be aborted.
It also served the purpose of providing false leads if it were not otherwise utilized.
One of these terrorists, Jean Souetre, met with CIA’s E Howard Hunt in Madrid and with General Edwin Walker in Dallas in the spring of 1963.
He also met in New Orleans with anti-Castro Cubans in an assassination training camp during that same period.
This operation was headquartered in Guy Banister’s office in New Orleans, which was frequented by Oswald.
This was during the same time span that the meetings between Vidal, Hargraves, Colonel Bishop, and the Texas right-wing leaders occurred.
Hunt and General Willoughby were leaders in a worldwide, extreme right-wing network linked with the John Birch Society and the Minutemen in the United States, and therefore also had access to the European assassins.
Hunt, with Willoughby, sponsored even more radical spin-off groups from the Minutemen, and terrorist groups in Europe, including the French OAS that was linked to CIA-front corporation Permindex in Italy.
A CIA document shows that Jean Souetre, or someone using his name, was in Dallas on the day of the assassination, and left Dallas or Fort Worth 48 hours after the assassination.
Guy Banister and David Ferrie were members of the Minutemen; Clay Shaw was active in right-wing activities and was on the board of directors of Permindex.
Their role was one of omission—to minimize the protection of the president during his Dallas trip and to participate passively in the coverup.
The Warren Commission was not part of the conspiracy, but its members either went along with the cover-up or were duped by Johnson and Hoover.
He was set up by the conspirators, who knew that he had CIA and FBI connections, and that the hierarchy of these agencies instinctively would contain the investigation to cover themselves.
The preponderance of available evidence is not sufficient to implicate the CIA, directed from the top, in master-planning the crime or ordering its execution.
However, the evidence does indicate that some of its midranking officers were involved in the assassination.
These officers included William K Harvey, David Atlee Phillips, and David Sanchez Morales.
Both Harvey and Morales had become very closely associated with Mafioso Johnny Rosselli, who was assigned to the CIA in the plots to kill Fidel Castro.
The cumulative evidence that Harvey, Morales, and Phillips were a trio who planned and oversaw the assassination is very persuasive.
Harvey’s notes on assassinations are an exact blueprint of the JFK assassination—including the use of French Corsicans as the shooters, and the use of disinformation schemes to blame the Communists.
Harvey had become personal friends with Mafia leaders, and, according to a recently released HSCA document, was suspected by high-ranking CIA officer John Scelso of being the one who murdered Sam Giancana.
By the time of the assassination, Harvey’s mental condition had deteriorated badly, and he was close to being a broken man with nothing to lose.
David Phillips hated John Kennedy and had long been involved with David Morales in CIA assassination operations in South and Central America to overthrow governments.
Phillips was the master of disinformation, and worked closely with Harvey and Morales in the plots to murder Castro.
Phillips was CIA’s monitor of activities in the CIA-financed Cuban exile organizations DRE and Alpha 66—both linked to 30 November—and all three were Cuban exile groups that are prime suspects in the assassination.
Phillips offered bribes through Cuban exile Antonio Veciana to get his cousins in the Cuban consulate to say that Oswald had been there in late September/early October 1963.
Phillips had met with Oswald in Dallas in late August/early September 1963.
David Morales told his close friends in Arizona of his assassination operations for the CIA in South America.
Morales was involved with another prime suspect in the assassination, Rolando Masferrer, in attempts to overthrow the Castro government in the late 1950s.
David Morales is the most likely candidate for managing the operations in Dallas.
The key Mafia leaders in the plot were Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante Jr., Sam Giancana, Johnny Rosselli, and their partner, Jimmy Hoffa.
Their primary roles were recruit the French Corsican assassins, distribute the money obtained from Jimmy Hoffa, and provide some of the staffing at Dealey Plaza.
The primary roles of the powerful Dallas right wing were control Dallas officials, bring Johnson and Hoover into the plot, and provide additional money.
The extreme right wing considered the eastern power structure, both Republicans and Democrats, to be no better than Communists selling out the nation to a one-world government through the United Nations.
By participating in the murder of President Kennedy and replacing him with Lyndon Johnson, the extreme right wing in the Southeastern and Western United States struck a mortal blow to the reign of power of the Northeastern establishment that had been largely in control of government from the inception of the nation.
It was an evil idea that hatched at a lower level; then grew to where it was given the go-ahead by the ultimate sponsors at a high level.
The weight of the evidence indicates that the concept of the plot was designed by CIA’s mentally unstable William Harvey, working with the fascist-racist-paranoid General Charles Willoughby.
Both had experience with the Mafia in assassination plots of political leaders.
Harvey could have coordinated his planning with Willoughby through Colonel William Bishop in Dallas, who was part of Harvey’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program.
Evidence of an elaborate scheme taking place in Mexico City in late September-early October 1963 shows that CIA operatives, probably working with individuals from Mexico’s national police and Nicaraguan intelligence, laid down a scripted ruse wherein Oswald was portrayed as a Communist recruited by Cuban intelligence to assassinate Kennedy.
The plan was intended to precipitate an invasion of Cuba by falsely setting up Castro as a sponsor of the assassination.
The plan was quickly abandoned when Oswald was captured and the plot began to unravel, thereby threatening exposure of the master conspirators.
This proved to be impossible to sustain because it was transparently false.
The only way that the plotters went scot-free was through the prodigious efforts of Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover, assisted in the cover-up by CIA ex-director Allen Dulles and CIA counter-intelligence chief James Angleton.
The roles of Oswald, Clay Shaw, Guy Banister, and David Ferrie in New Orleans began as a counter-intelligence scheme by the FBI and/or the CIA under the direction of David Atlee Phillips, to discredit the Fair Play for Cuba Committee; but along the way this scheme was converted to a cover story for the assassination.
There is no evidence yet available that links the Joint Chiefs of Staff or any of its members to the plot or the cover-up.
There is no evidence yet available that the military industrial complex or a world-wide high cabal were the originators of the plot.
The enemies of the Kennedys came to obsessively loathe them and to believe that the only way to protect themselves and stop the Kennedy dynasty was by assassination.
Many of Kennedy’s ideological enemies genuinely believed that the Kennedys were going to destroy the nation with their perceived ineptitude, weakness, appeasement of communism, dismantling the military-industrial complex, and liberal policies concerning race.
The Kennedys may have helped bring on the assassination by their own duplicity, hardball politics, and reckless, self-serving behavior, which was perceived as jeopardizing national security.
Nonetheless, the Kennedys’ larger goals for the nation were admirable and their faults were mild compared to those of the conspirators.
It can be persuasively argued that if the Kennedys had succeeded in ridding the nation of organized crime, dumping Lyndon Johnson, taming the extremists, stopping the cold war, and retiring J Edgar Hoover, the United States would not have the legacy of gigantic problems that we have today.
The “power elite” in the United States, consisting of the liberal and conservative establishment, were willing to look the other way because of their own economic interests.
No one wanted the crisis that would have erupted had the truth been revealed at the time of the assassination.
It would very likely have had a devastating impact on political stability and economic interests.
The truth would have shattered the nation, possibly with an irreparable constitutional breakdown.
The news media and intelligencia were willing to go along with established authority, as was their accustomed role at that time.
Congress is a more vigilant watchdog; the news media is far more diversified and critical of power, thus making it more difficult to contain a major scandal.
Today we do not have a monster heading the FBI with a lock on government officials by blackmail, or a vice president with the criminal genius of Lyndon Johnson.
The militant right wing, although still active, does not have the alliances with powerful politicians and wealthy industrialists that it had in 1963.
And new presidents are not taking on all of the evils of the world at one seating.
The assassination of John F Kennedy can properly be described as an immense national disgrace that revealed the incapacity of our Congress to confront and expose a coup d’ état within the executive branch.
The harm done to the nation, although not irreparable, has been enormous.
November 22, 1963 marked the beginning of a decline in the fundamental strength of our economy, the beginning of an inexorable erosion of law and order, and a diminution of our sense of pride and confidence as a nation.
The Kennedy assassination was the consequence of a national disorder of venality, deception, and hatred that had infected the nation long before 1963.
It does seem now, however, that our nation is healing and regaining strength as we approach the new century.
Our nation’s recovery from the disaster is a tribute to the resiliency and adaptability of the American people.
This will require a great effort by our most honorable and _ wisest constitutional/governmental scholars, supported by the president, the Congress, and the Supreme Court.
The task will be daunting, but a determined, long-term effort should be made.
November 24, 1996 Location: Hyatt Regency Tower, Dallas, Texas Time: 1:30m. to 3:00 m.
I met with Madeleine Brown for lunch on the 50th floor in the rotating restaurant with a spectacular view of Dallas, including a view of Dealey Plaza and all of the interconnecting streets and freeways.
After a few minutes of introductions, we got to her discussion of the common practice of murder in Dallas high circles in 1963.
I’m here with Madeleine Brown and we’re looking down at Dealey Plaza, and we’re talking about the Texas people, the people who ruled Dallas.
Well, it’s like I said, I would be at socials, I asked where so and so was, they mysteriously had disappeared, we asked that question but they never surfaced.
Looking down from here now at Dallas, I’d say that 90% of it didn’t exist back there.
He was in the Agricultural Department with Billie Sol Estes with Orville Freeman.
Jesse told me that Puterbaugh came into town and changed the motorcade route.
You see, I have no way of knowing; I’m just telling you what was told to me.
Earlier I told you they could have turned on Elm Street rather than Main Street; they would then have a direct route, right down Elm Street, could hit the freeway over here and be at the Trade Mart.
But they came down Main Street and made that turn, you could tell it was an ambush, a total ambush.
And I’ve also done a lot of reading on Billie Sol Estes, and you’ve got a big piece in your book on him.
You know it’s so disturbing, this recent thing that’s come out about all these people that Billie Sol claims Lyndon had killed.
I said we would like to put you on a camcorder, interview you, and talk about things that we know.
So anyway, on Tuesday, I turned the television on and he had been in an accident and died.
Well, what lay people don’t know is that our government basically made a turnover in 1963.
It’s just like the day that I got out of my car, and we parked in the same parking lot.
You see, in 1960, in the Kennedy-Johnson campaign, I was told that H L Hunt and Joe Kennedy met in California and stayed behind closed doors a day or two.
So they made a pact that John Kennedy would go on the ballot and Lyndon would take the second position.
President Kennedy was fixing for a lot of people, costing a lot of money here in Texas.
So Hunt told Lyndon, who they manipulated—he was manipulated all the time he was in Washington, I mean totally manipulated—that he had to do something.
By the same token Lyndon Johnson was in deep trouble—Billie Sol Estes, Bobby Baker—so there wasn’t much choice at the time but to eradicate Kennedy.
You know, if you have any imagination or intelligence, it’s easy to see what happened.
And the White family was close to President Taft, and J Edgar Hoover at the time he was starting in, all of them.
And we had Roosevelt, and Roosevelt used to come to Texas all the time.
I don’t know that he hunted, per se, but they would drive him around and they would hunt.
Jesse Jones from Houston wrote the program or whatever it was to get our country out of the Great Depression.
I am developing the idea that the Texas right wingers down here began to hate the Eastern establishment.
And then out here you have these wildcatters and renegades in Texas who became personally very wealthy.
But one of my theories is that in killing Kennedy they accomplished many things.
And it reversed the trend that Kennedy was bringing on about getting out of Vietnam, disarmament, making peace with the Soviets.
But I did notice in your book that you mention the party at Clint Murchison’s home, the night before the assassination, with John J McCloy at that party.
He also put the money deals together for Murchison and Hunt, I mean the financials.
I’ve been asking about him because I was one of the first, I guess, to say that John McCloy was close to these people.
See, I did not know until Connie started interviewing me and everything.
But my first thought, Fred Florence, of Republican National Bank, he was a White Russian, in charge of the White Russian community.
Well, I think they said he was born here in Texas but it was his family who were immigrants.
Yes, and he started distributing John Birch Society literature, and Bobby Kennedy got him out of it—ran him off.
They would all get together and go down here to Matagorda Bay off the coast of Texas, have parties.
I wanted to ask you, when Lyndon made this statement to you to the effect that after tomorrow the Kennedys are not going to embarrass me anymore, humiliate me anymore.
And I didn’t know whether I should leave; the party was almost breaking up.
The thing being that all of them came into Texas on Tuesday for a big Pepsi Cola convention.
And then Clint’s secretary called and said drop by, we’ll have a hell of a time.
I really thought, because Clint adored Hoover, or Edgar they called him in those days, I thought it was a party.
Now when Lyndon had this outburst, after the assassination, when you challenged him, tell me about that.
Well, everyone in Dallas—it was general gossip in the business group—that Lyndon was responsible.
He screamed and hollered, and I was really frightened because he had told me many years before that you don’t see, hear, or repeat anything.
And when he said that he went into the bathroom and he almost knocked the hinges off the door.
Well, anyway, needless to say, I was so ill I was sick to my stomach over all of it.
One account I read of this was that this was at a New Year’s Eve party.
I was so glad to see him, because it was the first time that I had seen him since he became president.
The first time I saw him or heard about this, I thought it doesn’t exist...in my mind.
And, again, I promise you, if things got in Lyndon Johnson’s way, or if something he didn’t believe in, he didn’t have a problem of getting rid of it at all.
You know the deeper I dig into this whole thing the more incredible it gets.
Now I find it really difficult to believe that this Malcolm Wallace did the shooting at Dealey Plaza.
I was at the Dallas gun club about three days before the assassination.
I'd think that if it were a military intelligence or CIA operation they wouldn’t have anybody near there doing shooting who could be linked right into Lyndon Johnson.
But, of course, maybe this whole thing is a lot simpler than one thinks.
Mexico City, the Oswald impersonators, the Walker shooting attempt—all of these things are described.
You put all these ingredients together—you have to know who these people are and the position they played, to understand.
You see, Mac Wallace met with an untimely death down in Houston, Texas.
And the thing that really got to me—of course, Mac Wallace and Billie Sol were very close together—the car was picked up and sent to Houston and mashed without any investigation.
I was going across the toll way here in Dallas, and the exhaust system of my car was blown completely off.
I went down to the police department; in those years a black didn’t mean anything in Dallas.
And really—maybe my ego—I would like to think that I was something to Lyndon.
That really down deep in his heart he had some kind of feelings for me.
He said at that time if things had been different, if he hadn’t been a political figure, you know, things would have been different.
Anyone that worked downtown Dallas—from the police department down to the Carousel Club—knew Jack Ruby.
And if he didn’t know you on the street (I still have my Carousel card), he’d jump up and say, “Hey, Clancy,” he’d say; I mean he’d look him over.
So when Henry Wade said he didn’t know Jack Ruby, and some of the others, I say they’ re lying.
And so it wouldn’t be any trouble to go down to Jack’s, buy some drinks, smoke a Camel, play cards, or anything.
I’m interviewing Gerry Patrick Hemming, and he’s got an incredible story.
He told me that he’d come out here to Dallas, talked with the Hunts, and was later offered a contract to kill Kennedy.
He had a group of guerrilla warfare people down in No Name Key, Florida, training assassination squads.
He said if I don’t have enough money to get what I want, I’ve got a squad that can take care of it.
Hurt wrote that Hunt could just spread out cards, fold them up, and he could tell you every card that was there.
I’m going to tell you, we were told immediately, of course, all of us thought it had something to do with this, in our minds—that he had gone on a sabbatical to Mexico right after the assassination.
Or if I went first to the parking lot I practically ran to my car to keep from seeing him.
I told Dick Russell when he called me, I said I can still see the old man picking up the phone and calling Jack Ruby.
If you wanted to waste someone in Dallas, all you had to do if you knew the right people— $100 get him wasted, $50 get the hell beat out of him, whatever.
And I can still see the old man calling Jack, saying we don’t want that man down there in the city jail.
The day, I think it was a couple weeks prior to the time the map was published about the motorcade, we were at Jack Ruby’s and we were playing cards.
It was made public in the paper, I think, only four days before the assassination.
I interviewed Gerry Patrick Hemming and he said that some of the people that ran the JFK assassination were out of the Department of Agriculture.
But now you tell me there was Malcolm Wallace and a lot of other people in the Department of Agriculture who seem to have been involved.
Bill Bank, the attorney that represented the Marshall family in getting this overturned, the suicide to murder, went to school with my son that died.
He went to Texas A&M with Steven and he helped overturn the case from suicide to murder.
If you have that number in Brady, he’ll probably answer the phone and call me.
Okay, you having been, as you say, LBJ’s “sideline,” and this guy, Ragsdale, was the intermediary.
But I know that the Ragsdale family in Smithville and the Carter family were big names.
The only thing is I had the letter that was left that I met with Jesse Kellam in Houston and Jerome Ragsdale.
Jerome Ragsdale wrote it to assure me that my funds would continue to take care of Steven.
And I’ve always thought that Jesse Kellam and Ragsdale went to splitting the money.
Of course, there must be hundreds of witnesses who saw the two of you [Madeleine and Lyndon] together over the years.
And he pulled out those checks, and my eyes almost fell out of my head.
He interviewed Currington, and Currington talks about Hunt and Hoover meeting, I think it’s in Chicago.
From ’69... the last time in Houston when the astronauts were having a big parade there.
You know, I marvel at the fact that intelligent people allowed him to operate, and looked to him for—whatever.
In your book, Connie writes that LBJ told you about how Hoover had his “you-know-what” in a vise.
Again, Kennedy was trying to kill the FBI and the CIA agencies...eradicate them.
He was trying to take them over and run them instead of having them run themselves.
And he said that he wished that he could splinter it into a thousand pieces.
He said it was the men that J knew, which of course were the oil people, you know.
I wanted her to use an explanation of what it was; I don’t think she has done that.
I was trying to find the page in here where he first told you about this, and I can’t find it.
Why don’t we get a cab and I’Il take you back to your house and drop you off, and then I’1l go on to the airport and find out when I’m getting out of Dallas.
KKK I sent the full original transcript to Madeleine Brown for her final review, with the understanding that I would condense it.
She called a week later and said that it was correct, except for two spellings of names which she corrected.
I regret that I must end this book without further investigation of the Billie Sol Estes allegations, or the Department of Agriculture connection.
A thorough investigation of these areas might prove to be very fruitful in getting to the bottom of the complete story.
If proven to be true, particularly the part about Malcolm Wallace being one of the shooters at Dealey Plaza, it would implicate Lyndon Johnson more deeply into the assassination than I can place him with the material and time now at my disposal.
But I don’t think that it would change my conclusions as to the structure of the plot.
It would just move Lyndon Johnson further into the inner group, and perhaps enhance Gerry Patrick Hemming’s contention that Larry LaBorde and the DOA were involved.
Hemming told me that the DOA was a repository for CIA agents, which makes sense to me.
The DOA—a perfect cover for secret agents—had people all over the world doing agricultural and weather studies and the like.
This compares to 55 items found in a computer search by personnel at the National Archives.
I was able to obtain a portion of these documents at the time of publishing Bloody Treason.
Many of the documents still had been referred to another government agency before release.
There is little doubt that there is much more about Hemming and his associates that will ultimately become available.
Unfortunately, some of the documents that you have requested have been referred to another agency for review under the JFK Act.
The problem that the Dallas police had was that the third empty casing had an inward dent in its mouth which made it questionable evidence of having fired a bullet projectile.
When the Zapruder film was examined by the FBI, along with selected other forensic evidence, it became obvious there had to have been at least three shots fired; therefore, the Commission had to find three—not two; and not four either—empty shell casings, to make their case of a lone assassin, which, by this time had solidified into Oswald acting alone.
It was thus decided to ignore the initial FBI exhibits and other documents showing only two empty casings and, instead, show all three as valid evidence of shots fired from the sniper’s nest.
My purported mistake, actually an omission, was to ignore the dented casing in the belief that it was not valid evidence of a shot fired.
And, at least initially, so did the FBI, the Dallas Police, and many others.
Another criticism of Bloody Treason about the shell casing subject was my analysis of the photos showing cartridge cases on the sixth floor.
My critics said I should have questioned the quality of the photos Admittedly, some details in the photos are questionable, although it seems quite obvious that at least one has been doctored.
The best evidence, which I did cite, was two separate handwritten reports stating only two empty casings, signed by FBI agents J Doyle Williams and Charles T Brown, Jr.
The accumulated evidence shows last minute scrambling in the FBI and the Warren Commission about the dented casing problem.
The problem would not even begin to go away until the HSCA investigation, fourteen years later, in which test firings were conducted with the alleged Oswald rifle to see if the dent could have been caused by bolt action ejection of the cartridges in rapid firing.
Therefore, there was a possibility that the dented casing could have been authentic evidence of a third shot by Oswald.
First, the scrambling by the FBI, by the Warren Commission, and by President Johnson, to prove their case, reinforces the main thrust of my analysis, which is their willingness to meddle with and stretch, to extreme, the facts.
Second, to this day there is solid evidence that there were six shots fired that struck Kennedy, Connally and other objects in Dealey Plaza that day.
And there is a mountain of other forensic evidence to prove conspiracy.
We really don’t need the empty cartridge evidence, although it is of value.
Moreover, after reviewing all of the above, I believe that what I wrote on this subject presented the best evidence and the best conclusions.
The Warren Commission report depended upon Arlen Specter’s ludicrous argument for a Single Bullet that caused JFK’s wounds and Connally’s wounds.
This canard, I contend, helped them to suppress other forensic evidence to the contrary.
Meeting with Roy Hargraves DATE: February 10, 2001 PLACE: Law Offices of Mike Hemming on Mission Blvd., Pomona Start time: 10:10m.
Roy Hargraves Robert Hemming Jerry Mings Noel Twyman Cliff Schoedl, Jr.
Before using this it should be checked against the tapes, where there is much more detail.
It should be noted that Roy Hargraves and Robert Hemming would occasionally step out of the meeting to call Gerry Hemming who presumably was in Florida, obviously trying to control the interview.
Roy said that he did not shoot JFK, didn’t even know that JFK was to be in Dallas.
At the end of the meeting when we were looking at photos of Dealey Plaza from Groden’s book of photos, Roy reiterated that Vidal was the man on Elm Street with the walkie talkie.
He explained that Vidal did not know what was coming down and was following specific instructions to do exactly specific things, thus explaining Vidal’s arms being raised up.
I suspect that this was Gerry at work in the telephone calls trying to control the interview.
Roy said that Colonel Bishop was Vidal’s case officer who gave him the “ereen light” on all their raids in Cuba.
Roy would not say who else were at meetings with Colonel Bishop, General Walker, Roy and Vidal, or who they met when they were in Dallas starting November 18, except to say that they were very dangerous people and no way will he reveal their names.
In discussions about General Walker shooting, Roy said Walker arranged it to make him look like a hero.
He blurted that he and Gerry Hemming were arguing over who would take the shot.
Roy said later that if he met the torturer General Escalante he would kill him on the spot for what he did to Vidal.
Roy said Gerry drove the getaway car in the LA Operation Chaos bombings for LAPD counterintelligence unit.
Roy intimated that he, not Ponce De Leon, was the “good looking kid” sitting on the couch mentioned by Florence Martino—when I started on this, he angrily said, “That’s not nice’”—got up and left the room —when he came back, I told him that Gerry said that Ponce De Leon was the kid.
Roy mentioned Dick Whatley, Bobbie Willis, and Jim Lewis as important figures to investigate.
It would require an enormous amount of digging, travel, document research and interviews with the character’s friends and relatives.
Noel Twyman, 2009 APPENDIX E—Rival Authors I include in this category a book by Professor David R Wrone who believes in a conspiracy and, in fact, writes that a coup de’ etat took place.
And, he does not discuss or mention the part of my work about the Z-Film that was authenticated in consultations with the late Dr.
Rod Ryan, a PhD in motion picture film technology, and academy award winner in that category.
My work was also authenticated by Hollywood motion picture film technician, Leon Carrere, and Wrone doesn’t mention him.
John Costella’s work on the Z-Film or even list him in the index, although Wrone had access to this material at the time he wrote his book.
It is not difficult for me to have sympathy with an author who has based a career on the authenticity of a piece of key evidence in an historical crime only to find in later years that he was mistaken.
And only human to go into denial and on the attack against the revealer of the mistake.
Costella’s work, using scientific analysis to refute our conclusions and then let us all debate the subject.
Until then, I won’t go further except to say that the remainder of his book, although worthy in some respects, is trivial or without consequence in his criticisms of others.
As I was wrapping up the galleys of Bloody Treason in 1997, I didn’t know that an ARRB Senior Analyst by the name of Douglas P Horne, with three other ARRB staff, was interviewing a retired NPIC manager, Homer McMahon about the Zapruder film.
One or two days after the assassination, and before the John Kennedy funeral, a man who claimed to be a United States Secret Service agent by the name of Bill Smith arrived at NPIC and delivered to McMahon an amateur movie film of the assassination, the same type of film and specification as that in Zapruder’s camera—a double 8 Kodachrome II film unsplit.
Bill Smith requested that 5” x 7° blow up prints be made of selected frames.
This meeting and others are described in detail in reports about interviews with Hunter and McMahon, reproduced in the book Murder in Dealey Plaza.
All told, in the months of June, July and August, 1997, there were four meetings and two telephone call reports conducted by ARRB staff, all including Doug Horne, always accompanied by ARRB staff.
In brief, McMahon said that he produced the required 5” x 7” prints some of which were mounted by others on briefing boards at NPIC and delivered first to John McCone at CIA and then to Lyndon Johnson at the White House.
McMahon described the work as “an all night job” and said they were instructed by Bill Smith that this was top secret, and not to tell anyone, even their supervisor, about what they did.
An important part of this story is that Bill Smith guided McMahon to select frames that would show three shots from behind from the Schoolbook Depository, which was what they wanted to see.
All but one of the foregoing statements by McMahon were confirmed by Ben Hunter (McMahon’s assistant who was present at the incident) in a separate interview of him by Doug Horne and ARRB staff.
The one exception was a statement by McMahon who said that, in his opinion, President Kennedy was shot 6 to 8 times from three different locations, but that this was ultimately ignored.
We must remember that this interview of McMahon was from his memory, thirty four years after the event.
The important points here are that he remembers seeing more than three shots that hit JFK, and even more important, from three different directions, and Bill Smith restricted NPIC to selecting only three shots from one direction.
Further confirmation of both McMahon’s and Hunter’s stories was in a series of undated handwritten and typewritten notes in which some of the notes were identified by both of them as their handwriting.
These notes were mostly a timing analysis of three shots at two shutter speeds (18 and 16 frames per second), in one case compared to that in Life Magazine.
Apparently, NPIC was working on some of this after their initial overnight work before the funeral.
Now, in another part of the CIA’s headquarters, the National Photographic Interpretation Center, the Agency’s top photo analyst, Dino Brugioni, watched in horror as the top of the president’s head exploded in a shower of crimson.
We were asked to time it, which was difficult because the camera was spring-loaded.
November 22, 1963 12:30 pm: Abraham Zapruder films assassination; returns to his office in state of shock.
Actually, a total of four positives were developed at Eastman Kodak in Dallas, the first positive from the camera original, after which three positives were developed from the three reversal duplicates made by Jamison from the camera original positive.
Zapruder and Schwartz deliver one copy of the film to Secret Service office in Dallas with understanding that it was to be sent immediately to FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., by courier jet plane.
An analysis of the chain of possession of the film shows that in all probability it was in the FBI’s possession when it was altered, while at the same time the Nix film was altered.
The obvious problem with the Bill Smith story is that the copy of the original film had already been developed by Eastman Kodak in Dallas, not Rochester.
This leads to support of those who suspect there were two films taken of the assassination.
The most direct answer is Abraham Zapruder himself, instead of a second cameraman.
If this is taken as truth, it brings a disturbing complication about Mr Zapruder.
If for the moment we assume that the copy that Bill Smith took to Eastman Kodak in Rochester was an undeveloped reversal duplicate from Zapruder’s camera it is disquieting to me because I detected not a whiff of deception from Erwin Schwartz or Bruce Jamison when I interviewed them.
If Mr Zapruder had requested a secret extra reversal duplicate copy, it seems Jamison would have known.
Moreover, all eyewitnesses have stated that Jamison made only three reversal duplicates.
Hunt, and J Edgar Hoover, within a few days after the assassination, together in Washington, D.C. with a secret first copy of the Zapruder film that showed in high color fidelity the president being murdered by multiple shots from front and back, being secretly developed or analyzed by the highest qualified photographic experts in the world, namely CIA’s NPIC and Kodak’s Hawkeyeworks.
You’ve got to give these three diabolical geniuses credit for smarts and competence, aside from the fact that they were, arguably, certifiable mad men.
They must have seen that, without alteration of the film, the horrible and criminal secrets of all of them would be exposed to the world, and that they had to quickly order the fabrication of a new film or they would all be ruined or much worse, executed.
But the decision to alter the film would be an inevitable, natural step inasmuch as the horrific acts of altering of the president’s body had already been done.
Jack Ruby had been ordered to silence the incorrigible patsy, Lee Harvey Oswald, before he spilled the beans to the world.
First, create a new Zapruder film; and, second, create a commission to cover up all critical legal evidence, 1.e., the Warren Commission.
It would all be done in the name of preventing World War I[I—national security—which has now become the standard rationale for covering up dirty national secrets for survival of our nation.
Both and are true regardless of the excursion to Eastman Kodak in Rochester, and whether or not there were two films involved.
This evidence shows that LBJ and Hoover knew about their need for Z-film alterations within about 72 hours of the murder of the president.
And above all let’s not forget Hoover’s direct line to the exotic James Angleton who was very close to Hoover and CIA’s Bill Harvey/ 4 Until I see more evidence it seems that he, at least, made a terrible mistake in using Oswald in a covert CIA counter-intelligence scheme that backfired.
Search on Angleton or read chapter 28 for what I wrote about Angleton and Gerry Hemming.
Exactly where the final 8mm version of the altered Zapruder film was fabricated remains unknown by me at this writing.
The super secret Kodak Hawkeyeworks in Rochester could have done it all based on the selection of critical frames by NPIC, and after instructed as to the required results.
When I was writing Appendix F, I tried to telephone Doug Horne because I felt he had obtained more information, particularly about the involvement of Kodak’s Hawkeyeworks in the Z-Film alteration.
But Horne was not receiving calls because of his total effort in getting his manuscript finished.
In the interim, I had read what Horne had written in Murder in Dealey Plaza and The Great Zapruder Film Hoax.
Later yet I had read Dick Russell’s latest book, On the Trail of the JFK Assassins, and was surprised to find that he had interviewed Horne about the medical evidence and Z-Film alterations.
But I was debating if I should wait for Horne’s Magnum Opus because there was more material to come.
Fortunately, in early December 2009 Horne’s book became available on Amazon.com.
Horne’s work proved to be a monumental 1800-page blockbuster, dealing mainly with the medical evidence and the Z-Film.
I was pleased to find that he corroborates virtually everything I wrote in Bloody Treason on these subjects and more—about the autopsy, about the Zapruder film; and about David Morales and William Harvey.
The “secret location” in which the body was altered, according to Horne, was in the morgue at Bethesda Naval Hospital; and the JFK body alterations were performed by Navy Doctors Humes and Boswell.
Lifton will write about the differences in his forthcoming book Final Charade.
He believes that the primary body alterations were performed before the body was delivered to the morgue at Bethesda, and does not believe that Commander Humes altered the body.
But, Horne readily acknowledges Lifton’s work as being the foundation of the medical evidence, and he is very generous in his praise of him.
As to the Zapruder film, Doug Horne makes it very clear that he now believes that the Z-Film was in fact altered by the conspirators to conceal the truth about what happened at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963.
Horne writes that he began his investigation believing that the Z-Film probably was authentic, but as the evidence of alteration grew, he changed his mind.
One of Horne’s departures from what I had written in Bloody Treason is that he makes a case that the Z-Film was altered, in part, to conceal the involvement of the United States Secret Service in the conspiracy, such as the driver deliberately slowing down the car, if not stopping the vehicle entirely, during the shooting.
He also raises the possibility that the driver turned around and shot the President.
Although I was aware of this long-standing allegation, I never came to that conclusion.
He wrote of his strongly held belief that Kodak’s Hawkeye plant performed the final alteration of the ZFilm.
I had suspected this to be true but had backed away from the thought because I didn’t think I had enough solid material on which to base such an opinion.
It made sense, but there were other possibilities of alteration such as, maybe it was done in the hands of Life Magazine in Chicago assisted by George W Colburn Laboratories there.
Or maybe minimal alterations were done overnight in Dallas or even in Hollywood, and the altered films returned to Zapruder before Saturday morning.
Or maybe a combination of these elements did it in steps to keep up with public releases by Life Magazine and the Warren Commission.
As I was about to set aside the question until I had read more of Horne’s book, I received an E-mail from David Lifton in which he wrote that he had closely read Horne’s chapter about the Z-Film, for the fifth or sixth time, and he now wanted to say, from the onset, that he did not agree with it as to the ‘when and where’ of the Z-Film alteration.
I agree with that except to say I can see that the simplest, most straight-forward way for LBJ to have accomplished the Z-film alteration was to have it all done at the government’s top secret contractor, Hawkeyeworks, and maneuvered so that CIA Director John McCone saw only frames selected by LBJ, showing only shots from the rear.
At this point in time I had only hastily read through Horne’s Z-Film chapter.
This was now the second disagreement on specifics between Lifton and Horne.
The details of the time-line of handling of the Z-Film in Dallas, Chicago, Rochester, and Washington D.C. gets very complicated when all documents and testimonies are studied.
Combine this with the fact of two separate covert operations, secret from each other, on the weekend of November 23 and 24, 1963, between White House people and NPIC in Washington D.C., and it really gets complicated when we consider it is based on memories of old men, 34 years after the fact, and perhaps bogus Secret Service Agents.
By that term I mean evidence that has been proved true so many times that there’s no longer room for serious argument.
I decided that what I now had was enough for me, and that I would not pursue the fascinating detail further.
What we now see in the JFK assassination is a breakdown of the United States Constitution—a failure of the separation and balance of powers.
It was and will be a fearful disturbance to patriotic United States citizens.
It seems to me that it is now in the year 2010 ina beginning process, fueled by ideologues, racists, war hawks, and national security paranoiacs.
Horne wrote that it was ‘case closed’ regarding hand-painting of the mysterious blobs around JFK’s head —therefore proof of alteration—Horne having gotten corroboration from two other Hollywood film experts.
I was also happy to see that Horne had joined in my belief that David Sanchez Morales was very likely the man from CIA who directly managed the assassination, along with CIA’s Bill Harvey as a master planner.
How LBJ Killed JFK, was very close to my interpretation except that Horne was a bit stronger than I, and he went into more detail than I about Mac Wallace’s fingerprints.
This book is a must-read for anyone who wants to learn more about the JFK assassination.
But it does have its share of serious faults and pitfalls, and the outline of the conspiracy he describes is much too simple.
However, if its key aspects prove to be accurate, it is very important.
McClellan wrote of Lyndon Johnson’s near death confession to his lawyer Don Thomas in which LB§J said, in effect, that “I had to do it; I had no choice; that damned Bobbie was closing in on me, stirring everything, surrounding me.
McClellan readily states, understandably, that he doesn’t have tapes or documents to back this up.
And, I would add, such probably never existed—after all, high level criminals and traitors are not known for leaving paper or magnetic trails.
McClellan also wrote that LBJ’s hit-man, Mac Wallace, along with Oswald, were the gunmen on the sixth floor, and a third gunman recruited by Wallace was shooting from the grassy knoll area.
This has been reported and written about extensively by others and is, by and large, convincing.
The fingerprint evidence is backed up by a private fingerprint analyst and a key fingerprint expert at Interpol in Europe.
McClellan was a partner in the Austin, Texas law firm that handled LBJ’s legal work and other matters over his entire political career.
The name of the firm in 1960 was Clark, Mathews, Thomas, Harris & Denius.
The head of the firm was LBJ’s long time friend Edward Aubrey Clark, who according to McClellan, was the man who took care of LBJ’s crimes including assassination of President Kennedy.
Don Thomas was another close friend of LBJ and was a partner in the firm.
McClellan joined the firm in 1966 and was there for about ten years before leaving.
He put together the story about the near death confession from specific discussions with Don Thomas and other lawyers in the firm, including associate attorney John Coates.
This material, in its full context, deserves careful reading in McClellan’s book, keeping in mind that its most important parts are hearsay, or even double hearsay, from a “death bed” confession but admissible in a court of law, in some cases, when it is part of other strong circumstantial evidence.
I am inclined to believe it because it fits into all the other evidence, and my sense is that Barr McClellan is being very honest about this terrible subject, particularly regarding his private conversations with the other lawyers in the firm.
A fault I do find in McClellan’s book is that he leaves out important evidence that could explain the larger plot.
He writes essentially nothing about the New Orleans evidence (Bannister, Ferrie, Oswald, Clay Shaw, the CIA) the military, the mafia, the French connection, William Harvey and ZR/Rifle, David Morales, anti-Castro Cubans, Angleton, and Oswald in Mexico City.
I can see how a combination of these elements could have been joined into the conspiracy after the word was out that LBJ would be behind it.
It concerns me that McClellan, in confining the plot to LBJ and Texas big oil, tends to let other main culprits off the hook and, paradoxically, LBJ becomes a sort of scapegoat, albeit an evil and deserving one.
As the years go by and more is developed about this huge rupture in American history that occurred on that fateful day it becomes clear that it went beyond the assassination of John F Kennedy.
I’m speaking here of the assassinations of Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King, and what it tells us about the psyche of our nation, or will tell us, if the complete, ugly truth forces its way out of our minds-in-denial.
There was only one substantial criticism of Bloody Treason I have found so far in Horne’s book.
He wrote, in effect, that I was incorrect in stating that J Edgar Hoover was the one behind the alteration of the Z-Film.
Horne wondered if, in light of what he has written, I would change my mind.
The but being that I had focused on Hoover as the most likely guilty party, mainly because the documented information at the time showed that he was the first to get a first-copy of the Z-Film, sent to him by the Secret Service by special courier on the night of November 22; this is reported in my time-line in Bloody Treason but now, challenged by Horne, based in part on Richard Trask’s book National Nightmare on Six Feet of Film, which, I agree, makes a strong case that the FBI didn’t get the film until 5:20 pm on November 23, about 18 hours later than DeLoach stated.
My mistake in writing was that I was not careful enough to make it very clear that Hoover was my number one suspect at the time because he had the motive, the means (the power), and the opportunity to direct others to do the alteration.
I still say that what I wrote in Bloody Treason—that Hoover had to know early-on about Z-Film alterations and therefore was complicit from the beginning in the conspiracy to alter the film—because, at the very least, the altered film had to be switched with the FBI’s first copy.
However, in light of Horne’s release of the McMahon/Hunter/Brugioni/NPIC material, I want him to know I have changed my mind because, for the first time thanks to Horne, we have convincing evidence that LBJ was in-the-loop and most likely the one who ordered the Z-Film alteration; but, with at least J Edgar Hoover’s knowledge.
Maybe it’s what the National Security State could sink to if given the necessary evil people in the right positions, and in the right circumstances.
But this is a far cry from claiming that the assassination was a simple Mob hit, from start to finish.
Furthermore, the rapidity with which these criminal actions occurred (particularly the alteration of wounds on the body, the planting of bullets, and the alteration of the Zapruder film) is the surest indicator that the government was not simply covering up a Mob hit to hide the CIA’s use of the Mafia in the attempted assassination of Castro.
If the coverup was a benign one, then the government would first have had to establish that the Mob did it in the first place, and that would have taken weeks, even it that were the case.
But the President’s wounds were altered the day of his death; bullets were planted the day of his death; and the Zapruder film was altered during the weekend following his death.
The timing of these actions—and the actors who performed them—are the surest indicators that it was the national security state that killed President Kennedy, not the national syndicate of Organized Crime.
Finally, the identification of Oswald’s handler as David Atlee Phillips, and the confession of David Sanchez Morales, both prove that the JFK assassination was not a simple Mob killing.
I agree with Horne on all of this and so stated in Bloody Treason, but maybe not as succinctly and not using the term National Security State.
Horne’s book seems to be similar to that in Oliver Stone’s movie, JFK; that is, assassination of the President by the military industrial complex.
Mine is more like assassination by mortally threatened political enemies joined by ideologues, militarists, and men with criminal minds.
We may never know for sure who initiated the plot, or if it went together all at once, as I described in the first publication of Bloody Treason.
In closing, I believe that virtually all of my basic conclusions about the JFK assassination have been proven to be sound.
A Naz-Talgic Peek at PostWorld War II America ; originally published in The Rebel, November 22, 1983.
Hewett, Carol, “Oswald Didn’t Talk—But John Thomas Masen Does,” unpublished article, 1996.
Joesten, Joachim, The Case Against Lyndon B Johnson, Volume I Published somewhere in Europe.
A Naz-Talgic Peek at Post-World War II America ; originally published in Covert Action Information Bulletin, Fall 1990.
Summers, Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994.
Marcus, Raymond, The HSCA, The Zapruder Film, and The Single-Bullet Theory, 1992.
Thomas E Davis II, Jean Soutre...and certain other individuals, dated January 16, 1981.
An interim report of the Select Committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities.
United States Senate together with additional, supplemental, and separate views.
Joint Hearing Before the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research of the Committee on Human Resources United States Senate, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS From the beginning, it was apparent that it would be impractical and an exercise in vanity to attempt to complete this book without help from many people.
In fact, the relationships with these people would prove to be among the most rewarding aspects of my endeavor.
This ranged from private citizens whose technical and professional skills I sought, to actual witnesses to the assassination, or in the periphery and aftermath.
And, surprisingly, I found cooperation from retired government officials who were close to John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson.
I will begin with one closest to home, living here in San Diego, and go from there.
Robert Livingston, M.D., medical scientist and expert on the structure and function of the brain, provided many hours of consultation and advice.
David Mantik, M.D., physicist and radiation oncologist then at Eisenhower Memorial Hospital who had access to the autopsy materials in the National Archives, taught me the rudiments of x-ray technology, and shared with me the scientific evidence of conspiracy that he developed concerning Kennedy’s x-rays.
And Louis Kartsonis, M.D., who also had access to the autopsy materials and provided guidance in the early stages of my investigation.
He provided help in understanding his work and gave constructive criticism on how to write a book of this kind.
I hold his pioneer work to be the largest single contribution to the solution of the John F Kennedy murder mystery.
In addition, David Lifton helped me extensively in my analysis of the Zapruder film; he inspired me to give it highest priority when he lectured at a conference in Dallas; he shared his hard-gotten copy of the film with me; he gave me counsel and criticism on my initial proof of the forgery, himself having noticed Secret Service Agent Greer’s excessively rapid movement in the limousine near the time of the fatal head shot.
I thank Dick Russell, author of The Man Who Knew Too Much, who helped me understand why I should believe the story of Richard Case Nagell.
Russell’s book stands out to me as the single most comprehensive non-scientific compilation of new evidence yet published.
And Anthony Summers, whose works on the Kennedy assassination and J Edgar Hoover have been most valuable.
And Paul Hoch, an invaluable critic of evidence, who has tried to keep me on the straight and narrow path.
Anna Marie Kuhns-Walko, a dedicated genius at finding documents in the National Archives, provided me with thousands of selected pages of newly released documents and assisted me in reducing that material to a manageable level.
Mary Ferrell generously gave her time and encouragement and shared her vast knowledge of the Kennedy assassination.
Mary is a rare and colorful person, unique in American history, and, in my judgment, deserving of the highest honors for her relentless pursuit of evidence concerning the Kennedy assassination over the past thirty-four years.
And Deborah Stockton and Lee Ann Hubbard, who provided their publishing and editing skills in the final stages to make this book a reality.
A special word of thanks to David Swift, screenwriter, producer, and director, who encouraged me not to give up.
He devoted many hours trying to help me find a publisher, and he introduced me to motion picture editor Leon Carrere, from whom I learned about techniques of movie film editing.
I also thank George Kendall, who taught me about film editing machines and who introduced me to Peter Silverman, who introduced me to Dr.
I thank my good friend Vice Admiral Robert Baldwin, who introduced me to retired naval officers who had direct experience with naval intelligence.
A special acknowledgment is extended to the retired government officials, military officers, and private citizens who granted me interviews.
Their hours of discussions with me shed much-needed light on the circumstances and state of knowledge surrounding the Kennedy assassination within the government in 1963 and to the present day.
This book is only a continuation of their sacrifices and labor over the past thirty years.
He volunteered to conduct independent tests and analysis concerning my proof of the missing frames in the Zapruder film.
He worked many hours and weekends at his expense and freely provided me with the results of his tests which confirmed my original experiments.
Those who helped me gave freely of themselves, demonstrating the need of large numbers of American people to get to the truth of the assassination of John F Kennedy.
But, in the end, the conclusion and judgments that I have reached are my own, and are not attributable to nor endorsed by any of those who helped me along the way.
It is not necessary to start at the beginning and read chapter by chapter all the way through the book.
Some readers may wish to skip around as their energy level and interests vary.
Looking at all of the photographs first and reading their captions will be useful to become acquainted with the major characters . i This is a method I learned as a systems engineer and businessman solving large, complex problems in the materials processing, electric power, and aerospace industries.
When approaching a problem, it is best to look first at the obvious; the broad picture; the tips of the icebergs, from which a tentative solution can be derived; then to proceed in depth.
The CIA mind-control programs have been thoroughly exposed and documented in the Church Committee Report.
The CIA penetration of news media is summarized in Namebase Newsline, Journalism and the CIA, April-June 1997, citing a wide range of sources.
For simplicity, I use the term “Mafia” and “organized crime” interchangeably, although there is a distinction.
Evidence of CIA involvement with the Mafia is included in Chapters 20 and 21. 7 i See Chapter 4 for a discussion of evidence that Marilyn Monroe was murdered, and its ramifications. 8 {sl See Chapter 31 for evidence of Lyndon Johnson’s corruption.
See Chapter 15 for more on Robert Kennedy’s crusade against organized crime Letter from Burt W Griffin to Mrs.
I still believe that the Commission, with the possible exception of Allen Dulles, did not participate in any cover-up, but that it was the work of others.
A CBS poll reported by Dan Rather on May 30, 1996 for the CBS Evening News showed that 89% of the American people did not believe that Oswald acted alone.
The reader is reminded that in constructing an hypothesis, one is allowed to speculate, if done rationally.
The Kennedy brothers, above all others; if incriminating diaries and tapes about them could be confiscated and kept from public view.
E The term used by the CIA is “false sponsor’; that is, creating false information or planting evidence to direct the blame to an innocent, yet plausible, person or group.
EE Please read Chapter 9, Questions of Evidence, for a discussion of the legal concept of “best evidence” as related to scientific concepts.
The possibility of an “induced cover-up” by the CIA or FBI will be considered as the book progresses.
That is, fear of exposure of their dark secrets if the crime were to be solved could conceivably have induced the CIA or FBI to cooperate in the cover-up.
The United States did not promise never to invade Cuba under any circumstances , but for the purpose of this semi-fictional chapter I am taking a hypothetical point of view of the conspirators; and it remains a controversy whether or not the missiles were actually removed.
Shortly before Robert Kennedy was assassinated, he had stated that only by becoming president would he be able to determine the truth about his brother’s assassination.
Perhaps the plotters underestimated Robert Kennedy’s resolve, and were forced to kill him later when it became apparent that he would very likely become president.
The assassination of Robert Kennedy will not be included in the scope of this book, although the full knowledge of what happened there, as well as the assassination of Martin Luther King, holds promise of finally rounding out the complete story.
This was confirmed on November 22, 1993, when President Clinton, a most intelligent and informed president, stated on national television that he believed Oswald acted alone.
This, thirty years after his idol, John Kennedy, was murdered in Dallas.
President Clinton apparently had too many other problems on his platter than to deal with the past.
Also, he had just visited with the Kennedys at Martha’s Vineyard while on vacation.
In the fall of 1993 , a new book was published entitled Passport to Assassination by Col.
Oleg M Nechiporenko in which he outlined his fundamental analysis of the nature and structure of conspiracies.
Nechiporenko was an officer in the Russian equivalent of the CIA and was stationed in Mexico City when Oswald went there in September 1963.
Nechiporenko wrote that the main attributes indicating conspiracy are the agreement of several people and secrecy.
He says these principles are universal and are followed by the intelligence services, the Mafia, and any criminal organization.
He says that the executioners would be professional killers, both primary and reserve.
He says at first glance this model may appear to be too large or overly bureaucratic but that its structure makes a great deal of sense.
He says the structure of the Mafia provides an example of this principle along with intelligence services’ operational work, which is based on the same principles.
Upon reading this analysis written by a KGB colonel who shared an office with Kostikov, a KGB officer in the “Liquid Affairs” branch , I noted that my hypothetical master plan seemed to include all these elements.
Perhaps the colonel did not see that element as necessary in Russia, where brutal military repression would be taken for granted.
I reflected that, of any people, the Russians would have the greatest insight into the nature of conspiracies, particularly conspiracies to assassinate their leaders.
Russia’s history of assassinating leaders perhaps exceeds that of any other nation in modern history.
Also, evidence of shots from the scientific acoustical analysis, although supporting a conclusion of more than one gunman, is not included here because of its controversial, maybe doubtful, validity.
The autopsy pathologists also did not dissect the throat wound to see where it went, despite being informed by telephone before the autopsy to do so by the chief of the United States Neurobiological Laboratory at the time, Dr.
See Appendix C for discussion about controversy regarding this subject.
Mary Ferrell is renowned as an authority and collector of JFK assassination documents.
The nature of Kennedy’s wounds will be examined thoroughly in the chapters immediately following.
Charles Crenshaw, who was present at the Parkland Hospital emergency room when President Kennedy arrived there after the assassination.
Unfortunately for the JAMA, its attack was based on false information and poor research.
Crenshaw and Shaw sued the JAMA and were awarded a large financial settlement.
The JAMA was required by the court to print an article retracting its statements about Dr.
Bruce Jamison told me that the three copies were made using the contact printing process, and that all of the information from the original would be exactly duplicated on the copies, including edge images and film stock symbols.
This undoubtedly gave the forgers grave problems in preserving the original printing.
In a 11/21/94 interview, Schwartz said he personally delivered the original to Stolley at the Adolphus Hotel in Dallas on either November 26 or 27.
Stolley may have been given a copy on November 23 and then the original on November 26 or 27, although Schwartz does not remember Stolley getting a copy on November 23.
Not shown in the September 1964 issue were frames missing while the limousine was behind the freeway sign, explained as an inadvertent break in the film while handling by Life lab technicians.
In my interview, Erwin Schwartz was under the impression that negative copies were made at Jamison Film, but in a later telephone conversation with Bruce Jamison , I learned that three “reversal dupes” were made on Kodachrome II camera stock furnished by Eastman Kodak in Dallas; from these, positive prints were developed later in the day at Eastman Kodak in Dallas.
In 1995 the book Hoover s FBI by Cartha “Deke” DeLoach, J Edgar Hoover’s numberthree man, was published.
DeLoach made a very curious statement when he wrote about first seeing the Zapruder film.
He said that he had viewed the Zapruder film in FBI headquarters “on television” at 3 m. on November 23, 1963.
This statement is certainly not true because the Zapruder film was not shown on television until years later.
It seems very unlikely that the film could have arrived at FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., and been converted to a television tape in such a short period of time.
It seems much more likely that DeLoach was watching a projection on a screen of a copy of the actual film.
The Zapruder film that we have all seen shows unmistakably the president’s head and body being thrust suddenly backward.
DeLoach either has a very faulty memory or saw the original, unaltered film which could, indeed, have shown JFK being pitched forward only to have those frames deleted later in the film alteration.
This reporting of JFK being pitched forward was also made by Dan Rather of CBS who saw what was in all probability the original film on Saturday morning, November 23, 1963 in Zapruder’s office in Dallas.
But, when challenged, they changed their story to that of a backward movement.
His supportive wife had long since found her caring place in his diffuse life, but Allen ever enjoyed the company of hearty, opinionated women who talked tough.
I would later find out that more than an optical printer would be required to reduce the 35mm film back down to 8mm on Kodachrome II film stock.
How suspicious that Oswald, an avowed Communist, traitor, and “promoter” of pro-Castro literature, and who was being watched by the FBI, would be employed in top-secret photographic work for the United States government.
Photographic expertise for extensive alteration of film was available also in government at the FBI labs and the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington, D.C. loz Schwartz had told us in the interview that once the film print was made, he, Zapruder, and a few employees of Eastman Kodak viewed the film there on the spot.
Marler and I had both hoped that when we advised him that he and his group were looking at the wrong frames he would back off and leave the rapid head/body turn subject alone until I could publish.
Livingstone acknowledged that we may have been looking at different frames than he.
Unfortunately, he did not include photos of the actual frames that he was looking at for his reader to study.
This is unfortunate because both David Lifton and Marler had presented my work based on missing frame counts.
Later I decided that the angular velocity was the only way to analyze it because frame counts are very deceiving— head and body turns start with miniscule frame counts and build up in degrees as the turn accelerates.
I now regret that I agreed to let David Lifton present what we call the “rapid head turn” before I had finished my work and was ready to publish.
This led to Marler’s articles and now, finally, my book, which was published only after extensive study and consultation with experts.
I wish that Livingstone had held off until I could finish my work and publish, but he was unwilling to do so.
Mantik about this after I had seen that Livingstone had made that statement, and Dr.
Mantik told me that he, indeed, agreed with the estimates of angles I am reporting here.
Roger McCarthy, president of Failure Analysis, Inc., in a mock trial held by the American Bar Association in San Francisco in the summer of 1992.
He went on to state that Kennedy would not have been hit any later than frame 221, at a minimum, and therefore Kennedy and Connally were hit by separate bullets.
Presented by Sherry Pool Gutierrez, CSCSA, at COPA meeting in Washington, D.C., October 21, 1995.
Of the twenty-one witnesses who said they saw the limousine stop completely, six were Dallas policemen.
These allegations are derived primarily from David Lifton’s monumental and pioneer book Best Evidence.
Lifton’s work is essential to understanding the evidence concerning the autopsy.
I made a point of getting to know David Lifton early when I started working on this book.
We spent many long hours together discussing and debating the evidence.
But after getting to know David Lifton very well, I observed that he is a man of intellectual integrity and would not write of anything that he did not believe to be true, and only after exhaustive analysis.
Lifton himself has written that he proceeded a little too rapidly in the early days of his research when he was very young.
Some critics still go back to Lifton’s early writings and try to discredit him.
But none, in my view, has been able to discredit the main thrust of his work in Best Evidence.
It took a gigantic, prolonged effort on my part to overcome my instinct to reject Lifton’s conclusions about the medical evidence.
But, finally, with the exceptions that are noted in the text, I concluded that Lifton’s discoveries rank at the very top of the list.
The specific wording of the above allegations, however, is my own; at this point they are only allegations, which do not necessarily agree with Lifton.
Disguise and Deception in the Assassination of John F Kennedy, 600, 674; also my disussion with Aubrey Rike in November 1992.
Crenshaw confirms that the body was “wrapped in two white sheets” before it was placed in the coffin at Parkland Hospital.
David Lifton has documented that, at the time of the swearing-in ceremony, all of Kennedy’s aides and Jacqueline Kennedy were in a forward compartment of Air Force One, thus leaving the coffin unattended for a few minutes.
The coffin could have been opened at that time and the body hidden somewhere on Air Force One; a most likely spot was in a cargo hatch directly below where the coffin was placed.
He discovered through research of the design of Air Force One that there is a large cargo compartment, accessible by a trap door, underneath the carpeting in front of where the coffin was placed.
It would have been a simple matter to open the coffin, remove the body, and drop the body into the lower compartment where it would later be removed from the aircraft in a body bag, through a bottom cargo door—either in Dallas and flown separately back to Washington, or after Air Force One landed at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington.
He first told of the two ambulances and two caskets to the Washington News Sun, reported in its article on May 1, 1975.
Dennis David stated that he witnessed the arrival of the first ambulance at the rear of Bethesda Hospital.
He said it was a black Cadillac ambulance as opposed to a gray Navy ambulance.
Humes were present, plus the chief of the Army medical departments, and the chief of the Air Force medical departments.
David said the casket came in through the “back gate” from the east entrance off Jones Bridge Road at approximately 6:45m.
Accompanying the casket were six or seven civilians whom he assumed were Secret Service people.
He also said there were two civilians in white smocks, one driving the hearse and the other in the front seat.
David witnessed the casket being taken off the hearse and seven or eight men carrying the casket into the morgue.
He said it obviously wasn’t just an empty casket, because it appeared much heavier than that, and he could see the strain on the men who carried it.
When Lifton asked David what the casket looked like, David said, “It was a gray metal casket.
When Lifton asked him if it was a polished bronze casket, David replied, “No, it wasn’t.
Jerrol Custer first told his story for public disclosure to David Lifton.
Custer told me the President’s wound was enormous—‘“I could put both of my hands in the wound.
He said that he exposed the x-ray film and returned to the morgue, x-rays showing that the rear of the President’s head was blown off.
Custer then went on to say that after he had taken the x-rays, he left the morgue, and as he was walking through the main foyer he saw Jacqueline Kennedy coming in through the main entrance.
Custer said that he saw Jacqueline from a distance of ten or fifteen yards.
Outside the hospital door stood the Navy ambulance, with the Dallas casket.
Jerrol Custer related this same story on KRON-TV in San Francisco in 1988, along with Paul O’Connor, Dennis David, and Aubrey Rike, who also related their stories as stated in this book.
The “ambulance chase” is a very complex story, possibly involving two Navy ambulances.
O’Connor’s visual estimate of the amount of brain remaining in the skull was independently confirmed three years after this interview in an optical density analysis of the autopsy xrays by radiation oncologist Dr.
O’Connor’s testimony to the HSCA, released in 1994, tells of the hearse being at the rear of the hospital and relates Jerrol Custer’s remarks to him about seeing Mrs.
Kennedy in the lobby afterwards, but it does not state directly that there was a decoy ambulance at the front.
To my knowledge, there are no government documents of Dennis David’s or Jerrol Custer’s statements. {sl} In November 1995 I obtained a copy of the tape of the Lipsey interview and listened to it carefully.
Lipsey did, in fact, talk of the decoy ambulance at the front of the hospital with Jacqueline Kennedy, just as the HSCA had written.
Also, in the interview, Lipsey said several times that while he was watching the autopsy he was absolutely and unequivocally certain that Kennedy had been shot three times.
This, of course, nullifies the Warren Commission’s theory that Kennedy was hit by only two shots which is absolutely necessary for their hypothesis.
Later in the interview, Lipsey questioned the HSCA interviewer about conspiracy, referring to Jack Ruby’s shooting of Oswald.
The National Archives has released negatives of the autopsy x-rays; positive prints are included in Chapter 14.
Robert Livingston explained to me how cerebellar tissue is distinguished from other tissues of the brain.
He completed medical training and a residency in Internal Medicine at Stanford, and conducted advanced neuroscience research at the Universities of Geneva, Zurich, Collége de France, Oxford, Géteborg, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He founded and directed the hospital for wounded Okinawans and Japanese prisoners of war during the battle for Okinawa, served on NASA’s First Life Sciences Committee, was Scientific Director for the National Institute for Mental Health and the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness, and was the first National Scholar at the National Library of Medicine.
William Kemp Clark is a neurosurgeon—an expert in brain anatomy and therefore of its appearance in an opened skull.
The fact that the brain was severely mutilated is supported in a document that Anna Marie obtained from the National Archives.
It is an HSCA memo of an interview of the autopsy physician J Thornton Boswell on August 16, 1977.
I noted while cutting the tissue there is a definite picture of the way the missile passed.
Boswell but is in substantial agreement with the drawing of the photograph of the brain in Exhibit 13-8.
This piece had reportedly been found in the limousine in which the President was riding.
This piece of bone was x-rayed and doctors determined it had evidence of metal particles.
When the body was first observed on the autopsy table, it was thought by the doctors that surgery had possibly been performed in the head area and such was reflected in my notes made at the time.
If we accept Sibert’s HSCA interview as his best reconstruction of what happened, then the “surgery on the head” statement in his initial report would be discounted.
Humes still puzzled about surgery on the head the next day when he phoned Dr.
These questions, combined with all of the other evidence that the brain was either completely or partially removed by the conspirators, leads me to give credence to the original FBI report, and not to a rationalization twelve years later.
I have viewed that program many times and concluded that I will not try to deal with its errors and distortions except for one item.
In the Nova documentary, four of the Dallas hospital doctors, acting as consultants for Nova, were brought to Washington, D.C., to view the autopsy pictures and x-rays in the National Archives.
All of them earlier had said that when they observed Kennedy’s body at Parkland Hospital they saw a large wound in the rear of his head.
Nova permitted them to enter the viewing room for the photos and xrays, each for about one-half hour.
When they emerged from the room they said they had seen no evidence that the wounds had been altered.
We should keep in mind that this was twenty-five years after their first testimonies.
He restated his consistent past statements that the photographs did not agree with what he saw—a large hole in the back of the head.
Dulany, Jenkins, and Peters, years earlier they had all clearly stated that there was a large hole in the back of the head.
Perhaps they were intimidated or confused by seeing the autopsy photos in total for the first time in 1988.
In any event, their earlier testimonies are inherently more credible than later vague statements under pressure.
We must remember that for the doctors to accept that the autopsy photos were not what they had seen at Parkland Hospital, and so announce on national television, would have been tantamount to accusing the government of involvement in a cover-up of the conspiracy.
It is understandable that some may not have wished to place themselves in such a storm of controversy.
The Nova program, from beginning to end, despite Walter Cronkite’s good intentions, is flawed with faulty reasoning and incomplete evidence.
Cronkite, in his attempt to be balanced, makes the mistake of presenting the evidence for conspiracy in a greatly simplified form, then presenting remotely possible doubts that can always be raised for any evidence, no matter how powerful it is.
Cronkite then concludes, one by one, for each item, that there isn’t proof of conspiracy “beyond a shadow of a doubt’—an impossibility for any evidence, as legal scholars and trial attorneys know only too well.
He studied the JFK assassination perhaps harder and longer than any other network newsperson.
I wonder if he realizes how much good he could have accomplished for our nation, if only he had come down strongly on what, in my judgment of his intelligence and reasoning power, he must have genuinely, deeply suspected—that a very sinister conspiracy assassinated his president.
Humes’ handwritten notes concerning his telephone conversation on November 23, 1963 with Dr.
Malcolm Perry, in which Perry describes a puncture wound in the anterior neck; Humes wrote that Dr.
Mantik was chairman of the Cancer Committee at Eisenhower Hospital and practices in the Peter Lake Center of Eisenhower Hospital in Rancho Mirage.
As a practicing radiation oncologist, he is engaged daily as a practitioner of x-ray techniques and technology to examine cancer patients for life-and-death diagnoses.
In this practice, he became intimately familiar with the practical application of the science of optical densitometry for interpreting x-rays and, more specifically, for detecting and measuring the dimensions and physical characteristics of tumors in patients.
This combination of practical experience and academic training, along with the fact that Dr.
Mantik has a Ph.D. in physics , uniquely qualifies him to speak about the x-rays of John F Kennedy and the autopsy following his murder.
Mantik has the courage and love of country to challenge the orthodoxy, while still working in the establishment mainstream.
The use of optical densitometry for measurement of the dimensions, mass, and density of objects in x-ray films has been developed over the years to an empirical science, with a large body of information available in the medical literature to facilitate reasonably precise calculations and interpretations.
L101} The HSCA appointed a panel of experts who concluded that the autopsy x-rays (and photographs) are all authentic.
That conclusion boggles the mind in light of the evidence presented in this chapter.
It should be noted that none of the experts on the panel made optical densitometer measurements of the x-rays, as did Dr.
Mantik encountered a stumbling block in his concept of x-ray composite forgeries, which led him to temporarily believe that it was not possible to forge x-ray film using composites, due to the impossibility of achieving more than an optical density of 2. in the composite x-ray, whereas the optical density in the Kennedy x-rays approached 4. in area F and in the background.
But with technical information he received from Eastman Kodak Company, he then went back to his laboratory and found that it was indeed possible to make a composite forgery of an x-ray and achieve the optical densities that he had measured in the Kennedy x-rays.
Mantik presented this update at the COPA Conference in Washington, D.C., on October 21, 1995, but unfortunately not everyone has since gotten the word.
But a blow-out in the side of the head is another matter, because removal of a large number of frames (enough to remove the entire view of the side of the head) would have been required, impossible to conceal.
I find this notion to be extremely implausible, to say the least. ; he mean transmission measured in area P by Dr.
Mantik was 23.7%, whereas that measured in area F was 0.020%, a ratio of 1130:1.
This compares to an average ratio of area P to F of 1.37:1 in nine coroner’s cases that Dr.
According to an entry in the attorney general’s calendar on May 7, 1962, Robert Kennedy probably learned of the Mafia connection in a meeting with Richard Helms on that date.
He then met with J Edgar Hoover on May 9, 1962, and Hoover prepared a memorandum recounting what was said at the May 7 meeting.
On May 11, Robert Kennedy asked Sheffield Edwards to prepare a memorandum (dated May 14, 1962) relating what had transpired in the May 7 meeting.
Edwards prepared the memorandum with the assistance of Lawrence Houston.
Houston later testified that Kennedy was upset that the CIA had used Giancana.
Houston said that he did not remember Kennedy commenting about the operation itself.
The Johnny Rosselli Story, 245. — 21 1967 Inspector General’s Report on plotting against Castro, 53.
In a symposium in Dallas in November 1993, it was announced that, based on a telephone call, Karen Carlin may have resurfaced.
At the time of his arrest, he confessed to killing JFK, but later recanted.
He strongly resembles photographs of a tramp arrested and released at Dealey Plaza.
According to one of my psychoanalytical advisers, it is true that even gangsters (some gangsters) can have a conscience, particularly if it involves country or family, thus violating their code of honor ci An irony is that confessions are discredited if they fit too neatly into already public information.
Presumably, if all the details are public, no confession could ever be believed without irrefutable scientific evidence.
Also, Aleman testified that the conversation must have occurred in June 1963; the consensus of the Committee was September 1962.
It is interesting to note that when President Kennedy was murdered, Robert Kennedy’s first thought was that Hoffa was behind it and had bribed the Secret Service.
This was in an article in Vanity Fair in December 1994 by Anthony and Robbyn Summers.
I talked with Anthony Summers about this in Nassau, Bahamas, in December 1995.
Summers said he is convinced that Ragano’s story about Trafficante is not true.
Ragano said in his book that he met with Trafficante on March 13, 1987.
Yet Trafficante’s widow, two daughters, and several neighbors say the meeting with Ragano never happened, based on their recollection that Santo had not visited Tampa since the Christmas holidays.
Ragano later said that he was telling the truth and that he has three witnesses to prove it.
In any case, even if we discount Ragano’s story of the alleged Trafficante confession completely, there remains powerful evidence that Trafficante knew of the assassination plot beforehand, that he had ample motive, and was involved with Jimmy Hoffa and Carlos Marcello in planning the death of John F Kennedy.
Also, read Operation Zapata, the report prepared by a committee chaired by General Maxwell Taylor for John Kennedy to assess the reasons for the Bay of Pigs failure.
Morales would later become a prime suspect as the man who directed the field operation in the JFK assassination.
A Biography of Eleanor, Allen, and John Foster Dulles and Their Family Network by Leonard Mosley; also, Gentleman Spy: The Life of Allen Dulles by Peter Grose.
The Cuban missile crisis is generally accepted as starting on October 15, 1962, when definitive evidence of offensive missiles planted in Cuba by the Russians was first obtained.
The evidence that Oswald was in Mexico City on September 28 will be addressed in a later chapter.
Brown said, ‘Bogard was beaten by some men so badly that he was in the hospital for some time, and this was after he testified.
He added, *I think he may have seen something important, and I think there are some who don’t want to talk.
Robert D Rogers, 3821 Whitehall Road, Dallas, Texas, advised that she has known Miss Silvia Odio for about a year.
She stated Miss Odio’s family were acquaintances of friends of her husband’s family in Miami, Florida, from pre-Batista days.
Rogers stated when Miss Odio’s parents were arrested and put in jail in Cuba by the Castro government, Miss Odio and all of her brothers and sisters were able to get out of Cuba and they all came to the United States.
She stated Miss Odio went to Puerto Rico with her husband and children, but became involved in marital troubles in Puerto Rico and eventually divorced her husband.
She understands that her husband actually obtained the divorce from Miss Odio, but they have some sort of written agreement permitting her to have the children.
She stated that when Miss Odio arrived in Dallas, Texas, she was quite upset emotionally and has undergone psychiatric treatment at the Southwestern Medical School.
Rogers stated Miss Odio had stayed a short time with the John B Rogers’ family due to the family ties that went back beyond the Batista days in Cuba.
However, when she was able to bring her four children to Dallas from Puerto Rico, she moved into her own apartment.
Rogers described Miss Odio as a very well educated person who has a typical “Latin” personality, that is, she is very excitable and emotional.
Rogers stated she is a truthful person, who is not believed to be the type who would make up a story to impress others of her importance.
Rogers stated she has never known Miss Odio to lie to her about anything.
There was no scheduled airline flight from England to Helsinki that would have permitted Oswald to arrive in Helsinki by midnight on October 9.
We should keep in mind that Hoover may have been part of an orchestrated disinformation scheme fed to the Warren Commission to connect Oswald ominously to the Soviets.
The white Chevrolet and the dark-complexioned Cuban will become very important in a later chapter.
The Reilly Coffee Company is suspected of having been a center of right-wing, anti-Castro activities with connections to federal intelligence agencies.
An inordinate number of people who left the company in that time period ended up working for NASA and government defense contractors.
Curtis is a CIA code name for Winston Scott; he went by the name of Willard Curtis.
This information has been revealed in studies of numerous CIA documents.
Knight is probably a code name for either Richard Helms or David Atlee Phillips.
Most likely it is Richard Helms, but Phillips was also occasionally referred to as Knight.
This retraction was typical of many witnesses who revealed evidence incriminating the government, only to “change their minds” later when they realized the consequences of what they had said.
He said his name was Lee OSWALD and wanted to know if they had heard anything.
Scott, Deep Politics IT, 14n NO IN IN —|O \oO This report has been slightly edited by this author for ease of reading, by paragraphing and spelling out of abbreviations.
LEGAT is a code for FBI representatives at the United States embassy in Mexico City.
Yuri Gagarin appeared in Mexico City on October 11, 1963 (Nechiporenko, Elena Garro never appeared, despite a date scheduled.
The fact that the White House was aware of the Alvarado story is significant.
I have noticed on other CIA documents that McGeorge Bundy was on the distribution list.
This includes the original cable traffic concerning keeping the Duran interrogation secret from the American people.
All of this is documented evidence that Lyndon Johnson was getting up-to-date information on the Mexico City evidence and that, apparently, the CIA was not concealing anything from him.
When questioned by the FBI, the United States embassy said that it had no knowledge or records of these telephone calls by Alvarado.
The words “respond to suggestion” and “psychiatric treatment” remind one of hypnosis and mind-control methods employed by the CIA in that era.
He said that the Nicaraguan secret service was under the control of the CIA at the time.
It should be noted that this was over the strong objections of Thomas Mann, United States ambassador to Mexico.
Ambassador Mann pointed out the detail in the Alvarado story, stating that it was very believable.
Station’s Double Agents have not had meetings with the Soviets since the assassination.
When doubt was expressed regarding this statement Giancana reportedly assured those present that Castro’s assassination would occur in November.
Moreover, he allegedly indicated that he had already met with the assassin-to-be on three occasions, the last meeting taking place on a boat docked at the Fontainbleau Hotel, Miami Beach, Florida.
Within seven months after this memo, Hoover knew of the mob’s arrangement with the CIA and the plots against Castro.
The significance of this in the JFK assassination is that Hoover knew very early about CIA dirty business with the Mafia.
In a previous chapter, I wrote that Hoover knew about Oswald and CIA connections while Oswald was in Russia; thus Hoover would have seen the opportunity to set up Oswald and the CIA in a plot to kill Kennedy.
Yet, if Alderson is correct, the FBI knew, on its own, about Souetre very soon after the assassination and attempted to conceal it.
Researchers believe there is no reason not to believe Alderson, who had no reason to lie about the matter.
This leads to the suspicion that the FBI never would have left a paper trail of its prior knowledge of Souetre had it not been forced to do so by the formal notification from the French.
It should be noted that none of this evidence was made available by Hoover to the Warren Commission, although the FBI clearly had it in its possession before the completion of the Warren Report.
For those who wish to see no further progress in the Kennedy case, a much-trumpeted British television program, produced in November 1988 by Central T.V., was a welcome event.
Among its many follies, the program named as Gunman Two and Gunman Three two men whose names had come up during Rivele’s discussions with David, but who David had since specifically said were innocent.
In the wake of the television program, one of the men produced a plausible alibi for November 22, and Rivele’s exclusive story suddenly appeared—however unjustifiably—to have been exploded.
Rivele’s French publishers backed off, and no American publisher had been found as this book went to press.
But I urge the reader to suspend judgment until this segment is completed, and reasons to believe David’s story are evaluated.
The picking up of the assassins on the Texas border by the Chicago Mafia was also reported in the Sam and Chuck Giancana book Double Cross.
When QJ/WIN said he not interested, WI/ROGUE added there would be bonuses for special jobs.
When [Station Officer] tried learn whether WI/ROGUE had made approach latter claimed had taken no steps.
In any event, David was knowledgeable of the CIA operation to kill Lumumba in the Congo.
Although this implies that perhaps Lucien Sarti was QJ/WIN, it seems very unlikely since Sarti was too young.
Of course, David, Sarti, and QJ/WIN could all have been in the Congo assigned to the Lumumba assassination, as well as later becoming involved in the Kennedy assassination.
Christian David’s description of the gunshots fits the evidence if the back wound was an entry wound at the base of the neck, resulting in an exit wound in the throat.
However this would have required a very low position for the gunman in the rear, and still does not seem to adequately fit the location of the bullet holes in Kennedy’s jacket and shirt, which were six inches below the collar line.
We should keep in mind that we do not, to this day, understand Kennedy’s wounds because of forgery of films and alteration of autopsy results.
On the other hand, David could have constructed his own Dealey Plaza scenario from books available in 1986.
It seems very unlikely that David would have had access to these notes in 1986.
Jim Lesar agrees with me that this gives credence to David’s statements.
Letter also suggests intended addressee attorney Thomas G Proctor donate to Johnson’s campaign.
The Soviets knew about it before “the first spade had been put in the ground,” having been kept current on the project by George Blake, a Soviet mole in British intelligence.
The Soviets had transmitted only innocuous information over the cables It is not clear that Harvey had gone to Italy before June 1963.
The /nspector Generals Report states that when Harvey met Rosselli in Washington in June 1963, he had by then closed his home in preparation for leaving the country.
It is possible, however, that Harvey had gone to Rome, returned to Washington to close his home, and then gone back to Rome.
Ted Shackley was chief of station, Ray Cline was deputy to Shackley, David Morales was chief of operations.
Perhaps Vietnam was LBJ’s priority, or he simply wouldn’t continue anything that Robert Kennedy had been pursuing as a priority.
This again raises the question of whether the prime motive for the assassination was to trigger an invasion of Cuba; or whether the Cuban/Mexico City set-up was a false trail to lead investigators away from the real conspirators, whose motive was to get rid of the Kennedys and preserve their own power and freedom.
Rosselli, along with others, concocted a scheme wherein a cohort, hidden in a space above the card room at the Friars Club, looked through a peephole drilled in the ceiling.
The cohort would relay radio messages to others at the card table who had radio receivers strapped to their stomachs.
When the scam was uncovered, Rosselli was indicted, convicted, and sentenced to five years in the federal penitentiary at McNeil Island.
It was on July 18, 1976 that Rosselli had finally talked too much about the JFK assassination and was dismembered and disposed of in an oil drum in the Florida waterways.
Richard Case Nagell had mentioned to Dick Russell that he had once met Johnny Rosselli at the Friars Club.
Gaeton Fonzi, The Last Investigation; David Corn, Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA’ Crusades; Charles Rappleye and Ed Becker, A// American Mafioso: The Johnny Rosselli Story; Bradley Ayers, The War That Never Was ; also, my own interviews, and Bob Dorff’s interviews, with Robert Walton and Ruben Carbajal; and my discussions with Wayne Smith.
Crest told Dorff he was in Vietnam with Morales in 1964, in the Phoenix Program.
Crest also said that he had first met Morales in the Belgian Congo in 1960-1961.
David Morales, at the time I knew him, was about 6’23, portly and reflecting a heavy drinking habit.
He was foul tempered, suspicious of all but a few staff members and extremely protective of his turf as Operations Chief.
There was constant friction between Bob Wall and Morales but Morales held sway with Shackley and dominated the entire operational agenda at the Station.
Ted Shackley and the CIA’s Crusades, 85 I have vague recollection of David Morales being away from the Miami Station for extended periods when Bob Wall would serve as the Chief of Operations.
It is my opinion that Morales’ frequent absence was a source of conflict between Wall and Morales.
It was two to four months after this that Bradley Ayers saw Harvey, Morales, and Rosselli together in the Florida Keys.
This was probably Edwin Wilson, the renegade CIA man recently released from prison for selling arms to Libya According to researcher Bob Dorff, Robert Walton first revealed this story in 1989 or 1990 to Bradley Ayers.
The story was not published until Fonzi’s book was published in 1994 130) If Walton is correct on this date, the “leader” would have been General Rene Schneider, who was assassinated in 1970.
General Schneider was assassinated in 1970, shortly after the $10,000,000 was authorized; Allende was assassinated in 1973.
Ruben Carbajal told Bob Dorff that he believes unequivocally that the CIA killed Morales.
It should be noted, however, that Carbajal did say that Morales had received a diagnosis of a minor enlarged heart at one time in his life, but there had never been any overt symptoms.
When Robert Walton reviewed this transcript, he requested that I note that his experience with Morales as related to the JFK assassination occurred when he was a business partner of Morales, not when he was Morales’ attorney.
Therefore Walton did not feel that he was violating any attorney/client relationship in telling this story.
The following day, September 16, Director Helms called a meeting at the CIA to discuss the Chilean situation.
The Director told the group that President Nixon had decided that an Allende regime in Chile was unacceptable to the United States.
The President asked the Agency to prevent Allende from coming to power or to unseat him.
Further, the Agency is to carry out this mission without coordination with the Departments of State or Defense.
Formed in 1963, they began robbing banks to aid the poor, but later resorted to terrorism in an effort to overthrow the government and set up a Marxist state.
Within two days after the bombing, the FBI had picked up a young man who was connected with a right-wing extremist group called the Michigan Militia.
But these types of right-wing extremist organizations had not just “sprung up”; they had been in existence since before 1963, perhaps becoming dormant in the interim.
While seemingly new, their origins were in the Ku Klux Klan and Nazi-like movements.
The extremists had aligned themselves with numerous members of Congress in 1995, as in 1963.
But new targets of the extremists in 1995 were the FBI and federal law enforcement in general.
Similar to 1963, some of the religious right wing and right-wing extremist radio talk shows fanned the flames of paranoia in continuous diatribes against President Clinton.
In the months preceding the Oklahoma City bombing, fanatics had made two attacks on the presidency, one in the form of a small plane diving into the White House; and the other in the form of an extremist who opened fire with an assault rifle on the White House from Pennsylvania Avenue.
Another disturbed man had climbed over the White House fence with an unloaded pistol and was shot and wounded.
Another man was shot and killed when he brandished a knife in front of the White House.
In a conversation with Dick Russell, General Walker denied that this incident occurred; but the fact remains that the newspaper had called him all the way from Germany the morning after the assassination and did print the story before anyone could have known that Oswald was a suspect in the Walker shooting.
I should add that if ever extremism was justified, it was in the case of the people in the antiCastro movement in Florida.
After all, Castro had seized their businesses—fruits of their lifetime labor— forcing them into exile and imprisoning their families.
Go N ik General Charles Willoughby will be discussed in later chapters.
Murchison had received large loans from Hoffa’s Teamsters Union, thus indirectly connecting him to the Mafia.
And Murchison had direct financial ties to mobsters Vito Genovese and Carlos Marcello and was linked to the Bobby Baker scandal.
The purpose of the conference was to conduct a major assessment of the United States involvement in Vietnam, and to prepare recommendations to the president for a continuing program.
McGeorge Bundy prepared a directive— NSAM 273—which ultimately was approved by Lyndon Johnson.
One of the more extreme speculations about the Kennedy assassination has been that the Honolulu conference itself was part of a master plot to send the key members of Kennedy’s administration out of the country while he was assassinated.
This hypothesis included the notion that with these people out of the country, the stage would be set for a complete coup and takeover of the government by the United States military if things went so wrong that it would be needed.
From the research I have done, this appears to be utter speculation, without merit.
It should be noted that Robert McNamara had returned to Washington, D.C., by the time of the assassination.
But Johnson also approved planning for covert action against North Vietnam by CIA-supported South Vietnamese forces.
Rather, it was a final product of the November 20 Honolulu conference, the results of which were never reported to Kennedy because he was killed two days before anyone who had attended the conference could speak with him.
There is no way to know whether Kennedy would have approved the change, but we do know that Johnson did.
Johnson felt more certain than President Kennedy that the loss of South Vietnam had a higher cost than would the direct application of United States military force, and it was this view that shaped him and his policy decisions for the next five years.
President Johnson made clear to Lodge on November 24 that he wanted to win the war,and that, at least in the short run, he wanted priority given to military operations over “so-called” social reforms.
He felt the United States had spent too much time and energy trying to shape other countries in its own image.
From McNamara’s perspective, Johnson continued Kennedy’s policies, albeit with a greater emphasis on winning the war.
We should also keep in mind that there were hawk and dove factions in the Kennedy administration, and that with Johnson now at the helm, the hawks would prevail.
Even if McNamara and the doves had persuaded Kennedy to adopt the policy of early withdrawal from Vietnam, we cannot be certain that Kennedy was committed deeply to it.
And, of course, early withdrawal from Vietnam made good politics for the upcoming election.
According to the report prepared by a board of inquiry headed by General Maxwell Taylor for President Kennedy , only one air strike was withheld.
This was a second air strike requested by the CIA to destroy three remaining Cuban fighter planes that had not been taken out in a first planned air strike that had been designed so it would not appear to be conducted by United States forces.
Upon the urgings of the State Department, Kennedy (and McNamara) refused to approve the second strike because it would have revealed United States involvement.
In Operation Zapata, Bundy wrote a letter to Maxwell Taylor stating that he had given the order refusing the air strike, but Bundy was ambiguous in his letter as to whether he received the decision from Kennedy.
As described in my interview with McNamara, he clarified this important point.
Also, Bundy wrote that the importance of the three fighter planes was never relayed to Kennedy by the CIA or the military, and that he had offered to have the military and the CIA speak directly to President Kennedy to try to change his mind, but they declined to do so.
The supply ships were sunk by the Cuban fighter planes that had not been taken out because of Kennedy’s refusal to allow the air strikes.
Lyndon Johnson and His Times 3 Richard Reeves, President Kennedy: Profile of Power, 222.
This meeting was summarized in a sanitized, highly redacted copy of a document obtained from the John F Kennedy Library by Bob Dorff.
It shows that there was a follow-up meeting in which the subject was again reviewed.
General Johnson, who made the presentation, then confirmed to Kennedy that even if the United States attacked the USSR first , the loss to the United States would be unacceptable to political leaders.
However, General Johnson did state that he was convinced from his report that you could resort to nuclear weapons in a limited situation without it expanding into all-out nuclear war.
Although much of the summary of the meeting is deleted in the document, it is apparent that it had been decided that an opportunity for a first nuclear strike had passed, even in the eyes of the generals.
I telephoned her several times but only got her answering machine; she never returned my calls.
I later learned from Anna Marie that she had heard that Eugene B Dinkin was still alive, living in some sort of rest home and only available through a third party.
Time had run out for me in pursuing this story further—my publishing deadline had arrived.
Oo —~ William Manchester, The Death of a President, November 20-November 25, 1963, 67.
First published in American Opinion (Volume VII, Number 2, February 1964 37 An annual conference of COF in New Orleans on April 4-6, 1963, which attracted wealthy right-wing extremists from across the nation.
Setting up “a criminal activity to assassinate particular persons” was discussed.
The report stated that high-ranking members of the armed forces secretly belonged to the COF organization.
The compelling lesson is that organizations and talk-show hosts should be wary in fanning passions of extreme positions.
Hunt’s extensive ties to Hoover, which include discussions between Hunt and Hoover in 1967 concerning the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Hunt’s largesse to political figures John Connally and Senator James Eastland of Mississippi; and how he provided cash to Jimmy Hoffa through a Louisiana state official.
She was described in Warren Commission documents as an alcoholic, a liar, a very nervous woman, intelligent, and a prostitute.
Emphasis added 2 B 47 This list is a composite drawn from HSCA documents and a variety of other sources.
The Assassination of President Kennedy by Organized Crime, 8; also HSCA Vol.
He said he never attempted to renounce his citizenship and never attempted to reinstate his military discharge, and that he applied only to change his status for pension purposes.
He was particularly upset by my statement that he had a pattern of insubordination and troublemaking.
He also stressed the point that he had never had psychiatric treatment at any time.
Nagell said that he had only been observed in psychiatric examinations.
He defied anyone to show a document signed by a legitimate psychiatrist who ever said he had a mental illness or was mentally disturbed by the air accident.
I told him that I had interpreted his book to include potential evidence that the CIA was not involved in the assassination of Kennedy except possibly on a renegade level.
The leftist leaders who would be eliminated included Manuel Artime and Dr.
Aureliano Sanchez Arrango when Kohly’s group received notice that the remainder of the Cubans being held at Opa-Locka had been eliminated.
When President Kennedy found out about the Cubans being held, he dispatched Schlesinger and Adolf Berle to meet with the group at OpaLocka at the time of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Apparently, neither Kennedy nor Schlesinger knew the fate that was in store for the Cuban leftists.
He showed me his credentials & said he had received a telephone call from Director Hoover telling him to make himself available to us.
When I inquired of Agent Drain who the unidentified male was who accompanied him, he replied that he was a doctor friend of his.
E Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, i Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, E Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, E Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, E WG N R Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “Zhe Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, 2p.
For Willoughby affair with Clare Boothe Luce see Old Soldiers Never Die, Geoffrey Perret, 236, citing Luce’s papers in Library of Congress containing two folders of correspondence with Willoughby.
For Allen Dulles’ mind-control program, read John Marks, Search for a Manchurian Candidate.
For General Walker’s being a closet gay, see footnote in Chapter 22 citing his arrest by undercover officers in Dallas.
For J Edgar Hoover and Clyde Tolson’s homosexuality, see Chapters 2, 5, and 29.
Also, 2-17-83 Shaw files; interview with Colonel William Bishop, 1-18-90.
He said this was in part his reason for joining Castro’s forces—to get experience.
He infiltrated Cuba as an arms smuggler, bringing weapons that he had purportedly “stolen” from the United States Naval Academy armory.
Hemming also told me that he parachuted into Cuba during the 1961-1965 anti-Castro operations.
He said he posed for a photo wearing a Nazi Youth uniform only once as part of a plan to establish his cover as a right-wing youth for future use.
He had told me in San Diego that not everything in the San Diego interview was from first-hand experience; some of it had been arrived at over the years in his own private investigations.
A CIA document dated June 11, 1962 states that KUBARK had used LaBorde in CIA operations since early 1961.
The document states that LaBorde had formerly been employed by the Department of Agriculture in Mexico from 1947 to 1949 as a small boat operator.
Later, LaBorde acted as captain or chief engineer of a motor vessel called M/V Tejana III in CIA’s JM/WAVE operations against Cuba.
During or after the end of this period, LaBorde became associated with the Cuban Revolutionary Council—Sergio Arcacha Smith’s operation officed in the same building in New Orleans with Guy Banister and Oswald.
Another CIA document describes LaBorde as indiscreet, addicted to alcohol, of unsavory reputation.
At the time of the JFK assassination, LaBorde was 52 years old In later discussions I tried to clarify this statement.
I asked him if he was certain that he wanted that impression to be conveyed.
Hemming responded, somewhat upset, that he meant this to be a general statement regarding “tradecraft methods,” not that he had accepted the contract.
One must admit that Oliver Stone goes to great lengths to get realism in his movies, despite the criticism that has been heaped upon him.
Here we have an indication that Angleton may have found out about Oswald through Hemming.
Weberman speculates that Angleton, on his own, sent Oswald to the Soviet Union, without anyone in the CIA outside of his counter-intelligence group knowing about it.
As chief mole-hunter for the CIA, Angleton was chartered to be on his own.
No one in the CIA had the power to control him, except possibly Allen Dulles, if even Dulles.
Hemming says, however, that Oswald had earlier been successfully “dangled” to a Japanese-Soviet spy ring and later was one of four men sent to Russia to take blame for the shoot-down of the United States U-2 plane on May 1, 1960.
HEMMING received considerable newspaper publicity which caused adventurers from all over the United States to come and join his organization.
Most of these adventurers and mercenaries later became police problems and a number of them have been arrested for vagrancy, larceny, bad checks, and other minor offenses.
Members of HEMMING’s group usually stay in flophouses, eat at the Salvation Army and other relief organizations, beg money and food from Cuban refugees, and at times, form military training camps.
However, the turnover is high, because the members soon become dissatisfied with the organization’s inactivity and leadership.
During the past two years, HEMMING has visited the majority of the Cuban refugee leaders in Miami and has offered his group’s services, and requested money contributions.
At times, HEMMING has attempted to launch military invasions of Cuba, and on December 4, 1962, he and twelve others, who were attempting to launch a military invasion of Cuba from Marathon, Florida, were arrested by United States Customs Agents.
Hemming later told me that by this time, J Edgar Hoover had targeted him because of Hemmings’ involvement in obtaining the compromising photographs of Hoover.
Howard K Davis was Hemming’s most trusted associate, perhaps his equal or senior partner.
Davis, a decorated exArmy Airborne Ranger, was a pilot flying arms to Raul Castro during the Cuban revolution and later became a pilot for an airline on the East Coast of the United States Davis was 33 years old at the time of the Kennedy assassination.
Gary Shaw, who met Davis, describes him as quite different from Hemming in that Davis is very quiet.
According to Fonzi’s notes in an HSCA document that Hemming gave me, Howard Davis was Interpen’s contact man with the Mafia.
Hemming expressed strong feelings to me that Larry LaBorde was involved in the JFK assassination.
When Hemming had come upon the information about Jack Lawrence a few years before, he put two and two together and assumed that the Jack Lawrence in Dallas was the same person as the Jack Lawrence in New Orleans.
This had significance in that it would have been a direct link to Hemming and LaBorde in New Orleans.
This led Hemming to believe that it was part of an attempt to frame him in the Kennedy assassination.
To check into this, I contacted Sheldon Inkol in Toronto, Canada, who had done considerable research on the Jack Lawrence in Dallas.
Inkol believes that the Jack Lawrence in New Orleans is a different person from the one in Dallas.
He bases his conclusion largely on a physical description of the New Orleans Jack Lawrence that Hemming telephoned to him in 1994, compared to the known description of the Dallas Jack Lawrence, and records showing them as having different birthplaces and birth dates.
Inkol also came to believe that the Dallas Jack Lawrence had nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination.
Inkol agrees with me that there are many disturbing questions concerning the events and people at the Downtown Lincoln-Mercury Agency in Dallas.
After spending several weeks off and on researching this subject, I reluctantly decided to shelve it, at least temporarily, as another curious and very suspicious set of coincidences that should be given in-depth study.
Sheldon Inkol, Third Decade, Vol., #5, July 1991,3 72 In our first meeting in Fort Lauderdale, Hemming handed me a four-page document that he had prepared for me which explains his trip to Washington D.C. in February/March 1963.
While in Washington D.C., Hemming met with General Ted Clifton at the White House, Sterling Cottrell at the State Department, and General Victor J Krulak, U.S.M.C. and special assistant to the Secretary of Defense.
In a telephone conversation with Hemming in July 1997, he told me that he did not know where Hargraves was during the week of November 22, 1963, but Hargraves was repairing a boat with him at Christmas, 1963.
Fonzi’s source began with a Miami jail inmate, Rolando Otero, who led them to another source, a Florida State prison inmate codenamed Ten-One , who had told Otero that Oswald was sent to Russia as a CIA agent and the decision had been made to kill Kennedy before Oswald returned from Russia.
Ten-One said that Carlos was in contact with Oswald and was posing as a photographer at Dealey Plaza on November 22nd.
Important here is that Ten-One had a close linkage with Mitchell WerBell, the arms dealer whom Hemming and Carlos jointly represented.
An interesting linkage is that Otero said he understood from Carlos that most of the final planning and coordination took place in the Dallas YMCA building.
This is where Oswald stayed for one night, and Jack Lawrence, Lawrence Howard, and Loran Hall were staying at various times in late 1963.
My feeling is that in extended conversations profanity distorts meaning more than it conveys meaning.
Weberman had included all of the profanity in his web site on the Internet.
Moreover, explicit recording, in writing, of profanity conveys a much harsher impression of a person than is justified.
After all, many of our presidents, including JFK, used extreme profanity in private conversations.
Use of profanity does not necessarily mean that the person is a liar or unreliable.
However, in cases in which I thought the profanity was necessary to convey Hemming’s feelings and attitudes, it has not been deleted.
Hemming later confirmed that this was the reported incident concerning Bill Harvey/Johnny Rosselli in which these two were personally handling the transfer of weapons.
According to State Department documents, de Mohrenschildt and his wife were living in Haiti at the time of the assassination.
He was ostensibly in Haiti on a geological survey for oil, but, according to one witness, could have been on a CIA or MI undercover mission, contemplating the overthrow of Duvalier’s regime.
De Mohrenschildt was dealing with Haiti’s Duvalier in the sale of boats, weapons, and two T-28 fighter planes from Dallas that were reportedly flown to Haiti illegally.
He also was reported to have had $200,000 or $250,000 deposited in his bank account in Port-au-Prince shortly after the JFK assassination.
It is entirely possible that he could have been flown to Dallas and been at the Texas Club on July 5, 1963.
De Mohrenschildt has demonstrated himself to be an obfuscator in many aspects of his statements about his role with Oswald and the JFK assassination.
De Mohrenschildt was a friend of Lyndon Johnson and corresponded with him after the JFK assassination.
This made some sense to me in that it was a practice of the FBI at that time to infiltrate radical organizations with the intent of making them even more radical by provoking their tendency for violence.
An example of this is the FBI’s penetration of the Ku Klux Klan, supposedly to break it up, but in reality to spur it toward even more violence.
It is not beyond reason to me to imagine that a government agency in that era, such as the FBI, would conceive of an agent provocateur to infiltrate the John Birch Society, for example, and incite some of their more impassioned members to promote a plot to kill JFK, and to set up Hemming’s group as a fallback false flag.
Based on this exchange, I later surmised that Pawley was killed because he knew too much and might, to relieve his conscience, talk.
Hemming had told me in San Diego that his hair had become bleached by constant exposure to the sun in his paramilitary training exercises.
Hal Hendrix was the newsman who strangely knew all about Oswald—knew he had defected to Russia, returned to the U.S., etc.—early in the afternoon of November 22, 1963, when newsman Seth Kantor talked with him from Dallas.
Hendrix also knew about the coup that ousted the pro-Kennedy Bosch, of the Dominican Republic, twenty-four hours before it happened.
In reality, they would overlap and there would be more nuances; and there would be one scenario that describes exactly what happened, which we may never know with certainty.
See Appendix B for a list of 95 documents about Hemming in the National Archives.
At the time of the cut-off point in publishing the first edition of Bloody Treason, many of these were “referred to other agencies,” pending release to the public.
William Turner, former FBI agent under J Edgar Hoover, wrote, “Bobby Kennedy instinctively believed that there was more to his brother’s assassination than Lee Harvey Oswald.
But he was not in a position to turn the Justice Department loose to try to discover who was responsible.
He was now a lame-duck attorney general, hated both by Hoover and Johnson.
He instructed Daniel P Moynihan, then Assistant Secretary of Labor and a charter member of the Kennedy inner circle, to secretly investigate the possibility that Bobby’s arch-enemy Jimmy Hoffa was behind the plot.
Moynihan assembled a small team of trusted Justice Department agents to discreetly carry out the inquiry, but in the end he was forced to report that no evidence of Hoffa’s complicity could be found.
As we sat there, Connally began outlining the schedule for Kennedy’s trip.
It was firm, he kept insisting; it was his state, and if the President didn’t like it, he could stay home.
I’m here to get everybody’s recommendations, and I’1l forward them to the White House.
The Dallas Citizens’ Council, described as an oligarchy, was founded in 1937.
Doctors, lawyers, and professional people were not eligible for membership.
But even if Connally had been in the same car with LBJ, the same ploy could apply.
In November 1963, when JFK’s Chicago trip was scheduled, Bolden was a member of the Chicago Office of the Secret Service handling security.
Harkness which reinforces Jean Hill), or without discussing innocent explanations for flaws in the testimony.
After I had written this account of Jean Hill and decided to include her story despite its ambiguities, a very satisfying moment occurred at a November 1993 symposium in Dallas.
Researcher Wallace Milam made a presentation which drew a standing ovation from the audience.
Milam presented a photograph and a film of a small, stuffed toy dog in Jacqueline Kennedy’s arms that had been handed to her by a little girl along the parade route.
This, after Jean Hill had been pilloried and discredited for thirty years by anti-conspiracy zealots like Gerald Posner.
One of the “flaws” that Posner had jumped on in his book was her statement about the dog.
With this discovery by Milam, Hill was vindicated and her testimony made much more credible.
Astonishingly, he had been totally immersed in the Kennedy assassination since he was twelve years old.
Palamara succeeded in getting numerous interviews with key retired agents who were with the Secret Service at the time of the assassination.
In an exclusive interview conducted on 10/9/92, the author obtained the following new information: Underwood became “an honorary Secret Service agent” and served under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.
It should not be all that important, but it is very relevant in this case.
In 1963 the persecution of gays in the United States had probably reached its zenith.
Even today it would probably be impossible for the head of the FBI to be revealed as gay and retain his or her position.
My premise is that Hoover’s homosexuality is relevant because of his overwhelming need to retain his power base in order to prevent revelation of even more damaging secrets and crimes that would have resulted in his removal from power—and his imprisonment, if justice prevailed.
Fields, the old drunk, reprobate, and movie actor, to give him these paintings.
Hunt was probably the wealthiest man in modern history , or for that matter the wealthiest man who ever lived.
His reputed fortune of $5. billion in 1963, when adjusted for inflation, makes Ross Perot’s and Bill Gates’ wealth seem paltry by comparison.
John Mitchell, who had left the post of Attorney General in order to run Nixon’s reelection campaign, had the same worry.
It was decided not to announce Edgar’s death publicly until eleven o’clock.
Gordon Liddy, Nixon’s dirty-tricks specialist, thought it was vital to find the skeletons.
As an FBI veteran, he had once worked with some of Edgar’s most sensitive political files.
Two neighbors recalled in 1992 that, some time that morning, they had seen two men carrying a large object wrapped in a quilt out the kitchen door.
I never had...all they did was put me on the bottom of the car...face down...and some reporter, I guess, saw me with my hand, and they were pretty excited about that time...but J never felt better in my life...and I was up till 2:30 this morning on that speech.
III, 1976 edition Telephone interview with Frank B Harrell, November 19, 1996.
Tape recorded Telephone interview with Frank B Harrell, November 19, 1996.
Apparently it was not resisted by the Kennedy party; in fact, the family reportedly was adamant that the body not remain in Texas.
And it would have been very difficult—even with a crooked coroner in Texas—for the incredibly complex, illegal, and unprecedented manipulations in the autopsy (to conceal the evidence of a second gunman) to have been done at Dallas Parkland Hospital, so close to the team of doctors and nurses who saw an entry wound in the throat and an exit wound in the back of the head.
Much better for Johnson that the autopsy be under military control, performed by military doctors dutifully taking orders.
The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Volume I, xix o° Caro, The Path to Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Volume I, xix.
He said, “I worked quite some time for Lyndon Johnson as broadcast personnel, and I think I learned more about the art of deception from him than I did from my father.
Johnson usually designed his approaches to other senators to seem to be wholly spontaneous —as an accidental encounter in a Senate corridor leading to a private talk.
Had the Congress gone ahead with determination, the conspiracy would probably have been uncovered, history may have been radically changed, and possibly millions of lives spared that were lost in the Vietnam war and its aftermath.
Hoover released the results of his report to the press before he sent it to the Warren Commission—a fait accompli—much to the dismay of the Warren Commission staff in that they were put in the position of having to go up against J Edgar Hoover in public—a personally very dangerous thing.
Johnson now seems to be admitting to his confidant, Senator Russell, that he did not believe the nuclear war scare ploy, but still presses for a containment of the investigation.
This was days after the White House had received the John Scelso report saying that there was no evidence in Mexico City to implicate Oswald in a conspiracy, or that Cuba or the Soviets were involved.
But Johnson is still using the Mexico City fabrications to achieve his purpose.
Senator Russell later had grave misgivings about the conduct of the Warren Commission and considered resigning from it.
After completing this chapter I had the opportunity to interview Madeleine Brown in Dallas on November 24, 1996.
She confirmed the statements quoted here, but added her belief that Lyndon Johnson was deeply involved in the plot from its inception and was involved in numerous other murders in Texas.
The Years of Lyndon Johnson, xxvi Robert Dallek wrote: A November 1988 Louis Harris poll on presidential performance from Franklin Delano Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan consistently ranked Johnson near or at the bottom of eleven categories.
Asked which of these Presidents made people feel proudest of being an American, most inspired confidence in the White House, and could be trusted most in a crisis, respondents consistently put LBJ last along side of Gerald Ford and behind Richard Nixon.
Three percent said Johnson, 1 percent more than said Jimmy Carter and 2 percent more than said Ford.
Johnson stood alone in last place, chosen by only 1 percent of the sample.
One should keep in mind that LBJ could have been laying down a cover story for history, realizing that the lone-assassin notion would be entirely discredited when all files were released some time in the twenty-first century, if ever.
The White House Years, l 72 EE As a senator, Johnson had moderately supported liberal causes regarding racial discrimination and the poor, but his efforts in these areas escalated prodigiously only after he became president.
To determine its authenticity, an attempt was made by Bob Clark of KPSI Radio in Palm Springs, California, to contact Richard Duncan at the Northside Middle School, but he had left there.
The school gave Clark a telephone number to reach him, but it had been disconnected.
Former United States marshall who figured prominently in the Billie Sol Estes case.
In it, Caddy wrote that Estes claimed he and LBJ’s former assistant Cliff Carter had gathered evidence to prove that LBJ had ordered eight people to be murdered.
Although the Justice Department responded with a list of particulars, nothing came of it.
