Visit WebsiteRadio quickly followed with its own nightmarish nuclear scenarios of all-American disaster as, within years, would TV, while post-nuclear landscapes of horror were a dime a dozen in the world ofpulp fiction.
At 18, with most of my life still theoretically ahead of me, I believed him.Fifty years later, in his new TomDispatch post,Noam Chomskyreminds us of just how close we truly got to a self-induced apocalypse and why it came to that.
The CD operations were designed to make it crystal clear to the Russians that they were hardly even competing in the military confrontation, and could quickly have been destroyed.From the ExComm records, Stern concludes that, on October 26th, President Kennedy was “leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles” in Cuba, to be followed by invasion, according to Pentagon plans.
It was evident then that the act might have led to terminal war, a conclusion fortified by much later revelations that tactical nuclear weapons had been deployed and that Russian forces were far greater than United States intelligence had reported.As the ExComm meetings were drawing to a close at 6m. on the 26th, a letter arrived from Soviet Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev, sent directly to President Kennedy.
But that was unthinkable.The basic reason why no such thought could be contemplated was spelled out by National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, former Harvard dean and reputedly the brightest star in the Camelot firmament.
A vastly more powerful United States missile force trained on the much weaker and more vulnerable Soviet enemy could not possibly be regarded as a threat to peace, because we are Good, as a great many people in the Western hemisphere and beyond could testify -among numerous others, the victims of theongoing terrorist warthat the United States was then waging against Cuba, or those swept up in the “campaign of hatred” in the Arab world that so puzzled Eisenhower, though not the National Security Council, which explained it clearly.
And they prevail to the present, with only the rarest of exceptions, as easily documented.We might have been “in even a worse position” if the world had known more about what the United States was doing at the time.
To this day, Okinawa remains a major offensive United States military base over the bitter objections of its inhabitants who, right now, are less than enthusiastic aboutthe dispatchof accident-prone V-22 Osprey helicopters to the Futenma military base, located at the heart of a heavily populated urban center.An Indecent Disrespect for the Opinions of HumankindThe deliberations that followed are revealing, but I will put them aside here.
Cuba’s “political subversion” consisted of support for those resisting the murderous assaults of the United States and its client regimes, and sometimes even perhaps -horror of horrors -providing arms to the victims.The usage is standard.
The primary example at the time was South Vietnam, where the United States was defending a free people from “internal aggression,” as Kennedy’s United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson explained -from “an assault from within” in the president’s words.Though these assumptions are so deeply embedded in prevailing doctrine as to be virtually invisible, they are occasionally articulated in the internal record.
That suggests that, in addition to the cultural factors revealed in the hysteria of the Camelot intellectuals, there is a powerful state interest involved in punishing Cubans.Saving the World from the Threat of Nuclear DestructionThe missile crisis officially ended on October 28th.
The November 8th terror attack lends support to Bundy’s observation that the threat to peace was Cuba, not Turkey, where the Russians were not continuing a lethal assault -though that was certainly not what Bundy had in mind or could have understood.More details are added by the highly respected scholar Raymond Garthoff, who also had rich experience within the government, in his careful 1987account of the missile crisis.
Shortly after came “the most dangerous moment in human history,” not exactly out of the blue.Kennedy officially renewed the terrorist operations after the crisis ebbed.
Terrors of the Earth”The American attacks are often dismissed in United States commentary as silly pranks, CIA shenanigans that got out of hand.
The events just reviewed help explain why Cuba and Russia had good reason to take such threats seriously.Years later, Robert McNamara recognized that Cuba was justified in fearing an attack.
So “the Bay of Pigs was really right,” JFK concluded.These principles still contribute to the constant risk of nuclear war.
We don’t have Russian records, but there’s no doubt that their systems are far more accident-prone.Meanwhile, India and Pakistan have come close to nuclear war several times, and the sources of the conflict remain.
War threats in the Middle East, which might become reality very soon, once again escalate the dangers.In 1962, war was avoided by Khrushchev’s willingness to accept Kennedy’s hegemonic demands.
ATomDispatch regular, he is the author of numerous best-selling political works, most recently,Hopes and Prospects,Making the Future, andOccupy.Follow TomDispatch on Twitter @TomDispatch and join us onFacebook.
