The United States believes in a strategy of containment, does not like this.
So in 1961, the United States, the CIA, the Kennedy Administration, they try using Cuban exiles, people who have left Cuba, they try to support them to enter and invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
The support for the Cuban exiles, the counter-revolutionaries, those were trying to oust Castro, it was kind of this half-hearted effort.
It didn't make anyone on the American side look all that competent, because of that failure.
And at the same time, if you go to what the United States was doing around the Soviet Union, it started placing missiles, starting the late 50's, all the way into 1961 and 1962 --it started placing medium-ranged ballistic missiles in Turkey and in Italy.
And the significance of that is that now these missiles could reach the major population centers of the Soviet Union in really a matter of minutes, in 10 to 20 minutes, I think. 16 minutes was how long most of these stayed airborne.
And in a situation where both sides have nuclear weapons, there was this kind of notion of well, maybe if you're able to get to the other guy faster, they wouldn't be able to retaliate, and maybe you wouldn't have that mutually assured destruction.
So there's this whole idea that you want to get your missiles as close as possible so that they could reach the populations centers, the strategic centers of your opponent, as quickly as possible.
And if you look up on the Web, you can actually find the actual missile sites, and where they were installed, and when they became operational.
These are the ones that were in Italy, kind of right here, near the heel of Italy.
So you have this environment, the United States was looking a little bit weak after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
It looks like they wanted to oust Castro, but they weren't able to do it.
And at the same time you could imagine that the Soviet Union did not appreciate the United States placing these missiles so close to its population centers.
So, on the 14th of October we're sending these U2 spy planes over Cuba.
And so all of a sudden, it looks like the Soviet Union is using Cuba to do the same thing that we used Turkey and Italy for, to set up ballistic missiles, really, right off of our coast -and ballistic missiles that could now now reach any of the strategic population centers, especially on the east coast or the midwest of the United States.
So by the 16th-So this is literally two days after the pictures were taken.
The next day, they're analyzing them, they tell the State Department about them. the 16th, they tell Kennedy about them, and Kennedy holds a meeting of the Executive Committee.
But it was really a subset of special advisors -a subset of the National Security Council and other advisors that essentially become the brain trust to figure out what to do about this forming crisis.
Because of all of a sudden you have a state that we don't like off of our borders -a Communist state -a state aligned with the Soviet Union.
All of a sudden, it has nuclear missiles. it looks like these are offensive weapons.
Once again, if they're being launched from Cuba, maybe they can attack -maybe they can obliterate the United States before the United States even has an opportunity to respond properly.
But they didn't really think that that would have any significant effect on the Soviets.
Especially, because they probably thought that Kennedy was weak at this point.
And just to understand who was leading the Soviets at this time, it was Khrushchev.
And he had even made remarks to the effect that he thought that Kennedy was young and may be naive, and maybe too intellectual to really play a good game of chicken here.
But then that's actually considered an act of war because you are, to a large degree, starving a country.
Another option for the United States, (because it was completely viewed as unacceptable that these missiles should be here, and that they should be deployable from Cuba), the other option would be to do air attacks on these missile silos.
And ,obviously that goes in line with, the US' general interest of not having a communist regime so close to its own borders.
And really early on in these early days, most of the team was actually advising Kennedy that they should do a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
They thought that this was the only thing that the Soviets would take seriously, it would show that the United States is serious about this.
And they didn't think that the Soviet Union would really try to put up a fight in Cuba, so far away from their own borders.
But Kennedy, probably thinking about it pretty reasonably, realized ""Well, hey.
They might not do anything in Cuba, and they might allow us to oust Castro and install a new regime there.
But they might retaliate, in fact, they probably would retaliate in Europe, but specifically, in Berlin, probably in Germany as a whole.
So, just for the sake of getting these things out of Cuba, we could sacrifice a lot in Europe.
It prepares for any of these situations, because they really don't know what's going to happen.
So, on, kind of with hours notice, any of those options can, kind of, go into effect.
By the 22nd, you have the Executive Committee -(And that just becomes formalized as an actual, official group that is advising the President in this capacity.) -and on the 22nd, Kennedy finally puts out his first salvo on what is the US' position on what's going on here.
And, to most people, defensive weapons would mean things like surface-to-air missiles, things that would stop planes from bombings.
But not surface-to-surface missiles, not something that could attack a country.
But we'll see, in future letters from Khrushchev, that maybe they actually did perceive these missiles as somehow being defensive.
That was on the 18th, it kind of made, it made Kennedy and the United States frustrated with the Russians, because it felt like the Americans are saying, ""Look, we clearly know you have missiles there"", but Gromyko is saying ""No, these are just defensive weapons nothing to worry about.
But more importantly, Kennedy gives a speech to state the United States' opinion.
All ships of any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port will, if found to contain cargos of offensive weapons, be turned back.
So, the Kennedy administration's position became slightly more nuanced.
So both parties are kind of saying, ""We don't care what you're gonna do.
We're gonna do what whatever we have to do"" And this whole time, both sides are getting tense, the whole world is kind of taking sides, they're making public statements about what's right or wrong.
So, we really are getting very close to the brink of a very major confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States.
And you know, you can read the book ""13 Days Robert Kennedy"", there's also the movie ""13 Days,"" which actually is not based on the book.
But both of them really kind of give the account of what happened over this period.
But then you fast forward to the 25th and Kennedy essentially replies, ""Look, these are offensive weapons and these require the responses I have announced.
So the Soviets, even though they're speaking the game of chicken, they are turning back.
And the best guess is that those 14 ships probably did contain some type of armament.
So even though, publicly, everyone is playing a very strong game, behind the scenes, there is a little bit of a softening of the stance.
And then you fast forward to the 26th, and Khrushchev essentially sends his first proposal.
Because, in Khrushchev's mind -(And this is a fascinating letter to read.
It's a fairly long letter, so I'm not gonna go into the whole thing and you can get it at this URL right over here.
He kind of goes into the nuance of what he views as a defensive or an offensive weapon.
He implicitly admits that the missiles are there -That they're not these benign weapons.
But, in his letter, he kind of makes the nuance that he'd use them as defensive weapons.
So, Khrushchev is kind of setting up-Kruschev is saying, ""We don't have the intention of using these to attack you for no reason.
That's the reason that they placed those weapons there in the first place.
Another rationale for why they did it -and it's just, and probably the more strategic rationale -is that we already did have these missiles that were pointed at the Soviet Union in Turkey and Italy.
So, they wanted to put missiles near the United States some ally's country, from the Soviet Union's point of view.
And this stance right here really does make it look like their main interest in having those missiles was, kind of, to protect Cuba -so that the United States would not try to oust the Communists from there.
But then on the next day, Khrushchev has a public broadcast where he kind of changes his tone a little bit.
Now he's saying that they would undo the situation in Cuba only if the United States removed their missiles from Italy and Turkey.
This is when both armies are really at, kind of, they're at hair-trigger notice, it's a really scary situation.
And this was actually done by-It was a local decision by a Soviet commander.
And lucky for, I guess, the world, the United States did not use this, alone, as a reason to engage in war.
So it was lucky that this did not trigger an immediate war with the Soviets.
And what the Soviets also didn't know at that time is that the Americans were planning on -that these missiles, to a large degree, by this point in time, were already obsolete.
Because we already Polaris missiles that were deployable by submarines.
And clearly, submarines can deploy things much closer to the action, and they're much harder to track.
And the whole point here is that neither side wanted to look like they're giving in.
And so, publicly, the first Khrushchev proposal was agreed to by both Khrushchev and the United States.
Khrushchev agreed to remove -to not send any more weapons, and also dismantle the weapons that were there, and the Americans agreed that they would not invade Cuba.
The big winner here is probably Fidel Castro, because the whole time he's paranoid that the United States is planning another attack on him.
And, at least publicly now, they're saying that they cannot invade him.
And privately, the United States agreed to remove its missiles from Turkey and Italy.
They didn't wanna do this publicly, because then it would like they were being weak.
And by doing it, they were able to extract something out of the United States.
They were able to -By doing this action, they were able to get these missiles removed from Turkey and Italy.
Especially after the Bay of Pigs, he needed to look like a strong leader.
He kind of swallowed his pride and allowed it to publicly look like he lost the negotiation.
He publicly made it look like he got nothing in return for backing down, but in reality he did.
Because this was the closest that the Soviet Union and the United States ever got to really the brink during the Cold War.
