American businessmen had property and industry in Cuba and USA was a major market for Cuban goods.
Americans were concerned of Cuba as Castro was believed to be a communist and USA feared spreading of communism.
USSR now had ally close to America. 1 of 11 Bay of Pigs Before Kennedy became President, there was a plan for USA to invade Cuba and team up with enemies of Castro.
The CIA advised that Castro could be overthrown if USA supported Cuban rebels.
With American support, a force of 1400 rebels landed at Bay of Pigs in Cuba.
They were trapped on the beach by Castro's forces and could not link with rebels on land.
Disaster for Kennedy as many in the USA blamed him for refusing air cover to the invasion as he did not want to be seen openly supporting rebels.
Castro feared Americans would attack again so he turned to the USSR for help.
He announced he was a communist and Khrushchev supplied weapons and surface-to-air missiles that could shoot down American planes.
USA suspected missiles being put up but Khrushchev denied it when challenged and claimed USSR had no intention.
No missiles at the moment but when in place, could carry hydrogen bombs that could reach and destroy American cities within 20 minutes.
Millions of American lives would be lost so Kennedy had to take action. 3 of 11 Difficulties Facing the USA If Kennedy ignored missiles and just made diplomatic protest, he would have appeared to backed down and was weak.
If nuclear attack it could provoke nuclear war with the USSR resulting in destruction of world.
Soviet ships with missiles heading towards Cuba so kennedy decided to put naval blockade around Cuba.
October he announced sea within 800km of Cuba will be placed in quarantine and no ships carrying weapons will be allowed through.
Kennedy called Khrushchev to withdraw weapons from Cuba. 4 of 11 Crisis Point Soviet ships carrying rockets approach Cuba.
Kennedy demanded Soviets remove all sites and missiles.th October Khrushchev agreed to consider dismantling if Kennedy removed blockade.
Next day Kennedy received letter from Khrushchev demanding he remove all missiles in Turkey in exchange for removal of missiles in Cuba.
He threatened to invade Cuba if Khrushchev did not respond by 29th October.
One Soviet ship boarded and crate containing nuclear bombs opened.th october U2 plane shot down over Cuba and pilot killed.
Secretary General of UN urged leaders to avoid war.th October Khrushchev agreed to dismantle missile sites in return for Kennedy lifting blockades and not attacking Cuba.
Khrushchev guaranteed safety of Cuba and worked with UN to prevent war.
Kennedy's reputation increased, seen as strong as stood up to Khrushchev and forced him to back down.
Khrushchev protected Cuba and claimed as peacemaker who had listened to UN, avoided war and seeked peace.
Telephone link between Washington and Moscow set up so can talk directly.
Disarmament Conference held in 1962 resulting in Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Kennedy initially refused to withdraw American missiles in Turkey, he later agreed secretly to dismantle them. 6 of 11 Czechoslovakia Last satellite state to become communist in 1948.
Censorship of press and radio removed and powers of secret police reduced.
Government control of industry and agriculture reduced and trade unions given more power.
Dubcek remembered Hungary 1956 and constantly stressed to Soviets that Czechoslovakia is still communist and will not withdraw from Warsaw Pact.
Reforms were known as Prague Spring but concerned USSR. 8 of 11 USSR Response Brezhnev feared reforms in Czechoslovakia will lead to demands in USSR and other satellite states.
Warsaw Pact leaders also felt threatened by Czechoslovakia, as they felt their own positions were being weakened.
Brezhnev scared Czechoslovakia will look to West rather than USSR causing gap in Iron Curtain, leading to its collapse.
Dubcek maintained Czechoslovakia was communist and wanted to remain in Warsaw Pact.
Great surprise when 20th August 1968 Soviet tanks invaded Czechoslovakia.
Reforms withdrawn, opposition continued and a student set himself on fire in protest.
After a year or so, all opposition died down, Soviets restored control by force. 9 of 11 Brezhnev Doctrine Statement to explain Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia.
Made it clear that if any country attempted to break away from Soviet control will be regarded as threat to other Warsaw Pact countries.
Doctrine remained in force until reversed by President Gorbachev in 1989. 10 of 11 Effects of Events in Czechoslovakia Suppression of Dubcek's reforms and Brezhnev Doctrine sent clear signal to satellite states the USSR will resist any attempt to break away from Soviet control.
Czechs even more resentful of Soviet rule but realised there was little they could do.
Relations were better since Cuba and USA realised helping Czechoslovakia will end it.
Example of how USSR allowed its own sphere of influence without interference.
Tweet Combine this resource with othersUse this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.cmd.push { googletag.defineSlot.addService); }); googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); }); Comments No comments have yet been made Sign up to Comment Related discussions on The Student Room AQA GCSE History B » Gcse modern world history » Please help.
THE USA 1945-1970 1. / 5 based on 1 rating GCSE Edexcel History Cold War Timeline 0.
