All for deploying and withdrawing the missiles. garian archives to show how the Cuban evidence suggests that the Soviet Union That the Warsaw Pact was of only mar­ missile crisis influenced Warsaw Pact nuclear neither consulted nor even informed its East ginal significance during the Cuban Missile operations.
No definitive judgments about European allies about the installation of Crisis hardly comes as a great surprise.
Nevertheless, enough evi­ Soviet leadership consult its Warsaw Pact egy.s Moreover, the crisis was far outside dence has emerged from East-Central Eu­ allies about the removal of the missiles. the European theater, and East European rope to permit several tentative conclusions.
Although the Pact declared a joint military leaders had resisted Soviet efforts to extend The article will begin by briefly re­ alert on 23 October 1962 (the day after the alliance's purview beyond the continent. viewing the ""lessons"" that the Cuban Mis­ President John F Kennedy's televised rev­ Despite fears that the showdown over Cuba sile Crisis offered for Soviet nuclear weap­ elation of the Soviet missile deployments), might spark a NATO-Warsaw Pactconfron­ ons deployments abroad.
It will then delin­ the alert had no more than a symbolic impact tation in Berlin, the situation in Germany eate thecommand-and-control arrangements and was carried out solely at Moscow's remained calm throughout the crisis.
The joint alert was formally can­ the standoff in the Caribbean was a matter saw Pact nuclear operations, and examine celled on 21 November 1962, the same day for the Soviet Union to handle on its own, the East European states' unsuccessful ef­ that the Soviet Union ended its own unilat­ not a matter for the Warsaw Pact. forts to aIterthose arrangements.
Although Soviet leaders had been General Issa Pliev, who was chosen for the actions involving nuclear weapons were to concerned well before the Cuban Missile post because of his long-standing and very be undertaken without direct authorization Crisis about the difficulty of retaining se­ close friendship with both Khrushchev and from Moscow. 6 cure control over nuclear weapons and about the Soviet Defense Minister, Marshal Rodion Still, the very fact that Pliev sought to the danger of unauthorized actions, the cri­ Malinovskii.
At no time during the crisis have the restrictions lifted, and his seeming sis put these risks into a whole new light. did Pliev have authority to order the use of willingness to use tactical nuclear weapons By underscoring how easily control could either medium-range or tactical nuclear mis­ if necessary, provided a sobering indication be lost, the crisis inevitably bolstered siles, but it is now known that several weeks of the risks entailed in giving discretion to Moscow's determination to ensure strict before the crisis-in the late summer of local commanders.
This is not to say that it would have weapons to be misused if the aims of local invasion had proven insufficient.
A written been easy for Pliev to evade the procedural actors were not identical to Soviet goals.
It order to this effect was prepared on 8 Sep­ limits-to do so he would have had to obtain is now known that at the height of the crisis tember 1962, but in the end Malinovskii cooperation from troops all along the chain Fidel Castro sent a top-secret cable to Mos­ declined to sign it.
Thus, at the time of the of command-but there was no technical cow urging the Soviet Union to launch a crisis Pliev had no independent authority to barrier per se to unauthorized actions. nuclear strike against the United States if order the use of nuclear weapons or even to Thus, one of the clear lessons of the United States forces invaded Cuba.
Castro appar­ order that nuclear warheads, which were crisis was the need not only to maintain ently had been led to believe that the Soviet stored separately from the missiles, be re­ stringent procedural safeguards for all So­ Union would be willing to go to war-and leased for possible employment.
The limita­ viet nuclear forces, but also to equip those risk its own destruction-in defense ofCuba. tions on Pliev's scope of action during the forces with elaborate technical devices that Nikita Khrushchev's response to Castro's crisis were reinforced by two cables trans­ would prevent unauthorized or accidental plea indicates that the Soviet leader had no mitted by Malinovskii on October 22 and 25, launches.
This applied above all to nuclear intention of ordering the use of nuclear which ""categorically"" prohibited any use of weapons deployed abroad, where the lines weapons, regardless of what happened to nuclear weapons under any circumstances of communication were more vulnerable to Cuba. without explicit authorization from Mos­ being severed or disrupted.
One further lesson from the Cuban Mis­ pecially unnerving because he initially had The strictures imposed by the Soviet sile Crisis, which reinforced the perceived given serious consideration to providing leadership held up well during the crisis, as need for strict, centralized control over all Castro with direct command over Soviet the procedural safeguards for nuclear opera­ nuclear operations, was the role that acci­ forces in Cuba, including the nuclear-ca­ tions proved sufficient to forestall any unto­ dents played.
IS For the most part, stance came on October 27 when an Ameri­ craft.o (Only the medium-range SS-4 and Khrushchev's and Malinovskii' sfaith in Pliev can U-2 reconnaissance aircraft was shot SS-5 missiles would have been left under was well-founded.
Manescu (The absence of nuclear weapons accorded then arranged a private meeting with Rusk, with United States inteIligence, and the United States by Raymond L Garthoff attended only by aninterpreter.
It was the did not pursue. the verification offer.) first opportunity after tbe crisis nearly a year In view of the sensitivity of the matter, In April 1964, the Romanian leadership earlier for the Romanian leadership to ap­ any knowledge of this exchange was very issued a declaration in which it first ex­ proach the United States governmentatthis closely held in Washington, and no doubt in pressed pUblic dissatisfaction with the W ar~ level.
Georghiu Dej, and after 1965 his Manescu told Rusk that Romania had governments.
So far as is known, the Soviet successor Nicolae Ceausescu, increasingly not been consulted over the Soviet decision leadership did not learn of it~a1thoughthat distanced themselves from the Pact and to place nuclear missiles in Cuba, and was remains to be determined from the Soviet Moscow's leadership, although withoutcbal­ not therefore a party to the dispute.
Romaniaceased Romanian government wanted the United do not know if there is today any written to participate actively in the military com­ States to understand that Romania would account in either American or Romanian mand of the Warsaw Pact after 1969.
All of remain neutral in any contlict generated by archives. this small slice of history has, of course, such actions as the Soviet deployment of I was told about the exchange by Dean been well known.
It has not been known nuclear missiles in Cuba, and sought assur~ Rusk soon after it occurred, and I recon­ why Romania launched itself on tbat path at ances that in the event of hostilities arising firmed this· account of it with him in 1990.
Above all, seemed to me that with the col­ it has not heretofore been known THE FAR SIDE By GARY LARSON lapse of the Warsaw Pact, the that even earlier Romania es­ overthrow ofthe Romanian gov­ sentially repudiated its alle­ ernment, and the reunification giance obligations in a secret of Europe, the matter is now approach to the United States safely history, and should be­ government in October 1963, come a footnote to the historical promising neutrality in case of record. the outbreak of war.
This was a It may be instructive, as stunning, unilateral breachofthe wen as interesting, history.
For central obligation of Warsaw example, as far as I am aware no Pact alliance membership, which one has ever speculated on a Romania nominally maintained relationship between the Cuban until the very end, when the Pact Missile Crisis and the Roma­ dissolved in 1991. nianactions in distancing them­ What precisely happened, selves from the Warsaw Pact.
The precipitating is also interesting to reflect that event was the Cuban Missile despite that crisis and other se­ Crisis of October 1962.
The vere trials, the two alliances did tensions generated by tbatcrisis hold together throughout the had reverberations throughout Cold War, and with relatively Europe.
No country wanted to be brought from suchasituation, the Unites States would little evident concernover the risks involved, into a war over the issue ofSovietmissiles in notstrike Romania onthe mistaken assump­ even in other countries hosting nuclear weap­ Cuba.
But while members ofNATO and the tion that it wuld be allied with the Soviet ons ofthe superpowers.
Thus, remarkable as Warsaw Pact dutifullygavepublic support Union insueh a war. was the Romanian case, it was the sole to the United$tates and the Soviet Union, Secretary Rusk in response indicated exception to alliance solidarity~assuming respectively, some did so with considerable that the United States would take intoac­ the archives or informed officials do not trepidation.
CWIH.P Mos~ow Conference on New Evi­ Manescu asked to meet withtheSec~af ~ R""Omani~os""s~bseqliJ¢:ntlyre~ tknceon Cold War History.
After the Cuban Missile carrying out an attack.o When the U-2 was supplied with nuclear-capable Frog-7 and Crisis, those two agreements were supplanted shot down, no one in Moscow was quite sure Scud-B missiles.
In all cases, the deploy­ by a much more far-reaching ""Treaty Be­ what had happened-Khrushchev and most ment of these delivery vehicles was well tween the Governments of the USSR and others mistakenly thought that Castro had under way by the time of the Cuban Missile CSSR on Measures to Increase the Combat ordered Soviet troops to fire at the plane­ Crisis.
Readiness of Missile Forces,"" which was but everyone was certain that further inci­ The new East European weapons were signed by Malinovskii and his Czechoslo­ dents of this sort might cause the crisis to officially described as components of the vak counterpart, Army-General Bohumir spin out of control.
The risks posed by ""Warsaw Pact's joint nuclear forces"" and Lomsky, in December 1965.
After all, Pliev and der exclusive Soviet control, and the deliv­ This third agreement with Czechoslo­ other officers based in Cuba, whose lives ery vehicles themselves would have come vakia was concluded just after the Soviet were directly at risk during the crisis, were under direct Soviet command if they had Union had worked out a similar arrangement naturally inclined to overreact to unintended ever been equipped with warheads during a with Hungary.
Moreover, the thousands of tactical agreement was signed by Brezhnev and the the extent that such overreactions could not nuclear weapons deployed by Soviet forces Hungarian leader, Janos Kadar, and was be avoided in future crises, it was essential on East European territory were not subject kept secret from almost all other Hungarian that the consequences be minimized and to any sort of ""dual-key"" arrangement along officials.
Obvi­ the lines that NATO established in the mid­ agreement that the Soviet Union concluded ously, it would be vastly more difficult to 1960s.
In every respect, then, the East belonging to Soviet troops stationed in those the need for rigid safeguards, both proce­ European governments had no say in the use countries.
Some of the warheads were also dural and technical, to preclude the use of of the Pact's ""joint"" nuclear arsenal. intended for weapons deployed by the local Soviet nuclear weapons except in the most The exclusivity of Soviet command was armies, but in that case the delivery vehicles dire emergency.
This lesson, like the others reinforced by secret agreements that the So­ would have been transferred to direct Soviet that Khrushchev and his colleagues derived viet Union concluded in the early to mid­ command.
Under the new agreements East from the crisis, survived the change of lead­ 1960s with Czechoslovakia, East Germany, European officials had no role in the use of .' ership in Moscow in October 1964.
Al­ Hungary, and Poland regarding the storage the Pact's ""joint"" nuclear arsenal, nor any though Leonid Brezhnev altered many as­ of nuclear warheads in those countries.
The first A senior East European military official nuclear forces. such agreements were signed with East Ger­ later confirmed that ""the procedures for the many and Czechoslovakia before the Cuban defense and protection of these special-pur­ Nuclear Operations and the Warsaw Missile Crisis.
The Soviet-East German pose storage centers for nuclear warheads Pact agreements, signed at various intervals in the were such that no one from our side had Nuclear weapons first became an issue early 1960s, covered some 16 storage sites, permission to enter, and even Soviet offi­ for the Warsaw Pact in mid-1958 when, all of which were controlled exclusively by cials who were not directly responsible for allegedly in response to deployments by special troops assigned to the Group of So­ guarding and operating the buildings were NATO, Khrushchev warned that the Pact viet Forces in Germany.
Even before the Cuban German, and Polish armed forces began Soviet troops had been present on Czecho­ Missile Crisis, Soviet leaders had been in­ receiving nuclear-capable aircraft and sur­ slovak territory since the end of 1945.
Two clined to move in this direction, but the crisis face-to-surface missiles from the Soviet preliminary agreements were signed in Au­ greatly accelerated the trend and effectively Union.
The lack of East European simply called for both German states to As on previous occasions, however, the input proved unsatisfactory to several of the forswear nuclear weapons, proposed the cre­ Soviet Union resisted whatever pressure was allied governments, who urged that they be ation of a nuclear-free zone in central Eu­ exerted for the sharing of nuclear-release given some kind of role in nuclear-release rope, and advocated a freeze on all nuclear authority.
The implication was that ar­ after the Bucharest conference, the Warsaw in part by changes in Soviet military doc­ rangements within the Warsaw Pact were Pact conducted huge ""Vltava"" exercises, trine in the mid-1960s, which seemed to best left unchanged. which included simulated nuclear strikes open the way for a nuclear or conventional That stance was reaffirmed over the under exclusive Soviet control.
Under Khrushchev, next few months in a series of conspicuous arrangement was preserved in all subse­ Soviet military doctrine had long been predi­ Soviet declarations that ""the Warsaw Pact is quent Pact maneuvers involving simulated cated on the assumption that any war in dependent on the Soviet strategic missile nuclear exchanges.
The codification of exclu­ any change in the alliance's nuclear com­ pean leaders, who feared that their countries sive Soviet control over nuclear weapons mand-and-control structure.
Had it not been might be used as tactical nuclear battle­ deployed in the other Warsaw Pact countries for the dangers that were so clearly revealed grounds without their having the slightest all but eliminated any basis for the East by the events of October 1962, Soviet lead­ say in it.
European governments to seek a role in the ers might have been willing to consider an The issue became a source of conten­ alliance's nuclear command structure. arrangement for the Warsaw Pact similar to tion at the January 1965 meeting of the Yet even after the Soviet Union tried to the ""dual-key"" system that NATO adopted.
Warsaw Pact's Political Consultative Com­ put the matter to rest, controversy persisted When Operation ""Anadyr"" was first being mittee, where the assembled leaders dis­ within the Warsaw Pact about the allocation planned in the late spring of 1962, cussed NATO's plans to create a Multi­ of responsibility for tactical nuclear weap­ Khrushchev had toyed with the idea of giv­ Lateral Force that would supposedly ons.
At a closed meeting of Pact leaders in ing Fidel Castro broad command over So­ give West Germany access to nuclear-armed East Berlin in February 1966, Romania again viet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba as well missiles.
The PCC warned that if an MLF pressed for greater East European participa­ as over all non-nuclear forces on the island. were formed and the West Germans were tion in all aspects of allied military planning, Ultimately, Khrushchev decided not to share included, the Warsaw Pact would have to and was again rebuffed.
Indeed, a Warsaw Pact allies a direct say in the use of nian proposal for modifications to the alli­ ""dual-key"" arrangement for the Warsaw Pact, nuclear weapons stationed on East Euro­ ance was leaked to the French Communist which would not have provided any inde­ pean soil.
The Romanians were especially newspaper, L'Humanite; the document called pendent authority to the East European coun­ insistent on having responsibility shared for for, among other things, an East European tries, could easily have been justified as a all Warsaw Pact nuclear systems, including role in any decisions involving the potential response to NATO's policy and as a useful those deployed with the various Groups of use of nuclear weapons.
Only 25 October 1962 , in Vojensky Historicky Archiv Praha, Fond Ministerstvo Narodni Crisis had not occurred.
After all, when by excluding the East European states alto­ Obrany CSSR, 1962, Operacni sprava Soviet officials seriously contemplated al­ gether from the nuclear-release process could Generalniho stabu cs. armady , 8/25. lotting partial nuclear authority to Castro in the Soviet Union avoid the unintended esca­ 2.
That approach Soviet troops who might one day have been , F 89, Opis' 28, Delo 14, Listy had long been used for tactical weapons ordered to use the weapons.
If a future 1-8. deployed by Soviet forces in Eastern Eu­ conflict had become so dire that Soviet lead­ 3.
I. cious if a ""dual-key"" system had been of tactical nuclear weapons, they would have 4.
The 1956 Re\'olution and Realpolitik (Stanford: nuclear-capable delivery vehicles.
Zakharov. head of the General Staff Military porating electronic use-denial features into have provoked retaliatory strikes by NATO Academy, 28 August 1964, in Tsentral'nyi arkhiv its strategic missiles, and the same was true against East European sites.
I am of Soviet tactical weapons by the early to would have been especially salient in the grateful to Matthew Evangelista for providing me with mid-1970s.
Concerns in Moscow about the case of East German officials who would a copy of this document. physical security of nuclear weapons were have been asked to go along with nuclear 6.
This point is stressed in the top-secret cables adduced hardly negligible before October 1962-in strikes against targets in West Germany. in note 2 supra.
On the state of the Russian archives, see Mark part because of the possibility that requisite Thus, even though Soviet officials could Kramer.
From the Soviet perspective, it Vestnik Ministerstva inostrannykh del SSSR dangers posed by crises.
To be sure, Soviet made far more sense to circumvent the prob­ 24 ,67-80. esp.]-73.
This point was reemphasized to Castro leaders were hardly complacent before Oc­ lem entirely by eschewing any form of shared by Prime Minister Mikoyan during their conversations tober 1962 about the need to maintain tight authority. in November 1962.
Kastro,"" 20 November command was a consistent theme in Soviet all, would have had such an important long­ 1962 , both published in Mezhdlazarodnaya military planning.
OS/GS, 26/2. with nuclear warheads if they had been placed under the tactical weapons,"" See Dokuchaev, ""100-dnevnyi 30.
Beloborodov reemphasized this o merakh povysheniya boegotovnosti raketnykh voisk,"" 12.
Respublik 0 voennom sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi tions of any type, whether for the medium-range or the 31.
USSR Nuclear oborone,"" undated, Article 10. tactical weapons, were ever moved Weapons Formerly Stored in Country,"" translated in 13.
See Nikita S Khrushchev, Vospominaniya (Mos­ out of storage during the crisis.
Sergei, account was endorsed by General Leonid Garbuz, the 16. for providing me with a copy of the 3,600-page tran­ deputy commander of Soviet forces in Cuba in 1962, in 32. ""0 przedsiewzieciu majacym nacelu podwyzszenie script of his father's memoirs.
For an English transla­ an interview that same day in Moscow. gotowsci bojowej wojska,"" 25 February 1967. in tion of most of the account about the Cuban Missile 18.
The exact contents of Pliev' s telegram on the 26th Centralny Archiwum Wojskowy.
Interview with chief of the Czechoslovak General Tapes, trans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter and available makes clear that he sent at least two that day, Staff, Major-General Karel Pezl, inJan Bauer.
Maj.-General V Makarevskii, ""Oprem'ereN. 1992, pertained only to air defense operations against 34.
Shtemenko, otnosheniya 8-9 , able , and, combined with retrospective ""Sukhoputnye voiska v sovremennoi voine i ikh boevaya 197.
Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev's comments by ex-Soviet officials, it suggests that Pliev podgotovka,"" Krasnaya zvezda.
Secret), 27 October 1962. reproduced in Operation po sovremennym predstavleniyam."" passim.
P Maksimovetal.,eds., Raketnye Warschauer Vertrages,"" January 1965 , in 16.
Anatolii available in ""Voina ozhidalas's rassvetom,"" Krasnaya komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov Varshavskogo Dokuchaev, ""I OO-dnevnyi yadernyi kruiz,"" Krasnaya zvezda, 13 May 1993,2.
Dogovora 0 druzhbe, sotrudnichestve i vzaimnoi zvezda, 6 November 1992.
In early 1994, General Anatolii Gribkov claimed 3753, D I, Korebka 3573.
Grechko, ""Boevoi soyuz bratskikh Gribkov comments at a 5 April 1994 meeting at the Khrushcheva na Soveshchanii Politicheskogo narodov,"" Pravda, 13 May 1965.
I Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C., orga­ Konsul'tativnogo Komiteta gosudarstv-uchastnikov 40.
HlavnaPolitickaSprava, 1965. assertion that warheads were actually moved out, and in 26.
IV 27/208/85. cation of state of the art technology within a presented the dual American proposal in his talks 42.
Mise au Point du variants in the American initiative, insisting on reveal information that would seriously ministere des Affaires etrangeres a Bucarest,"" and demonstrably impair relations between the strict adherence to the Vladivostok framework L Humanite , 19 May 1966, 3.
Reprasentanten der Bruderstaaten des Warschauer seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing The dispute quickly broke into public view in Vertrages,"" July 1966 , in SAPMDB,ZPA, diplomatic activities of the United States; a series ofdueling press conferences.
On March IV 2/202/431. reveal information that would clearly 30, Vance told reporters in Moscow that ""the 45.
They ""Vyhodnotenie cvicenia 'VLTAVA',"" VHA Praha, F proposed nothing new on their side."" [n Wash­ the President, Vice President, or other officials Sekretarial MNO, 1966, OS/GS, 412. ington the same day, Carterdefellded the propos­ for whom protections services, in the interest of 46.
See also ""Razvitie voennogo reveal information that would seriously reduction"" in nuclear arms.
The Inside Story of SALT II (New tional Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C"" in 1991 with the help of the lohn D and Catherine T York: Harper & Row, 1979; Raymond L Garthoff, MacArthur FOUndation.
American-Soviet governments on all sides of the Cold War, and seeks to disseminate new infonnation and perspectives Relations from Nixon to Reagan. rev. ed.
Communist bloc-through publications. fellowships, and scholarly meetings and conferences.
William Taubman and from the Carter-Brezhnev Project.] consisting of Michael Beschloss; Dr.
Samuel F Wells, lr. ; andProf;Sbaron Wo1chik , Within the Wilson Center, CWIHP iSWlder the Divisionoflnterniltional Studies, headed by Dr.
Publication of articles does not constitute CWIHP's endorsement of authors' gress, Washington, D.C.] views.
