All color codes * must be added after the colon and before the semi * colon.
This can be all the way from pandemics, diseases, wars, natural disasters, and important moments in political history.As the anniversary of the Crisis is approaching, we thought it would be an appropriate time to publish an article describing the event.
The 45 year period directly after World War II known as the Cold War was one of the most tense periods in American and World history.
The crisis was a military standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union which lasted 13 days.
This event showed just how fragile International relations were during this difficult period of the 20th Century.
One split-second decision could have led to total nuclear war between the two superpowers.
During the months leading up to the crisis, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev secretly collaborated with Cuba's leader Fidel Castro.
Castro had allied himself with the USSR in 1959 to gain more military and economic power.
Their plan was to transport and install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles from the shores of Florida.
The two communist leaders acted in this way to combat the threat of a possible second invasion from the U.S., following the infamous ""Bay of Pigs"" in 1961.
Kruschev also felt threatened by the U.S missiles that had recently been deployed in the neighboring countries of Italy and Turkey.
The confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union began on October 14, 1962, when photographs of a partially assembled Soviet SS-4 ballistic missile were taken by U2 spy plane pilot Major Richard Heyser.
When President John F Kennedy was briefed about this two days later on October 16, he immediately took action by calling in a team of diplomatic and militaristic executives to plan the next course of action.
Kennedy and his administration knew that if the missiles became operational, it would completely alter the course of the Cold War.
Throughout the week, ExComm created a multitude of potential solutions to the unfolding crisis, including an elaborate takeover of the island, and a possible bombing attack.
Kennedy however, suggested that the U.S navy construct a ""quarantine"" or blockade of Cuba in order to halt the supply of Soviet nuclear materials.
Kennedy saw it important that he word this as a ""quarantine"" in hopes that Kruschev would avoid declaring it as an act of war or hostility.
On October 27, several U.S navy ships enforcing the ""quarantine"" had encountered a Soviet B-59 submarine that was one of several ordered by the USSR to travel to Cuba.
At the time, the crew of the submarine had not been informed of the blockade, as their communication with Moscow had been cut off many days prior.
Several depth charges were dropped on the submarine by the Navy ships in an unsuccessful attempt to signal the B-59 submarine to surface.
Thinking that war had already broken out above the waters, a unanimous vote between the three senior officers was agreed upon.
If passed, the submarine would fire its T-5 nuclear-tipped torpedo, which was around â ” the strength of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
The crisis was finally averted through a series of letters and compromises between the White House and the Kremlin.
On October 26, Kruschev sent Kennedy a formal message explaining that he would remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for Kennedy's promise that Castro's communist regime in Cuba would remain unopposed by the United States.
However, the very next day Kruschev added that the U.S missiles in Italy and Turkey would have to be dismantled as well.
The president then sent his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy to secretly correspond with USSR ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
The two opposing sides discussed the formalities of the agreement to remove both the missiles from Cuba and Europe, and on October 28, the crisis was effectively concluded.
WiNK serves as the student voice of our community, and provides readers with a weekly overview of what's happening in our students' lives, and it gives students a chance to share their interests and voices.
The majority of the content is developed in our Upper School Journalism classes, but we also accept contributions from other students and faculty members.
WiNK Contact Brooke Thaler Publications TeacherBrooke.Thaler@woosterschool.org203-730-6706 Our purpose is to prepare young people for fulfillment, happiness, and success in life through the rigorous and healthy development of intellect, conscience, body, and spirit.
