Examining their conjunction brings academic specialties together and broadens one’s understanding of how political forces function between political actors.
Such an approach can challenge military historians, for instance, to address larger policy questions, clarify to historians of foreign relations how particulars of armed forces interrelate with the achievement of diplomatic efforts, and generate a more comprehensive understanding of past events.
Brands, and the anonymous readers at Diplomatic History for comments on earlier drafts of this article.
Historical experience has demonstrated that national security strategy is more effectively served when military strategy and diplomacy are integrated.
In practice, the role for the military during a crisis may range from active use, to an instrument that makes a negotiated settlement attractive, or it may remain in the background because its misuse could trigger an avoidable war.
At the very least, wielders of the diplomatic and military instruments of power need to take each other into account, but a tendency of treating the two as profoundly different remains.
War, military actions short of war, and diplomacy mutually support each other when thought of as instruments of power that inhabit the same continuum.
Rhetoric on the resolution of international security crises tends to treat military force and negotiations as two completely distinct realms.
Politicians, military leaders, and the public in general often segregate military actions from diplomatic efforts, even though the interrelationship between the two has been repeatedly demonstrated.
Too often people regard the two as apples and cinder blocks (two solids with next to nothing in common); one should however perceive of force and diplomacy as apples and oranges—distinct but with significant similarities.
Scholars, however, have repeatedly noted the relationship between force and diplomacy.
Hans Morgenthau asserted that “the diplomatic representative of a great power, in order to be able to serve both the interests of his country and the interests of peace, must at the same time use persuasion, hold out the advantages of a compromise, and impress the other side with the military strength of 4.
Theory and Practice in History,” in The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy, 2nd ed., ed.
Neither is the use of diplomacy with military force an innovation new to political leaders.
The power and threat of the Royal Navy aided Great Britain while it pursued favorable outcomes over conflicts with the United States such as the boundary between Maine and British Canada, and the dispute over Oregon during the 1840s.
During the Mexican War, the Polk Administration blended negotiations with military actions in order to achieve a lasting resolution.
Concurrent with the initial armistice negotiations in the Korean War, the Chinese decided in July 1951 that they needed their armies to push the American forces further to the south of their present position in order to persuade the United States to negotiate a truce.
Both sides were “convinced that military pressure was essential to force the other side to compromise” during the negotiations.
President Dwight D Eisenhower threatened to escalate the war if the North Koreans and Chinese rejected the armistice proposal of May 25, 1953.14 Shortly thereafter, the administration relied mostly on the threat of force to try to dissuade China from using military action to take the islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
Three years later, he melded nuclear forces with negotiation efforts in order to persuade the Chinese to refrain from military action against them, and combined firm diplomatic signals with military actions designed to avoid escalation to armed conflict.
Peaceful Resolution through Coercive Diplomacy,” in The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy, 114.
The United States and Mexico, 1845-1848 , 76, 82, 105, 109, 117, 161, 184.
Stueck’s is not an argument that force and diplomacy were the sole factors in this war.
Ideological differences, distrust, disputes over the fate of prisoners of war, and culture, for example, were all important issues.
Eisenhower recognized that force or force and diplomacy would not always serve his objectives.
He utilized a deployment of conventional military forces to Europe, along with additional instruments of power from across the NATO alliance, particularly diplomacy, to help persuade the Soviet Union to negotiate an end to the Berlin Crisis of 1961–1962.18 Despite the evidence of case studies such as these, the mutually supporting relationship between diplomacy and military force is common knowledge only among academic and professional specialists.
After examining American threats against Cuba and his own country’s nuclear imbalance vis-à-vis the United States in the spring of 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev decided, with the unanimous support of the Presidium of the Central Committee, to ship mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles to Cuba.
Khrushchev resented the stationing of American ballistic missiles targeted against the USSR on North Atlantic Treaty Organization bases, and he wished to place the United States under a similar threat.
Stationing Soviet missiles in Cuba would help to compensate for the imbalance between Soviet and American ICBMs, gain leverage for Soviet policy goals in Europe, and deter the United States from invading Cuba.
After receiving permission from President Fidel Castro to deploy the weapons, surface-to-air missiles and medium-range ballistic missile support equipment left the Soviet Union for Cuba in July, with the to project power into Hungary, for example, and Eisenhower’s desire to avoid escalation into “allout war,” persuaded him to rely on information warfare and diplomacy during the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956.
The Rise and Fall of Russia’s Strategic Nuclear Forces, 1945-2000 (Washington, DC and London, 2002), 82.
Medium-range “R-12” ballistic missiles had a 1,292-mile range; intermediate-range “R-14” ballistic missiles had a 2,796-mile range.
The U-2 overflights were part of a broad continuing effort to monitor and contain Cuba, so Soviet efforts at maintaining secrecy were unlikely to remain successful.
United States policymakers commenced marshaling diplomatic capital in Latin American during the preceding months while they prepared and positioned military forces for use against the island.
State Department diplomats consulted with the foreign ministers of numerous Latin American countries on how to prevent Cuba’s Communist revolution from spreading to other nations in the region.
The Kennedy administration’s goal of multilateral diplomatic coercion through the OAS shared some common ground with the policies of states throughout Latin America.
At the beginning of 1962, Argentina communicated that a “united front of the American nations” was “vital,” as far as imposing economic sanctions on Cuba was concerned.
The ministers as well as the Organization of American States were largely in agreement with Rusk regarding the Soviet buildup.
Both stated that the Soviet presence in Cuba constituted a threat to hemispheric unity and democracy.
The ministers called for increased surveillance of Cuba, with a particular lookout for offensive weapons—an understated way of saying nuclear missiles.
Kennedy’s goal was American security, and when push came to shove, he valued anticommunism over the expansion of liberalism and democracy.
Leaders within the Defense Department sought to blend force with diplomacy before the crisis broke, and the United States military began to plan for possible offensive operations and to take defensive measures in relation to Cuba.
The Air Force began to modestly build up Florida’s air defenses in January 1962, stationing four F-102A interceptors at Homestead Air Force Base in south Florida prior to the crisis.
In August, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy ordered an analysis of United States military options for destroying offensive nuclear installations in Cuba.
The staff for Command-in-Chief Atlantic produced four operational plans for the president’s use.
Oplan 312, consisting of air strikes by tactical fighters using conventional weapons, took center stage during the crisis.
Atlantic Command conducted a series of multiservice exercises in 1962 as practice for a possible invasion of Cuba, culminating in Phibriglex62, scheduled for that October.
Unger of the Joint Staff reminded Paul Nitze of the importance of synchronizing efforts with the OAS and UN if the United States chose to attack Cuba.
Wielders of diplomacy and military power need to know about the capabilities, motivations, and intentions of the adversary in order to apply instruments of power in the most productive manner.
As a case in point, signals intelligence the Navy gathered off the coast of Cuba in July encouraged the Kennedy administration to start focusing U-2 reconnaissance flights on the island.
Naval surveillance monitored the great increase in Soviet shipping into Cuba from July through October.
The Director for Central Intelligence , John A McCone, recognized that 28.
Richard F McMullen, The Fighter Interceptor Force, 1962-1964, United States Air Force Official History, 2–7.
The Atlantic Command Headquarters of the Commander in Chief Norfolk, Virginia.
As a consequence, the defense community began thinking about options, dangers, and complications that would be the results of such an action by the Soviets before the crisis was upon them.
In this way, intelligence gathering and analysis helped to provide analytical tools and plans for the execution of mutually supporting force and diplomacy.
Because of these actions, the United States achieved an intelligence success in discovering the missiles in time to take action short of war to persuade the Soviets to remove them.
Thus the discovery of the missiles in October was not a complete surprise.
Magazines and newspapers had been printing stories about Soviet activity in Cuba for weeks.
A Persistent Approach to the Intelligence-Policy Relationship,” International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence 2, no. : 555.
Indeed, it is conceivable that the United States would not have detected the missiles in time without McCone’s intuition and leadership.
It should be noted that there were “hundreds” of reports that ballistic missiles were being placed in Cuba—all of which were proven at the time to be false.
The administration knew that there were large numbers of Soviet technicians and workers in Cuba two months before the crisis.
Kennedy himself was involved in the October 9 decision to send a U-2 to photograph suspected ballistic missile sites.
Attorney General Robert F Kennedy’s back channel to Khrushchev, Georgi Bolshakov, had raised the president’s expectations with assurances that the USSR would never place “surface-to-surface missiles” in Cuba, but U-2 overflights on October 14 and 15 found signs of a medium-range missile site at Los Palacios, Cuba, and IRBM sites at Guanajay, Cuba.
On October 16, Kennedy convened the decision-making body called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council—Ex Comm—to analyze the problems the missiles presented and options for removing them.
As a result of their discussions, many of the policymakers concluded within a couple of days that solving the crisis required a strategy utilizing diplomacy and military force that built upon the preceding efforts of the State and Defense Departments.
The president utilized this subset of the NSC because that body “made him uncomfortable.
President Kennedy stocked Ex Comm with individuals sure to debate each other and even excused himself from some of the meetings so as to encourage free discussion.
Members of the Ex Comm included President John F Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor, Director of Central Intelligence John McCone, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, Undersecretary of State George Ball, Ambassador-at-Large Llewellyn E Thompson, Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen.
Diplomatic efforts not only held the possibility of success in their own right, they also paved the way for military action should that prove necessary by justifying such actions to the world.
At the same time, preparations for an invasion, a blockade, and air strikes were more than prudent; they encouraged the Soviets to choose to resolve the crisis via negotiations, since military action was a near-term threat and not a future abstraction.
Ex Comm also concluded that if they chose to destroy the missiles, it would be necessary to strike before they became operational, so as a consequence the administration had to resolve the crisis quickly.
In this instance human intelligence, specifically that of Oleg Penkovsky, helped the administration realize that it had days, not hours, to make decisions in relation to the missiles becoming ready to fire.
Penkovsky had provided his British and American handlers a technical manual on the R-12 missile.
Photo interpreters conclusively identified the first missiles discovered as R-12s of 1,292 statute mile range.
Installing warheads required only a couple of hours, and launch preparations as little as two to three more.
All this encouraged the Executive Committee to turn first to the air strike option.
Time until completion of the missile sites was a critical factor in determining United States strategy.
Once they were operational, options became more limited—better to destroy them before they were ready to fire.
Because of technological limitations, there was no defense against ballistic missiles short of destroying them before they were launched.
Even if the Soviets did not intend to fire them against United States targets, several Ex Comm members believed that Moscow could use the missiles as a distraction while 48.
Others believed Khrushchev also wished to establish leverage against United States missiles in Turkey in addition to bringing the Berlin issue to a head—political objectives which made it likely that the Soviets would be amenable a political solution.
In an ideal world, Kennedy would have known why the Soviets had sent missiles to Cuba, but intelligence briefs had not provided a definitive explanation.
That meant that the president could not apply force and diplomacy against a firm target; he could use them only against what he believed the Soviet motivation was.
Ex Comm recognized several technical and diplomatic shortcomings of military action by itself.
For one, they did not know if they had found every site, and certainty was out of reach because bad weather might prevent complete photographic coverage of Cuba for weeks.
The need to not signal that an attack was imminent actually worked against its success.
The JCS recommended that the Air Force should preserve surprise by foregoing low-level reconnaissance flights, which would broadcast the threat of tactical air strikes.
But the absence of highresolution photographs such flights would provide decreased the pilots’ chances of seeing and striking all the targets during their attacks.
A loss of surprise—a consequence of prestrike reconnaissance—meant prepared antiaircraft defenses and targets hidden under camouflage netting, an effective passive defense in that day.
By choosing to destroy the missiles, tactical fighters would have to “ensure by conventional means the most rapid and complete removal of” ballistic missiles, SAMs, jet fighters and bombers, and nuclear storage sites, but their complete destruction was unlikely.
The fundamental problem with the air strike option was that the United States Air Force would have to destroy every single missile in Cuba in order to ensure the safety of the United States.
The Air Force and CIA, however, knew the location of only thirty-six of the suspected forty launchers.
If just one operational MRBM escaped detection, it could still destroy an American city or military base.
With two missiles per launcher, that left eight unaccounted for in their minds.
The commander of Tactical Air Command, General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., whose fighters would 52.
The Americans later concluded that R-12 launchers were operational on October 15.
This source states that twenty-four launchers were ready, but a Soviet source states that “up to eight missiles” could be launched on October 20.
The United States had put 16 “Jupiter” MRBMs in Turkey as part of the nuclear deterrent.
Robert McNamara, “Notes on October 21 Meeting with the President, 11:30m.-12:30 p.m.,” NSAD 738.
Air Force Historical Research Agency photo, AFHRA IRIS number 1026391. carry out the air strikes, conceded that even under the best conditions he did not believe his planes could destroy all of the missiles during the first wave of attacks, which left open a launch window for the Soviets.
The generals were not writing-in excuses just in case the strikes met with less than complete success.
For instance, the Air Force believed its reconnaissance aircraft photographed IRBMs on October 16; they later found three IRBM sites with four launch pads each on October 23.
Pilots aimed unguided bombs, rockets, napalm, and gunfire through simple gunsights.
Digitally computed aim points and laser-guided precision weapons were years in the future.
The challenge they could not overcome was finding each and every missile.
Nevertheless, striking without warning remained attractive, for if the missiles were the vanguard of a Soviet first strike, Kennedy would have regretted having tried anything else but preventive action.
The JCS believed that the missiles ought to be attacked at once and as new ones appeared, instead of waiting until U-2s had discovered all of them.
To wait until they were all ready might be too late, for the Soviets might launch the missiles as soon as they were ready, before an air strike could arrive.
Although a war initiated from Cuba was probably not in the cards, the generals concerned themselves with what the Soviets could do, not necessarily with what they were likely to do.
The greatest merit of a preemptive air strike was that tactical aircraft would destroy most, if not all, of the missiles in the first wave of attacks.
A broader conventional attack would ensure the quickest and most complete elimination of offensive weaponry in Cuba, eliminating the possibility of a nuclear strike from the island.
The JCS, when faced with uncertainty, preferred to escalate, while Kennedy and many within the State Department were inclined to pull back and attempt diplomatic suasion.
As will become more evident, the JCS perceived the missiles solely as weapons, while the State Department interpreted them as instruments which generated political effects.
The way in which each bureaucracy perceived the missiles greatly influenced their response.
For example, an attack against even a single missile would complicate and escalate the problem politically, because Soviet technicians servicing the weapons would certainly become casualties.
Killing Soviet citizens was just one of many problems with using military force without any diplomatic preparation ahead of time.
A first-generation air-to-surface guided missile, the AGM-12B “Bullpup,” was also available, but it was not a true precision weapon.
Chronology of JCS Decisions Concerning the Cuban Crisis, SM-1451-62, 9, 15, 46.
He reminded the Ex Comm that America had forty-two allies and that it faced flash points around the world.
Furthermore, allied countries, not the United States, would probably bear the brunt of any retaliation if the USSR decided to respond militarily to an American conventional air strike against Cuba.
The United States simply had to consult with its closest allies on any military actions it might take.
Merely informing them of United States decisions after the fact was inadequate.
The Soviets might retaliate against one or more of the NATO allies—for an action that the United States had taken without their consultation, but which put them at risk.
Charles E Bohlen, the ambassador to the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1957, also warned against striking first without trying diplomacy.
If the United States had to attack at a later date, the administration would have already explained why, and could remind other countries that it had tried to negotiate the missiles out of Cuba.
Bohlen concluded that diplomacy was not dangerous to American objectives.
Undersecretary of State George Ball warned that an air strike could leave the NATO allies in “disarray,” and force Britain and France to adopt a Berlin policy different from America’s.
The use of military force, he warned, would leave a trail of political collateral damage if unleashed unwisely.
The president agreed that consultation with allies prior to military action was vital.
The administration had to explain the reasons why a preemptive attack was justified, and even then the nation’s friends might consider that an overreaction.
On the second day of the crisis, Bohlen proposed sending letters to Khrushchev and Castro, and consulting with the OAS and other allies prior to military action.
In contrast to several clear military advantages, an air strike without any warning or attempt at diplomacy had few diplomatic merits; it only demonstrated intolerance of Soviet malfeasance in sneaking the missiles into Cuba.
Khrushchev may actually wish to force a confrontation over Berlin—one that could lead to rifts within the alliance.
Stevenson urged Kennedy to make it clear to the Soviets in no uncertain terms that if they did not remove the missiles, the United States would.
Alexis Johnson warned that enacting a blockade without coordinating with the OAS would be the “worst” use of force—precisely because the effort to justify the action and gain support through diplomacy would have been missing.
George Ball perceived disturbing parallels between an air strike and the Pearl Harbor attack.
Confronted with the shortcomings of a military strategy executed in isolation from diplomatic effects and concerns, Kennedy’s men began to modify their approach to favorably resolving the crisis into one that blended military action and political efforts.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk explicitly suggested a judicious use of force and diplomacy to isolate and threaten the Soviets.
That could convince them that bending to United States demands was in their best interest.
McNamara lacked confidence in the air strike option, believing it would only destroy two out of every three missiles.
General Taylor likewise was moving toward a more nuanced use of coercion.
National Security Council minutes for October 20 reveal that he conceded the political importance of giving a warning prior to launching an air strike.
Dean Rusk continued to push for consultation with allies before taking action.
Military and political imperatives pulled President Kennedy in opposite directions.
What worked best for the political solution wrecked the optimum military solution—a surprise air strike—and the most effective military solution created political wreckage he may not be able to repair after the strike.
Kennedy needed to balance and utilize the strengths of both approaches.
Adlai Stevenson, “Memo to Self for Conference,” October 17, 1962, NSAD 650.
An effective use of force and diplomacy required that Kennedy order preparations for a major conventional attack against Cuba, convince the Soviets that nuclear strikes would take place if they launched their Cuban-based missiles, negotiate sincerely with the Soviets, convince world leaders of the legitimacy of his demands, and make concessions to the Soviets as long as they were less costly than military action against the missiles sites.
President Kennedy chose a moderate path, one which saw force and diplomacy not just acting in parallel, but constantly intersecting while working in the same direction.
An added strain on Kennedy’s efforts to use force and diplomacy in concert was the aggressive desires of several of his advisors who believed the missiles presented such a danger that proactive military strikes were the proper course of action.
These included not only military officers such as generals Thomas Power and Curtis LeMay but also civilians such as his brother Bobby, Douglas Dillon, DCI John McCone, and even Adlai Stevenson.
The Soviet Union might respond in an unpredictable way that could escalate to nuclear war.
To Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, for instance, the survival of the United States was at stake, so the risk of an air strike was worth it.
The United States ought to accept the negative political fallout from a surprise attack rather than allow the missiles to stay in Cuba.
The generals did not assess the political effects preemptive air strikes could produce.
The JCS had made no predictions as to the Soviet response to a conventional air strike, nor did they recommend the implementation of a specific American plan for general war.
They viewed the crisis through a lens of military targets and operational challenges, meaning that they perceived security in physical terms—weapons; the concept of “military” factors did not include diplomatic and political aftershocks military posturing and attacks could generate.
C Douglas Dillon, “Scenario for Airstrike against Offensive Missile Bases and Bombers in Cuba,” October 25, 1962.
Although he was secretary of the treasury, Dillon had gained considerable experience with nuclear diplomacy as ambassador to France and as undersecretary of state during the Eisenhower administration.
Air Defense Command in the Cuban Crisis, Air Defense Command Historical Study 15, 21.
Kennedy decided that he could best achieve his goals through a naval blockade in combination with diplomacy and a threatening military mobilization.
The Joint Staff had presented a blockade as a possible contingency even before the crisis broke, and Ex Comm discussed the possibility of a naval blockade from the first day.
He favored a coercive strategy that applied diplomatic pressure and gave negotiation a chance to succeed, and utilizing a naval blockade as the keystone of his strategy allowed Kennedy to be assertive and diplomatic at the same time.
His decision assumed that successful measures that did not resort to open conflict were better than air strikes that had not been preceded by a diplomatic offensive.
If the Soviets did not intend to commence a nuclear war as soon as the missiles were operational, the strategy of diplomacy backed by military force was not too risky.
This strategy also signaled to allies and nonaligned states that the United States protected its interests with measured responses.
The strategy gave NATO allies, especially the Germans, time to adjust to the crisis.
The Strategic Air Command history, for example, restricts itself to a tactical-level narrative.
Rusk suggested using the Rio Treaty as the legal basis for the quarantine, and the administration sought OAS support for this action.
Kennedy nevertheless decided that the United States would proceed with a quarantine if necessary without the backing of the OAS, although that would result in doubtful legality.
Multilateralism also made possible the loss of final authority over American actions.
Self-defense justified a unilateral strike against the missile sites, and the United States could not afford any sort of veto by its Latin American neighbors.
Diplomatic efforts clearly carried more legitimacy than unilateral action, but they also risked abrogating a state’s sovereign right to act on its own.
The president was ready to implement a quarantine in the absence full OAS support.
But of course a strategy centered around a naval blockade came at a cost.
First of all, General Maxwell Taylor warned the president on October 19 that deciding to impose a blockade equaled a decision to not execute an air strike because such an attack after 89.
Organization of American States, Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, September 2, 1947.
In General Taylor’s opinion, the best scenario for destroying the missiles was an attack without warning, for diplomacy might encourage the Soviets to camouflage the missiles, greatly reducing the chances of an effective attack.
Similarly, a blockade warned the Soviets that further military action could follow, and cost the Air Force the chance to hit the missiles with complete surprise before they were all operational.
Taylor believed that risks skyrocketed once the missiles became operational, because the launch crews might fire their ballistic missiles if American aircraft were launched against them.
Substituting a blockade for an air strike strategy could still subject European allies to Soviet pressure.
Soviet troops might blockade Berlin in retaliation, or embarrass the Turks by calling for them to dismantle their Jupiter missiles.
It could make the United States appear less firm than it claimed to be if the Soviets balked.
If the administration waited until November or December to bomb the missiles, critics could ask why the United States had to destroy the missiles when it had put up with them for a couple of months.
The JCS discussed a blockade as well, although as a component of wider military action.
Imposing a blockade offered the advantages of flexibility and control, and contained diplomatic and military benefits without relying solely on either.
It lessened the chances of a sudden escalation to a nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union.
It provided the United States time to present its case in the UN and rally international support and sanctions.
A blockade offered both superpowers a chance to stop and consider their next action, instead of leaping from one fire into another, no small matter when nuclear war threatened.
Dean Rusk and the president had already discussed the matter, and decided to not press the Turks to dismantle them until a suitable replacement—a Polaris submarine—was on station.
An early decommissioning of the missiles would have “embarrassed” the Turkish executive.
It would force him to ask Parliament to return them to the Americans just after allocating funds for their deployment.
His State Department advisors believed that the Soviets wanted to avoid a direct confrontation with the administration over Cuba.
State Department analyst Roger Hilsman deduced that Soviet leaders believed the United States actually knew of the ballistic missiles , and coyly wished to remain noncommittal to any particular action.
Therefore, the administration could expect the less aggressive blockade to have a real chance of influencing Soviet behavior.
Regarding the interests of allies, a naval blockade was more likely to gain OAS endorsement than a preemptive air strike.
A blockade carried the added value of being an equivalent “passive” counter to the missiles, since no one had been killed.
It was less apt to provoke retaliation against allies, and it allowed diplomatic solutions time to work.
A blockade was the wisest strategy, but, he added, the United States 104.
See also George Ball’s opinion in May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 143.
McNamara believed that a blockade would not be overly provocative, because the CIA had concluded that the Soviets would not attempt to break through it.
Furthermore, the secretary agreed that a surprise air strike was “contrary to our tradition,” and that a blockade lessened the chances of escalation with the Soviets and a rift with United States allies.
The next day, the president conferred with British ambassador David Ormby-Gore, put forth the two options of an airstrike followed by a blockade, or a blockade alone, and asked him which he preferred.
The ambassador replied that he thought a blockade was the better of the two.3 In order for a blockade to work, the United States had to make it clear that if the Soviets failed to remove the missiles, American armed forces would destroy the weapons.
Only under such a threat was there any reason for the Soviets to give in.
Kennedy’s decision to utilize a blockade appears to have been an out of hand dismissal of the air strike plans, but that was not the case.
The threat of a conventional air strike—under the umbrella of a massive nuclear alert—lent credibility to the blockade.
The administration always retained the conventional air strike as a trump card—a visible one considering the magnitude of the tactical aircraft deployments into Florida once the crisis became public—in case diplomacy was unable to persuade the Soviets to remove their missiles.
Just as diplomacy and military force had done, conventional and nuclear forces mutually supported each other.
Kennedy heightened the alert status of American nuclear forces in order to keep their Soviet counterparts at bay in case United States conventional forces struck Cuba.
With United States nuclear forces ready to attack, the Soviets, it was thought, would be more inclined to absorb a conventional attack on Soviet assets far from their own shores.
EST October 22, while the president announced the discovery of the missiles on television, the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered Defcon 3.118 SAC bomber and ICBM crews prepared themselves for an immediate counterstrike against the Soviet Union should it launch an attack on the United States.
Soon thereafter, one out of every eight B-52s was airborne in order to be invulnerable to an ICBM attack.
Remaining B-52s flew to dispersal bases and periodically relieved the airborne alert force.
Macmillan supported Kennedy’s choice, although some in the British cabinet doubted that international law would support the quarantine.
Tanker aircraft positioned themselves to increase the flying distance of both kinds of bombers.
The Air Force’s Atlas and Titan I ICBMs took on fuel and readied for launch.
Ordnance men armed some with antiaircraft missiles tipped with nuclear warheads.
In this way, United States armed forces, particularly manned bombers, put pressure on the Soviet Union—not only through their mere existence but through specific operational actions.
Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships carrying weapons to not cross the quarantine line, and Soviet military forces went to a higher alert status, including fueling ICBMs for launch.
The Soviets also ordered the ships carrying the R-14 IRBMs to turn around.
Consequently, the Executive Committee dealt with the crisis without knowing this vital information when it reconvened on the morning of the 24th.2 American naval forces also generated some subtle but critical side effects beyond the mere function of a blockade.
The preponderance of naval forces around Cuba meant that there were enough ships and aircraft to enforce the quarantine, which meant that Soviet ships carrying any additional missiles, warheads, and support equipment were not going to make it to Cuba.
The dominance of the United States Navy in this instance thus generated certainty within this aspect of the confrontation, which meant that Kennedy and Khrushchev had a couple of fewer variables to worry about.
Composed of two attack aircraft carriers, an antisubmarine aircraft carrier, three cruisers, and thirty-two destroyers, the Navy task force was strong but not over the top.
USAF Historical Division Liaison Office, Headquarters USAF, “The Air Force Response to the Cuban Crisis,” 6.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy: Volume VIII, 1961-1964 , 177.
Air Force RB-47 and RB-50 aircraft joined naval patrol aircraft in searching 4. million square miles of the Atlantic Ocean.
There were, however, still dangers of escalation, because Khrushchev had ordered Soviet submarines to sink American warships that tried to board Soviet merchant vessels on the high seas, informing the United States of this on the 24th through the businessman William Knox.
The DoD also took a step that could have worked against the peaceful resolution of the standoff in its rules for the quarantine; it devised procedures for Navy warships to coerce submerged Soviet submarines to surface.
Even though the United States published these procedures worldwide through a “Notice to Mariners,” they were still aggressive and risky, because it depended on the Soviet Navy forwarding the procedures to its submarine captains; that did not happen.
In order for a Navy ship to consider a submarine “as nonthreatening,” it had to surface and proceed on an easterly course.6 If the submarine did not surface, a Pentagon spokesman stated, the Navy warship 124.
Soviet submariners were familiar with the acoustics of American practice depth charges.
They were unresponsive to these efforts and did not surface until they needed to recharge their batteries.
The Beale followed it for a few minutes and even flooded it with a searchlight beam.
Maritime supremacy there also meant than when sixteen Soviet ships had either turned for home or were standing pat, the Navy knew about it.
Each side might then become reluctant to deescalate, which would reduce the possibilities for a peaceful resolution.
On October 25, for example, the JCS raised the alert status to Defcon 2 after receiving authorization from the White House.
When the Soviets intercepted the transmission of the DEFCON change, they raised their own military alert, particularly for the ICBMs.
This Soviet counter-alert may have appeared to be attack preparations and thus had the possibly of encouraging a U.S. preemptive strike, but the Americans did not detect this change.
The Soviet interception of the increase in DEFCON was an accurate piece of intelligence, but Soviet intelligence passed along an incorrect conclusion on October 25, that the United States was about to invade Cuba.
This information suggested that America was about to transition to open warfare, but in fact, the United States was only preparing to be able to do so.
The order for war had not been given, and more importantly, the administration did not want to resort to force.
So this incomplete information encouraged Kremlin leaders to feel even more threatened, which increased the likelihood that decisions detrimental to a peaceful solution would be made.
The SAC commander, General Thomas S Power, has been accused of acting as a loose cannon by sending the change in DEFCON over clear channels.
Transmitting DEFCON changes without encrypting them was, however, the normal procedure until President Richard Nixon directed otherwise in 1972.
With these forces in place, Kennedy urged Khrushchev to realize that he had lied to the United States about never placing missiles in Cuba, that the USSR bore responsibility for the crisis, and that the Soviets ought to return the weapons to Soviet soil.3 Diplomats can continue negotiations for years, but a military mobilization at such a peak of readiness could not be maintained indefinitely, a weakness that would erode the president’s options if the blockade continued for weeks instead of days.
After two weeks of waiting, aircraft were going to start malfunctioning, and after a month of not flying, the Air Force expected “extensive” system failures.
Air, as opposed to ground alert, wore down the maintenance-intensive aircraft then in service.
Had ADC and SAC kept the fighters and bombers flying more patrols, fewer would have been ready to fly during an air strike.
For example, after initially having ten fighters on airborne patrols over south Florida, ADC reduced the number to four on the 23rd.
Similarly, Marine Air Group 14 had to sit ready for action at Key West, but could not fly training sorties to maintain their flying skills at a sharp edge.
If Kennedy chose to wait a month or more, the Soviets would complete their missile deployment in Cuba as more and more United States aircraft broke down from either intensive flying or a complete lack thereof, as well as reduced maintenance— as the administration’s threat of force began to weaken.
Such limitations in extended military readiness constrained the president’s options.
Force and diplomacy can be used in this manner only for a limited amount of time.
The Contributions of CORONA,” in Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites, ed.
United States Marine Corps Emergency Action Center, 7m., October 23, to 7:01m., October 24, 1962.
The State Department recommended that measures for the use of military force parallel diplomatic preparations.
American actions would show that the United States sought a reasonable solution, but would impose its will by force in the face of Soviet intransigence.
The administration had to justify military action to the American people by first exhausting diplomatic means.
Because the State Department had been mobilizing Latin American diplomatic power for months, it more easily pursued Stevenson’s recommendation to meld their efforts with those of the United States.
This aspect of administration strategy rightly assumed that if the OAS condemned Soviet forces in Cuba, Moscow would have one less weapon in the public relations war; the Soviets would be unable to call the American reaction unilateral if most Latin American governments supported United States policy.
A multilateral diplomatic effort carried more weight than one waged by the United States alone.
While military forces dispersed and readied for action, State Department officials prepared diplomatic moves to preempt Soviet diplomacy.
A Soviet complaint to the United Nations about United States actions, for example, would upset American posturing in case a military strike was imminent.
The United States had to ready its own complaints so as to direct attention toward the Soviets’ surreptitious emplacement of missiles in Cuba.
Ambassador Stevenson could, for example, time an emergency convening of the Security Council to take place shortly before the air strikes commenced, if Ex Comm followed that path.
Allies had to be informed, and leaks prevented.2 As a step in paving the way diplomatically for a justifiable attack on Cuba, the secretary of state forwarded a letter from the president to Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on the morning of October 22 telling him of the ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Lord Alexander Douglas-Home of the British Foreign Office made a similar recommendation—that negotiations must be attempted prior to and to justify military action—during the Berlin Crisis in 1961.
At the same time, the Kennedy administration had to assure the Turkish government that it rejected a Soviet comparison of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey with those secretly installed in Cuba.5 As President Kennedy made his television speech announcing the presence of the missiles, administration officials informed the ambassadors from the Latin American countries about the crisis.
Though these ambassadors were usually reluctant to make quick decisions, Secretary Rusk gained their near-unanimous support for the quarantine; they endorsed strong action against Cuba.
Kennedy signed the “blockade proclamation” on October 23 and it became active the next day.9 While Kennedy implemented the diplomatic side of the American strategy through the Organization of American States—which functioned as the main forum for diplomatic pressure—he used the UN to show the limited nature of United States objectives, as well as for proposing a long-term political solution.
The administration also contemplated exerting pressure through the Brazilian ambassador to Cuba, an avenue that had been open since the Eisenhower administration due to Brazilian initiatives.
Ironically, diplomatic pressure from a country less powerful than the United States was more likely to succeed because it promised to embarrass Castro less, and also demonstrated that more was involved than the interests of the United States.
The most forceful use of the UN, of course, was Stevenson’s public questioning of Ambassador Valerian Zorin on October 25.
When Zorin accused him of producing fake photographs, Stevenson called for the Soviets and Cubans to permit UN inspectors to verify or refute American accusations, at which the Soviets balked.
This use of photo intelligence paid positive dividends as well when the United States released photographs of the sites to the European press.3 The United States obtained military support, however small and symbolic, from several Latin American countries.
Costa Rica, Panama, Nicaragua, and Guatemala offered basing support for United States forces in the blockade.
Zorin assured his foreign ministry that the Venezuelan and Chilean ambassadors were reading American “crib-notes” during their UN speeches.
Through these efforts, the United States undermined the arguments of those who accused it of unilateralism.
But like the blockade, diplomatic pressure to remove the missiles worked only if the Soviets cooperated.
Once the United States imposed the quarantine, leaders in the Soviet Presidium debated their next move.
Over the next five days, the administration received conflicting signals as to the success of the blockade and the concurrent diplomatic pressure it was using in pursuing the removal of the Soviet missiles.
On the one hand, several Soviet vessels, including ones carrying ballistic missiles, turned back on September 23.167 Averell Harriman, ambassador to the Soviet Union during the Truman administration, believed Kennedy’s efforts were working, in spite of the premier’s threats.
Khrushchev was, in his opinion, sending signals of concessions that the administration had to interpret and respond to in a way that would deescalate the crisis.8 161.
The premier rejected the legitimacy of the OAS, saying that it had no business meddling in Soviet-Cuban affairs, that it had no authority, and that whatever business the Soviet Union and Cuba conducted had no effect on anyone else.
For instance, the president approved low-level reconnaissance flights over the missile sites to keep pressure on the Soviets.
The flights signaled the American goal of ridding Cuba of the missiles that were already there, and if the Soviets rejected UN requests to inspect the sites, the United States would have fresh information on the missiles and could bomb them before they were ready to launch.
Tactical strike aircraft in Florida maintained high levels of alert, anywhere from pilots in their cockpits ready to launch to as long as a thirtyminute alert.
Commander of NATO, General Lauris Norstad, offered to carry out low-key preparations that would improve the readiness of his forces, but would not be so open and provocative that they distracted from diplomatic efforts.
Kennedy also persuaded Senegal and Guinea to “deny the Soviets the landing rights required for” aircraft that might possibly try to transport nuclear warheads to Cuba.9 As Kennedy continued with the dual track strategy of force and diplomacy, he reversed their roles.
If negotiating failed, he could therefore justify the conventional air strike.
By the 26th, the Executive Committee began codifying the strategy it had been employing throughout most of the crisis.
To afford the Soviets face-saving cover, if they wish, for a withdrawal of their offensive weapons from Cuba.
Preserving the interests of allies and of the cohesion of the NATO alliance remained key elements of this strategy.
First of all, the missiles belonged to the Turks; the United States owned only the warheads.
More significantly, a trade would undermine if not wreck the NATO alliance by making it appear as if the United States was willing to sacrifice an ally’s security in favor of its own.
Even though the Turks were disinclined to even admit that these missiles were on Turkish soil, they placed great stock in them and reacted harshly to proposals in the American press to give them up in exchange for the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cleveland was the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs; Thompson was Ambassador at Large, Department of State.
There was, however, open discussion of just such a trade in the press—along with vehement denials by both governments—during the crisis.
But with hundreds of nuclear weapons being brandished about, a solution involving some sort of American concession remained attractive, and trading the United States missiles in Turkey for the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba could look less damaging to the NATO allies when one considers the specter of a countermove against West Berlin.8 Two days after Khrushchev’s first warnings, the outcome looked promising.
On October 26, Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy offering in so many words to dismantle the ballistic missiles if the United States would promise not to attack Cuba.
This condition could argue for a preemptive strike, or for much greater caution.
On that same day a second letter from Khrushchev arrived, noticeably harsher in tone and more strident in its demands.
The premier demanded that the United States remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey if it wanted to see a nuclear-free Cuba.
Then a Soviet air defense commander in Cuba ordered the shooting down of a U-2.
President Kennedy also discussed the possibility with the prime minister of Great Britain.
Meanwhile, the Soviets directly threatened the Turks, calling Turkey the Soviet Union’s Cuba.
Message from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 27, 1962.
The president and his advisors again considered ordering an air strike to resolve the immediate crisis of more and more missiles becoming ready for launch.
An attack now appeared more justified than before since a majority of the Security Council and the entire OAS had condemned the Soviet nuclear presence in Cuba.
Besides, a single series of strikes might be less escalatory over the long run than protracted confrontations, if the assumption was correct that the Soviets would not go to war in retaliation.
Military action would also demonstrate that the president meant what he said, that he was willing to fight for vital American interests.
United States credibility and resolve lost power each day the missiles remained, which lent new urgency toward the air strike option.
Latin American support might wane and time could erode the acceptability of an air strike.
Military planners and political leaders often lack a complete picture of the perils they face, and this was true in regard to Cuba.
The Americans did not realize this, even though on October 15, U-2s photographed a cruise missile site at Santa Cruz del Norte.
During the course of the crisis, they photographed three cruise missile sites and one other “possible” cruise missile site.
Only by mid-November did analysts begin to mention that these rockets could mount nuclear warheads.7 After the climax of the crisis, CINCLANT speculated that since these weapons could carry nuclear warheads, American tactical nuclear weapons ought to be 194.
McNamara, Bundy, and Ball feared the likelihood of extreme knee-jerk behavior.
A U-2 had strayed over Siberia, and not a few Ex Comm members feared that a mistake like this would trigger a nuclear war.
A list of weapons the State Department wanted removed did not mention tactical nuclear weapons.
The note did include a catch-all coverall-the-bases phrase “or any other type of nuclear weapon,” but did not mention the presence of short-range nuclear missiles.
Major Consequences of Certain United States Courses of Action on Cuba, October 20, 1962.
John McCone showed a photograph to JFK on October 26 that McCone said might have uncovered battlefield nuclear weapons.
Especially puzzling is why the Soviets chose to not reveal the presence of these additional weapons after October 22.
While the discovery of the ballistic missiles was an intelligence success,199 missing these short-range nuclear weapons was just the opposite.
The inability to detect the presence of tactical nuclear weapons on Cuba meant that threatening an invasion was actually a much more dangerous proposition, not only because of the obliteration of the American invasion force the FKRs and FROGs could have inflicted, but even worse because their use would have been escalatory, and thus counter to the coercive goals of the administration.
The Soviets considered giving the on-site commander, General Issa Pliyev, local authority to launch them against an invasion force in case communications with Moscow were cut, but never did.
Khrushchev prohibited his generals in Cuba from using these weapons to defend the island, but during the crisis Pliyev double-checked the status of his authority to use nuclear weapons.
Although Pliyev acknowledged that he did not have the authority to fire nuclear weapons, he nevertheless retained the capability.
In a crisis such as this one, the executive leadership never had full control over the execution of their strategy.
It was thus fortunate that JFK favored diplomacy, because an attack could have sparked Soviet use of nuclear weapons.
At this point in the crisis, however, American force and diplomacy efforts had begun to bear more of a resemblance to trying to control a gasoline fire than they did to statecraft.
Kennedy and most of the Ex Comm badly wished to find a way out, for the momentum of the crisis was now pressing them back toward the air strike option.
USSR Minister of Defense R Malinovsky, “To the Commander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba,” September 8, 1962.
Archive of the President of the Russian Federation, Special Declassification, April 2002.
Secretary Dillon anticipated diplomatic challenges and postulated responses, with his eye on utilizing diplomacy to justify an air strike.
For instance, the United States could attempt to cast itself in a conciliatory light by proposing in a Security Council resolution that the Soviets remove the missiles, and by presenting additional evidence of the Soviet buildup.
If the White House decided to attack, it could first issue repeated warnings that the Soviets needed to dismantle the missiles.
If Kennedy ordered the attack, he would notify the chairman of the OAS shortly beforehand, the Latin American heads of state, and the NATO allies at its initiation.
His brother warned that it was not worth risking nuclear war when he could avert that risk by removing the missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of those in Cuba.
This negotiated proposal—lessening the possibility of war—could gain the appreciation of the NATO allies, or it could make them feel that their interests were being sold down the river in favor of America’s.
In contrast, RFK pressed that the military be ready to launch air strikes by Monday the 29th.
Likewise the president was prepared to order attacks on all of the SAM sites if they shot at another reconnaissance flight.
The administration believed it was reaching a point where it had to take bolder steps, lest the missiles become the status quo, and thus making an attack all the more difficult to justify.
The preparations for the use of force encouraged Kennedy to continue to try to find a diplomatic solution, and he had one last option through the UN, the “Cordier Maneuver,” if he needed it.
If he received orders to do so from the president, Cordier would hand it over to the secretary general.
Secretary General Thant could then present the motion to the Security Council as his own idea, not as Kennedy’s.
Kennedy’s idea was shrewd, because if the proposal had reached the Security Council, the United States, the USSR, and Turkey would all have a face-saving opportunity to diffuse the crisis by giving in to the UN, not to each other.
In order for his diplomatic efforts to remain credible, he had to escalate his military pressure on the Soviets.
On the night of the 27th, he agreed to the mobilizing of approximately three hundred cargo aircraft to fly troops into Cuba.
The administration also had to convince its NATO allies that some kind of negotiated missile trade was in their interests, because if the United States refused to consider Khrushchev’s offer, military action against the missiles in Cuba had to follow.2 The military meanwhile prepared orders for an air strike to commence on October 30, while the administration tried to figure out a way to pull of a missile trade with the concurrence of NATO.213 Diplomatic action still formed an element of the air strike, consisting of consultation with the NATO allies about the impending action.
While preparing this option, the president continued to seek a solution that did not involve combat.4 Ex Comm was not confident that multilateral action through the NATO Council would result in the removal of the missiles from Cuba, which encouraged the administration toward unilateral diplomacy.
The only remaining military options short of war were a tighter blockade and an expanded military mobilization.
Bobby Kennedy urged resolve, warning that if the Soviets believed the United States was giving in on the Jupiters in Turkey, they would soon thereafter press for the removal of Jupiter missiles stationed in Italy.
He believed the administration ought to wait and see what the next day would bring.
JFK, however, had already said that he would remove the Jupiters—if the Soviets proposed that course of action first.7 210.
Cabinet Room Meeting, October 27, 1962, 4m., Stern, Averting, 324, 328.
Absolute secrecy was going to be a challenge, for the idea was already a part of the public discourse in the newspapers.
There could be no appearance of a quid pro quo, so several months had to elapse before the dismantling of the Turkish missiles began.
This quid pro quo—behind the backs of the NATO allies, and behind Castro’s back—had to be kept secret by both sides.
The administration had already been sorting out a way to arrange an acceptable trade.
On the 24th, George Ball informed the ambassador to Turkey, Raymond Hare, that negotiating the removal of the Jupiter missiles was a possibility, and Hare cabled detailed trade recommendations on the 27th.
The president used his brother to provide the Soviets with the opportunity to make the bargain a reality, sending Attorney General Bobby Kennedy to negotiate a deal with Soviet ambassador Dobrynin to remove the missiles.2 On the evening of Saturday the 27th, Bobby Kennedy met with the Soviet ambassador.
He reminded Dobrynin that the Soviets had promised to not install missiles in Cuba and then did so, covertly.
The Soviets had to commit to the removal of the missiles by the next day, or America would take care of the problem itself, even though the USSR might retaliate violently.
Kennedy did offer a pledge to not invade Cuba in exchange for the removal of the Soviet missiles.
There was still a way out, and both men realized they had maneuvered each other into the same corner.
Dobrynin brought up the solution and asked Kennedy if there was a way of executing a missile trade like Premier Khrushchev had proposed.
Kennedy replied in the affirmative, noting that the United States needed time to remove the Turkish missiles through normal channels and procedures, so as to maintain the fiction that there was no connection between this action and the termination of the confrontation over the missiles in Cuba.
In terms of the effects on America’s nuclear arsenal, the fact that the missiles 218.
If this solution went forward, both sides would have to make concessions.
The Soviets had to remove their missiles from Cuba because of American threats, and the Americans had to later remove ballistic missiles from Turkey, an action that risked severe damage to the NATO alliance.
About six hours after Dobrynin met with Robert Kennedy (the morning of October 28 in Moscow), Khrushchev received a cable of Dobrynin’s discussion with the attorney general.
It required little discussion for the Presidium to agree to Kennedy’s terms.
Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missiles from Cuba prior to RFK’s discussion with Dobrynin; Kennedy’s offer to remove the Jupiters from Turkey was icing on the cake.
Later that day President Kennedy accepted the terms of Khrushchev’s letter of October 26, and agreed to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a noninvasion of Cuba pledge.
United States military and diplomatic initiatives had indeed created conditions in which the Soviets possessed few choices besides acceding to the American offer.
Soviet intelligence sources had even informed the premier that a United States attack on Cuba was imminent, although in fact no such strike was going to take place unless JFK gave the final order.
A combination of United States military power and diplomatic flexibility had coerced the Soviet Union into complying, but Khrushchev believed that the USSR had achieved some of its goals since missile deployment had led to an American promise to not invade Cuba and the “unexpected” removal of the missiles in Turkey.9 The administration had arranged and offered the Soviets the way out of the crisis after backing them into a corner, just as the secretary of state had earlier suggested.
The Soviets shipped their missiles home quickly, while the United States got to wait until the following spring when it could act as if it was casually 224.
In any event, the missile trade did not lead to difficulties in US-Turkish relations.
In January, it announced the replacement of the Turkish and Italian Jupiters by Polaris SSBNs, weapons that, unlike the Jupiters, were not vulnerable to a first strike.
The Soviets made up for their losses in a matter of months, for by 1964 they had about two hundred ICBMs with many more under construction.2 Although tensions remained high for several more weeks, the crisis had entered its waning phase.
In order to not short-circuit follow-on diplomacy, “Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October” when U Thant went to Cuba to meet with Fidel Castro.
The last of the R-12 missiles left Cuba on November 11, and United States forces maintained their high alerts until reconnaissance photographs verified their removal and of the nuclear-capable IL-28 bombers.4 By November 20, the Soviets decided to bring these aircraft home although they did not mention their redeployment to the Americans.
The Air Force cancelled the augmented B-52 airborne alert the following day, and it returned to Defcon 5 on November 29.235 Surveillance capabilities helped assure the administration that it had accomplished its goals, and thus prevented a follow-on crisis.
On November 1, photographs from Navy reconnaissance aircraft revealed that the Soviets were tearing down the missile sites, and nine days later reconnaissance flights “confirmed that all six MRBM and three IRBM sites had been 230.
I have not mentioned the exchanges between John Scali and Alexaner Feklisov because the Kremlin never received Feklisov’s messages in a timely enough manner to make use of them in the policy deliberations, and because the Kennedy administration did not make use of the Scali-Feklisov channel to negotiate an end to the crisis.
Furthermore, the Presidium had already decided on October 25 that Khrushchev would offer to remove the missiles if Kennedy promised to not invade Cuba.
For its part, United States Navy surface combatants followed the Soviet ships carrying the missiles from Cuba all the way back to the Black Sea in order to continue the confirmation of the agreement.9 As soon as the agreement was publicized, the NATO allies expressed their relief.
And again, the preponderance of naval power in the Atlantic had assured the operational success of the quarantine.
Military power provided him with flexibility; weakness would have limited Kennedy’s options.
Although a surprise air strike could have been most effective from a purely military point of view—the destruction of weapons and hardware—it would have been costly in terms of relations with other states.
The world stage required justification, and the blockade provided the Kennedy administration the opportunity to present its case.
A subsequent air attack on the missile sites would have then been more palatable.
He would have attempted diplomacy first, and made a case to foreign leaders.
The Air Force’s ability to carry out an effective conventional air strike (given enough sorties) empowered the State Department’s efforts to negotiate a 237.
Arthur C Warfel, History of the 4080th Strategic Wing , Special Operations, November 1 to December 31, 1962, 2–6, 12.
Roger Hilsman, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, “Western European Reactions to the Soviet Decision to Dismantle the Missile Bases in Cuba,” Research Memo REU-74, To the Secretary of State, October 31, 1962.
There were three wings of F-100D fighterbombers at Homestead Air Force Base south of Miami, another at McCoy AFB along with an F-105 wing, two wings of F-84F fighter-bombers and another F-100D wing at McDill Air Force Base , a wing of F-104C fighters and Marine Air Group 14 at Key West Naval Air Station.
The commander-in-chief of Atlantic Command commented that “nuclear weapons were not needed” for these air strikes.
In addition, there were 150,000 United States Army troops standing by for an invasion, nearly 6,000 United States Marines at Guantanamo Bay, and naval forces composed of three aircraft carriers and twenty-eight additional warships.
Had a transition to war become necessary, forces were in place for a quick transition to wartime operations.7 Policymakers in this case needed to use force and diplomacy together because the strength of one compensated for the weakness of the other.
Diplomacy had to have the threat of military action behind it to increase the attractiveness of a peaceful settlement.
The shortcomings in target acquisition and bombing precision of the day’s aircraft made a negotiated settlement more attractive, and perhaps necessary, for the United States.
In addition, force generates unexpected undesirable side effects that may worsen the situation.
Force could have encouraged military escalation on the part of the Soviets, or it could have alienated America’s allies.
Likewise extended diplomacy may work against the accomplishment of policy goals.
An adversary may interpret diplomacy alone as weakness or disinterestedness.
Air Force planning was narrow, for it omitted foreign relations considerations.
That made sense within their paradigm, which focused on “purely military” issues, and did not see war as a continuation of politics to a degree that would have passed muster with Carl von Clausewitz.
The Air Force at that time seemed to instead see the president as the general-in-chief.
One official history, for example, argued after the crisis that, “it is no longer possible in the nuclear age to expect a war to be conducted without the day-to-day exercise by the President of intimate control 244.
Its leaders frequently expressed a noncompromising attitude, and diplomats deliberately employed both force and diplomacy in pursuing national objectives.
For his part, the president had already laid the military and diplomatic groundwork in the form of consultation with allies and adequate force capabilities and operational plans.
Both leaders had less than full trust in the level-headedness of their senior generals.
Khrushchev lost confidence in the judgment of his generals when they regarded his wishes to avoid nuclear war with scorn.
Not a few American military leaders had developed an all or nothing approach to the use of force as a result of frustrations during the Korean War.
They had a track record of recommending the use of nuclear weapons to solve security problems that were not critical to national survival, as when they wanted to use them to defend the tiny islands of Quemoy and Matzu and to defeat Communist forces in Laos.
Robert Kennedy used the fact that many of the generals, as well as some civilian leaders, were “itching for a fight” to convey to Anatoli Dobrynin on October 27 how urgent it was to resolve the crisis.
During the crisis, General Power had the commander of the first set of Minuteman ICBMs—a new missile at an under-construction site—bypass the safeguards that required four officers to 248.
The inability of Admiral George Anderson to understand the need to modify the Navy’s doctrine for blockades to fit the sensitive character of the standoff with the Soviet Union resulted in McNamara’s loss of confidence in his judgment.
The reactions of Admiral Anderson and General LeMay to the resolution of the crisis confirmed Kennedy’s distrust.
He instituted changes that made it easier to inform the president of the possible consequences of actions taken.
He was also willing to give incomplete advice in a timely manner instead of waiting until most all of the intelligence had been processed and vetted.
As a consequence, the executors of policy rested on a firmer foundation.
Before the crisis erupted, the United States coordinated and consulted with Latin American states, if not as equals, at least as with independent sovereigns.
Once photo interpreters discovered the missiles, however, the administration formulated its strategy and was going to carry it out regardless of the wishes of Latin American states.
Its efforts through the OAS were ultimately a window dressing of multilateralism draping a unilateral operation.
It is ironic that effective diplomacy requires strong military support.
Likewise, effective military action requires laying diplomatic groundwork, much like a preparatory artillery barrage.
The rhetoric of “diplomacy first, followed by military action second” is a fallacy.
One’s understanding of the execution of state policy is broadened by perceiving aggressive military force and staid diplomacy not as distinct entities, but as essentially alike occupying widely spaced positions on the same continuum.
One should not deduce the necessity of the integration of force and diplomacy at all times from one example, but this case study verifies the arguments of many that force and diplomacy support each other.
Donald Alan Carter has argued that Kennedy never trusted the service chiefs in the first place.
