Program in Independent Studies, Rivier College Abstract Nearly twenty years have lapsed since the end of the Cold War.
Today it is relatively easy to forget the bipolar structure that dominated international relations and the intense conflict that the Cold War era generated.
It was a time when nuclear war was not some theoretical military strategy, but a real possibility.
During the crisis, President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev’s decision-making processes were those of rational actors and not of crazed heads of state playing a game of nuclear brinkmanship.
President Kennedy desperately sought to maintain the strategic balance of power, while Khrushchev wanted to alter the strategic balance of power in favor of the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy had no choice but to respond to the Soviet nuclear missile deployment in Cuba, for if he failed to respond to this probe of Soviet intentions into the western hemisphere Khrushchev would continue to probe in all other spheres of American influence.
Some scholars suggest President Kennedy’s management of the crisis was dangerous and unnecessarily provocative, propelling the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of thermonuclear war.
The crisis did thrust the two superpowers toward the precipice of nuclear war, however, the argument that revisionist historians put forth that the Soviet missiles in Cuba posed no additional danger nor did it alter the nuclear threat to the mainland of the United States is almost entirely without merit.
While the argument is certainly true that revisionist historians put forth that Soviet based nuclear missiles launched from Cuba would have the same disastrous results as if they had been launched from within the Soviet Union.
That fact in itself is insufficient to support the conclusion that the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba did not pose any additional danger to the United States.
Most importantly, the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba did alter the strategic balance of power.
Upon close examination of the historical record, alteration of the strategic balance of power was a significant motivational factor in Premier Khrushchev’s decision to deploy nuclear missiles.
As with most political decisions, Khrushchev’s decision to deploy the missiles was multifaceted.
Not only did he want to alter the strategic balance of power, he also sought to thwart the American policy of containment, especially in Berlin as well as in Latin America.
Furthermore, the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba allowed Khrushchev to threaten the American mainland in the same manner in which American missiles in Europe threatened the Soviet Union.
Fidel Castro was willing to accept the Soviet missiles, albeit not entirely on his terms.
Like Khrushchev, Castro did agree to accept the missiles for the sake of communist expansionism, however, the primary reason he agreed to the deployment was for the salvation of Cuba.
Joseph T Thompson misperception that an invasion of Cuba by the United States was imminent, a perception that was not without considerable merit, nor did the Kennedy administration pursue policies to halt the possibility of such misperceptions.
Instead, his failure was his inability to stem the misperception of an imminent invasion by United States backed forces.
To examine the crisis otherwise, is to disregard the long-standing traditional adherence to the Monroe Doctrine and ignore the American foreign policy of containment.
During this era, American foreign policy can be best summed up utilizing one word, containment.
Without a Cold War context, the task of scrutinizing the crisis and the decision-making processes of Kennedy and Khrushchev is perilous indeed.
Although the decision-making processes of both superpower leaders were occasionally faulty with some foreseen and some unforeseen harrowing consequences they were able to bring the crisis to a successful diplomatic resolution.
The years preceding the Cuban Missile crisis are particularly relevant to the crisis itself, for several events directly influenced key decision-making processes during the crisis.
Those years reveal an extremely pervasive and robust Cold War atmosphere, hence, the rationale why the missile crisis needs to be analyzed in the Cold War context.
After the successful launch of Sputnik on October 4, 1957, the American public was in a state of near hysteria over the perceived might of Soviet technocracy.
No event influenced American perception of Soviet superiority more than the successful launch of the first artificial satellite.
A Gallup poll in January 1958 revealed that 67% of Americans believed the Soviet Union was ahead of the United States in the Cold War.
The successful flight of Yuri Gagarin in 1961, the first human to orbit the earth, only added to the American public misperception of Soviet technological and military superiority.
In 1960, historians, political scientists, and sociologists heralded an “age of consensus,” a time when social protest in America was rendered obsolete by agreements on numerous issues, one of which was a nearly universal fear of communism.
Gallup Polls conducted in the period leading up to 1960 confirm the nearly universal aversion to communism by the American public, in 1953, 1954, and in 1956, Americans had an unfavorable opinion of Communism/Soviet Union of 88.5%, 91.1% and 86.4% respectively.
A History of the United States since 1945; (Boston MA: Houghton Mifflin, 2007), 115.
The Cold War and the strategy of containment were more than political policies or ideals; it was an American way of life that provided a common identity for Americans in the post-war era.
When President Kennedy took office, he inherited, from his predecessor, President Eisenhower, a covert military operation designed to overthrow the newly installed communist regime of Fidel Castro.
The covert military plan, later to be known as the Bay of Pigs, and subsequently as a fiasco, was an absolute failure of policy and decision-making.
Professor Irving L Janis cites the Bay of Pigs invasion plan of Cuba as a perfect illustration of groupthink mentality and faulty decision-making.
Janis addresses specific areas in which the Kennedy administration made dreadful and faulty decisions, namely that the group suffered from the illusion of invulnerability, the illusion of unanimity, a suppression of personal doubts, the docility fostered by suave leadership and a taboo against antagonizing new group members.
President Kennedy’s failure, for which he claimed sole responsibility, afforded the opportunity to learn from the failures of the group decision-making process in the Bay of Pigs invasion plan.
Thus, the pitfalls of not questioning intelligence services, military advisors, and a desire to seek consensus within the group without alternative viewpoints would be avoided during the next crisis, which turned out to be far more complex and precarious than the Bay of Pigs.
Nevertheless, the Bay of Pigs invasion and the failure to halt the Central Intelligence Agency backed plan precipitated a military rapprochement between the Soviet Union and Cuba,7 which aided Premier Khrushchev’s decision to transport Soviet nuclear missiles to the island nation of Cuba.
The other geopolitical area of instability and conflict that highlighted Cold War tensions during the same epoch was Berlin, Germany.
At the summit conference in Vienna, on June 4, 1961, Khrushchev’s opinion of Kennedy was that he was weak and ill prepared to ward off realpolitik diplomacy the way the Eisenhower administration had successfully done, therefore, he tried to bully Kennedy into capitulation over the Berlin issue.
During the summit, Khrushchev handed Kennedy an aide-memoire that issued a new ultimatum on Berlin.
The following day Khrushchev traveled to East Germany and formally announced a December 31, deadline for a Berlin settlement.
Because of Khrushchev’s forcefulness on the “Berlin Problem,” Kennedy invariable linked Berlin with Cuba.
To Kennedy, holding the line on Cuba inevitably meant holding the line on Berlin.
To lose Berlin to the Soviets was equivalent to nullifying containment.
After the Bay of Pigs failure, Khrushchev supplied Castro with more advanced weaponry to act as a deterrent for any possible future invasion by the United States and to protect the communist foothold in the western hemisphere, strategically located just ninety miles from the United States mainland.
President Kennedy was aware of the Soviet military build up on Cuban soil; on September 4, 1962, he issued a statement read by press secretary Pierre Salinger, it stated, that there was “no evidence… of significant offensive capability in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance.
Were it to be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise….11 Kennedy felt it necessary to continue issuing threats of deterrence, as a result he held a news conference on September 13, 1962.
These series of increasingly heightened political affirmations by Kennedy indicated resolve on part of the United States that the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba was intolerable.
The answer is multifaceted, ambiguous, and complex; however, the question requires analysis in the context of Cold War politics in which misperceptions and miscalculations of ones adversary were commonplace.
Foremost, Khrushchev miscalculated President Kennedy’s response to the installation of missiles in Cuba.
He wrongfully perceived Kennedy would have no choice but to accept the Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba especially because he intended to reveal the clandestine installation after the November mid-term elections.
Scholars offer many different interpretations of why Khrushchev went ahead with the deployment of missiles in Cuba.
Cold War historian John Lewis Gaddis cites Khrushchev’s desire to spread communism in Latin American as the chief reason for the deployment.
It is highly improbable that this was Premier Khrushchev’s rationale for the deployment of nuclear missiles; however, the hypothesis has substantial merit as a contributing factor in Khrushchev’s decision-making process.
Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara conceded at the Moscow Conference, “If I was a Cuban and read the evidence of covert American action against their government, I would be quite ready to believe that the United States intended to mount an invasion.
The Kennedy administration’s failure to refrain from covert operations to overthrow Castro’s communist state enhanced the Kremlin’s misperception that an invasion was imminent.
It is highly probable that Khrushchev sought to justify his actions in a more favorable light in his memoirs and substantially more credible that Khrushchev did indeed install the nuclear missiles as part of an offensive strategic Cold War maneuver.
Khrushchev was vehemently annoyed by the proximity of American Jupiter missiles located so close to the border of Russia, in Turkey.
In the case that the Soviet Union ever had to withdraw the missiles, Khrushchev could always point to the American missiles in Turkey as well as other NATO countries, which housed similar missiles, as a bargaining chip for their removal.
Further, it is highly unlikely Khrushchev would embark on such a risky venture, because it did not alter the balance of power one iota.
Perhaps Khrushchev had a larger prize in mind, namely a resolution to the Berlin problem.
West Berlin was a prize that eluded Joseph Stalin and an ultimate trophy of the Cold War conflict.
Confidential correspondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy illustrates that the subject of West Berlin was the foremost issue on the agenda.
If the United States were to lose Berlin the entire strategy of containment could be nullified, furthermore, the Cold War victory by America with the enormously successful Berlin Airlift would have been destroyed.
Throughout the entirety of the Cuban missile crisis, the fate of Berlin weighed heavily on President Kennedy.
Kennedy linked the fate of Berlin with the Cuban crisis, theorizing if the United States were to attack Cuba then the Soviet response would be to move on West Berlin.
In a remarkable act of diplomacy and non-partisanship that is difficult to envision today, President Kennedy telephoned 16 Bruce J Allyn, James G Blight, David A Welch.
Conversation on White House taping system Friday, October 19, 1962 at 9:45 meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
By Monday, October 22, President Kennedy had formally decided against the military airstrike option, but now viewed West Berlin as the strategic objective the Soviets were after and would bargain for, in exchange for the missiles in Cuba.
Even during the last day of the crisis, Kennedy continued to perceive a linkage between Cuba and Berlin.
De Gaulle reminded Kennedy, “that the Soviet leader had a habit of issuing ultimatums and then forgetting about them.
Interestingly, at no point during the crisis did Khrushchev even intimate the possibility of an attack against Berlin.
Alteration of the balance of power, if successful, would enable the Soviet Union significant increased leverage in global international relations, and could potentially negate the long-term American foreign policy of containment.
A shift in the balance of power is the objective that Khrushchev desperately sought.
In 1962, the United States was the much stronger superpower and was constantly thwarting Khrushchev’s initiatives.
If President Kennedy failed to respond to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev would have a much freer hand to act against Berlin or challenge America in other arenas of global contest.
Moreover, Kennedy’s acceptance of the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have altered the balance of power within the western hemisphere.
Nuclear parity did not exist, the supposed “missile gap” did not favor the Soviets; it drastically favored the United States.
Telephone conversation with Eisenhower Sunday, October 28, 1962 at 12:08.
Khrushchev in effect, could more readily and more cost effectively alter the balance of power by the Cuban deployment, than by any other means, as long as Kennedy acquiesced to the presence of the missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev was taking an enormous gamble, but it also had the potential to reap significant rewards.
Cuban officials also viewed the missile deployment as a shift in the balance of power.
Years later, the United States discovered that the Soviets intended to develop Cuba into a full-scale strategic Soviet base.
The security implications of a major Soviet military base located just ninety miles from the coastline of the United States were enormous and unacceptable.
Although the development of a fullscale Soviet military base was unbeknownst to Kennedy at the time, at no time during the Cold War could any President resign the doctrine of containment to the scrap heap.
Gaddis explains that the doctrine of containment was sometimes applied very differently in different presidential administrations.
Nevertheless, all Presidential administrations have viewed “American security as tied up with the maintenance of the global balance of power and all have seen the Soviet Union as the major threat to that balance…”36 Soviet intervention in Cuba was a direct challenge to American prestige, power, and the policy of containment.
The adherence to the strict policy of containment by the Kennedy administration, much like his predecessors foiled Khrushchev’s risky gamble, as a result, American prestige increased and Soviet prestige declined.
However, if Khrushchev calculated differently, namely by going public, his risky gamble might have succeeded.
President Kennedy made repeated explicit public warnings that Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba would not be tolerated by the United States.
Khrushchev, instead of going public with the missile deployment as Castro had urged him prior to Kennedy issuing any warning statements regarding United States policy, decided to keep the deployment secret.
Gaddis examines conflict, concluding that containement has worked very successfully in the past and will continue as an instrument of United States foreign policy in the future.
Moreover, the Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations, Valerian Zorin denied the existence of the missiles in Cuba before the United Nations Security Council.
Ambassador Adlai Stevenson publicly confronted Zorin with intelligently worded diplomatic rhetoric along with definitive photography of the missile sites, it became abundantly clear that the United States declaration of the existence of the nuclear missiles was accurate.
Stevenson’s performance and the veracity of his statements along with incontrovertible evidence badly damaged Soviet credibility and enhanced the justification for the naval blockade.
President Kennedy announced in a televised address a strict naval quarantine of all offensive military equipment bound for Cuba.
Kennedy specifically used the term quarantine in his speech, because the use of a naval blockade was contrary to international law, nevertheless, Kennedy acted transparently, opening himself and his administration to criticism.
To provide for the quarantine’s legitimacy, Kennedy sought and won a unanimous resolution of the Organization of American States , which authorized the use of force in maintaining a naval blockade, either individually or collectively.
Through proper decisionmaking and acting transparently, Kennedy was able to garnish public support and transform skeptics of U.S policy during the crisis.
The successful application of transparency stood in stark contrast to Soviet policy, enabling the United States to maintain moral authority that made the choice of the naval blockade acceptable and ultimately more palatable to the Soviets.
The establishment of a naval blockade of Cuba was not President Kennedy’s initial choice upon discovery of the Soviet missiles.
Initially he opted to act unilaterally and for a military air strike to remove the missiles,43 subsequently, he heeded the recommendations of National Security Council Executive Committee , which recommended not only the blockade but also a greater multilateral approach to the resolution of the crisis.
The blockade had two major drawbacks, one, it would not remove the missiles already located on the island.
Two, Soviet ships bound for Cuba would inevitably encounter American warships and if those ships chose to ignore the blockade an escalation of the crisis could easily propel the two superpowers to thermonuclear war.
Some scholars such as Irving Horowitz suggest that President Kennedy initiated an “unnecessary dangerous game of chicken”44 with 38 Allison & Zelikow.
The government of the Soviet Union authorized the media agency TASS to release a statement that Soviet nuclear weapons were so powerful that there was no need to export nuclear weapons beyond the boundaries of the Soviet Union, giving more credence to the theory the Soviet Union wished to alter the balance of power.
Ambassador Zorin at the time genuinely believed Soviet missiles had not been installed in Cuba, because he was never informed about the Soviet installation.
Zorin’s denials, challenged by Ambassador Stevenson’s overwhelming evidence before a global television audience revealed the extent of Soviet deceit and secrecy.
To make such conclusions is to ignore the context of the Cold War epoch and Khrushchev’s intentions.
Khrushchev believed Kennedy to be weak willed and ill fitted45 for the task of halting Soviet aggression.
Diplomacy without deterrence would not have any impact on Khrushchev; it would have only strengthened his resolve to probe much further.
The day after announcing the establishment of the naval blockade President Kennedy expressed his grave concerns about the conflict with his brother Robert F Kennedy.
One, the President clearly expresses his concern that if he fails to contain the current threat of Soviet aggression, the consequences of his inaction will encourage further Soviet incursions into American spheres of influence.
Second, Congress would interpret President Kennedy’s failure to respond to the communist threat, as such an egregious capitulation that it warranted impeachment, as it unnecessarily endangered the vital security interests of the United States.
A failure to respond to Soviet aggression, especially in the western hemisphere during this era was simply politically untenable.
Some scholars interpret President Kennedy’s decision-making during the crisis as purely political, dangerous and excessively concerned with public opinion.
In his article, he downplays the role of ExComm in the decision-making process.
Professor Irving L Janis offers a much better analysis of the Kennedy administration’s decision-making process during the crisis.
Whereas the decision-making process during the Bay of Pigs illustrated groupthink mentality, Professor Janis found in his analysis of Cuban missile crisis an absence of the symptoms of the groupthink decision-making process that previously plagued the Kennedy administration.
Kennedy had learned not to overly rely upon the military and intelligence community enabling him to avoid the pitfalls and poor reasoning exemplified by the Bay of Pigs decision-making processes.
Had President Kennedy relied heavily on the advice of the military and went ahead with his initial inclination to utilize air strikes against Cuba, the consequences of that decision would have meant nuclear war.
In an interview-styled documentary, McNamara relates a meeting he had with Fidel Castro in 1992.
Castro informs McNamara if the United States responded by a military attack against Cuba itself that he recommended to Khrushchev using the nuclear warheads against the United 9 Joseph T Thompson House tapes reveal intense thoughtful discussions to allow for the proper decision to be made and for the implications of those decisions to be fully analyzed.
Janis points to several aspects of the decisionmaking process that highlight the avoidance of groupthink.
Kennedy purposely acted as an antagonist to challenge different points of view.
Further, the administration acknowledged grave dangers even after arriving at a decision; there was also an explicit discussion of moral issues, reversals of judgments, non-stereotypical views of the enemy, and an avoidance of humiliation to allow Khrushchev a face-saving way out of the crisis.
After serious deliberations and the weighing of all options, the crisis ended with a compromise.
The United States pledged not to invade Cuba and outdated United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be secretly dismantled at an undetermined later date.
The missiles in Turkey were removed later to avoid the appearance of a negotiated quid pro quo settlement, while the Soviets were required to immediately removal the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Thus, it appeared as if the Soviets unilaterally withdrew the deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba in the face of American military pressure.
Indeed that perception remained for many years, in part, because the Soviets upheld the negotiated arrangement to keep the removal of the missiles from Turkey secret.
Robert Kennedy’s book, Thirteen Days, clearly states that the diplomatic deal struck between the Soviets and the United States was not a quid pro quo deal.
Immediately following the crisis there was a temporary cooling of Cold War tensions.
A limited Test-Ban Treaty of nuclear weapons was signed on August 5, 196357 and a hotline (direct teletype machine) was installed in Washington and Moscow to hasten communication in case of another crisis.
However, the cooling off period was short lived as the Soviets sought and achieved nuclear parity with the United States.
European allies of the United States felt hopelessly trapped by the bipolarity of Soviet and American dominance.
Khrushchev, although willing to accept the risky gamble that President Kennedy would not militarily object to the missile deployment, was nevertheless a rational actor who realized the consequences of his and President Kennedy’s actions and pursued a diplomatic solution to avert nuclear holocaust.
If President Kennedy accepted the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union stood to gain international prestige, shift the balance to power toward the Soviet Union and communism and would have every reason to continue to challenge American spheres of influence globally.
The risk of placing the missiles in Cuba was extreme, but the benefits were enormous, Khrushchev simply miscalculated Kennedy’s response.
Kennedy had to act assertively, an emboldened Khrushchev who perceived Kennedy as weak would not merely acquiesce without some form of deterrence from Washington.
Furthermore, Khrushchev miscalculated the overwhelming anti-communist ideology of the American people and their elected officials.
It was politically impossible for Kennedy not to confront the Soviet Union over Cuba due to the significant security implications along with the threat of further communist expansionism.
During the era of the Cuba Missile Crisis, Cold War tensions dominated not only the domestic security politics of the United States but also dominated international relations.
To analyze the missile crisis without this context is tantamount to analyzing the American Civil War and disregarding the context slavery played.
Leaders in Washington won elections for their hard-line stance on communism and were held accountable to contain it.
He was an Individual Studies major with a concentration in History at Rivier College.
He completed his education at Rivier College in December 2009 and will formally graduate in spring 2010.
Upon graduation, his plan is to attend graduate school to complete a Masters Degree, while maintaining the possibility of eventually completing a Ph.D. in History.
