The contestant’s attire was said to be ""inspired by the supersonic bomarc missile"" because it mimicked the coloring and markings of the United States Air Force's nuclear antiaircraft weapon during its development, as demonstrated by the adjacent reduced-size model.
Four of 56 United States Air Force BOMARC IM-99A nuclear antiaircraft missiles emplaced at a site about twenty miles southeast of Trenton, New Jersey near McGuire Air Force Base.
Missiles remained horizontal in the shelters shown except when preparing to launch or the erection equipment was being tested.
Each missile carried a W-40 nuclear warhead which yielded about 6. kilotons.
Thirteen months before this photograph was taken in October 1960, McGuire became the first BOMARC site to be declared operational.
It also was the location of a June 1960 accident in which fire destroyed a warhead.
The United States Air Force’s Falcon guided nuclear antiaircraft missile with an interceptor in the background.
The nuclear Falcon entered the inventory in 1961 as the result of the Air Force’s decision to have a nuclear antiaircraft weapon capable of being carried by the F-102 Delta Dagger interceptor.
Designed in 1959, it was fifteen inches long, nearly eleven inches in diameter, and only weighed fifty pounds.
The relative small size of this nuclear device compared to those developed just three years earlier demonstrates the rapid pace of the American nuclear weapon design effort in the period.
A United States Air Force F-101B Voodoo interceptor presumably carrying two non-nuclear training versions of the Genie MB-1 nuclear air-to-air rocket.
Sidney Bruce stood 18,000 feet below an aerial detonation of a MB-1 in Nevada, he touted the F-101 and its armament to a St.
Ground crews prepare to attach a United States Air Force Genie MB-1 nuclear air-to-air rocket to the wing of a specially decorated F-89 Scorpion interceptor preparing to conduct Shot John in Operation Plumbbob at the Nevada Test Site on July 19, 1957.
For Shot John, five Force officers volunteered to stand beneath a Genie detonated in the air eighteen thousand feet above them.
Five Air Force officers recoil as a United States Air Force MB-1 Genie nuclear antiaircraft rocket is detonated above them in Operation Plumbbob’s Shot John.
Members of Battery A, 2nd Missile Battalion of the United States Army’s 57th Artillery scramble during an alert drill at the Montrose-Belmont Nike-Hercules nuclear antiaircraft missile site on the lakefront in Chicago, Illinois on September 30, 1959.
The Nike-Hercules carried the W-31 nuclear warhead which could yield either two or twenty-two kilotons.
Nuclear Antiaircraft Arms and the Cold War by historian Christopher J Bright.
The United States government publicly acknowledged the facts of the deployments in the 1950s, yet they garnered surprisingly little public opposition, Bright concludes, in disclosing for the first time that air defense weapons comprised as much as one-fifth of the United States nuclear arsenal in 1961.
Still, nearly 25 years after the United States retired the last of them in 1986, their exact number remains secret.
Bright's work also raises the possibility that air defense weapons may have been among the most dangerous nuclear arms because of their widespread deployment and the predelegated use arrangements that could have led to inadvertent nuclear use during a crisis.
Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era is a reminder of the extent to which nuclear weapons were integral to Cold War American military strategy.
It comes at a time when United States policy makers are giving renewed attention to nuclear arms, occasioned in part by President Barack Obama's support for their ultimate abolition, and the suggestion by others that existing United States nuclear warheads should be replaced or refurbished, along with continuing political disagreement about the necessity and adequacy of a New START arms control treaty with Russia.
Bright's book recounts many other formerly secret details about the thousands of Army and nuclear air defense weapons built during the Cold War, the plans and procedures for their use, and their eventual withdrawal.
Recognizing the difficulty of targeting relatively high-flying, fast-moving airplanes, proponents of nuclear air defense believed that relatively small defensive nuclear warheads compensated for inaccuracy by producing comparatively large lethal blast zones.
They further argued that nuclear warheads would assuredly destroy attacking planes and the bombs they carried, while posing minimal risk to those on the ground.
Policy makers, including President Dwight Eisenhower, military service leaders, and members of Congress, agreed.
Defense officials announced the deployments to the public; arms manufacturers and the news media also publicized them.
Even members of the nascent anti-nuclear movement at the time devoted almost no attention to these arms.
While this does not indicate their assent to the weapons, it suggests that they did not see nuclear air defense weapons as especially worrisome.
Eisenhower authorized in advance the use of these arms in the event that an aerial attack upon the United States was known to be underway but the president could not be contacted.
In February 1958, an Air Force publicist revealed the cost of the Genie's W-25 nuclear charge, one of only two occasions in which the expense of a United States nuclear warhead has been revealed.
The Genie rocket was test-fired from an Air Force plane over Nevada in July 1957.
Five officer volunteers stood below in an attempt to demonstrate that the weapon could be utilized without endangering those on the ground.
In July 1958, extensive preparations had been made to test-fire additional Genies as well as Nike-Hercules missiles over the Gulf of Mexico.
Days before the operation was scheduled to be conducted, Eisenhower canceled the test, in an Oval Office meeting with Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others.
The Soviet Union was interested in the details of American nuclear antiaircraft arms.
In 1958, the USSR's military intelligence agency apparently recruited an Army lieutenant colonel to provide classified information about the Nike-Hercules.
This alleged activity was not uncovered until several years later when Soviet colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, an American agent, reported that the Army missile information was in the USSR's possession.
Despite the ubiquity and visibility of air defense nuclear weapons to Americans a generation ago and the importance of many of these and other related issues, Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era marks the first book-length scholarly examination on the topic.
Coinciding with the publication, the National Security Archive is posting thirteen documents which highlight many of these and other important topics covered in the book.
Further details about Continental Defense in the Eisenhower Era are available at www.ChristopherJohnBright.com.
In August 1954 President Eisenhower appointed Massachusetts Institute of Technology President James R Killian, Jr. to lead a group of scientists and engineers to examine technological applications that could improve the nation's offensive forces, intelligence collection, and continental defense efforts.
In addition to Killian, the group's steering committee included Polaroid camera inventor Edwin H Land, Williams College president James Phinney Baxter III, and retired General James H Doolittle, the World War II hero who held an MIT aeronautical engineering doctorate.
The danger posed by a thermonuclear-equipped adversary and the consequent requirement for effective air defenses was a significant theme of the Killian study.
The report recommended that nuclear warheads become ""the major armament"" for American air defense arms.
Additionally, the committee recommended that one ""high altitude"" nuclear shot in a forthcoming test series be promoted by officials in a way which might reduce public angst about the dangers of deploying or using nuclear antiaircraft weapons.
The Killian panel believed that the relatively low yield of nuclear antiaircraft arms, and the altitude at which they would be detonated, meant that if used, they would pose little harm to those on the ground below.
In January 1956, the congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy asked the AEC to consider testing versions of the MB-1 Genie and Nike-Hercules once they were in production.
Various iterations of the warheads had been detonated and the design of the missile and rocket components had been validated.
However, neither Genie nor Nike-Hercules had been operated as a complete weapon in a single exercise from launch to nuclear blast.
The AEC believed its function was the design, manufacture, and testing of nuclear components, and it had little interest in funding, supporting, or organizing what it considered to be practice firings of completed arms.
On July 19, 1957 in Shot John of Operation Plumbbob, an interceptor detonated an MB-1 at 18,000 feet above five United States Air Force officer volunteers standing on the ground at AEC's Nevada Test Site.
On January 1, 1957 the United States Air Force declared operational the MB-1 Genie rockets.
The month before, Herbert Loper, an aide to Defense Secretary Charles Wilson, wrote Lewis Strauss, the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, about the need for ""a public announcement"" of the nation's ""new capability"" in nuclear air defense weaponry.
Loper outlined the Pentagon's approach to announcing the deployment of the Genie and the Army's Nike-Hercules, which was also scheduled to be introduced in the next year.
The next year, he noted the Genie's cost in a press release issued in conjunction with a Las Vegas air fair.
After the announcement garnered a front-page article in the Washington Post and Times-Herald, the Air Force investigated.
The cost of nuclear weapons was an important secret because defense officials believed that an adversary could estimate the size of the United States arsenal based on the total AEC budget.
Nonetheless, Oldfield's statement about the Genie cost was the first time an official acknowledged the figures for a specific American nuclear weapon.
During the entire Cold War and ensuing years, the cost of only one or two other warhead types may have been officially confirmed.
The Pentagon scheduled a Nike-Hercules operational exercise and a second full-fledged Genie test to take place over the Gulf of Mexico in 1958.
However, President Eisenhower halted the operation a week before it occurred following two Oval Office meetings with senior military and civilian officials.
AEC Chairman Lewis Strauss ""questioned the possible adverse public reaction"" if the operation went ahead.
Nonetheless, the Army prepared to have a Nike-Hercules battery at Eglin Air Force Base's Santa Rosa Island launch two missiles over the Gulf, each with different version of the W-31 nuclear charge, at a formation of three obsolete Air Force F-80 fighters converted into drones.
In the same exercise, the Air Force intended to have interceptors fire Genies at other unmanned aircraft.
The United States Public Health Service also made arrangements to collect air, rainwater, milk, crop, and seafood samples in cooperation with health departments in Georgia, Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi.
On June 27, 1958, Lewis Strauss, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and others discussed the Eglin operation with President Eisenhower.
Strauss emphasized his belief that what he considered unnecessary tests of production nuclear arms might imperil future test activities he thought which were central to the AEC's mission.
Dulles and his deputy, Christian Herter, expressed concern that neighboring nations might react poorly to the operation.
A month later, as test preparations proceeded, another White House meeting was convened.
Dulles reported to Eisenhower that ""consultations"" with Cuba and Mexico led him ""to recommend strongly"" that the nuclear operation be moved to the Pacific.
There is no evidence that the 1958 test arrangements became known at the time.
Revelation of PredelegationDonald A Quarles memorandum for the president , October 13, 1958.
Before the advent of nuclear antiaircraft weapons, any expenditure of atomic arms required explicit presidential permission.
However, the Killian committee asserted in February 1955 that the brief and hectic period following the detection of a bomber attack made it difficult if not impossible to secure the necessary authority while still allowing ample time to react.
Consequently, as the National Security Archive has revealed previously, on April 18, 1956 the president executed an ""Authorization for the Expenditure of Atomic Weapons in Air Defense"" which allowed military officials to use nuclear air defense arms in certain emergency situations without further approval.
News article and that CONAD had used it on other prior occasions as a basis for other briefings to journalists.
Quarles countered that CONAD had received a broadly worded message a month before ""countermanding"" the prior permission to discuss the topic.
In addition, Quarles reported to the president that the Pentagon was distributing more precise regulations to clarify the prohibition on public comment.
Development of Small, Light-weight Nuclear WeaponsPaul Ager memorandum to Alfred D Starbird, November 24, 1958.
The Falcon air-to-air missile, developed by Hughes Aircraft, was designed originally to carry a conventional warhead.
It was six and one-half feet long, had a small diameter, and tipped the scale at less than one hundred and fifty pounds.
When the F-102 was slated to remain in service longer than intended, Air Force Vice Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay sought to field a nuclear version of the Falcon.
However, the size and relatively weight of the Falcon airframe posed significant challenges for designers of the nuclear warhead destined for it, because Air Force wanted a warhead mated to the Falcon which required only modest missile modifications or performance inhibitions.
When members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy visited the AEC's Los Alamos laboratory and the Sandia Corporation in November 1958, they heard apparently futile complaints that the precise dimensional limits imposed on the nuclear components threatened to greatly increase the warhead's development costs.
The W-54 warhead which was ultimately developed in 1959 for the Falcon was fifteen inches long, nearly eleven inches in diameter, and weighed only fifty pounds.
The fact that three years later a nuclear device could be produced that was a fraction of the W-25's size and weight demonstrates the trajectory and speed of the American nuclear weapon design effort in the period.
On June 3, 1960, the BOMARC missile installation near McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey passed an inspection that evaluated the unit's nuclear warhead handling, safety, and security procedures.
Nevertheless, four days later, a highly pressurized helium used in the BOMARC fueling process burst with explosive force in one of the missile launch shelters.
Airmen trained hoses on the conflagration, which kept the flames from spreading beyond the affected building, but the intense heat and flame enveloped one missile.
Spot checks across sixty-six square miles outside the facility's boundaries found no trace of radiation.
Nonetheless, it was, according to an Air Defense Command history, ""perhaps the worst"" event involving any of the ADC's nuclear weapons.
With no antiaircraft missiles deployed in Florida or the adjacent areas in 1962, on October 24, NORAD commander John Gerhart ordered a mobile Nike-Hercules battalion to move by train from Fort Bliss, Texas, to the Miami area.
In a message to the Joint Chiefs, Gerhart worried about the adequacy of the Commander-in-Chief Atlantic's ""operational plan"" that would go into effect if war broke out.
According to Gerhart, most Nike-Hercules missile batteries were exclusively nuclear-capable.
In response, the JCS reiterated air defense forces in the Florida area were to be ""nonnuclear"" only.
The next day, Lieutenant General Theodore W Parker, the Army's deputy chief of staff, then posted at the JCS war room, asked subordinates to determine if it was ""a fact"" that the Nike-Hercules sites across the nation had few nonnuclear warheads.
Parker also confirmed that the Nike-Hercules unit being shipped to Florida also had only high-explosive warheads on all seventy-two missiles it carried.
Parker's inquiries and the JCS's stipulations makes clear that the latter had prohibited the use of nuclear antiaircraft weapons around Florida during the Missile Crisis, despite longstanding policies intended to facilitate the use of such arms.
In addition, in the 1990's the cost of the Advanced Cruise Missile's W-80 warhead was inadvertently disclosed.
This memorandum was fully declassified in 2001 at the request of the National Security Archive, in part, because the balance of the meeting it addresses covers predelegation instructions for other types of nuclear weapons.
The reference to nuclear tests over the Gulf of Mexico generated some press coverage when the document was released.
However, at least two scholars have misunderstood its significance since then, probably because other information was not available to place it in the proper context of antiaircraft weapons.
McCool memorandum for the Atomic Energy Commission, July 23, 1958, Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession no.
John R McBride memorandum to Assistant Chief, and Acting Chief, Division of Radiological Health, July 25, 1958, Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession no.
NV0023334; Melvin W Carter memorandum to James G Terrill, Jr., August 6, 1958, Department of Energy/Nevada Nuclear Testing Archive accession no.
