A Re-examination of the UN Charter System1 Joel H Westra Calvin College Much of the existing literature has accorded the Security Council with collective authority to confer legitimacy on actions involving the use of armed force.
However, because of the veto, scholars have been able to point to relatively few instances in which the Charter has functioned thusly to legitimate or to restrain the actions of powerful states.
This article provides an alternative conceptualization, treating the Charter as the basis of a broader system of international order in which legitimacy is conferred cumulatively, by both states within the Security Council and those outside of it, based on the extent of actions’ congruence with Charter rules that serve states’ shared interests.
States’ expressions of acceptance confer legitimacy, while their expressions of resistance withhold legitimacy, evoking prudential restraint from major powers attempting to signal their continuing commitment to the existing, postwar international order.
The article applies this conceptualization to a case study of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
Under conditions of anarchy, states’ interest in self-preservation and in the mutual benefits derived from cooperation incline them to establish systems of order.
The UN Charter makes explicit provision for carrying out these tasks, providing a basis for the broader system of postwar international order that exists today.
Earlier versions of this article were presented at the ISA Comparative Interdisciplinary Studies Conference in The Hague on July 3, 2006 and at the APSA Annual Meeting in Philadelphia on September 1, 2006.
These include—but are not limited to—actions explicitly authorized by collective decision of the Security Council.
Historically, attempts at collective decision making within the Security Council often have been stymied by veto or threat of veto, which the major powers possess as the five permanent members of the Security Council.
These scholars largely have ignored the Charter’s role in clarifying and legitimating state actions.
These scholars can point to relatively few instances in which the Charter served as an effective instrument of international order—especially during the Cold War.
This article provides an alternative conceptualization, treating the Charter as the basis of a broader system of postwar international order that is maintained via processes of cumulative legitimation and prudential restraint.
According to this conceptualization, legitimacy is not a matter of collective decision by the Security Council or other international bodies, but rather the extent of an action’s congruence with Charter rules intended to serve states’ shared interests.
It does not require deep internalization of Charter rules and is conferred cumulatively, by both states within the Security Council and those outside of it.
States’ expressions of acceptance confer legitimacy, while their expressions of resistance withhold legitimacy.
The anticipated likelihood of such resistance elicits prudential restraint from major powers, which alter the manner and timing of their military actions in accordance with the arguments they have offered (or intend to offer) to justify such actions as consistent with the Charter and therefore not threatening to the existing order.
This alternative conceptualization allows us to observe the functioning of the Charter system in maintaining international order both during the Cold War and afterwards, in instances in which the Security Council acted and instances in which it did not.
Thus, it expands our current understanding of the Charter as an instrument of international order, as well as our understanding of the process of legitimation within the international system and other social systems in which actors have internalized existing rules only thinly, without having formed a collective identity as members of a community.
The second section considers legitimacy within the Charter system as being conferred collectively, laying out three distinct formulations and considering the shortcomings of each.
The fourth section applies this conceptualization to a case study of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, demonstrating the Charter’s role in evoking prudential restraint as policymakers sought to cumulate legitimacy for US actions in an attempt to reduce the likelihood of resistance from other states.
The UN Charter System of International Order To understand the functioning of the Charter system in maintaining international order, we must begin by examining the Charter itself.
In consideration of these and other Charter provisions, legal scholars generally have characterized the Charter as an instrument of international peace.
More than an instrument of peace, the Charter is an instrument of international order that alters the costs and risks associated with using armed force.
As Wolfrum has suggested, the consistent coupling of these two concepts is purposeful, insofar as the phrases signify a ‘‘comprehensive and cooperative’’ approach to achieving states’ shared interests by restraining actions that threaten international order and legitimating actions that uphold international order, including those involving the use of armed force.
As Ikenberry (2001:258–259; see also Stein 1984:377) has suggested, to bind less powerful states to this emerging postwar order, it was necessary that the major powers offer them a more favorable bargain than they otherwise would have been able to negotiate, based on their relative power positions at the time.
According to the Charter, the Security Council has ‘‘primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security’’ , but it does not have sole responsibility for doing so, nor is it the sole arbiter of the legitimacy of states’ actions.
Such actions can best be understood as occurring within a broader system of international order built upon the basic UN Charter framework.
Understanding state actions within the context of this broader system of order helps us better to understand the process by which legitimacy is conferred internationally, for legitimacy is a concept that can be defined only in the context of an existing social order, whether that order be domestic or international.
Hence, the literature tends to treat international legitimacy as a matter of states’ subjective beliefs that lead to voluntary compliance with shared rules, such as those codified in the Charter text.
States do not necessarily agree, however, on how such rules are to be interpreted or applied.
Nevertheless, because the Security Council has ‘‘primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security’’ and consists of a broad sampling of states within the international system, much of the existing literature accords the Security Council with collective authority to confer legitimacy on actions involving the use of armed force.
Though there are several variants, most understand the Charter as a means of coordination, as part of a system of communal obligation, or as an expression of domestic social purpose.
Almost all of them assume that the post-World War II international order, which the Charter originally was designed to sustain, has given way to a new, post-Cold War international order.
The Charter as a Means of Coordination According to scholars who understand the Charter as a means of coordination, the Charter serves as an instrument of international order by reducing complexity and providing a basis for coordinating state action.
Voeten provides the most complete articulation of this position, describing the Charter as an ‘‘elite pact,’’ which provides a focal solution to the coordination dilemma faced by states attempting to enforce limits on the actions of the major powers.
Such beliefs arise among states that have thinly internalized Charter rules by accepting them and making them part of their established practices.
The mere existence of rules that serve states’ shared interests, however, does not necessarily mean that those rules will be internalized by them.
Even then, however, there remains the question of when enough states have internalized such rules to render them selfenforcing.
In general, the argument seems to be that internalization of Charter rules did not occur until after the end of the Cold War.
Voeten is more explicit, arguing that the 1990–1991 Persian Gulf War was a ‘‘galvanizing event’’ in that the Security Council acted collectively in response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait.
In other words, this operational rule became established practice and hence the basis of a new, post-Cold War international order.
Though the Security Council collectively confers legitimacy on state actions, no international community has emerged as the setting in which such legitimacy is conferred.
It would seem that some other threshold might have sufficed if states have not deeply internalized Charter rules so as to have formed a collective identity among themselves as members of an international community.
It would seem that such a process would have begun already in 1945, when states ratified the Charter as part of their attempt to instantiate and sustain the emerging, post-World War II international order.
Such rules, which are a product of consensus among states, define membership within that community and provide an agreed standard for assessing the legitimacy of state actions.
It arises through social learning and argumentation , which combine to produce a gradual trend toward impartial acceptance of Charter provisions regarding the use of force.
As suggested above, this process of collective identity formation involves deep internalization of Charter rules.
As they do so, their interests become reconstituted such that habit supplants short-term interest calculations.
As Johnstone notes, states responding to this pressure become increasingly unlikely to use armed force without seeking prior authorization from the Security Council and seek to gain the approval of other members of the community through arguments propounding common understandings of Charter provisions.
Collectively, the Security Council confers legitimacy on these shared understandings.
Most scholars who understand the Charter in this way suggest that the ‘‘minimal sense of community’’ necessary for its effectiveness did not emerge until after the Cold War, when the Security Council responded collectively to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
Hurd (2007:129–130; see also Caron 1993:553), for example, argues that it was not until then that the Security Council could be understood to have developed a ‘‘corporate identity’’ such that it could act in a manner distinct from the particular interests of its members.
In other words, Charter rules were not deeply internalized by most states until sometime after the Cold War had ended and a new, post-Cold War international order had emerged.
First, if the process of internalization produces a gradual trend toward shared understandings of 5 Mitzen applies similar logic to the working of the Concert of Europe.
Major powers continue to use armed force absent explicit Security Council authorization, and their arguments continue to reflect fundamental areas of disagreement.
According to this understanding, states value a particular international order insofar as it corresponds to the configuration of their domestic social identities.
The resulting Charter system of order reflects the internal ordering of these constituent states.
Koh characterizes this as a process in which rules become ‘‘entrenched’’ in states’ domestic processes, such that their domestic decision making becomes ‘‘enmeshed’’ with them.
Liberal theorists argue that the process of internalization is more effective in liberal states than it is in non-liberal states because liberal states have a domestic political culture that is premised on the rule of law and hence more easily ‘‘enmeshed’’ with international legal rules.
Chayes , for example, 6 These include disagreements over whether or not humanitarian concerns or other ends ‘‘consistent with the purposes of the United Nations’’ have priority over the Charter’s general prohibition of force, whether or not indirect aggression is tantamount to ‘‘armed attack’’ under Article 51, and whether or not existing Security Council resolutions implicitly authorize the use of armed force in specific situations.
Gray suggests that consensus on many such issues has emerged among less powerful states, though perhaps not among the major powers.
Whatever the case, the emergence of this new international order involves the deep internalization of liberal norms by most states in the system, with the United Nations and other multilateral institutions functioning as repositories of international legitimacy.
To the extent that the post-World War II international order has given way to a liberal, post-Cold War international order, these arguments become virtually indistinguishable from those posed by scholars who understand the Charter as part of a larger system of communal obligation.
The only distinction is that, according to scholars who understand the Charter as an expression of domestic social purpose, liberal states that existed during the Cold War had deeply internalized Charter rules already, forming a liberal community among themselves.
However, because of the two diverse systems of international order that existed during the Cold War , the Security Council seldom was able to reach collective decision and thereby confer legitimacy on state actions.
To the extent that these scholars examine Cold War cases, then, they tend to focus on cases in which the Security Council delegitimized state actions or cases in which legitimacy was conferred by regional organizations acting in combination with the Security Council or General Assembly.
Analysis of such cases tends to be rather cursory, insofar as the cases often are intended for purposes of illustration only.
Chayes’ argument is that Charter rules expressed shared norms that had been internalized by liberal states.
Policymakers within these states experienced a ‘‘felt need for justification’’ when making decisions regarding the use of armed force.
Thus, as the crisis unfolded throughout October 1962, US policymakers heeded the advice of State Department legal advisors by attempting to legitimate United States military actions through collective decision by the Organization of American States and were restrained by their desire to attain such legitimacy.
We will soon take a closer look at this case, but for now we should take note of an important shortcoming in Chayes’ analysis.
Although Chayes is correct to suggest that the Cuban missile crisis provides a ‘‘harsh test of international law,’’ insofar as it is a case in which ‘‘vital interests of the state threatened,’’ Chayes’ standard of evidence is too low to demonstrate that the Charter system actually functioned as he describes.
According to Chayes , in order to demonstrate the functioning of the Charter system, what 8 Examples of the former include Anglo-French intervention in Egypt during the 1956 Suez crisis, Soviet intervention in Egypt during the 1956 Hungarian uprising, and Belgian intervention in the Congo during the 1960 Katanga secession.
Examples of the latter include United States intervention in Guatemala in 1954 and the United States naval blockade of Cuba in 1962.
To demonstrate the functioning of the Charter system as a restraint on state action, it would be necessary not only to show that actions accorded with the arguments offered to justify them, but also that policymakers planned those actions in such a manner that the actions would be in accord with the arguments they intended to offer.
But even then, the outcome might not have been a consequence of states having deeply internalized Charter rules.
To demonstrate such internalization, it would be necessary also to show that there were meaningful deliberations among liberal states (as well as among legal advisors within those states) regarding the precise meaning and application of Charter rules and that policymakers planned military actions with explicit regard for the legality of such actions as a basis for collective legitimation.
Cumulative Legitimation within the UN Charter System According to the explanation proposed herein, legitimacy within the international system is conferred cumulatively by states that have thinly internalized Charter rules intended to sustain the postwar international order.
Because states have remained in agreement regarding the post-World War II order, it can be said to have attained legitimacy (Watson 1992:315; Morgenthau 1993:102), and so long as they remain in agreement, it will retain its legitimacy.
States thus have thinly internalized Charter rules by accepting them as reasonable approximations of underlying shared interests and incorporating them into their established practices.
They remain willing to accept the postwar order and the rules necessary to sustain it, and they act in general accordance with those rules, even if the rules diverge somewhat from their particular interests.
As codified in the Charter, these rules take the form of an incomplete contract.
The more persuasive the account an argument provides, the more credible the signal it sends, with its persuasiveness depending in part on the restrictiveness of the claims it contains.
The more restrictive the claim made by a major power, the more limited the set of military actions it defines as legal, and hence the greater the likelihood that the major power remains committed to the existing order.
Providing a persuasive account for the use of armed force thus is not costless, because maintaining its persuasiveness restricts the actions of the major power that provides it.
The magnitude and extent of the costs borne by a major power as a result of such restrictions serve to make its signal credible, though these costs may not be readily observable by other states because restraint is less readily observable than the absence of restraint.
In other words, states consider the costs that are indirectly associated with the arguments offered as a means of assessing the credibility of the signal sent.
States may disagree with the action itself, because it is not in full accord with their particular understandings of the Charter, but they are willing to accept the action as reasonably justified, nonetheless, insofar as it is consistent with the shared interests that underlie Charter rules.
Their acceptance of the action thus is not simply a judgment of the action’s legality based on a narrow reading of Charter rules, but rather an assessment of the action’s potential to threaten the existing order, based on the broader purposes underlying those rules.
By accepting an action, states confer legitimacy on it, with each state’s acceptance conferring additional legitimacy.
States may express their acceptance of the action by public statements and diplomatic exchanges supporting the major power that engaged in it, by casting votes favorable to that major power within multilateral institutions, or by participating in the action through providing assistance or logistical support.
More direct means of resistance include imposing tariffs, trade restrictions and embargoes, suspending or terminating treaties enabling the actions that the major power has taken, providing assistance to its adversaries, or joining a balancing coalition against that major power.
States’ resistance to a major power indicates that they have not been persuaded that the action it has taken is reasonably justified under the Charter.
They have concluded either that the arguments accompanying the action were likely to have been offered in bad faith or that the claims comprising those arguments are not sufficiently restrictive to provide evidence of future restraint and continuing commitment to the postwar order.
It is this perceived threat that provides incentive for states to respond with resistance rather than ‘‘free riding’’ on other states.
Moreover, such resistance withholds legitimacy from the major power’s actions and cumulatively can erode the legitimacy that has been conferred on those actions by other states (Beetham 1991:18–19), making those states more likely to conclude that the major power’s actions are not justifiable under Charter rules and therefore likely to threaten the existing order.
The more legitimacy that has been conferred on a major power’s actions, however, the less likely states are to perceive those actions as threatening and to respond with resistance.
Legitimacy thus is instrumentally valuable, insofar as it can help to alter states’ beliefs regarding a major power’s actions and intentions.
In considering possible courses of action, then, a major power must weigh the potential benefits of legitimacy against the potential costs of restraint—not only in the short term, but also in the long term.
In addition to downgrading their prior beliefs regarding a major power’s commitment to the existing order , states might also take actions to undermine that order in ways that are unfavorable to the major power.
Though not essential to the process of legitimation, the Security Council often does play an important role in it.
As suggested above, the Security Council represents the pooled judgments of a broad sampling of states within the international system.
By casting a vote in the Security Council that is unfavorable to a major power, then, a state not only indicates that it remains unpersuaded that the major power’s actions were reasonably justified; it also increases the likelihood that states outside of the Security Council will reach similar conclusions and respond accordingly, inflicting additional diplomatic, economic, and ⁄ or military costs on that major power.
Nevertheless, even if a major power acts outside of a multilateral organization, the Charter still provides a written record of that major power’s obligations, subjecting its actions to the scrutiny of other states and the possibility of resistance from them.
Thus, regardless of whether or not a major power acts through a multilateral organization, it is likely to offer an argument to account for its actions, hoping thereby to cumulate legitimacy for those actions while exercising restraint as part of its attempt to do so.
Throughout the crisis, United States policymakers do not appear to have been constrained by deeply internalized Charter rules, but rather the anticipated likelihood of resistance from other states if they failed to cumulate legitimacy for proposed United States actions.
They do not seem to have been concerned with the legality of those actions per se, nor with communal norms of consultation and deliberation.
Rather, their concern seems to have been with demonstrating United States restraint so as to provide a credible signal of the United States’ continuing commitment to the postwar international order.
They do not seem to have viewed authorization by the Security Council or the Organization of American States as means of collective legitimation—or even as means of demonstrating multilateral restraint—but rather as means of persuading other states that United States actions were in accord with Charter rules intended to sustain the existing international order.
The cumulation of such legitimacy would make it more likely that other states also would respond to United States actions with acceptance , retaining their own prior commitment to the existing order as well as their prior beliefs regarding the United States’ commitment to that order.
Kennedy received a report from the Central Intelligence Agency detailing the placement of Soviet nuclear missiles and medium-range bombers in Cuba.
Upon receiving the report, Kennedy called together a group of selected advisors, subsequently referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , to discuss the United States response.
Kennedy, however, ruled out such an invasion, at least initially, because of the anticipated response by the Soviet Union against Berlin.
Failing to resolve this disagreement, ExComm members met again on October 19.
While again expressing concerns regarding the need to legitimate United States actions and the possibility of resistance by other states in response to those actions, they still were unable to reach agreement.
Meeker suggested instead that a naval ‘‘quarantine’’ be initiated through the OAS, which would act under Article 54 of the Charter.
Still unable to reach agreement, the ExComm split into two groups, each of which prepared policy recommendations.
Both groups expressed concern that Latin American states might respond with resistance to United States military action against Cuba and prepared arguments to be offered in the Security Council.
Although air strikes and a follow-on invasion remained as possibilities, Kennedy ordered that further military actions be delayed until policymakers determined that the quarantine had failed.
Following the advice of Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin, Kennedy instructed that his speech announcing the quarantine be written carefully so as not to suggest that United States action would precede OAS authorization.
Under the agreement, an attack against any member state was considered to be an attack against all.
According to Presidential Advisor Theodore Sorenson , language in the speech regarding the implementation of the quarantine intentionally was left vague while OAS action was pending.
However, on October 28 the United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement for removing the missiles from Cuba, and the planned air strikes and invasion never occurred.
Assessing the Evidence Throughout the crisis, policymakers attempted to cumulate legitimacy for US actions, but they do not appear to have been constrained by deeply internalized Charter rules.
Rather, having expressed concern regarding the likelihood and severity of resistance in response to United States actions, they exercised restraint, altering the manner and timing of those actions by choosing a naval quarantine rather than air strikes and delaying implementation of the quarantine pending OAS authorization.
As suggested by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, policymakers’ main concern seems to have been that perceived violations of Charter rules would make the United States appear to be an aggressor and evoke resistance from states that perceived such actions as threatening to the existing, postwar order and to their own positions within that order.
In general, policymakers seemed to believe that the existing, postwar international order was instrumentally valuable to the United States, insofar as it approximated underlying United States interests.
Thus, they made efforts to legitimate United States actions, signaling the United States’ continuing commitment to the postwar order by acting in broad accordance with Charter rules intended to sustain this order.
Extending this logic, Ambassador Thompson noted that the Soviet Union would appear to be the aggressor if it ran ‘‘a blockade against military weapons’’ —irrespective of potential OAS authorization of such a blockade.
Policymakers’ efforts to cumulate legitimacy for United States actions also included emphasizing the limited nature of those actions.
They eventually came to agree that actions taken against Cuba in self-defense, under Article 51 of the Charter, would not sufficiently demonstrate such restraint, whereas regional action, taken under Article 54 of the Charter and accepted by most states, would.
Even as late as October 25, Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon expressed his concern regarding the ‘‘dverse effect on United States image’’ of attacking Cuba and recommended that the proposed air strikes be delayed still further, with the prerequisite for action being a Soviet veto of a US-sponsored Security Council resolution.
Notice here policy makers’ concern with gaining approval from most states, irrespective of Security Council authorization.
They do not seem to have been concerned with communal norms of consultation and deliberation.
But even if they did not obtain OAS authorization, they hoped to demonstrate that United States actions were in accordance with Charter rules regarding the use of armed force, having already delayed such actions as a means of demonstrating the United States’ continuing commitment to the postwar order.
Though always a looming threat, the risk of nuclear war does not appear to have been a deciding factor in these decisions.
To the extent, then, that legal advice shaped policy-making discussions, it did so not by evoking explicit concerns of legality, but by assisting policymakers in their efforts to assess the magnitude and severity of resistance that United States military actions might evoke from other states and in their efforts to cumulate legitimacy for such actions.
Conclusion Legitimation within the international system thus does not seem to require deep internalization of Charter rules—only thin internalization, based on states having concluded that Charter rules approximate their interests to such an extent that they remain willing to accept them, even when those rules diverge somewhat from their particular interests.
States appear to have thinly internalized Charter rules early on, as a result of the tradeoffs contained within the Charter; having done so, they sought to legitimate their military actions by demonstrating that those actions were taken in accordance with the Charter and therefore not threatening to the existing, postwar international order.
Throughout the crisis, the Charter served as an instrument of international order by selectively legitimating and restraining United States military actions that might have threatened the existing order.
Policymakers’ concerns regarding the possibility of resistance from other states prompted them to seek legitimation from those states, and in doing so, to delay proposed air strikes and a possible followon invasion of Cuba.
In this instance, such concerns allowed additional time for a negotiated settlement, but had the quarantine not been effective, such concerns might have prompted policymakers to undertake subsequent military actions under suboptimal conditions , thereby reducing the likelihood that those actions would have succeeded.
But in both instances, the Charter would have served as an effective instrument of international order, either by preventing a United States invasion of Cuba or by making it sufficiently costly that similar future actions might have been deterred.
As the balance of power shifts and new threats emerge, the Charter’s institutional framework must be changed accordingly, or else risk losing its legitimacy.
Legitimation and restraint are complementary means of maintaining international order, as we have seen.
But if consensus is unnecessary for legitimation, placing too much emphasis on it and on accompanying multilateral restraints might undermine the process of cumulative legitimation outlined herein and weaken the prudential restraint that this process evokes.
It would seem then that reform efforts should focus on updating and clarifying Charter rules regarding the use of armed force by states rather than on augmenting the role played by the Security Council, as the UN High-Level Panel recently has suggested.
References Abbott, Kenneth W., Robert O Keohane, Andrew Moravcsik, Anne-Marie Slaughter, and Duncan Snidal.
Caron, David D The Legitimacy of the Collective Authority of the Security Council.
Falk, Richard A The Interplay of Westphalia and Charter Conceptions of International Legal Order.
Institutions, Strategic Restraint, and the Rebuilding of Order after Major Wars.
Luck, Edward C The United States, International Organizations, and the Quest for Legitimacy.
The Struggle for Power and Peace, 6th edition, edited by Kenneth W Thompson.
The Quasi-Judicial Role of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Liberal Norms, Rhetorical Action, and the Eastern Enlargement of the European Union.
Great Britain, the United States, and the International Economic Order.
The Political Origins of the UN Security Council’s Ability to Legitimize the Use of Force.
An Outline of Interpretive Sociology Vol., edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich.
In The United States and Europe in a Changing World, edited by Roger Kanet.
