It is January 1st and Batista, the president of Cuba has just fled the country fearing Fidel Castro, a Cuban revolutionary who mounted a rebel force called the 26th of July Movement against Batista.
Castro assumes power on the 16th of February and establishes a dictatorship.
Communist Rule In Cuba So far, the Soviet leader, Khrushchev is in question of what political track Castro is deciding to take.
Russia themselves have only one connection with Fidel which is his brother Raul who is no doubt a full communist.
Unfortunately, Raul never showed his true feelings for communism to his brother, Fidel.
This causes quite a predicament for the Soviet Union to make them seen and heard by Cuba.
Smartly, Russia sends Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan, who held business contacts in the US, to the states as a guest of the Russian ambassador.
Although Mikoyan is traveling throughout the island, looking things over, Castro still has not identified himself as a Communist quite yet.
One reason why Cuba has turned to Russia is because the United States had cut off their oil supplies and imposed an economic embargo on the island because of the naturalization of United States owned companies and citizens by the Cuban government.
This calls for a massive oil shipment from the Soviets but unfortunately, Russia was unable to handle such a demand because of their limited overseas shipping capabilities.
Subsequently, Russia puts an order for extra oil tankers from Italy, a capitalist country.
When Italy agrees to the business proposition, the United States is infuriated that another capitalist country was willing to help a communist country.
Italy saw it as nothing more than an opportunity to make extra money, regardless of opposing economic systems.
Castro felt he needed protection against the United States and because Cuban forces mainly used small arms and guerilla warfare, Russia sent in tanks, artillery and attack planes as well as instructors on how to use the new technologies.
The former Russian ambassador in Cuba was then replaced after Khrushchev soon realized that he worsened relations with Cuba instead of bettering them.
A journalist replaced him by the name of Alekseyev who was friendly with Fidel and his brother, Raul.
Alekseyev was seen to be much better suited for his position and worked well with the Cuban government because he was already known and trusted by them.
As time, went on, Cuba became increasingly dependent on military and economic aid provided by the Soviet Union.
Russia made up much of the Cuban trade interactions including the purchase of sugar and nickel.
The United States was more threatened than ever by this socialist island nation on the rise.
United States spy planes are making a pass over Cuba, particularly, an area where much activity is spotted.
A Soviet-managed construction site is visible and photographs are taken of the site.
It is soon confirmed that the first of many medium/intermediate range ballistic missiles have been spotted.
Frantically, President Kennedy secretly meets with his advisory staff to question the approach.
On October 22, Kennedy announces a naval blockade aimed at preventing offensive missile weaponry into Cuba on Russian ships.
The Russian strategy was to install missiles in Cuba without the Americans knowing it.
They would then discover them only to find that it is too late to act upon it.
The Soviet Union saw installing missiles in Cuba as a very wise course of action seeing that United States missiles were stationed in Italy, Turkey as well as West Germany which were pointed towards mother Russia.
Also, even if the United States would try to neutralize the missile installations in Cuba, they would not be capable of neutralizing all of them.
Something that both the United States and the Soviet Union shared was their fright of world war and even nuclear war.
This is arguably the only time in history where the threat of nuclear war is possible.
President Kennedy became aware that the American army is pressuring the United States government to use force against Cuba.
This situation escalates so much that the president feels he is in danger of being overthrown by his own military.
The exchange of messages between Khrushchev and Kennedy begin to become more frequent as tension rose.
A final demand was made against the Soviet Union to dismantle the missiles immediately.
Word came from the Soviets that they were willing to take down the missiles in Cuba if the United States promised that they would not invade Cuba.
Kennedy agreed to the terms but wanted an inspection team to verify the dismantling of the missiles.
During the evacuation of Soviet missiles, a American U-2 spy plane was shot down by the orders of Castro which caused much commotion in the states.
This caused a total outpour of negative propaganda towards the Cubans and the Soviets.
Afterwards, though diplomatic relations with the Soviets and the United States began to settle, relations with Cuba and Russia began to worsen.
Wisely, the man who jumpstarted the Soviet-Cuban relationship, Mikoyan, was once again called upon and sent back to Cuba to discuss matters with Castro.
Once the disputes were settled with Cuba, and Mikoyan returned to Russia, Khrushchev decided to write Castro a letter pertaining to his feelings on the recent crisis.
He mentions the main objective of keeping Cuba a socialist country was successful in which no threat of invasion is posed towards the island nation.
His primary objective was to dominate the international sugar market with modern machinery and technology.
Because of the blockade on Cuba, the world sugar prices suffered much inflation but returned to normal after other countries elevated their sugar production to meet the demand.
I feel that the Cuban missile crisis served not only as another example of how nuclear war is in fact possible but also allowed interaction between opposing systems of government that were both seeking to expand their influence on third world countries.
For Russia, they have succeeded in guaranteeing that Cuba would not be invaded but they have compromised their balance of power with the United States for those missiles served as the only nuclear threat to the states where as the United States had missiles positioned in various places in Europe and the Middle East all pointed towards the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev has also lost face with China where they see him as a coward in retreating.
The people of the United States saw this as their own victory with the removal of the nuclear threat.
