The new film “Chappaquiddick” is, to date, the most brutal and honest account of what happened that night.
His brother Robert had been assassinated while campaigning for president the year before.
Ted himself barely survived a plane crash in 1964, dragged to safety by Senator Birch Bayh and hospitalized for five months.
It was assumed, within the family and without, that Ted would run for president in 1972.
He had three small children and, the July weekend he went partying in Chappaquiddick, a pregnant wife at home confined to bed rest.
As portrayed by Jason Clarke, the young senator is a venal, self-pitying coward, thoughtless and remorseless, ambition his only care.
Chappaquiddick must be counted one of the great untold stories in American political history: The average citizen may be vaguely aware of what happened but probably has little notion of just how contemptible was the behavior of Senator Ted Kennedy.
Mainstream book publishers and Hollywood have mostly steered clear of the subject for 48 years.
Chappaquiddick the movie fills in an important gap, and if it had been released in 1970, it would have ended Kennedy’s political career.
Moreover, as directed by John Curran , the film is suffused with lament that a man in Kennedy’s position could have been so much more than he was.
Yet Ted, the last and least of four brothers, was shoved into a role for which he simply lacked the character.
That the other three were dynamic leaders who died violently while he alone lived on to become the Senate’s Jabba the Hutt is perhaps the most dizzying chapter of the century-long Kennedy epic.
Vaccine experts decried the appointment of a vocal vaccine skeptic to explore the safety of vaccines and their purported link with autism, an association raised by a paper published in The Lancet in 1998 that claimed to find a connection between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and autism.
Since then, numerous studies have affirmed the safety of the vaccine, most recently including a study of 100,000 children considered at high risk of developing autism.
Schaffner said Kennedy has “raised issues that have been settled securely and completely by good science, and 80,0000 pediatricians, many family doctors and the World Health Organization all reinforce the current recommended childhood immunization schedule.
In Bizarre Interview, ‘Real Time’ Host Sides with Cuckoo Crackers Anti-Vaxxer Robert Kennedy Jr.
It was a very Beasty episode of the HBO series Real Time with Bill Maher.
On Friday night, The Daily Beast contributors Ana Marie Cox and Liz Mair joined Maher and some bald guy from The Weekly Standard to discuss the latest current events topics.
But prior to all that, Maher conducted a sit-down interview with Robert F Kennedy Jr. who came on the program to promote his book Let the Science Speak, as well as the full-page ad Kennedy recently ran in USA Today claiming that thimerosal, a mercury-containing preservative used in vaccine medications, causes autism.
Back in 2005, Kennedy made an infamous appearance on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart for an “autism” special.
There, Kennedy preached his anti-vaxx stance, claiming not only that vaccines cause autism, but also that there’s a wide-ranging conspiracy to cover this fact up involving the government, academia, and Big Pharma.
Maher opened the interview asking him about the USA Today ad, and his anti-vaxx stance.
I’m comfortable reading science and dissecting it, and discerning the difference between junk science and real science.
When I started looking at it, what I saw was very alarming, which is we were giving huge amounts of mercury to our children.
The former governor of Florida, Jeb Bush, another Republican with eyes on the White House, is, as Kennedy was, a Catholic from a wealthy and politically active family with bases in both New England and Florida.
Jeb Bush even wrote a book, Profiles in Character, with a title that is a conscious imitation of JFK’s Profiles in Courage.
Bush and Kennedy also both wrote books extolling immigration; Bush’s was Immigration Wars, Kennedy’s was A Nation of Immigrants.
On the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s assassination, Cruz published a remarkable piece in National Review Online crediting Kennedy with laying the foundation for Ronald Reagan’s tax cuts and Cold War victory.
We’ve seen an economic boom, we’ve seen people climb out of poverty into prosperity.
When another Republican presidential candidate, retired neurosurgeon Benjamin Carson, spoke to me about his opposition to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he said he would have responded instead to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, with “a Kennedy-esque moment,” launching a “national project” to become petroleum independent.
Photograph by Robert Knudsen, Office of the Naval Aide to the President, in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston.
My smoking habit began in my youth, helped me write my own adult history, and now, cigars are in my dreams.
Even though the world is rising against smoking, and particularly against cigars, I still feel they are part of my daily world and I have no incentive to stop smoking them.
I entered the United States Navy in the early days of World War II and when I reached the age of 19 I became commanding officer of a submarine chaser in the Pacific Ocean.
Even if the quality of those big cigars was mediocre, they accomplished their purpose–they made a 19-year-old boy really look like the commander of the ship.
When I returned to San Francisco after the war, I went back to a job at a daily newspaper where I had briefly worked before entering the Navy.
There was a wonderful woman journalist working for the newspaper who hated the smell.
She handed me $19.32 and told me it was her contribution for a better quality of cigars.
Despite the self-interested largess of my colleagues, I still did not advance to the cream of available cigars in those days, the imports from Cuba.
Actually, I would have to wait until I was almost 35 years old before I started to work for a rising young American politician named John Kennedy, who liked to smoke Petit Upmann Cuban cigars.
Working around him, I felt I had no choice but to upgrade my smoke of choice to a Cuban.
Shortly after I entered the White House in 1961, a series of dramatic events occurred.
In April, 1961, the United States went through the disastrous error of the Bay of Pigs, where Cuban exiles with the help of the United States government tried to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro.
Several months later, the President called me into his office in the early evening.
But since I was now a solid Cuban cigar smoker, I knew a lot of stores, and I worked on the problem into the evening.
The next morning, I walked into my White House office at about 8m., and the direct line from the President’s office was already ringing.
The only time I could get a few Cuban cigars was when I traveled abroad with the President to countries like France, Austria and Great Britain.
I met for two days with Nikita Khrushchev, talking face to face with the Soviet leader.
Kennedy also warned the Soviets that any nuclear attack from Cuba would be construed as an act of war, and that the United States would retaliate in kind.
Harking back to efforts to contain German, Italian, and Japanese aggression in the 1930s, Kennedy argued that war-like behavior, “if allowed to grow unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war.
The program originated in Chicago and was carried by all of the major radio and TV networks.
Howard K Smith served as the moderator and questions came from Sander Vanocur, NBC News; Charles Warren, Mutual News; Stuart Novins, CBS News; and Bob Fleming, ABC News.
My mother crossed it on her doctor’s visits in the months leading to my birth.
And while I spent my youth in freewheeling California, I knew I’d return to the changing seasons that give the region much of its character.
In 1963, that then-sleepy burg set off on a growth surge that’s ballooned in population to more than a million people today, with new homes and shopping malls spread out across what was farmland not long ago.
In fact, when I was a youngster, “going to McLean” meant driving out to the country for a picnic.
Now, if you don’t live in the national capital area, you might wonder what this has to do with you.
As the federal government expanded its footprint beyond the District of Columbia’s borders, it’s brought a bonanza to those surrounding areas.
He murdered Kennedy because the latter promised to send advanced fighter planes to Israel.
Johnny Raincloud: Americans think John F Kennedy was one of our greatest presidents.
Dionne, John F Kennedy, John Lewis Gaddis, Kennedy, Lee Harvey Oswald, Nikita Khrushchev, Ronald Reagan, Soviet | 4 Comments John F Kennedy was many things, but a great president was not among them.
I meant to wrap up our multi-volume series on Kennedy yesterday, but a this one caught my eye.
It fits in with the contrarian view–a reality check on Kennedy myth–to counter the Kennedy inflation that characterized much of the coverage of the 50th anniversary of the JFK assassination this month.
If you’re a Kennedy admirer, the Washington Posts’s WonkBlog‘s Dylan Matthews is here to rain on your parade.
Fifty years ago Friday, Lee Harvey Oswald assassinated President John F Kennedy.
The assassination was a tragedy — and it turned the target into something of a secular political saint.
A Gallup poll last week found that Americans rate him more highly than any of the other 11 presidents since Eisenhower.
A 2011 Gallup poll found that he came in fourth when Americans were asked to name the greatest president of all time, behind Ronald Reagan, Abraham Lincoln, and Bill Clinton, but ahead of George Washington, Franklin Roosevelt, and Thomas Jefferson.
Kennedy was a brilliant rhetorician who inspired a generation of young Americans, and his death left a lingering scar on the American psyche.
But it’s important that his presidency be evaluated on its actual merits.
Historians disagree on what exactly lead to the October 1962 crisis that almost ended in a nuclear exchange.
But basically every interpretation suggests that, had the Eastern Seaboard been wiped out that month, it would have been the result of Kennedy’s fecklessness.
The brief Kennedy years represent for many in the media their own golden moment.
JFK was their royalty, their idol, their ideal, their handsome and rich young war hero.
And then it was all cut short, like a Shakespearean tragedy or fairy tale.
I grew up around Dallas and heard about the assassination any time I visited anywhere else as a child, and later on I visited the Sixth Floor Museum.
For many in that generation, which was mostly born after World War II and then ended up losing Vietnam, JFK provides a meaningful anchor point, or at least a point that they have infused with meaning.
Don’t bring up his womanizing or how the Kennedy patriarch behaved toward the Nazis.
The fact is, while Dallas had its share of mainstream Kennedy-haters, none of them fired a shot.
Dallas citizens actually turned out on November 22, 1963, to greet the Kennedys warmly.
Even the horrible Zapruder film shows happy, cheering crowds lining the streets in Dealey Plaza just to get a glimpse of the First Couple.
One lone nut can change all that, and did, which is unsettling to the point of horror.
But Dallas was not and is not to blame, any more than Ford’s Theater is to blame for Abraham Lincoln’s killing.
But many on the left would rather blame their preferred villains than look at the truth.
The truth is, the assassination of John F Kennedy is the killing of one of life’s genetic lottery winners by a small-time loser.
The JFK assassination could have been a conspiracy, but it probably wasn’t.
The evidence points directly at one man whose ideology, coupled with his combination of grandiosity and mediocrity, led him to kill the president in order to elevate himself.
While true, perhaps Althouse is right and it’s become a cliche–and will probably violate a few more by the time November is over.
But since it’s Friday Nov., and I’ve included a lot of coverage of Kennedy this month, Althouse’s list of 10 rules is a welcome addition.
It’s coming up next Friday, and I’d like to help with that op-ed or blog post you might have in the works.
Don’t repeat the cliché that everyone who was around at the time remembers where he was and what he was doing when he heard the news.
Don’t tell us — especially don’t tell us as if it were not a big cliché — what youhappened to have been doing and how you’ve always remembered that.
Don’t even attempt to say that the assassination had a profound effect on people.
Don’t make up alternate histories of what would have happened if Kennedy had not been killed.
Everything would have been different; we would all have been different.
If you’re American and under 50, you can assume that you would never have been born.
If you’re into that sort of thing, enjoy it some day in your spare time, but don’t lard your 50th anniversary writings with that.
Don’t drag in the recent news that Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg’s son Jack appears to have reached adulthood in nonugly form and has grown a large head of hair and is therefore presumptive presidential material.
We celebrate his birthday, like Washington’s, because he was such a great President.
We don’t celebrate JFK’s birthday — I don’t even know what it is — because he was not great enough.
We celebrate Martin Luther King’s birthday, not the day he was assassinated.
Because of his greatness, and because we don’t want to direct our attention toward his murder.
It must be because he was not great enough, and because of points #1, #2, and #3, above.
A man died and we morbidly relive it annually, for some reason that must make little sense to those under 50.
Inspire us to move on to modest acknowledgements of the date at 10 or 25 year intervals up until 2063, when we — those of us who survive — can go big for the centennial.
Nearly all of us remember precisely where we were when we got the news.
But more and more Americans — those born after 1963, which is generally considered the last birth year of the baby boomer generation — have little interest in the Kennedy legacy.
Most of this exhaustive media coverage failed to note Kennedy was a mediocre president.
His record of less than three years provides little support for his place in many polls as one of the best presidents in history.
A recent survey ranked Kennedy as the most popular president in the past 50 years.
Another man, one of the few innocents who lost their jobs due to the Kennedy assassination, wrote feature stories for me when I was managing editor of the New Orleans weekly Gambit.
The reverberations from that assassination a half century ago altered not only the course of a nation but also the course of numerous private lives, in ways poignant and deep.
For the two men I knew, Ed Butler and Jesse Core, August 16, 1963, was a fateful day.
It was then that Lee Harvey Oswald was passing out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, outside the International Trade Mart in New Orleans.
Core was the Trade Mart’s publicist; as Oswald started causing a commotion, Core tried to shoo him away to avoid bad publicity for the Trade Mart.
Five days later, Butler, as the head of an anti-Communist outfit called the Information Council of the Americas , joined a Cuban exile and two local reporters on WDSU radio to interview, or debate, Oswald.
It was Butler who helped goad Oswald into proclaiming that he was a Marxist — an admission that the late United States representative Hale Boggs, who served on the Warren Commission and who greatly admired INCA, thought was highly important in establishing Oswald’s motives.
From strippers to interns and Swedish aristocrats, President John F Kennedy knew his way around the ladies.
The murder of a handsome and vigorous president shocked the nation to its core and shook the faith of many Americans in their institutions and way of life.
These scenes were repeated endlessly on television at the time and then reproduced in popular magazines and, still later, in documentary films.
Conspiracy theories are conquering the country, leading us into a dark age of cynicism.
Americans are bombarded by a growing barrage of outlandish tales, aided and abetted by a polarizing media, and amplified by the echo chamber of theInternet.
While all sides indulge in conspiracy theories, Republicans andconservatives are particularly prone to them.
Such inflamed rhetoric divides nations and destroys deliberative democracy.
Fortunately, we have a much better sense of where conspiracy theories come from and why so many people believe them.
One member of that majority turns out to be Secretary of State John Kerry.
Pressed in an interview aired Sunday on NBC’s “Meet the Press” to explain his beliefs that JFK’s death was part of a bigger plot, Kerry said: “I just have a point of view.
It’s just inappropriate, and I’m not going to do more than say that it’s a point of view that I have.
But it’s not right, or worthy, or appropriate for me to comment further,” Kerry told host David Gregory.
Kerry said in a recent interview with NBC, as the 50th anniversary of the assassination approaches, he doubts the official story.
It’s a black-and-white picture we’ve all seen before: an earnest, 16-year-old Bill Clinton shaking hands with President John F Kennedy.
It was snapped in July 1963 in the Rose Garden, soon after Kennedy addressed a group of Boys Nation delegates.
Ever since, and most notably during his 1992 presidential campaign, Clinton has recalled the moment.
Memories of Kennedy’s presidency, from his inaugural address to the horror of Dallas, live on in the American imagination.
But they linger particularly with Democrats, and for the past 50 years, generations of them have venerated JFK as their party’s tragic hero.
Democrats may have long ago abandoned the Kennedy program, but JFK’s flame flickers elusively in their hearts.
In the wake of the resurgence of left-wing propaganda about Dallas in 1963, its a topic that deserves honesty, legitimate pushback, and clarification.
Stay tuned for updates. , I welcome The Weekly Standard‘s Mark Hemingway commentary, and include it here.
The fiftieth anniversary of the assassination of President Kennedy is nearly upon us, so one would expect America’s public intellectuals to be gearing up to present a series of sober and illuminating reflections about the tragedy’s cultural and political legacy.
Any misty-eyed resonance that can be wrung out of JFK’s death is already being exploited by our elite media gatekeepers to advance a political agenda.
Racism is, of course, described as a “right-wing passion” though it is conveniently forgotten that at the time of JFK’s assassination this odious legacy was exploited and enforced primarily by the Democratic party.
And yes, Dallas may have been suffused with “Bircher anti-Communism” but that seems very much at odds with the identity of JFK’s assassin who had spent time in the Soviet Union under mysterious circumstances.
A lot of my conservative friends were contemptuous of the whole Kennedy family.
And a lot of my left-of-center friend admired Kennedy, but for all the wrong reasons.
The same issues that Kennedy grappled with — economic growth, tax cuts, the dollar, free trade, peace through strength, immigration, welfare reform — are still with us today.
I think he had some ideas that can inform our current debates over politics and policy.
And when he built up the military we were in a global conflict with the Soviet Union.
You may be surprised by how similar some of the arguments then were to the arguments today.
Al Gore Sr., the Democratic senator from Tennessee who was the father of Bill Clinton’s vice president, was denouncing tax cuts as a bonanza for fat cats.
John Kenneth Galbraith, the Keynesian Harvard economist, opposed tax cuts and preferred, instead, more government spending.
The top long-term capital gains tax rate in the Kennedy administration was 25 percent, and Kennedy wanted it lowered to 19. percent.
In 2013, if you include the Obamacare tax, the top long-term federal capital gains tax rate is 23. percent.
There’s a lot in the book that will probably resonate with libertarians.
Kennedy was likely influenced by a libertarian writer called Albert Jay Nock.
Early in his political career, JFK gave some amazing speeches about the individual versus the state.
And the Inaugural Address line “Ask not what your country can do for you” was a call for self-reliance and an attack on the welfare state.
Other parts, like Kennedy’s foreign policy and his stance on some social issues, libertarians might find less attractive.
By Larry Kudlow After delivering a number of “economic growth” speeches this summer, President Obama has failed to inspire any confidence, falling all the way back to square one in a recent Gallup poll.
Gallup reported that Obama’s approval rating on the economy has sunk to 35 percent in August from 42 percent in early June.
This so-called recovery remains the worst in modern history dating back to 1947.
End the spending-cut sequester, lower tax deductions, and raise taxes on the rich, all to free up money for infrastructure, green energy, “manufacturing innovation initiatives,” and the teachers’ unions.
Of course, this would all come on top of Obamacare, which if it doesn’t fall of its own weight, will add so many new taxes and regulations that it will sink the economy even more.
The Gallup poll also reflected voter fatigue over Obama’s stale class-warfare act.
Yet America is on the verge of allowing Communist China to enslave the free city of Hong Kong.
If this happens, it will be one of the greatest abdications of U.S. moral leadership in history.
Chinese President Xi Jinping inspects Chinese troops of People’s Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison at the Shek Kong Barracks in Hong Kong, Friday, June 30, 2017.
Xi landed in Hong Kong Thursday to mark the 20th anniversary of Beijing taking control of the former British colony, accompanied by a formidable layer of security as authorities showed little patience for pro-democracy protests.
Right now, Communist China is massing paramilitary forces on its border with Hong Kong.
Intimidate the pro-freedom movement that has brought parts of the city to a standstill in recent weeks.
The echoes of the Tiananmen Square massacre 30 years ago are unmistakable.
These developments are eerily familiar to the Soviet Union’s attempts to dominate West Berlin.
Yet the United States always made it clear that we would defend the city.
Presidents John F Kennedy and Ronald Reagan even traveled there personally, proving by their presence that America stood with its residents.
The blockade of Berlin in 1948 was widely seen as the opening salvo of the decades-long struggle between freedom and communism.
With Beijing’s crackdown on Hong Kong already well underway, maybe now we’ll admit that another struggle has arrived.
Yet unlike the first Cold War, this time it’s unclear whether America has the will to win.
EST Tuesday from launch pad 39A at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida, the same facility used by the Apollo 11 lunar landing crew and numerous space shuttle missions.
An upcoming movie, Chappaquiddick, attempts to tell the story of what happened that night and why it took Kennedy some ten hours to report the accident to the local Edgartown police … Chappaquiddick poster … The film, directed by John Curran, stars Jason Clarke as Senator Kennedy, Kate Mara as Kopechne, and Bruce Dern as Ted’s father Joe Kennedy.
Despite all evidence to the contrary, they are still widely believed, and not only by members of a credulous public.
The claim that JFK was a victim of hatred and bigotry or a martyr in the crusade for civil rights is now a basic element in the liberal interpretation of the post-war era.
It has now been 50 years since President John F Kennedy was cut down on the streets of Dallas by rifle shots fired by Lee Harvey Oswald, a self-described Marxist, recent defector to the Soviet Union, and ardent admirer of Fidel Castro.
Forty-five minutes later a policeman stopped Oswald on foot in another section of the city to question him about the shooting.
Two days later Oswald was himself assassinated while in police custody by a nightclub owner distraught over Kennedy’s death.
Despite the evidence, few Americans today believe that Lee Harvey Oswald shot President Kennedy or that, if he did, he acted alone.
A recent poll found that 75% of American adults believe that JFK was the victim of a conspiracy of some kind, usually of a right-wing variety.
This is not surprising because most of the popular books published on the assassination since the mid-1960s have elaborated one or another conspiracy theory.
Right-wing businessmen, disgruntled generals, CIA operatives, and Mafia bosses are the typical villains in these scenarios.
Before long the Kennedy assassination came to be encrusted in layers of myth, illusion, and disinformation strong enough to deflect every attempt to understand it from a rational point of view.
And this enduring national illusion and confusion has had unfortunate consequences.
Creating the Myth In the days and weeks following the assassination the idea took hold that a climate of hate in Dallas and across the nation established the conditions for President Kennedy’s murder.
Racial bigots, the Ku Klux Klan, followers of the John Birch Society, fundamentalist ministers, anti-Communist zealots, and conservatives of all kinds had sowed hatred and division in national life.
These battalions of the American Right had been responsible for manifold acts of violence across the South against Negroes and civil rights workers in the years leading up to the assassination, and they must have been behind the attack on President Kennedy.
It followed that President Kennedy was a martyr, like Abraham Lincoln, to the great causes of civil rights and racial justice.
Now it appeared that their warnings had come to fruition in the murder of a president.
This explanation for the assassination did not drop out of thin air but was circulated immediately after the event by influential leaders, journalists, and journalistic outlets, including Mrs.
Reston returned to this theme in subsequent columns, pointing the finger at hatred and a spirit of lawlessness in the land as the ultimate causes of the presidential assassination.
Many took this a step further to declare that all Americans were complicit in Kennedy’s death because they had tolerated hatred and bigotry in their midst.
For his part, President Johnson saw that his job as national leader in that time of crisis was to supply some meaning to his predecessor’s sudden death.
The civil rights bill, which Kennedy belatedly proposed in mid-1963, was approved in 1964 with bipartisan majorities in the Congress.
On the international front, Johnson feared a dangerous escalation of tensions with the Soviet Union and another McCarthy-style “witch-hunt” against radicals should the American public conclude that a Communist was responsible for the assassination.
From his point of view, it was better to circumvent that danger by deflecting blame for the assassination from Communism to some other unpopular target.
Community NewsInspiration from Zion: This is a Love StoryMedia Myth AlertThe American RevenantThat Wilder GirlAmerica On CoffeeThe ""Me"" DecadeCatholicism Pure & SimpleRealityChekWebner House.widget.widget_media_image { overflow: hidden; }.widget.widget_media_image img { height: auto; max-width: 100%; }SEARCH THE ARCHIVES Search for: Google+ Google+ ANALYTICS FlipIt Add to Flipboard Magazine.
AreoFree Expression • Humanism • Culture • Politics • Human Rights • ScienceSoraNews24 -Japan News-Bringing you yesterday's news from Japan and Asia, today.MovieBabbleThe Casual Way to Discuss Moviesmotto.mediaもっとメディアRegie's BlogThe pen is mightier than the sword ...unless someone is trying to stab you with a sword.
Then, it's the sword ...definitely the sword.According To HoytBorn FreeBriar PatchNAVIGATING THIS MESSDr.
Community NewsSkagit County, WAInspiration from Zion: This is a Love Story""An age is called dark not because the light fails to shine but because people refuse to see""Media Myth AlertCalling out media mythsThe American RevenantNews RevivedThat Wilder GirlMildly irreverent thoughts on sex, higher education, media, and my life.
I meant irrelevant.America On CoffeeWe’re just inviting you to take a timeout into the rhythmic ambiance of our breakfast, brunch and/or coffee selections.
