NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 FEBRUARY/MARCH 2018 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 14 pages.
SOURCE 1A The extract below focuses on the relationship that Cuba had with the Soviet Union.
Cuba's ties to the USSR were strengthened by two of Castro's closest advisers – his brother, Raul Castro, and the legendary revolutionary, Che Guevara.
Both men shared the communist ideology of the Soviets … Castro came to believe that the Americans would invade Cuba no matter what.
Soon the USSR and its allies were providing military aid and weapons to Cuba.
Khrushchev and the Soviets couldn't have asked for a better-located ally against the United States.
The United States had a huge number of military forces in Europe near Soviet borders … It was well-known that the United States had nuclear missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at the Soviet Union.
While the United States had forces surrounding the USSR, the Soviet had no military presence at all in the Western Hemisphere.
They did not even have aircraft carriers to put their planes within striking distance of the United States mainland.
After the Soviets moved missiles to Cuba, the global balance of power would shift.
Kennedy and his advisers were debating what to do about the missiles in Cuba.
On Tuesday 16 October, the same morning he learned about the photographs, the President immediately called for a meeting.
Kennedy and his advisers gathered before noon in the White House cabinet room.
Joining the President in the large room were several intelligence officers, who presented the photographs and pointed out details showing the missiles.
They were found in the area around San Cristobal, located in western Cuba.
The President and his advisers pored over the evidence, asking the intelligence officers questions about the photographs and the missiles.
They wondered if there may have been more missiles in Cuba not seen in these spy photos.
Along with key members of his Cabinet, the President assembled a team of experts to help him determine what to do.
Most of these advisers were part of the President's administration, but Kennedy also sought the advice of people outside his government who were experts on Soviet relations.
This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or 'ExComm' for short.
It depicts an eagle attempting to catch a mouse that is carrying a missile.
Eagle Missile Mouse [From www.plainlocal.org/userfiles/508/classes/1085/Cuban.
It explains the Soviet Union's position on the deployment of missiles in Cuba.
The Soviet government stands for peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems, against the interference of one state into the internal affairs of others, and against the intervention of large states into the affairs of small countries.
It is well known to you, Mr President , the attitude of the Soviet government and personally, of Nikita Khrushchev toward the dangerous developments connected with the USA administration position on the issue of Cuba.
An unrestrained anti-Cuban campaign has been going on in the USA for a long time and apparently there is a definite USA administration policy behind it.
Right now the USA is making an attempt to blockade Cuban trade with other states.
If we speak about dimensions and resources of the two countries, the USA and Cuba, then it is clear that they are a giant and a baby.
SOURCE 2A This extract focuses on the process of decolonisation in Angola that began in 1975.
The transition to independence in Angola was spoiled by violence, division and foreign intervention.
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola , National Front for the Liberation of Angola and National Union for the Total Independence of Angola … The hastily concluded Alvor Agreement of 15 January 1975, signed between the Portuguese government and the three nationalist movements, promised independence on 11 November of the same year.
The Portuguese troops were to remain in Angola until 19 February 1976 … Another proviso under Article 40 of the Alvor Agreement was that the transitional government must organise general elections to a constituent assembly within nine months of 31 January 1975.
By July 1975, the transitional government had collapsed due to mutual distrust among the three groups, which had led to outbreaks of fighting.
It was published in the News Diary of Lisbon, a Portuguese newspaper on 15 January 1975.
It was written by Victoria Brittain, a journalist who spent ten years working in Angola.
The MPLA, they claimed, never intended to share power with the other two parties and was planning with the Soviets and Cubans to crush the FNLA and UNITA militarily, giving the Soviet Union a strategic foothold in a key region of Africa.
The FNLA leader, Holden Roberto, had been on the CIA payroll since 1961 … the Americans also stepped up military support for UNITA, and throughout the year ambushes and assassinations of the MPLA by its two rivals destabilised the country and made a mockery of power-sharing within the transitional government.
In terms of an agreement signed in January 1975 in the Portuguese town of Alvor, the Portuguese transferred power in Angola to a 'Government of National Unity' … This interim government was supposed to rule until a general election had been held, with independence taking place on 11 November, but it did not happen that way.
Because of its own internal problems Portugal could not or would not exert any real influence during the transition period.
The interim government disintegrated and, with the help of Cuban troops the MPLA, soon became the sole rulers in the capital Luanda.
Soon Angola was a battleground … It will be remembered that during the 1960s and 1970s and thereafter, the pattern was for the big powers to take sides and become involved in regional and local conflicts and they secured the active participation of their allies.
The United States of America was the leader of the West and the Soviet Union of the East and the participation on almost every continent of the Americans with their allies and the Soviets with theirs is common knowledge … This is the international 'Cold War' background against which the conflicts of that time must be seen.
And so South Africa, with the war on its doorstep, became part of the anti-Marxist alliance.
SOURCE 3A The extract below explains the reasons for the establishment of the Black Power Movement in the United States of America during the 1960s.
The Black Power Movement grew out of the Civil Rights Movement that had steadily gained momentum through the 1950s and 1960s.
Although not a formal movement, the Black Power Movement marked a turning point in black-white relations in the United States and also in how blacks saw themselves.
The movement was hailed by some as a positive and proactive force aimed at helping blacks achieve full equality with whites, but it was reviled by others as a militant, sometimes violent faction whose primary goal was to drive a wedge between whites and blacks.
In truth, the Black Power Movement was a complex event that took place at a time when society and culture were being transformed throughout the United States, and its legacy reflects that complexity.
Blacks still faced lower wages than whites, higher crime rates in their neighbourhoods, and unspoken but palpable racial discrimination.
Young blacks in particular saw the Civil Rights Movement as too mainstream to generate real social change.
What they wanted was something that would accelerate the process and give blacks the same opportunities as whites, not just socially but also economically and politically.
Perhaps more important, they felt that the Civil Rights Movement was based more on white perceptions of civil rights than black perceptions.
By the mid-1960s, dissatisfaction with the pace of change was growing among blacks.
The term 'black power' had been around since the 1950s, but it was Stokely Carmichael, head of the Student Non-violent Co-ordinating Committee , who popularised the term in 1966.
When we form coalitions we must say on what grounds we are going to form them, not white people telling us how to form them.
We must think politically and get power because we are the only people in this country that are powerless.
We are the only people who have to protect ourselves from our protectors.
We are the only people who want a man called Willis removed who is a racist, that have to lie down in the street and beg a racist named Daley to remove the racist named Willis.
We have to build a movement so we can see Daley and say, 'Tell Willis to get hat,' and by the time we turn around he is gone.
Everybody in this country is for 'Freedom Now' but not everybody is for Black Power because we have got to get rid of some of the people who have white power.
We have to be able to smash any political machine in the country that's oppressing us and bring it to its knees.
We have to be aware that if we keep growing and multiplying the way we do in ten years all the major cities are going to be ours.
We have to know that in Newark, New Jersey, where we are sixty per cent of the population, we went along with their stories about integrating and we got absorbed.
All we have to show for it is three councilmen who are speaking for them and not for us.
Around the border of the poster the words 'POWER TO THE PEOPLE' are written.
When traditional modes of repression failed to counter the growing insurgency and even helped to fuel it, the Bureau took the law into its own hands and secretly used fraud and force to sabotage constitutionally protected political activity.
The FBI secretly instructed its field offices to propose schemes to misdirect, discredit, disrupt and otherwise neutralise specific individuals and groups.
Close coordination with the local police and prosecutors was encouraged.
The black community's lack of material resources for fighting back, and the tendency of the media and whites in general to ignore or tolerate attacks on black groups, worsened their situation.
It also reflected government and corporate fear of the Black Power Movement because of its militancy.
The Black Panthers came under attack at a time when they provided free food, free health care and free community-based education.
