Both countries, at the time, were vying for global dominance in virtually every facet of human life.
One crucial aspect of the Cold War involved the issue of nuclear weapons and missiles.
Many countries all over the world braced themselves for the possibility of a third world war as the United States and the Soviets had a showdown over missile positioning in Cuba.
And without a shred of doubt, they would certainly have taken the entire world down with them.
One Soviet Officer’s Decision Saved the World On the fateful day of 27th October 1962, the Cold War nearly ignited into a full-scale and all-out war.
A nuclear-armed Soviet submarine on its way to Cuba encountered aggression from a United States Destroyer.
At that dangerous location, the crew of the Russian sub couldn’t tell whether the war had started or not.
Fortunately enough, one crew member of the Soviet submarine failed to authorize the attack.
To this day, Vasili’s decision not to fire is hailed by many as what saved the world from a nuclear conflict, perhaps nuclear annihilation.
The United States Planned to Invade Cuba When Fidel Castro took revolutionary actions and came to power in 1959, he and Che Guevara disliked United States policies.
US-Cuba diplomatic relations were cut off when America realized that Castro allied Cuba to the Soviet Union.
America worked tirelessly to support Cuban exiles to topple Fidel Castro’s government.
When Fidel Castro realized that the United States was hell-bent on removing him from office, he sought military hardware and assistance from the Soviet Union.
As part of the agreements, the Soviets built and operated Soviet missile sites in Cuba. .push; What the United States Surveillance Plane Revealed about the Missiles Stationed in Cuba When bad blood developed between the United States and Cuba, America flew spy planes to watch and capture activities in Cuba.
In October 1962, while conducting its intelligence-gathering flight, an American U-2 plane captured photographic evidence of Soviet missile facilities in Cuba.
The site of installation was a stone throw from United States land; America was innocently sleeping in hell.
Even though the Cold War was real, America least expected the Soviets to go that far.
In any case, Kennedy knew that immediate counter actions were supposed to be taken.
In order not to risk precious lives, he sought a peaceful approach to the resolution of the missile crisis.
The president set up an advisory committee known as “ExComm” to help him in the decision-making process.
The quarantine line announced by Kennedy on 22nd October served to block the Soviets from further transporting missile equipment to Cuba.
Diplomatic Negotiations Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev meeting with the United States President John F Kennedy.
The heat of the crisis lasted about 13 days, during which a lot of negotiations kept the two factions at close contact with each other.
Judging from the destructive capabilities of the armies of both countries, a little mistake in the decision was bound to trigger a devastating nuclear conflict.
There was a direct exchange of messages between the United States and the Soviet authorities.
In the end, the two sides took a compromise because it was a clear case of mutual-assured annihilation.
The Soviet Concessions during the Crisis After days of reasoning and negotiation, Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union made an important announcement on 28th October.
The Soviets also promised to remove their installed missiles from Cuba.
A United States nuclear-armed Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile was just one of the numerous in the United States arsenal.
On his part, JFK pledged not to invade Cuba, provided the Cubans didn’t directly provoke America.
But America also had nuclear missile installations in Turkey and Italy.
As part of the deal, President Kennedy secretly assured the Soviets that America would withdraw all United States missiles in Turkey.
The Outcome of the Agreements As the world sat on a ticking time bomb of nuclear warfare, there came a huge sigh of relief as the two countries started fulfilling their promises.
Well, reportedly, he was not much impressed with the manner in which the Soviets backed down.
In any case, Castro had no authority or say in how things should have panned out between the United States and the Soviets.
But at least, he was probably grateful that the war didn’t ignite, lest Cuba would have been annihilated.
Aside from the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, there were an estimated 40k Soviet military men in Cuba– something that the United States was completely oblivious to.
It was virtually impossible for the United States to have known because the Soviet soldiers disguised themselves as Cuban civilians.
The Soviet used “Maskirovka” to beat United States intelligence, by way of denying and deceiving Americans about their operations in Cuba.
The crisis has been singled out as the closest war event that nearly exploded the Cold War into a hot war. .push; Back in the U.S., President Kennedy was admired as a hero, for his rightful handling of the crisis.
The Russians were, however, very disappointed in their leader, partly because of how he handled the crisis.
As a result, Nikita Khrushchev lost power in 1964. .push; To prevent future misunderstandings, a direct telephone line was made active for the Kremlin and Washington authorities.
After narrowly escaping a nuclear war, the two nations began to appreciate the valuable lives of their citizens.
