Introduction HISTORY OF CUBA Christopher Columbus discovered Cuba in 1492.
Cuba is a little island about 90 miles south of Florida and also about 90 miles north of Jamaica in the Caribbean Sea.
It is nearly the size of Pennsylvania, which is about 42,803 square feet.
Cuba is always hot and humid due to its tropical climate, and is the biggest Caribbean Island.
On February 15, 1898, the American battleship Maine mysteriously exploded.
The United States subsequently blamed the Spanish, and declared war against Spain.
The land battles at El Caney and San Juan Hill, and the naval battle at Santiago de Cuba, were all fought in July, and were the main events of the war.
A treaty was signed on December 10, 1898, called the Treaty of Paris, which confirmed that Spain gave up all claims to Cuba.
Middle Castros rebellion became known as the 26th of July Movement winning its name from the date of this first attack.
Castros revel forces staged another unsuccessful revolt in the province of Oriente in 1956.
The rebels engaged in guerrilla warfare from the mountain headquarters, for the next two years.
In January, 1959, Batista fled to the Dominican Republic, and Castros forces gained control of the government.
Raul Castro, Fidels brother, and Ernesto Guevara also became leaders in the new government.
Both men were were known to have communist backgrounds and were leaders in the 26th of July Movement.
Relations with the United States became seriously strained in 1960 when Castro seized almost all American-owned property.
Property owned by other foreigners and by wealthy Cubans was also nationalized.
Sugar factories and estates, telephone and transportation companies, power plants, banks, mines, apartment houses, and hotels were all taken over by the government. ...read more.
Conclusion Shiploads of Russian military equipment and Russian technicians started arriving in Cuba.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy announced that Russia had built missile bases in Cuba that could launch atomic attacks against the United States and other parts of the Western Hemisphere.
President Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to halt the flow of weapons to the island.
He demanded that Russia remove all missiles and missile bases from Cuba.
In October, Premier Khrushchev agreed and invited the UN to inspect and verify the dismantling of the bases in Cuba.
He also demanded that the United States give up its Guantanamo Bay as an act of privacy.
In April 1963, the United States announced it would not allow the exiles to launch raids from United States territory.
They made some sea and air attacks on sugar refineries, ports, and railroads in Cuba.
In conclusion Cuba is a beautiful country, yet has always been place of turmoil and relative violence.
Even today you are still not allowed to visit Cuba without special permission. ...read more.
The above preview is unformatted text This student written piece of work is one of many that can be found in our AS and A Level International History, 1945-1991 section.
The cold war made the crisis more likely because the superpowers were now natural enemies.
They both hugely disliked each other and believed that their countries were run in the right way.
Moreover, the 1984 Land Acquisition Act meant that the government was only legally bound to supply cash compensation, which was often below the market value of the land.
Furthermore, few of the uprooted were adequately resettled (Bandyopadhyay, Mallik, Mandal, & Perveen, 2002, History of the United States The Federalists, who in the HARTFORD CONVENTION had capped their opposition to the war with demands for major changes in the Constitution, now were regarded as disloyal, and their party dwindled down to a base in New England and in the 1820s dissolved.
One element was that Americans in trade, finance, and foreign affairs soon realized the AOC was c**p b/c Congress couldn't levy taxes, establish a uniform commercial policy, or enforce treaties.
Superpower Relations 1945-90 * After invading Inchon , MacArthur's troops recaptured Seoul, and moved up rapidly through North Korea within 100km of the Chinese border.
