A decade of social upheaval… …and change… …of war… …rebellion… …and fear.
And through it all, two leaders with liberal sensibilities drove America forward …with confidence and vision.
The Presidencies of John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson created a lasting impact... on America in the 20th Century.
John F Kennedy hailed from a wealthy Boston family with long-standing political ties.
But when he announced he was running for Congress in 1946, many thought he was a longshot.
He would be the youngest candidate ever elected to the office and the first Catholic.
But Kennedy pitched his experience and said he was the better man for the job.
The initial program drew over 70 million viewers and became a historic milestone in politics.
For the first time, the candidates’ image became a major factor for voters.
The appearance built momentum in the campaign for Kennedy and his running mate Lyndon Johnson.
He used his connections to raise money, rally support and--some allege--buy votes for his son.
The next morning, America woke up to learn that John F Kennedy had beaten Nixon by a narrow margin to become the 35th president of the United States.
Kennedy’s speech marked the beginning of a presidential age that sparkled with potential.
President Kennedy surrounded himself with brilliant thinkers. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 4 His closest advisors became known as “the best and the brightest”—including Robert McNamara as Secretary of Defense, Dean Rusk as Secretary of State and the president’s closest confidant his younger brother Robert, or Bobby, who served as Attorney General.
Where Jack was diplomatic and thoughtful, Bobby was brash and impulsive--he became the fall guy— willing to take the heat for the president on issues such as Civil Rights and fighting organized crime.
Kennedy encouraged citizens to work together as Americans faced this new frontier.
Most of Kennedy’s idealistic domestic policies would not find support in congress, still he pushed ahead with characteristic determination.
He aggressively took on the country’s recession, urging tax cuts, and boosting federal spending to spur the economy and promote job growth.
It rested on his belief in America’s youth to deliver aid and promote international friendship.
Many idealistic college graduates volunteered for two years to be teachers, health aides, engineers, or agricultural advisers in developing nations.
Another international priority was maintaining stability in Latin America.
The common cause was improving the standard of living in South America and using economic development to prevent communism from taking root.
Sputnik was an awesome achievement that underscored the Soviets’ leadership in space technology.
Kennedy unveiled the goal for landing a man on the Moon while speaking to a Joint Session of Congress.
Congress approved $20 billion dollars for the space program. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 6 One year later, John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth.
The success propelled the space program forward, and on July 20, 1969, John F Kennedy’s dream came true.
Millions of Americans watched as astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the moon.
Just weeks after entering the Oval Office, Kennedy gave the go-ahead to a CIA plan to invade the island of Cuba and overthrow the Communist government of Fidel Castro.
The mission--which came to be known as the Bay of Pigs--was a disaster…and tarnished the new administration.
Some advisors called for a pre-emptive air strike or invasion of the island.
He said that ships bound for Cuba with military equipment would be quarantined.
In this charged atmosphere the smallest mistake at any level could lead to an all-out nuclear war.
For eleven days Americans worried, waited and wondered if they would see tomorrow.
Finally on October 28th, after much diplomacy and back-channel negotiations, the situation was diffused.
In return, President Kennedy publicly agreed that he would not invade the island.
Privately, he also conceded to the removal of US, medium range missiles from Turkey.
Khrushchev said the Soviets would cut-off access between the communist East and the democratic West.
East Berlin was losing as many as 1,500 people per day -many of whom were well educated and skilled workers.
If the United States intervened, he threatened nuclear war. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 8 The Soviets built the Berlin Wall —96 miles of concrete isolating East from West.
Since the Soviets took no military action against West Berlin, the president could only protest.
In the newly divided city, the president denounced communist oppression.
In Laos, President Kennedy reluctantly accepted a coaltion government that includeded Communists.
In neighboring Vietnam, however, Kennedy and his advisors set the country on a course that would consume twenty-years, more than 50,000 American lives and ultimately force many to question the trust they placed in their political leaders.
Signed in Moscow by the United States, the Soviet Union and Great Britain, the treaty prohibited atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons.
It was a small step but started a collaborative process that would be used throughout the cold war.
He would soon be forced to take a stand. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 9 In the early ‘60s, social unrest grew.
As student volunteers, or “Freedom Riders,” took bus trips throughout the South, testing segregation laws for interstate travel facilities and drawing a sometimes violent response from the Ku Klux Klan.
Federal marshals were sent to protect Meredith from threats of lynching… Then Kennedy sent federal troops to Mississippi after riots broke out, leaving two dead and hundreds injured. 1963 marked a pivotal year for civil rights… In April, Martin Luther King, Jr. began a series of peaceful demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama… where the police met peaceful marchers with fire hoses and dogs.
But at brother Bobby’s urging, Kennedy committed himself to racial equality.
As clashes grew more violent, civil rights leaders pressed Kennedy for legislation.
I have a dream today.” copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 10 Still, Congress dragged its feet… and no action was taken.
With a 60% approval rating, the president looked ahead to a second term in which he would renew his commitment to end racial injustice and fight poverty.
He would also re-consider the future course of America’s involvement in Vietnam.
Two years later, an official government investigation concluded that Oswald acted alone.
The nation mourned their youthful leader…his optimism and seeming invincibility.
An estimated 1 million people lined the streets from the Capitol to Arlington Cemetery…Adding to Kennedy’s legacy....as a martyred president.
Much of the fallen president’s vision for America was shared by the new man in the White House, Lyndon Baines Johnson.
Johnson would enjoy success building on Kennedy’s domestic accomplishments, but he would fail to escape the destructive power of Vietnam.
Chapter 2 Johnson 2. THE ROAD TO THE WHITE HOUSE Lyndon Baines Johnson came to Washington as a congressional aide and a fervent supporter of Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal.
The experience fueled the ambitions of the Texas democrat and by 1955, he was one of the most powerful congressmen on Capital Hill. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 11 Johnson’s personality served him well in politics -Complex and contradictory, he swung from the heights of idealism and generosity to unsavory depths of duplicity and petty cruelty.
His homespun, profanity laced remarks often cloaked his sharp intelligence.
But it was all a part of the colorful Texan’s roughhewn charm— In 1960, Johnson joined the Democratic ticket as John F Kennedy’s vice-presidential running mate.
But the legislative giant grew dispirited living in the the president’s shadow.
He resented the administration’s East Coast intellectuals and tangled constantly with the President’s brother and Attorney General, Bobby Kennedy.
President Kennedy was cut down by an assassins bullet and President Kennedy’s assassination gave Johnson inherited the office he desperately wanted to win.
He was confident that, as president, he could deliver what Kennedy had only promised.
His sweeping vision for America was influenced by the experiences of his childhood.
Growing-up poor in rural Texas, the President identified with those in need.
African Americans were demanding equality and the movement could no longer be contained.
He thoroughly enjoyed the game of politics and was a tough competitor -using whatever it took to win.
He encouraged Congressmen, cajoled the press and pushed his former colleagues to get behind the bill.
Within a year, Johnson achieved his goal…the most sweeping civil rights legislation since reconstruction.
Yet millions are being deprived of those blessings--not because of their own failures, but because of the color of their skin.
The law outlawed barred discrimination on the basis of race, religion, national origin, or gender -and banned the practice of segregation in schools, public places and employment.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was created to oversee the fairness in employment.
In many areas, literacy tests and other forms of discrimination still prevented African Americans from voting.
Johnson further championed civil rights in 1967, with the appointment Thurgood Marshall, the first African American Supreme Court justice.
And the selection of Robert Weaver, as the first African-American to hold a presidential cabinet position. copyright Media Rich Communications LLC all rights reserved www.mediarichlearning.com page 13 2. THE WAR ON POVERTY In 1964, Johnson made poverty a national issue.
With one in five American’s living below the poverty line, Johnson was determined to bring about real change.
And this Administration today, here and now, declares unconditional war on poverty in America.
Head Start…. helping preschool children learn skills necessary to be successful in school Job Corps….training unemployed young people from poor backgrounds for new jobs And VISTA, short for Volunteers in Service to America, providing a “domestic peace corps” to help disadvantaged areas.
His social programs were working and Americans faced the future with optimism.
The campaign was a chance to silence those who saw him merely as an “accidental” president.
The campaign spot “Peace Little Girl” insinuated that Johnson’s opponent, Republican Senator Barry Goldwater would start a nuclear war in Vietnam or other cold war conflicts.
The controversial ad was severely criticized and pulled after one airing.
The president and his running mate Hubert Humphrey gained 61 percent of the popular vote … the widest margin in American history.
Congressional Democrats rode Johnson’s coattails and increased their majority in Congress.
Within months of his inauguration, the president and the democratic congress pushed forward a flurry of reform bills.
Medicare—helping to provide medical care for those 65 and older… And Medicaid—offering health care for the poor and disabled.
He set standards for the labeling of consumer goods...and automobile and highway safety...along with creating the Department of Transportation.
Not since the New Deal had so much important domestic legislation been passed so quickly.
When it came to the war in Vietnam, Johnson anguished over the stark choices.
At first, the President was able to balance military and domestic spending.
But as the cost of both ""guns and butter"" escalated, it was not sustainable.
The American military machine had pounded away at the enemy for more than three years. and there was still no end in sight.
But in the early morning hours of January 30, 1968, the enemy launched a massive attack that proved they were stronger than ever.
Tet Offensive, as it came to be known, was not a victory for the enemy in military terms, but the battle turned the tide of public opinion in the United States and called into question much of what Americans had been told about the war, After Tet, it was clear that there would be no victory for the United States in Vietnam.
Even some of Johnson's closest advisors began to lobby for a withdrawal.
In April 1968, the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in Memphis, sparking riots in major US cities.
The President hoped to unite the country with social progress but his administration left the country more divided than at any time since the Civil War.
Despite all that he had accomplished divisiveness and war became his Presidential legacy.
As for the man, Lyndon Johnson, Hubert Humphrey described him best… “He was an all-American President.
He was really the history of this country, with all of the turmoil, the bombast, the sentiments, the passions.
In the decades following Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, the trend in the White House turned conservative.
In the course of 40 years, only 12 of them have been governed by democratic presidents.
