The threat of a third World War allowed United States government officials to deceive the press under the guise of protecting national security.
This paper will explore the relationship that President Kennedy cultivated with the press to promote his political agenda and the impact that this relationship had on the reporting of future foreign policy crises.
The lesson that appeared to be learned from Kennedy’s “staring contest” with Khrushchev was that the key to resolving foreign policy crises is to take a tough stance and refuse to compromise under all circumstances.
Immediately after the discovery of missiles in Cuba, inquisitive investigators were ready to share the story with the American people, but Kennedy stopped them.
Kennedy hinted to Philip Graham, publisher of the Washington Post, that he would be embarrassed if the “real” activity was in Berlin instead of Cuba.
On Sunday, October 28, 1962, Khrushchev backed down, and the press hailed Kennedy as a national hero.
The public believed that Kennedy had scared Khrushchev into submission.
Kennedy orchestrated a secret deal with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, to make a missile trade.
RFK “made clear that if the Soviets withdrew their nuclear missiles from Cuba,” the United States would respond by withdrawing their Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Administration officials kept their promise to Kennedy, and they never explicitly revealed their participation in the Turkey deal.
The press also perceived no connection between the Turkish bases and the resolution of the crisis.
When the United States withdrew its Turkish missiles six months after the close of the crisis, the press failed to detect the significance of the event.
Kennedy was the only person to emerge from the crisis unscathed; in fact, the crisis strengthened his international reputation of toughness.
Secrecy was also integral at the end of the crisis because it allowed Kennedy to orchestrate the missile swap without jeopardizing U.S relationships with foreign allies.
Both during the Bay of Pigs and the Vienna summit, Khrushchev had emerged the victor.
Republicans were vying for Kennedy to take an immediate and forceful response to the threat of Soviet missiles on the American border, and Kennedy had the sense that he would have been impeached if he had not immediately removed the Soviet missiles from the Western Hemisphere.
Thus, although initially the Kennedy administration had used secrecy to protect the American people, they also used their insulation to regain American mastery over history.
Early accounts produced by top officials in the administration lionized President Kennedy for standing up to Khrushchev.
Beginning in the 1980s, Soviet and American administration officials conducted a series of meetings to revisit the details of the crisis.
Revisionists describe the president’s fallibilities, and his desperate attempts to bring the crisis to a peaceful resolution.
Bernstein argued that Kennedy invaded Cuba for purely political reasons, and when the Bay of Pigs turned into a foreign policy disaster, Kennedy authorized covert activities to overthrow the Cuban government, which led Khrushchev to construct a defensive nuclear base on the island.
Kennedy and Khrushchev 1960-1963, Michael Beschloss suggested that Kennedy lacked subtlety in solving foreign policy crises.
Kennedy’s anti-Soviet rhetoric and crusade against the Cubans tied Khrushchev’s hands to retaliate against the Americans with equally incendiary force.
Both scholars have neglected to take into account the press’s participation in promulgating the Kennedy legacy.
In the late 1990s, working with material from Soviet and American archives, scholars compiled more balanced and authoritative accounts of the crisis.
This book challenged previous conceptions of the administrative deliberations during the crisis.
In all public accounts, administrative officials and the press emphasized JFK’s 14 McCarthy, “Rallying Around the Flag,” 42.
Kennedy was tough, but he was also much more flexible than the public record indicated.
Instead of designating heroes and villains to the Cuban Missile drama as other historians had done, Fursenko and Naftali assigned equal culpability to all the actors involved.
Finally, in 1999, Laurence Chang and Peter Kornblush compiled documents from the National Security Archives into a documents reader.
Like other works of this decade, their research challenged the official account of crisis management.
My goal is to fill in the gap of how administrative officials were able to peddle their version of the crisis to the press for so many years.
Alice L George has focused on how Americans reacted during the thirteen days of the crisis.
During the thirteen days of terror, Americans feared they would wake up to nothing left on earth.
The first chapter of this thesis examines Kennedy’s relationship with the press.
It argues that Kennedy developed a network of relationships with journalists to frame the publicized version of the crisis.
Having established Kennedy’s relationship with the press, the second chapter examines how Kennedy used his friendship with journalists to persuade publishers to withhold information about the developing crisis.
Finally, the third chapter explores how Kennedy administration insiders were able to hide a secret deal with the Soviets from the press and the American people.
This thesis concludes by arguing that press coverage of foreign policy crises has not changed dramatically since the early 1960s.
Examples from recent foreign policy crises show that in times of war or national emergency, the press supports the policy of the current administration.
A counter-example is that after the Tet Offensive, journalists became more critical of Johnson’s Vietnam policies.
Kennedy feared overexposure, so he looked to the printed press to shape the news.
These publications demonstrate the extent of public knowledge throughout the crisis.
A major limitation to these papers is that they have been heavily edited to align with government policy.
Since Kennedy monitored the news during the crisis, information or opinions that deviated from the New Frontier agenda are sparse.
Memoirs from syndicated journalists, reporting at the height of the crisis, supplement the information contained in these periodicals.
Finally, biographies and accounts from Kennedy administrative officials provide a glimpse inside the White House during the most contentious moment of the Kennedy presidency.
These accounts must be read with extreme caution because many were published for the purpose of preserving the Kennedy legacy.
Since the close of the crisis, administrative officials have admitted to fabricating details and facts contained in their books.
To give one example, Ted Sorensen, Kennedy’s speechwriter, confessed at a 1989 meeting in Moscow between Soviet and American officials that he had edited the secret missile swap out of Robert Kennedy’s posthumous memoir, Thirteen Days.
Blight, and David A Welch . 9 printed word, “so he controlled the flow of information during the crisis not only to prevent 31 nuclear war, but also to create a lasting legacy.
The President and the Press The press coverage of presidents can make or break a presidency.
News media possess tremendous power to influence the public attitudes about a particular president.
President Johnson and President Nixon cite the press as a primary reason for their unpopularity.
Secretary of State George Shultz complained about the biased media coverage of the U.S. invasion of Grenada in 1983.
The adversarial relationship between president and press stems from the president’s desire to release favorable information and withhold unfavorable information.
All presidents have managed the news in some form, but Arthur Krock coined the term “news management” during the Kennedy presidency because of JFK’s skill at manipulating the press to effectively censor public information during most of his presidency.
The positive reports printed about Kennedy during and after the crisis raises the question of how Kennedy was able to manipulate the news.
The simple answer is that Kennedy cultivated friendships with journalists, editors, and publishers before he became president, so that once in office, he could appeal to his friends’ patriotic sensibilities.
He blamed reporters for notifying Khrushchev and the Cubans about his operational plans.
First, this chapter begins by examining John F Kennedy’s symbiotic relationship with the press.
There were a few terse moments when journalists became annoyed with Kennedy’s media management, but, on the whole, the relationship between the president and the press was generally cooperative.
The chapter argues that the press trusted the president’s judgement during the pre-Vietnam era.
Next, the chapter examines how the Bay of Pigs contributed to Kennedy’s political agenda.
Finally, the chapter closes by examining how the press changed their media strategy in response to the heightening of a potential showdown with the Soviets.
Before becoming president, Kennedy had ardently read Richard Neustadt’s Presidential Power to develop a media relations strategy.
Most Americans read about the news in daily papers, so Kennedy influenced public perception by framing his agenda in the papers.
Before becoming president, Kennedy worked as a special correspondent for the Hearst newspaper; from his experience covering the Potsdam Conference, Kennedy learned how journalists collected information to write a story.
Upon entering the White House, Kennedy cultivated a network of journalists, editors, and publishers, whom he fed select information to shape his presidential legacy.
Kennedy ran the White House like a newspaper and every journalist wanted a favorable relationship with the president to gain access to insider information.
Historians have described Kennedy’s press management strategy as the carrot and stick approach.
Kennedy would dangle the possibility of exclusive inside stories to reporters whom he deemed his “friends,” while journalists who published stories that cast the Kennedy administration in an unfavorable light would struggle to get even a crumb of information.
Kennedy mastered the art of media relations during his presidency; by influencing members of the press, Kennedy used the media to highlight his strengths and gloss over his weaknesses.
When rumors began circulating that the White House had not been forthcoming during the missile crisis, Arthur Sylvester defended the government’s “inherent right to lie” when faced with the possibility of nuclear war.
If President Kennedy had been entirely forthcoming with journalists, he may have precipitated a nuclear conflict.
By framing the crisis in the press, he was able to secure the endorsement of Allies and to protect the American people.
The press agreed that the White House had the right to withhold “sensitive” information during a “sensitive” situation, but that right expires as soon as the situation has been resolved.
In fact, Cuba was a major point of contention leading up to the 1960 election.
Kennedy inherited the Cuban problem from his predecessor, Dwight D Eisenhower, and once comfortably seated in the presidential seat of power he was forced to confront the Cuban problem straight-away.
In early 1960, Eisenhower had authorized a CIA-Cuban exile project to overthrow the Castro regime, and less than a few weeks into his presidency, Kennedy endorsed the plan.
He did not want the world to interpret the paramilitary operation as a direct United States attack on Cuba, so he revised the plan to make the American hand more invisible.
This plan entailed new risks because if the counterrevolutionaries did not secure the beachhead before the Cuban forces arrived, then the guerilla fighters would be left defenseless.
In addition, the “unspectacular landing at night” might not stir up the mass uprising necessary to make the 48 Thompson, ed., Ten Presidents and the Press, 75.
The “Ultrasensitive” Report and Testimony of the Board of Inquiry on the Bay of Pigs , 67. 15 operation successful.
If Kennedy did not take any action toward Cuba, then Kennedy would demonstrate to the world that he tolerated Castro’s communist regime.
He called and consulted with bureau chiefs and pleaded with them to change their story.
Nobody wanted to be blamed for alerting Castro’s forces of the invasion, so publishers edited out obvious references to the CIA or buried the story in the back of the paper.
The Cuban defense forces were taken by surprise, yet Kennedy still found cause to blame the media for his defeat.
Kennedy had doomed the operation when he made multiple changes to the CIA’s original plan.
Kennedy had faced a major embarrassment when Adlai Stevenson, United States ambassador to the UN, lied about United States involvement in a recent air attack.
Kennedy did not want to suffer more negative publicity, so he canceled a second airstrike on Castro’s air forces.
This decision left a large portion of Castro’s air force still intact, which enabled Castro to have the upper hand in the invasion.
Kennedy’s decisions left the Cuban émigré air force and the United States backed armada open to attack.
Hesitant to risk direct U.S. involvement, Kennedy finally authorized six “unmarked” jets to defend the remaining Cuban exiles from air attack.
Ultimately, only 14 of the 1,400 exiles were rescued, and the Bay of Pigs became a sore spot in Kennedy’s political career.
Defeat is an Orphan Publicly, Kennedy accepted responsibility for the Bay of Pigs fiasco, but privately he blamed just about everybody else.
In a meeting before newspaper publishers, Kennedy chastised them for publishing uncensored stories.
Despite his attempts to play damage control, Kennedy could not prevent the press from publishing negative comments about his presidency.
In Time’s September 1961 issue of Fortune, Charles V Murphy blamed the president for the Bay of Pigs failure.
Kennedy covertly dispatched General Maxwell Taylor to meet with Henry Luce, the publisher.
Luce was not happy to be scolded for his publication, but he agreed that unity was paramount to deter Khrushchev and the communists.
Castro publicly declared himself a communist and Kennedy lost the faith of the American people.
Before a room full of reporters, Kennedy accepted personal responsibility for the Bay of Pigs disaster.
The Bay of Pigs was a foreign policy nightmare, but Kennedy had learned from his defeat how to proceed with his Cuba policy.
Instead of advertising his foreign policy plans and accomplishments in the press, Kennedy decided to conceal details about an upcoming Cuban invasion.
He devised a secret American program, codenamed Operation Mongoose, to topple the Castro regime, while publicly announcing an embargo on Cuba.
The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro,” in Kennedy’s Quest for Victory , 18 Kennedy would proceed with caution, and he would wait until the time was right to disclose information about the operation.
This time Kennedy would control the narrative, so that the next time the press published a story about Kennedy’s Cuba policy, he would be the American hero.
The Cuban Question Over the summer, Cuba had transformed into the top issue of the 1962 election.
Republicans were clamoring that offensive Soviet missiles were already in Cuba, but the president was too “soft-on-communism” to do anything about it.
As Republican calls for military intervention grew louder, President Kennedy promised to take action if Cuba became an offensive military base.
Despite this promise, White House spokesmen were careful to keep Operation Mongoose out of the press.
This section argues that Cuba was an important issue of the 1962 election, and Americans were divided over how the president should proceed.
He cultivated an inner circle of journalists, editors, and publishers to preserve his legacy in the written record.
Despite his attempts to control the story, he could not prevent right-wing conservatives from lashing out at him after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
Kennedy attempted to restore his reputation by publicly taking responsibility for the operation, but privately planning how to defeat Castro and win back America’s trust.
Popular opinion of Kennedy dropped to an all-time low in August 1962, and Sept., 1962.
Historians have focused on the military and diplomatic significance of Kennedy’s presidency, but even more important than the Bay of Pigs and Kennedy’s Cuba policies, is what the pre-crisis rhetoric illustrates about American sentiment in the early 1960s.
Historical studies emphasized the diplomatic consequences of the Bay of Pigs instead of the political consequences on Kennedy’s presidency.
After the Bay of Pigs, Cuba was no longer a military problem, but a domestic political problem.
Newspaper coverage in the buildup to the crisis offer a rare opportunity to peer into the American psyche.
Because the White House had not yet confirmed the existence of offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, the president had no reason to censor or suppress the press.
Thus, the pre-crisis period provides insight into the true American sentiment before Kennedy began to “manage” the news.
The following chapters will examine how Kennedy’s media strategy changed upon the discovery of missiles in Cuba.
The press has a duty to report the news, but they are willing to hold back tidbits of information when the threat of nuclear annihilation is at stake.
Secret Missiles The discovery of offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba confirmed Republican suspicions that the Soviets were indeed building a nuclear base only ninety miles away from the coast of Florida.
Kennedy commissioned ExComm to determine how to respond to the Soviet threat.
The committee was limited to only twelve government officials to prevent U-2 photographic evidence from leaking to the press.
Nevertheless, journalists also uncovered evidence of Cuban missile sites before President Kennedy disclosed this information to the public.
In the interim period between the discovery of the missile sites and Kennedy’s address to the nation confirming the existence of Soviet missile sites, the president and the press worked together to suppress the flow of information.
While most reporters respected this arrangement given the magnitude of the situation, some columnists felt that the president was stripping journalists of their right to report the news.
Despite minor grievances, the press complied with the president’s demands, and the nation was shocked when Kennedy confirmed that the Soviets were in the process of building offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
Government secrecy in the early days of the crisis was justified because it allowed ExComm the privacy to devise a plan.
If journalists reported the news before President Kennedy devised a course of action, then the press could have endangered the lives of American citizens.
Fear was not lost on the politicians and journalists, who Alice L George claims “rallied around 76 Schwarz, Democracy in the Dark, 49.
The president personally monitored publications, and by personally calling reporters, Kennedy stopped the publishing of information that might threaten national security.
The White House’s control of the timing and flow of information allowed ExComm a sufficient amount of time to weigh United States options and reach a peaceful resolution.
It was not until historians began examining the Soviet perspective that they realized there were many inconsistencies in Kennedy’s account.
In light of new information, historians have begun to rethink the news coverage of the crisis and President Kennedy’s motives for managing the news.
Most scholars agree that the president’s tight reins on the press allowed ExComm to deliberate without domestic or foreign interference.
Some scholars argue that Kennedy’s executive oversight of the press protected American freedom by giving the ExComm the privacy to deliberate.
Others, like James Graham and Robert Smith Thompson argue that Kennedy manipulated the press for personal political advancement.
This chapter examines President Kennedy’s motives for managing the news at the onset of the crisis.
Legitimate foreign policy concerns prohibited the press from printing until the president could deliver a streamlined message to America’s foes and allies.
These concerns were legitimate because premature leakage of inaccurate information could have prompted a nuclear war.
However, once President Kennedy’s speech was delivered, the press continued to promulgate the president’s message.
Kennedy had relationships with publishers of the major newspapers, and McGeorge Bundy argues that the press trusted the president during the crisis because Kennedy dealt with it “directly and honorably;” Kennedy personally called publishers and reporters to appraise them of the situation, and because Kennedy took the time to inform journalists of the situation, the press trusted the president’s judgement to report what they had been told.
First, this chapter will examine journalists’ discovery of missiles in Cuba, and President Kennedy’s strategies for convincing them to withhold the news.
Next, the chapter will explore how Kennedy framed his political agenda in the papers, specifically with regard to Soviet intentions and American actions.
In early October 1962, journalists observed a frenzy of activity at the State Department’s Latin American Bureau, and they suspected that a crisis was developing in Cuba.
Assistant Secretary of State Harlan Cleveland accidentally confirmed journalists’ suspicions when asked by Murrey Marder, a reporter at The Washington Post, how bad the Cuban situation looked.
On Sunday, October 21, 1962, reporters at The Washington Post published a story, which described the sudden amassing of American forces in the Southeast and prescribed Cuba as the likely destination for a Caribbean confrontation.
If Kennedy canceled these public meetings, he would set off alarm bells of danger to the Soviets that the United States knew about the secret missiles.
Kennedy’s control of the flow of information in the first few days of the United States’ discovery of missiles in Cuba, allowed ExComm the insulation from outside pressure to reach a well-informed consensus.
Philip Graham was one of Kennedy’s friends; in fact, they had just recently eaten dinner together.
Kennedy persuaded Graham to withhold publishing about the Cuban missiles by appealing to the journalist’s patriotic duty to protect the American people and by promising an exclusive once Kennedy informed the world of the situation.
Philip Graham weighed his constitutional right to report the news against his right as a citizen to protect innocent American lives.
Ultimately, Graham decided that suppression of the news would save more American lives.
Especially during foreign policy crises, presidents may control the flow of information to the press to protect national security concerns.
For instance, President Eisenhower denied that the United States was flying spy planes over Soviet territory, but when the Soviets shot down an American U-2 plane piloted by Gary Powers, Eisenhower admitted the truth.
By the time Kennedy came to office, tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union had augmented to such an extent that the appearance of strength was more important than actual strength.
For this reason, Kennedy’s job as president was not only to protect Americans from an impending nuclear conflict, but also to reassure Americans of the strength of American democracy.
After reading the Washington Post’s Sunday paper, Kennedy knew that journalists had learned about the developing situation in crisis.
Not wanting the public to learn about the crisis prematurely, Kennedy instructed James Reston, The Times bureau chief in Washington, to notify the White House Press Secretary before The Times released a story.
I’m going to order a blockadea blockade of all Soviet shipping to Cuba.
Journalists were Americans first, and in the early 1960s, they were committed to helping the president preserve democracy from the clutches of communism.
Many journalists, including Max Frankel, realized the mistakes they had made in the preamble to the Bay of Pigs invasion which may have alerted the Soviets to an American attack.
Both Kennedy and members of the American Press Corps learned after the 95 Reston called the National Security Adviser instead of the White House Press Secretary because Reston had no memory of the agreement between him and the president to notify Pierre Salinger before publishing a story.
Kennedy’s friendship with influential publishers, and journalists’ desire to prevent a nuclear war allowed the president to contain information about the Cuban crisis until EXCOMM determined an appropriate course of action.
Premier Khrushchev had declared war with the United States when he placed a series of ‘offensive’ missiles aimed at America’s heart.
The morning after Kennedy’s speech, the American press corps published various statements of support for the president’s highly questionable propositions.
The press did not challenge any of Kennedy’s bold assumptions, nor did they consider alternative viewpoints of the situation; instead, members of the press offered unqualified praise for the president and his policies.
Kennedy Library. 29 missiles in Cuba because the president’s speech “confirmed” Soviet intentions.
Other journalists ridiculed the possibility that the missiles could be defensive despite Khrushchev’s insistence that the missiles were intended to deter an American attack.
Administration officials codenamed the top-secret program Operation Mongoose, and the objective of the program was the complete capitulation of the Castro regime.
The mediator had asked Mikoyan why Khrushchev installed the missiles in Cuba.
Tensions were high, and the threat of a nuclear war was a novel situation; the public was looking for a strong leader to protect the tenets of American democracy.8 Consequently, I believe that even if the press addressed the Soviet perspective in their articles and editorials, the public would have accused the press of being anti-American.
James McCartney argues that this is another instance where the press failed to exercise independent judgement from the Kennedy administration, but I do not think that the press can entirely be blamed for not asking this question.
In addition, McCartney is assuming that journalists have access to classified government documents to check the veracity of the president’s statements.
Journalists were working in a period before the Vietnam-Watergate era shook the public’s confidence in American democracy.
The Hidden History of Negotiations between Washington and Havana, 2014.
Nevertheless, ExComm advisers prepared a statement of defense in case the public ever questioned why Soviet bases in Cuba were automatically offensive and American bases in Turkey were automatically defensive, but neither the press nor the public ever questioned the administration’s assumption.
Besides not questioning the administrative position, journalists went further to defend the administrative position against possible objections.
Instead the press exaggerated the danger, so that Kennedy would have no choice, but to respond to the placement of missiles in Cuba.
Even the president conceded that Khrushchev’s strategy was more of a political play than a military challenge.
Nevertheless, some members of the press presented the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a challenge to American nuclear superiority.
Therefore, Kennedy believed a show of strength was necessary to reaffirm American superiority.1 From the first moment that Americans learned of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the press was on the administration’s side.
Instead of challenging the highly questionable propositions of the Kennedy administration, the press defended these propositions without a reasonable justification.
Members of the press did not examine alternative viewpoints of the crisis, nor did they check the veracity of the president’s statements; they simply reiterated word by word, lie by lie, all the ‘facts’ that the administration took to be true.
Without questions or challenges from the media, Kennedy sold his version of the crisis to the public, and he was able to win back the hearts and minds of the American people while also reestablishing his international image of American toughness.
American Action Kennedy’s speech on October 28, 1962, was explicitly shroud in incendiary language for the purpose of appeasing his political opponents and regaining international favor.
Kennedy had campaigned on the promise to be tougher on Cuba than the Republicans and to eradicate communism from the Western Hemisphere.
Americans, especially Republicans, were disappointed that the president had failed to live up to his 1960 promise.
Although still quite high, a 1961 Gallup poll showed Kennedy’s popularity dipping below the 70 percent mark after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
When U-2 surveillance photos showed missiles in Cuba, Kennedy had one more chance to stand up to Castro and Khrushchev, and he had one more opportunity to imprint his lasting legacy in history.
Consequently, when ExComm members were discussing possible responses to the Cuban crisis, diplomacy simply wasn’t an option for domestic political reasons.
Kennedy leaned more towards moderate action, but for the sake of America’s international credibility, it was paramount that the administration make a show of strength.3 After the blockade went into effect, Kennedy scrambled to control the Cuban missile narrative.
Kennedy exercised tight management over the press and the stories they were reporting.
Kennedy’s oversight bordered close on censorship, but the press tolerated the president’s executive management of the papers because they believed that they were helping the White House win the war on communism.
Publishers and journalists, who Kennedy knew personally, such as Stewart Alsop, James Reston, Walter Lippmann, and Philip Graham, were given private interviews by EXCOMM members.
Finally, journalists that Kennedy considered close friends, such as Charles Bartlett, had the privilege of receiving exclusive information about the crisis from the commander-in-chief.
Krock argued that the Kennedy administration had known about the missile sites weeks in advance of the public.
The announcement of Soviet missiles in Cuba was conveniently timed to influence the election.
By the middle of October 1962, Kennedy learned that the Soviets had deployed missiles into Cuba.
The rhetoric of the Cold War required that Kennedy put on a show of strength.
Therefore, publicly, Kennedy used the press to present the strength of “American will and resolve,” while privately he used private channels to secure a diplomatic solution with Khrushchev.
This strategy allowed the president to insulate foreign policy from domestic politics while he secured support from America’s allies.
In times of a national crisis, information control is necessary, if not required, to safeguard the lives of the American people.
Secret Deal As the crisis continued and a peaceful outcome seemed uncertain, the public trembled on the brink of nuclear war.
However, only a few members of the Kennedy administration were aware of all the precautions the president had taken to prevent nuclear war.
While the press presented a tough image of Kennedy to reassure the American public and NATO, privately Kennedy worked through back channels to strike a deal with Khrushchev.
The missile crisis reached its climax during the weekend when Khrushchev sent two private letters to the president.
Departing from diplomatic tradition, Kennedy publicly responded to the letter with more favorable terms.
This left Khrushchev in the uncomfortable position of accepting the president’s offer or preparing for military confrontation.
On Sunday, October 28, 1962, Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s offer, and the public celebrated on what appeared to be an American victory.
Statesmen and journalists celebrated the United States reaffirming mastery on the global stage.
In a Life editorial, Henry Luce rearticulated the responsibility of America as the dominant global power “to exert upon the world the full impact of our influence” to bring about a more peaceful world order.
Kennedy continued to preserve his legacy as a Cold War warrior by restricting information access after the crisis was over.
The president granted an exclusive interview to Charles Bartlett and Stewart Alsop; their “Profile in Courage” became the official account of the crisis, and Kennedy had the benefit of editing their story before it was published.
Thus, the missile crisis became a tale of heroic military leadership, and the lessons that appeared to be learned from the confrontation was that crises could be mastered.
Some foreign policy analysts argue that this pervasive belief continues to harm United States foreign relations today.
This chapter first examines how journalists worked with the president to help him attain a diplomatic solution.
Kennedy nurtured close friendships with many reporters to help him defeat communism.
Then, it examines the secret missile deal that Robert F Kennedy made with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin.
Back-Channel Diplomacy In the heat of the crisis, back-channel diplomacy was an effective way for Kennedy to convey to Khrushchev that he was willing to trade missile bases in Turkey for missile bases in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy later observed that “the luckiest thing in the world” had been the president’s control of the timing and flow of information in the press.3 Kennedy’s ability to keep up a tough public image while privately negotiating a diplomatic solution allowed the United States to secure the endorsement of allies and to strengthen the United States position with the Soviets.
Although Kennedy believed his efforts at back-channel diplomacy to be successful, recent evidence suggests that KGB agents did not consider journalists as a reliable conduit to the president, so they did not report information from their meetings with American journalists to the Kremlin.
Nevertheless, the Kennedy brothers thought that back-channel meetings between American journalists and KGB agents would successfully resolve the crisis because these meetings allowed Kennedy to convey his flexibility to Khrushchev without appearing weak to the public.
On October 23, 1962, both Charles Bartlett and Frank Holeman met with Georgi Bolshakov of the KGB to inform him that the president wanted to trade missiles in Cuba for missiles in Turkey.
On October 24, 1962, after the blockade went into effect, Robert Kennedy dispatched Bartlett once again to meet with Bolshakov.
Historians continue to debate the role that journalists played in resolving the crisis.
Specifically, historians have questioned whether John Scali of ABC news helped resolve the crisis.
Initially, historians thought that Scali brought information about a missile swap to the Kremlin’s attention.
Soviet documents reveal that Scali contacted Fomin, and Khrushchev did not view Scali or other journalists as a channel to Kennedy.
In addition, the pledges made by Scali and Fomin appear redundant because by the time Fomin’s cable reached the Kremlin, Khrushchev and Kennedy already agreed to trade missiles in Cuba for missiles in Turkey.
The Scali-Feklisov 40 have been the primary factor to resolve the crisis, these meetings may have prepared the Kremlin to accept a diplomatic solution.
Lippman had learned in a private briefing with the president that Kennedy was contemplating a missile swap to trade the aging Jupiter missiles for the newly constructed Soviet missiles.
James Graham argues that this article was significant because although it deviated from Kennedy’s public image as tough and uncompromising, Kennedy did not demand Lippman to retract his story.
Furthermore, historians believe that Khrushchev learned of Kennedy’s willingness to trade missiles through Lippman’s column.
Khrushchev was aware of Kennedy’s friendship with journalists, so the fact that Kennedy did not refute Lippman’s article may have indicated to Khrushchev that Kennedy was willing to consider a diplomatic solution.
Journalists helped resolve the missile crisis, but not in the way that historians originally believed; publications, not meetings, brought the possibility of a missile swap to the attention of the Kremlin.
Secret Deal Kennedy’s efforts at back-channel diplomacy worked, and on Friday, October 26th, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba if the president promised not to attack Cuba.
The president rejoiced, he had achieved the public outcome he had desired.
For foreign policy reasons, Kennedy could not dismantle the Jupiter missiles because if he did, the United States role of protectorate would be called into question by America’s allies.
On Friday, October 26th, the president received startling news; U-2 photos showed that the Cuban missile sites were operational, and the Soviets would be able to launch an attack against America within a few days.
The “hawks” in Kennedy’s committee pressed for the president to launch an invasion or an air strike, but the president was hesitant to take military action that might endanger the lives of the people.
If the president heeded his advisers advice not only would America receive bad public opinion for “conducting a Pearl Harbor in reverse,” but also dropping a bomb would give Khrushchev reason to escalate.
Kennedy knew that taking such reckless military risks would only hasten a nuclear war, so he tried to convince the members of ExComm that a diplomatic solution was the best strategy.
Adlai Stevenson, the United States Ambassador to the United Nations discussed possible diplomatic solutions with ExComm.
Stevenson advised for the United States to lift its quarantine on Cuba, pledge not to invade Cuba, agree to make the Western Hemisphere a nuclear-free zone, and suggest the possibility of a missile swap.
Many of the “hawks” in the committee adamantly disagreed with Stevenson’s suggestions.
John McCone, director of the CIA, articulated the typical argument of dissenters that it was too dangerous for the United States to remove all of its defensive capabilities when the Soviets were prepared to launch a missile strike against the United States at any minute.
The idea of a missile swap dissipated from everybody’s minds-except for the Kennedy brothers.
Without the public, the press, or ExComm knowing, the Attorney General met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, on Saturday evening, October 27, 1962.
However, the deal was contingent on the Soviets not disclosing that a compromise took place.
Robert Kennedy also warned Dobrynin that if Khrushchev did not accept this deal, the United States would be forced to escalate its response.6 Khrushchev agreed to the terms of the missile swap, but at the time, the public did not have any knowledge of this secret arrangement.
Kennedy responded with a public letter to Khrushchev, in which he pledged not to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviets to remove their missiles from the Western Hemisphere.
Only nine people knew about the missile swap, and they did not disclose this secret until 1982 when the surviving participants to the deal jointly wrote a letter to Time magazine, in which they described their knowledge and participation in the secret missile swap.8Other presidents have kept secrets from the public for national security reasons or to protect a political reputation.
Schwarz argues that there were legitimate foreign policy concerns for keeping the deal secret immediately after the missile crisis, but adherents to the deal harmed the public by keeping the deal a secret for several decades.
Although the Jupiters were “a pile of junk”, removing them too quickly after the missile crisis would weaken NATO and make United States allies doubt US resolve.
Consequently, most historians and foreign policy analysts agree that Kennedy had substantial reasons for initially keeping the missile deal a secret.
However, the prolonged secrecy of the missile swap appears to be largely motivated by political interests.
During the crisis, only a small group in the White House knew about the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba before the president’s official announcement.
Even White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger was unaware of the missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy purposely kept Salinger in the dark, so if pressed by reporters, Salinger would not accidently leak any information to the press.
Most papers published during the crisis helped to restore Kennedy’s reputation as tough on Communism and Khrushchev.
If the public found out that Kennedy had not actually defeated Khrushchev, but compromised with him instead, Kennedy’s political reputation would be ruined.
In the Cold War era, there were no middle-of-the-road diplomatic strategies.
This dichotomy permeated into the negotiating room, where Kennedy was forced to choose between a “hard” military strategy and a “soft” negotiation strategy.
Lippman urged the president to use his platform to educate the average American citizen about the subtleties of foreign policy negotiations.
With the creation of nuclear weapons that have the capability to destroy the world, negotiations became the only viable strategy to resolve foreign policy crises.
An American Hero On Sunday, October 28, 1962, Khrushchev publicly announced that he would withdraw his missiles from Cuba in exchange for a non-invasion pledge by the United States.
In addition, Kennedy was willing to make the missile trade public if Khrushchev did not agree to his initial proposal.
He had secretly contacted U Thant at the United Nations and told him to propose a missile trade if it seemed possible that Khrushchev was unwilling to back down.
Their retelling of the crisis soon became the official narrative of the thirteen days.
Details that did not fit with the narrative of political toughness were edited out of the account, and Kennedy restricted this exclusive only to the few journalists he could trust.
Kennedy planned to use his renewed popularity in the next election cycle, but unfortunately, his political aspirations were cut short by his assassination in 1963.
Kennedy took the secret of the missile swap with him to his grave, and his loyal advisers who had been privy to the secret denied in every forum that such a deal had taken place.
President Kennedy, like most presidents, desired a favorable press, but his media management techniques went beyond merely mediating the truth to outright creating his own version of history.
Kennedy may not have been as “tough” as reporters described him, but his media management techniques of restricting access to favorable reporters and influencing the story that they reported were so successful that Kennedy created his own personal legacy in the press.
Although Kennedy died before the truth could be revealed, Kennedy’s lie had detrimental foreign and domestic policy consequences.
The press’s portrayal of a nuclear standoff as a staring contest with winners and losers, and Schlesinger’s pernicious illusion that a tough resolve and cool control won foreign policy crises gave Americans an inaccurate understanding of the true nature of foreign policy crises.
The press praised President Kennedy for refusing to compromise to Khrushchev, so if President Johnson made any compromises during the Vietnam War, the public would have perceived him as weak.
I think that the strong media image of Kennedy may have been one of the factors that pushed Johnson to appear equally as tough in his foreign policy strategies, but I also think that a myriad of other factors contributed to Johnson’s Vietnam policies.
Schwarz argues that “this was an extraordinary misuse of secrecy” because Johnson was deprived of the knowledge of how foreign policy negotiations were conducted.
If he had been equipped with this knowledge, he may not have escalated the war so quickly.
If Kennedy had lived, the tough reputation he built during his short-term presidency would have certainly been tested.
Technology was improving to such an extent that television news became the dominant communications medium after Kennedy’s assassination.
This new technology offered reporters a way to test the president’s bold statements.
While during the early 1960s, the press generally trusted the president, this sentiment changed during the Vietnam War, and journalists became more cynical of the president’s motives.
Kennedy used the lack of intrusive technology to his advantage; he controlled the flow of information through the American printing press, but, Johnson and Nixon would have to deal with television technology that contradicted their claims.
Kennedy’s media management techniques saved the world from nuclear war, but also the deliberate disinformation put forth by the Kennedy administration planted the myth that international crises could be solved by using the right amount of force.
He planned on taking this public adulation with him to the polls, but his political motivations were stopped because of his death.
Nevertheless, Kennedy’s assassination made him even more of a hero, and journalists continued to write about his victory after his death.
Kennedy’s media management techniques also had the negative consequences of pushing him to policies that he did not want to pursue.
Cuba became the dominant concern of the 1962 election, and Kennedy campaigned on the platform of a tough Cuban policy.
When the public became aware of Soviet missiles in Cuba in October 1962, it was paramount that the Kennedy administration get them out.
While journalists helped to advance the administration’s agenda, they cannot be entirely blamed for filtering information during a national security crisis.
Kennedy was a master manipulator and he perfected the art of media relations.
He cultivated a circle of elite journalists, and he incentivized them with tidbits of information for favorable press coverage.
Kennedy used the papers as a forum for framing his political agenda; he emphasized his successes and omitted his shortcomings from the public record.
Many historians have questioned whether such deception could happen now, and the conclusions they have reached are mixed.
On the one hand, since the late 1960s, journalists and government investigations have decreased the level of secrecy.
Government secrets are intended to protect the American people, but Watergate and the Iran-Contra affair are two striking examples of a president misusing his presidential power.
Presidents have also taken a proactive approach to limiting government secrets through the creation of Jimmy Carter’s Information Security Oversight Office and the establishment of Bill Clinton’s commission on government secrecy.
In addition, the technological revolution of the post-9/11 period has rendered it almost impossible for the government to keep secrets from its people.
Yet, there are still instances of unchecked government secrecy as Edward Snowden’s 2013 allegations against the NSA illustrate.
The American media continued its press strategy of supporting the president during the Vietnam War, and it was not until the Tet Offensive that journalists became more skeptical of the president’s policies.
Notwithstanding, the government continued to monitor press coverage during President Reagan’s Grenada Invasion, President Bush’s invasion, and the coverage of the Persian Gulf War.
As the press continue to be an active participant to the conversations surrounding foreign policy, there continues to be debate about the role that the press should play during foreign policy crises.
Nevertheless, foreign policy crises continue to plague our society, and the solution is not as black and white as disclosing all secrets or creating an insular governing elite.
Rather, the press and the public should have access to classified information once a crisis has passed.
Information Security Oversight Office, Annual Report to the President, Fiscal Year 1979 . — Report of the Commission on Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy.
Newsweek — “How United States Voters Feel About Cuba,” October 13, 1962.
The “Ultrasensitive” Report and Testimony of the Board of Inquiry on the Bay of Pigs.
Rusk, Dean, Robert McNamara, George W Ball, Roswell L Gilpatric, Theodore Sorensen, and McGeorge Bundy.
The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro.” in Kennedy’s Quest for Victory.
