He also said that armies occupying Berlin should withdraw -This would leave West Berlin powerless to avoid takeover by the East Germans -But Eisenhower stood firm and the Russians backed down -When Kennedy became president, the Russians again raised the question of the status of Berlin -But Kennedy made plain that the Americans wanted no change, the Russians did not persue the matter 1 of 23 The Berlin Wall 1961 The Wall -During the 1950s and 1960s the East Germans were very unhappy.
From 1945 to 1961 over 3 million people fled to West Germany; these people included Doctors, Mechanics etc. who were valuable to the economy -The border between East and West Germany was guarded by watchtowers, barbed-wire fences and mine-fields.
But people could still pass freely from East Germany into West Berlin, and from there to West Germany -In 1961, this route for refugees was closed by the building of the Berlin Wall.
The wall became a symbol of the hatred of the two sides in the Cold War and the lack of freedom in Eastern Europe -The Berlin Wall was built through and around West Berlin 2 of 23 Evaluation of the Berlin Wall Crisis -Russians had built wall without notice, creating major crisis -Liklihood of war was high as United States generals wanted to knock down the wall.
United States troops reguarly crossed into East Berlin to find out how the soviets would react.
On 27 October, direct threat of war when Soviets pulled up to checkpoint Charlie and faced the American tanks all day in a tense stand-off -No direct threat of nuclear war, but if either side had fired on 27 October this may have lead to nuclear war, leading to the destruction of humanity -No deaths or destruction as Americans didn't knock wall down.
The West presneted it as a prison wall 3 of 23 The Cuba Crisis 1962 -When Cuba nationalised American-owned industries, Eisenhower responded by refusing to buy Cuban suar and by helping Batista supporters to prepare for an invasion of Cuba -Cuba got around this by drawing closer to Russia, who agreed to buy the sugar -In 1961, Kennedy authorised an invasion of Cuba, which took place in the Bay of Pigs, but was a total disaster that was crushed in 3 days -In August 1962, Russia sent IRBM's to Cuba to help them -Americans discovered the missiles using U2 spy planes.
No more weapons allowed in and Kennedy demanded that the missiles in Cuba be removed 4 of 23 The Cuba Crisis 1962 -Russian ships bringing more missiles were steaming towards Cuba.
If they had tried to break the American blockede, and the Americans had reacted by sinking then, then WW3 might have broken out -Khrushchev justified the missiles on Cuba by saying that America had their missiles in Turkey, which is right next to Russia -Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if America agreed not to invade Cuba, and a sevret understanding that American missiles would be withdrawn from Turkey 5 of 23 Results of the Cuba Crisis -Victory for America and it was clear Russia had backed down.
At the same time Castro remained in control of Cuba and the military leaders of America saw Kennedy as weak, piling on pressure for engagement in Vietnam -Crisis had frightened the world as it had got far closer to nuclear war than wanted.
Treaty limited as only 3 powers signed and could still test their weapons -The defeat of the Cuba Crisis played a part in Khrushchev's loss of power in Russia 6 of 23 Evaluation of the Cuba Crisis -Threat of wider war during the invasion at the Bay of Pigs, if it had succeded -Threat of nuclear war due to Russia stationing IRBMa on Cuba.
When America discovered this they could have fired their own missiles, but this would have lead to a wider nuclear war as the Russians would have retaliated by doing something in Berlin.
So Quarantine set up -Another threat of war as Russian ships were stopped by American blockade -Little deaths of destruction, except for one U2 pilot that was shot down over Cuba -Long-term implications.
When Khrushchev lost power it showed how Russia had changed as he was allowed to live a normal life afterwards, whereas Stalin killed people as he knew that if he had lost his power he would have been executed 7 of 23 Czechoslovakia 1968 -Czech people delighted when Alexander Dubcek, First Secretary of Czech Communist party, introduced a number of changes like free speech on radio and TV; no censorship; religious freedom for Roman Catholics.
Russia could have done it by themselves but wanted to show they had support from other countries -They found no armed opposition but public resented their presence.
There were several ugly incidents -Thousands fled to Austria, radio and TV keeping the outside world informed.
The Russians had now precipitated a worse crisis and they settled it by taking Dubcek to Moscow and there persuading him to abandon his liberal projects -Russians forced new constitution on Czechoslovakia in January 1969.
Because of this, disarmers assembled to protest in the capitals of Western Europ as there was a chance of nuclear war and they were affraid of dying -Superpowers did begin negotiations at Geneva in November 1981, but almost immediately came into conflict over the impostition of Martial Law in Poland 14 of 23 Detente in the 1970s -The process by which there was an attempt to improve superpower relations during the 1970s is known as Detente.
France and West Germany suffered their worst unemployment since 1945, while the eastern bloc countries endured constant shotages of foodstuffs and consumer goods -Between 1979 and 1981, Russia's harvest was dissapointing.
She desperately needed to import grain from Canada, Austalia and the United States and put up taxes in order to pay for this -This would have limited arms control as there would have been a focus on the economy rather than on nuclear weapons.
Control would put pressure on the Middle East the oil lifeline to the USA and western Europe threatened Political scene in Afghanistan was unstable and had got worse since spring 1979 This would counter American and Chinses influence in the area Muslim revolution in Iran might spread to Afghanistan so a Russian takeover would remove this threat.
Aspects of International Relations, 1945-2004 » AQA History Spec B Exam 16th May 2014 » GCSE History AQA » A2 Coursework History,HELP MEH » A2 Edexcel Unit 3 A World Divided: Superpower Relations 1944-90 discussion thread » Similar History resources: GCSE History: Superpower Relations and the Cold WarKey Topic 3 0.
International Relations 1943-1991 4. / 5 based on 6 ratings Superpower relations and the Cold War Detente, Easing of Tensions 0.
