Their publications contain highly valuable information on the origins of the ICRC's involvement in the missile crisis.
The personal papers of Paul Riiegger are to be found in the Archiv fur Zeitgeschichte at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich.
They are all written by former members of the ICRC or the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs, who emphasize the importance of the part he played in easing tension in the Caribbean at the time.
The ICRC itself summarized Riiegger's mission in two of its own publications.
After five days of analysis and controversial debates, President Kennedy decided on 20 October to impose a naval blockade on the further delivery of all offensive military equipment to Cuba and to insist on the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already in Cuba.
The American President was not prepared to run the risk of an air strike or a full-scale invasion to have the missiles removed, as had been originally discussed in the ExComm.
Had either Kennedy or his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev reacted too sharply, the crisis would have escalated into the Third World War.
The United States naval quarantine of Cuba was accompanied by a series of military and diplomatic moves and countermoves which were not all authorized by the political leadership of the two main opponents.
The events that followed made for the most tense week in the whole of the Cold War.
The Cuban missile crisis was clearly outside the conventional and traditional field of operation of a humanitarian organization.
New information, however, has made Red Crescent Movement, Handbook of the it clear that this informal demarche was International Red Cross and Red Crescent never authorized by the Kremlin.
At the same time the Soviet Chairman gathered the Presidium and Secretariat members in his dacha at Novo Ogarevo and stayed there all day and night discussing what to do if an American attack were unleashed.
In times of peace the United States armed forces are usually on DefCons.
The main task for Secretary-General UThant and the delegates of the parties concerned was to sort out the conditions under which UN supervision of the dismantling of the missile sites would take place.
On that same afternoon of 29 October the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Leopold Boissier, agreed in principle.
His organization would be ready to accept such an assignment, but only on condition that there was a formal request by all three parties to the conflict — including Cuba.
The debate was lively and some members immediately rejected the idea of accepting the UN Secretary-General's request for about 30 inspectors.
Riiegger was to state the conditions of acceptance by the ICRC of the planned assignment to it and once again explain the humanitarian organization's motives in lending its good offices.
The ICRC would therefore not assume direct responsibility for the inspections; its teams would work under the supervision of the United Nations.
UThant agreed in general and suggested that Riiegger meet with the representatives of the three parties the next day.
In his talks with the American delegates there was a wide consensus on the procedure, and the delegates even presented a list of Swedish ships which might be chartered for inspections by the ICRC.57 During the following meeting with the Soviet side, however, there were clear indications that these inspections would never be carried out.
The Soviet delegate stressed that the United States blockade, which was meant to be replaced by ICRC inspections, was illegal in his opinion and should be liquidated once the Soviet rockets were out of Cuba.
In reply Riiegger stated that ""a good week"" was necessary to put the corps of inspectors into operation and requested a clear indication of when the operation was to begin and how long it was to last.
Following these meetings, Riiegger reported the day's events in a long telegram to the ICRC in Geneva.
On 4 November the Soviet side signalled the possibility for the United States Navy, instead of the United Nations, to verify the removal of the missiles if Castro continued to oppose on-site inspections in Cuba.
Thus a solution for verifying the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba was found without UN participation.
As the Soviet side insisted that a replacement of the United States blockade for incoming vessels by ICRC inspection on the high seas was justified only until the missiles were removed from Cuba, and as the United States simply continued monitoring the island by air reconnaissance with the Soviets' tacit consent, Riiegger came to the conclusion that the planned ICRC inspections would never be implemented.
This proposal was published in a leading article in the French newspaper Le Figaro on 6 November.
Francois-Poncet obviously belonged to those in favour of a wider field of activity for the ICRC in the atomic age — including political missions.
As the documents indicate, and from what the present author has been told by the former Swiss ambassador and subsequent member of the Committee, Raymond Probst, it looks as if Leopold Boissier, the ICRC President at that time, was likewise seeking a more active role for his organization.
The concern of the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs about the ICRC getting involved in purely political matters is best reflected in an editorial by Willy Bretscher, a Liberal Democrat and Member of Parliament, in the Neue Zurcher Zeitung on 6 November 1962.73 Bretscher wrote that there was no reason for the ICRC to take over a task assigned to the United Nations and which was outside the humanitarian field.
There was a danger that, by taking part in an operation of a political nature, the ICRC would compromise its neutrality — an absolute prerequisite to its humanitarian duties.
Letter Petitpierre to 7 November 1962, NL Riiegger, Dossier Boissier, 31 October 1963, ibid.
The documents show that the humanitarian organization was ready to play an extraordinary role by lending its good offices to the United Nations and the parties concerned for a highly political mission.
Although the planned inspections of Soviet vessels by ICRC personnel ultimately never took place, the ICRC's involvement set a precedent for the future engagement of the humanitarian organization in similar circumstances.
It comes as a surprise that it was probably the President of the ICRC, Leopold Boissier himself, who gave the UN SecretaryGeneral the idea of asking the ICRC for help in this unusual task outside the scope of its traditional humanitarian mission.
II s'est notamment declare pret a mettre a la disposition de I'ONU des delegues qui auraient pour tdche de s'assurer que les navires sovietiques se rendant a Cuba ne transportaient pas d'armes.
