Get History in Your Inbox Get time period newsletters, special offers and weekly programme release emails.
Alex Browne 16 Aug 2020 President JFK signing the Cuba Quarantine Proclamation, 23 October 1962.
On discovering this, the Kennedy administration is torn between ‘hawks’ and ‘doves’, with JFK and his brother eventually pressing the decision to institute a blockade around Cuba, preventing Soviet ships entering the island.
The ships turn back, and ultimately the warheads are withdrawn from Cuba.
To his substantial credit, JFK didn’t cede to the hawks in launching an immediate strike on Cuba.
He was also prepared, at the risk of political expediency, to strike a secret deal whereby the United States withdrew its nuclear missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of ICBMs from Cuba.
Kennedy’s legacy is shaped by this ability to ‘thread the needle’ — face up to the Soviets challenge whilst giving them a way out.
It is true that Kennedy was a cold political pragmatist, well-suited to these crisis moments.
In a post-WWII world, appeasement was a very dirty word, and the dominant outlook in the military hierarchy was that nuclear war was inevitable and that the United States should strike first.
In this vein, Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy and Cold War veteran Dean Acheson all pushed for an immediate air attack on the Cuban missiles when they were discovered.
It seems he was revolted by the idea that people could countenance a nuclear conflict so blithely.
However, it must be added that Kennedy himself played fast and loose with American lives.
Political factors drove him to front up to Khrushchev in such a way that, had the Soviet Premier not had a moment of extraordinary humanity and called off the ships, a nuclear conflict would almost certainly have resulted.
The Cold War was inherently full of posturing and bluster, but Kennedy, when given the option to dissolve tensions, would always heighten them.
In reality, at the outset RFK was major hawk who initially advocated a full invasion of Cuba.
When he did take on a ‘dove’ position, it was only after vociferously defending the hawk’ stance.
He would later gain historic infamy as a spearhead of the war in Vietnam, but his thinking in this conflagration was central to its peaceful outcome.
