The program is a quiz contest in which two colleges are represented by four students each.
The master of ceremonies will give a ""toss-up"" question and the first team giving the correct answer gets a ""bonus"" question worth up to 40 points.
The team with the most points at Fund Raising Program Approaches Four Million The Colorado College fund raising program, under the direction of Mr Richard Wood and Mr Robert Brossman, is now almost two-thirds through the first goal.
This includes the one and onequarter million dollar grant by the El Pomar Foundation for a new library and a grant of almost one and one-half million dollars by the Olin Foundation for the construction of a new science building.
Thus, some two illion dollars has been raised from TIGER lobs Open To Incoming Students All Freshmen and upperclass students who are interested in working in some capacity on the TIGER are invited to stop in at the TIGER office sometime between 3:15 and 5:00m.
Experience is preferable, but definitely not a necessity. private subscription type pledges which state that a given amountwill be paid in installments on given dates.
A large part of the remaining amount is hoped to come from alumni subscriptions and donations of parents of Colorado College students.
Up to the beginning of the summer months the campaign, which i:--. being handled entirely by volunteer work of alumni, was waged only in the state of Colorado.
From the beginning of June until October fifteenth there will be a total of fifteen ""kickoff"" dinners in various states and cities across the nation.
Eventually it is hoped that there will be an active fund raising group in every city in the United States which has 25 or more alumni.
The method of campaigning is generally personal contact with the Mumni groups by a member of the school administration such as Mr Wood, Mr Brossman, and President Benezet.
It is felt that this is much more satisfactory than the preparation of an expensive brochure.
As there are now some 10,000 alumni of Colorado College over half of whom have graduated in the last ten years, this gives the school a gerat deal of potential to draw from for the purpose of raising money.
At the moment, the school is attempting to raise money for the construction of the sports complexes which have already been designed.
It is hoped that the parents of Colorado College students will be sufficiently interested in this to help out in some large manner.
CC Freshmen Men Top Girls, College Boards The new freshman class this year could be, in many ways, the best in CC's history.
Thomas Ross, director of admissions and associate professor of English, bases this assumption on high school records and college board scores.
The men had a higher overall average than the women, but the women placed higher in verbal scores.
There will be approximately 40 of the 50 states represented in the freshman class.
CC now has 47 of the 50 states represented, along with 16 foreign countries.
To clarify certain rumors going across campus, the ratio of men to women in the freshman class is 50:50.
College Announces Twenty New Members to Faculty The Colorado College faculty announces the addition of 20 new members for 1960-61.
The personnel have a wide variety of degrees and background experience.
Ursula Monroe, formerly a graduate student at Colorado College, and Mr Edgar Racey, Jr., who has instructed at Pamona College.
Also new in the English Department is Mr David Van Becker, who comes to Colorado College from the Unive of California.
In the field of foreign languages, three instructors have been added to the faculty.
Esther Elston, who received her A.B. degree at Colorado College in 1960, will be instructing in the German Department.
Hertha Feyock, who was an interpreter for the Military Government of Bavaria for seven years, is also a new member of the German Department.
New in the French Department as visiting lecturer is Mr Richard Miller, who acted as chairman of the French Section of the Advance Placement Conference of 1960.
Mr Jenkins received his M.S. degree from the Julliard School of Music where he also served as an assistant in music.
The History Department has added the largest number of new faculty members this year.
Geiger refused a nomination for a lectureship in American Civilization in Greece this year.
Laurel Ruch, who received her A.B. degree at Colorado College last year, will be instructing in the Mathematics Department.
Glenn Brooks will be instructing in the Political Science Department this year.
Brooks worked as a Research Associate on the Commission on Government and Higher Education from 1957-59.
The ROTC Department welcomes Captain Louis Pistone as an assistant professor of Military Science and Tactics.
Mr Gary Cook, who received his B.S. degree and did graduate work at Colorado College, will be an assistant in Rastall Center in addition to his position as an instructor in physical education.
Rastall Center Lists Tear's Movie Program The Rastall Center Board has announced their movie program for the forthcoming year.
These movies will be shown in the WES room of Rastall at 7:30m. on the Sunday dates given below.
During the s h o w Alexander Films will show a short film on CC, and panel members will be interviewed.
All professors are asked to turn in names of students they consider possible candidates.
Students must be able to think quickly under pressure, have poise, and have a wide range of facts at hand.
Grades are not necessarily an indication of the kind of student needed, as some of the questions are completely nonsensical.
Wynken, Blyken, and Nod Santiago, of Hemingway's Old Man and the Sea Simple Simon It has been suggested that two boys and two girls make up the team although it is not necessary.
A written exam will be given to all interested students followed by a faculty committee interview.
Final selecion will come from a faculty committee representing each division of the college.
As a send off it has been suggested that the finalists face a panel of professors in a simile of the program, open to the public.
Since only the top schools in the nation are invited to attend the program this is an indication of the reputation CC has acquired.
Lightning Kills CC Students When a bolt of lightning struck near Arapahoe glacier last July 17 two former CC students, David Cowperthwaite and his wife, the former Karen Smith, were killed along with Richard Raymond of Denver, a student at Colorado School of Mines.
The accident apparently occurred about 3m. that Sunday afternoon as the trio were returning from a hike at or near the glacier.
Cowperthwaite and Raymond were found 2»/l miles up a trail above Fourth of July campgrounds July 18.
The campgrounds are located five miles above Eldora, a mountain resort town west of Nederland.
It was speculated that after the lightning bolt struck Cowperthwaite was stunned and wandered for some distance before collapsing while the other two were killed instantly.
Rescue units were called around noon on the day following the tragedy to search for the then-missing trio.
Units involved included the Rocky Mountain Rescue Group, the Cherryvale crew from Boulder and a four-man sheriff's crew.
The Cherryvale unit and an ambulance from Howe Mortuary in Boulder returned to the scene of the disaster early that morning to await daybreak and to carry out the bodies.
Although the victims were termed ""reasonably competent climbers"" by Boulder sheriff's officers, there was no indication that any of the trio had been involved in a climbing or hiking accident.
September 13th marked the 100th anniversary of the birth of General of the Armies John J Pershing.
Proposed by the nation's military chief, President Eisenhower, Congress last June proclaimed the 13th of September as a day in memory of one of America's greatest military leaders.
Carson, members of the Pershing Rifles, Company D-9, Colorado College, performed in a half■remony on the paradi and of the post.
The officii proclamation from the President and dedication of the parade ground was given by PR 1st Lt.
Wallace Caldwell, while members of the PR company served as the center honor guard.
Those members of the National Society of PERSHING RIFLES in the ceremony were Dale Dalby, Mark Stetson, Ed Parker, Jack Cashman, Richard Dugdale, Dan Bernstein, Les Whittaker, Gary Ziegler, Harry Diack, Roger Mayo and Wally Caldwell.
Louis Pistone, members of the military department of Colorado College viewed the ceremonies with other noted military personnel.
The ceremony was highlighted by a 19-gun salute and the renaming of the Parade Ground as General of the Armies John J Pershing Parade Field.
Across the nation, members of PERSHING RIFLES along with all military organizations held ceremonies in memory of General Pershing.
The Colorado College chapter appeared on television and in the local newspapers for their work for the occasion.
WILLIAM CAMERON "">""-""-' i;EOR«:E ENGLISH ImiaKiUK E-lil e Arts Edit Copy Editor Civ.-ulati (HUN 'OLE 7 by PEERLESS PRINTING CO.. srndo on the CORNER With this issue the TIGER begins its sixty-first and, hopefully, best year of publication.
For the present staff, there are fifteen more issues before some changes are made, for the second semester staff, there are fourteen issues before final examinations begin in June.
June of 1961 should also see many more changes on the campus — changes in the wind as they've been referred to in past semesters.
The library building will be under construction, the science building should be in the same state.
Groundbreaking for the five new fraternity houses is due almost any day and they will be ready for occupancy next year at this time.
Colorado College is moving ahead physically and also in an academic sense.
We are pleased to welcome the addition of some twenty new professors to the faculty.
Of course, we are also quite pleased to have the new Class of '64 with us.
It will be intriguing to note whether or not the student body will move ahead with the school.
The Freshman Class certainly has the potential — with a little work this potential can be developed to the benefit of both Colorado College and the class.
However, as Tim Moe so aptly put it during the ASCC banquet, the primary purpose of school is to gain an education.
While books do not hold all the answers, they are the first place the students should look for them.
If I or any other responsible Senior would give advice, I'm sure it would be to get the studies organized and find out how much time they will take, then look about for an organization to which to give your support.
This is admittedly difficult when already organizations are recruiting new members, even before the school year begins, but you're certainly capable of making a reasonable decision.
Vespers Scheduled Sunday In Shove This Sunday, Shove Chapel will hold 5m.
Also participating in the service will be sophomore Bonnie Smith singing ""The Twenty-third Psalm"" by Mallotte.
Sundays with Mr Harry Booth, assistant professor of religion and minister of Shove Chapel, and Dr.
On certain Sundays there will be guest speakers who will also hold discussion groups on the following Monday and Tuesday.
Also lecturing in January on a Monday and Tuesday night will be Father William Ryan of Seton Hill College, Pennsylvania.
Anyone wishing to help plan these various visits should join the Religious Affairs Committee.
Student participateion in the Chapel Choir and assistance in leading the worship service is also encouraged.
In the northeast corner of the Chapel students will find the Chapel Study equipped with tables, chairs, phonograph and a small library where books may be checked out by signing a card.
Narks Beginning of Frat Construction Late this fall the Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta Theta and Phi Gamma Delta fraternities will begin construction of their new houses.
The city has closed Tejon street directly behind Palmer Hall for the new buildings.
The new houses were made possible by a $308,000 loan from the Home and Housing Finance Agency.
After that there will be a three to four weeks waiting period for the construction bids.
Formal ground breaking ceremonies are tentatively scheduled for Homecoming and actual construction is expected to begin early in December.
Each house, designed by Carlisle B Guy of Colorado Springs, will house about 34 men with board table facilities for 50 men.
The houses will be. in a semicircle with Kappa Sigma on the West side, Phi Gamma Delta in the center and Phi Delta Theta on the east side.
Pub Board Organizes Writers' Workshop A Writers' Workshop Week planned for the week of Octobei 1-7, will be sponsored by the Publications Board of ASCC as a promotional activity.
This week, designed as a means to promote writing in general, and campus publications in particular, will feature guest speakers, panel discussions, and practical writing workshops.
Cooperating — with Publication, in this promotional undertaking art Rastall Center Board, the Tuesday Assembly committee, and the International Relations Club.
Gary Gappert is director ox the week's activities, and Anni Hereford is chairman of Publics Board.
Austin Bluffs was an inspirational setting for those freshman and game professors who braved early morning hours September 14 to eat a hardy breakfast in the open Colorado mountain air.
Colorado College Tiger September 16, I960 ["" Rastall Board Plans First School Dance Rastall Center kicks off the year's social season tomorrow night with the first all-school dance of the year.
The dance, to be held in Rastall Center dining room from 9 to 12m. will feature the music of Al Dinero's band from Pueblo.
The dance will be the first opportunity for the entire college community to get together before school starts.
Kinnikinnik Needs Hew Contributions Freshman and new students are being especially urged to contribute | to this year's publications of the Kinnikinnik, the campus literary and art magazine.
As in the past, all students, teachers, administrators, and other campus personnel are eligible to contribute to the magazine.
Two issues are being planned this year, the first scheduled to be published December 1, thus necessitating a November 1st deadline for contributions.
Selections of prose, poetry, photography, and art will again be gleaned from the contributions in 'ach of the aforementioned areas by a Board of Review.
The Board, .■omprised of students, will examine each contribution anonymously so each contributor will have the same attention payed to his work.
The new co-editors, Jim Scarboro and Gary Gappert, wish to emphasize ""that we hope most of the freshman class will try their hand at creating contributions for their Kinnikinnik.
Many freshmen have had little or no writing experience, and would be surprised, we think, at what they could do in the way of literary effort.
In stressing the diverse content and authorship of the Kinnikinnik, Scarboro and Gappert go on to say, ""Our Literary magazine is by no means, exclusively for people interested in literature.
It is also designed to exhibit creative efforts in the areas of art and photography, and more important yet, it is designed to serve those students interested in improving and displaying their means of self expression.
REPRESENTATIVE WANTED in your territory From your desk you can earn a substantial addition to your income.
Write for particulars and further details to VKKOffice, Vienna 66, P.O.B 128, Austria.
SINCE 1872 SCHOOL AND OFFICE SUPPLIES t west out wes MElrose 4-5GQ1 ^TOWN . . tomjjW*n, iadfune atta, incite■ i buddy Force By Wally Caldwell It is impressive, even in these days when mass enterti ■place, when audiences numbering millions, unseen by the artist, are in a sense in even closer contact with him through their radio sets and hi-fi systems.
Nowadays, a fantastically large number of people know the star intimately well without ever seeing him.
This is one of the greate changes in the entertainment world that the phonograph, for example, has brought about, and with it a new kind of entertainer has sprung up— the man who is heard, but not seen.
Once in a while, a truly great entertainer who has been heard by millions, but rarely seen, makes his way to Colorado Springs.
Johnny and his quartet continue to belt out some of the finest sounds around as they now take over the Foxes Lounge in the Alamo Hotel.
For a unique style in jazz, promoted in a haven for Martini lovers, DIG SMITH is continuing through September 30th.
A preview of his performances can be heard nightly at 11:30 on KRDO's ""Night Time Jazz"" progr; the way, for a late music break— ""Night Time Jazz"" with goo< Ken Shaw is a flip.
Speaking of one Ken Shaw, who is a member of the Ai Academy Band) , the Air Academy Band Concert is scheduled for this Sunday, Sept.th at 3m.— Arnold Hall.
I just heard some of their selections for varying taste and it promises to be quite an affair.
They are being given out at various C Springs business, the Chamber of Commerce and yours truly has a couple to spare.
Harold Copenhaver, conductor, assures me that the first of the series will be a big hit.
The melodrama, which has been the summer's most successful plague in Colorado Springs entertainment has dwindled from three to one.
The last being ""The White Slave,"" presented by the Imperial Players of Cripple Creek.
Highlighting your trip across the hill will be some stunning scenery as the Aspen Trees put on their Fall dress.
For the freshman with the adventurous taste, might I suggest dining at Colorado Springs newest Supper Club, The Chanticleer.
As the Spanish would also add . . . ""cuesta Mueho""— or something like that.
Prices unfortunately range in and around the ""teens"" but the food is excellent. — AMEN — The world's greatest gospel singer Mahalia Jackson will soon make another appearance at the Denver Auditorium.
She is back by request of thousands and we're hoping to get her down to Colorado Springs for a night.
The word is also out that a ""Folk Festival"" will also hit Denver in the coming .months with such greats as Pete Seeger, Odetta and possibly Belafonte.
The event climaxed the annual All-American Indian Days held in Sheridan, Wyoming.
Ru.sh week went into full swing Wednesday when all sororities held open house for rushees.
Thursday Kappa Kappa Gamma, Kappa Alpha Theta and Alpha Phi entertained at their first series parities.
Today Delta Gamma and Gamma Phi Beta will wind up the first series parties.
Saturday, September 17 Kappa Kappa Gamma and Kappa Alpha Theta Sunday, September 18 Alpha Phi and Delta Gamma Monday, September 19 Gamma Phi Beta Thursday, September 21, all sororities will hold preference dii which will bring the fall rush schedule to a close.
The fraternities also started off the rush week by holding open houses for all rushees, Wednesday, September 14.
Thursday, September 15, the Sigma Chis and the Phi Delta Thctas entertained at their afternoon parties while the Kappa Sigs and the Beta Theta Phis prepared for their evening parties.
Today the Phi Gamma Deltas will hold an afternoon party and the Phi Delts will be on hand to entertain this evening.
Saturday, September 17 Phi Gamma Delta, Kappa Sigma, Sigma Chi and Beta Theta Phi will entertain during the afterSunday, September 18 Beta Theta Phi, Phi Delta Theta, and Kappa Sigma will bring the afternoon parties to a close and the Sigma Chis and the Phi Gamma Deltas will close the evening parties.
MEIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre ACA Summer Meeting Colorado College's president, Dr.
Louis T Benezet, moderated a panel of small college presidents and professors this August.
The American College Association has held week-long sessions of discussion and study for the purpose of self-improvement under the auspices of the Ford Foundation for several years.
It is not known at the present time whether the group will .be sponsored by the foundation another year.
In the mountain setting, of a guest ranch formerly owned by a trustee of CC, Mr Arthur G Sharp, the group representing diverse viewpoints reached the point patible discussion.
Present were presidents of religious colleges, including a Catholic priest and two nuns, and those representing schools where religion is no longer one of the four major study areas.
These various backgrounds evident in the discussion of the philosophical aspects of an education.
It was generally believed that education must convey a philosophical outlook.
A standard of evaluation was Plato's belief that education should teach the elements of reverence and order without which society lapses into riot, and should be penetrated through and through with unflinching rationality.
Tigers Open Football Season Tonight in Topeka Kansas The Colorado College Tigers enter the 1960 football season with some good, proven veterans, some mighty big gaps to fill and a determination on the part of head coach Jerry Carle that the Tigers will have a hand in deciding who is conference champion.
The Tigers won five and lost four last year and Carle would like to better that record this fall.
However, taking a realistic view of the season, Carle Another player who graduated Iknows it will be tough to improve and who will be keenly missed ' the mark.
I ""We netted our share of the 1 breaks on the field and I hope we escape all the injuries we had last season.
I would have to say that we will be the dark horse of e conference, but the team that ins will have to whip us,"" he said.
Carle's biggest task will be filling holes left in the line by graduation.
He figures he is in pretty good shape at the ends, but he and Frank Flood, line coach, will have build a new line from tackle to tackle.
They also must find a man to kick off, kick point after touchtown conversions and field goals.
Gone also are Gary Richon, one of the best centers in conference, and big George Grant, a pretty good tackle who set new small college record with .■en field goals last year.
Davy Parker, who was voted the outstanding sophomore of the conference and who led the team in pass receiving and rushing last year, did not return this fall.
Carle figures the Tigers will be weakest at center, and also will be weak at tackle.
Guard should be satisfactory, but thin, while the end positions should be the strongest.
The Tigers should be strong enough in the backfield despite the loss of Haering and Parker, according to Carle.
He will run Tony Sellitto, overall yardage gainer last year, Scott Tippin and Ed Kintz at quarterback.
Tippin also runs well, and Kintz is an all-around handyman in the backfield as well as being an able passer.
Most likely targets for the passers will be ends Jack Real, captain, and Ken Wisgerhof.
Real was the leading pass catcher among the ends last year, and Wisgerhof was the team's leading pass receiver until he was injured in midseason.
Running backs are expected to be Pete Pleasant, one of the leading ground gainers of last year, Jim Dunlap, a speedster who was injured most of last year, and freshmen Billy Crockett, Wayne Deutscher and Vince Greco.
Next Saturday is the Tigers' first home game at Washburn Field at 2m. against St.
Returning to the Tiger team from the backfield this year are Jim Blair, Larry Bowman, Bob Broyles, Billy Crockett, Dean Dickson, Wayne Dutscher, Vince Greco, Ed Kintz, Pete Pleasant, Tony Sellitto and Scott Tippin.
Returning on the line are Fred Emmerling, Bill Geary, Charles Henson, Robin Poole, Jack Real, captain, Mike Romero, Clifton Rouse, Ron Strasburger, Kent Vick, John Ward, and Ken Wisgerhof.
This year the team is in the able hands of coaches Jerry Carle, Frank Flood, Leon 'Red' Eastlack, and Gary Cook.
Carle has been head football coach and athletic director of the college since January, 1957.
In seasons prior to that time, the Tigers were ■IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII1I1IIIIIIIIIIII1IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop E Bijou St.
Cook is assistant football coach and assistant track coach and is a former CC gridiron star.
In his 25 years at Colorado College, Rosie has earned the respect of coaches and players alike.
In 1058, however, the Tigers tied for the Rocky Mountain Conference Crown.
Carle believes in working his squad hard, and guarantees his team won't be ""outconditioned"" by any opponents.
October 8— Colorado School of Mines ate Golden October 15— Colorado State College at home.
ATTENTION OKI VERS— The traffic committee will be issuing warning tickets until September 23.
Freshmen and transfer students will have their pictures taken Friday, men on Saturday and upperclassmen on Saturday.
Pub Board Selects Editorial Positions Last spring the Publications Board selected Doug Norberg as the editor of the 1961 Nugget and Anne Wilson as assistant editor.
Gary Gappert and Jim Scarboro have been chosen as the co-editors of the Kinnikinnik and Carol Coffman was selected to serve as the business manager.
EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3 1 7l/ 2 N T«jon Visit THE PANCAKE HOUSE 16 South Walnut The first six ads presented by Students each week good for SI .00 Free Food Steak Shrimp Sandwiches Norberg is a junior this year and is active in campus activities.
He worked on publications in high school and is presently treasurer of his fraternity.
Miss Wilson, a sophomore, acted as class editor for last year's Nugget.
Gappert and Scarboro hope to put out two issues of the Kinnikinnik this year.
Gappert was the past editor of THE TIGER and is presently Chairman of the Rastall Center Board.
Scarboro, a sophomore, has done a great deal of writing on his own and was a contributor to last year's Kinnikinnik.
Miss Coffman, a sophomore, was editor of the yearbook and on the editorial staff of her high school's literary magazine.
Stafford, a sophomore, was student photographer for four years in high school, and also served as photographic editor of his school paper and co-editor of his school annual.
NEW BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME 16 E Kiowa Tins Christian Science Monitor Subscribe Now at Hau Price* You can read this world-famous daily newspaper for the next six months for $5, just holf the regular subscription rate.
LXIV, N Stipends Approved by A S C C For Editors, Business Managers The Publications Board, after considerable discussion, submitted to ASCC on Monday, September 19, a substantial change in the status of editors and business managers of the three student publications at Colorado College.
The Board was dissatisfied with the present expense account arrangement because it encouraged loose accounting of funds and because it was felt that the money which was being used for expense Co-Editors Plan Innovations For This Year's Kinnikinnik Cash awards and a critical review service are two of the innovations planned for this year's KINNIKINNIK by its coeditors, Gary Gappert and Jim Scarboro.
Gappert and Scarboro also plan to renovate the idea of two editions, last accomplished in 1952.
Cash Awards The cash awards of $15 each, will be awarded to the best entry in each of the areas of art, photography, prose, and poetry. $15 will also be given to the cover design .-elected.
Those interested in participating in the cover competition should contact Dave Dunlap for the mechanical requirements for the cover.
Although the qualifying review :>f all the contributions will be done entirely by the student Board of Review, the recipients of the cash :s wards will be selected by a facilty member.
Critic Service The critical review service offered for the first time to contribiting writers will consist of a ally sheet attached to each conribution, upon which the student 3oard of Review will record their lecision and opinion.
These enries will also be viewed by a memr of the English department who II add his comments on the tally beet.
The faculty member's pinion though will not effect the ublishing decision.
In addition to this general critial service, early prose and poetry ontributions to the KINNIKINNIK will be criticized at the pracical writing sessions to be held Ictober 1 as part of the Writers' Workshop Week sponsored by Pubcations Board.
Deadline November 1 The deadline for all art and litiary contributions for the fall edion is November 1.
The fall issue ill then be published December As before, anyone connected ith the Colorado College may antribute.
ATTENTION DRIVERS— The traffic committee will be issuing warning tickets until September 26.
Since only a limited number of exams will be available, interested students are urged to see Dr.
On October 12 the finalists will face Professors Joseph Ball, Harry Booth, William Hochman, and Thomas Ross, in the W.E.S. room.
Albert Seay will act as master of ceremonies for the program and all interested students are invited to attend.
The new system provides ASCC stipends to the future editors and business managers of the TIGER, the NUGGET, and the KINNIKINNIK, stipends that will be publicized and sought after.
It is believed that such stipends will raise the prestige of these publications and encourage students of the highest caliber to apply for them.
At the same time, those winning them will be compensated financially in some measure for the heavy outlay in time and work that these positions entail.
Under the new system expense accounts are reduced to the minimum and no expenses outside of some meals missed and transportation are to be considered with such expenses being charged directly to the publication.
The stipends for editors and business manegers of the TIGER and the NUGGET are $350 per year.
The editors of the KINNIKINNIK will receive $300 per year (split in the case of co-editors) and the business manager of the KINNIKINNIK receives $150 per year.
One half of the above amounts are to be credited to the students accounts at the beginning of each semester.
Plans for the Fall and Spring editions of the 1960-61 KINNIKINNIKS are being made, and the staff intends to promote the active sale of KINNIKINNIKs to faculty members, staff, parents of students, alumni and townspeople through local bookstores.
In this way a substantial part of the outlay for stipends for this magazine may be returned to the treasury.
At the same time its business manager as well as its editor, can be justified in receiving a stipend and the prestige of the KINNIKINNIK can be effectively enhanced. ing of the ground floor began at a cost of about $9,000.
This remodeling of the business office area and some of the other administration offices has gained two offices in the treasurer's section.
Other smaller projects which greatly improved the appearance of the campus included the planting of about 50,000 square feet of lawn, installation of new sidewalks, new curbs, gutt the trimming campus. and dri trees and the PEP RALLY at 1:30m. in the parking lot behind Rastall.
Campus Improves As Campaign Progresses Nearly §100,000 worth of improvements are being completed on the Colorado College campus in preparation for the 87th year of classes.
The projects are part of an overall program to improve the physical plant and facilities and to make the campus more functional and attractive.
Last year, about $500,000 was spent on installation of a new heating system and other utilities improvements.
Due to start this year are three major building projects including a new library, for which the El Pomar Foundation gave $1,250,000, a science building, for which the Olin Foundation gave almost $1,500,000 and three fraternity houses.
Remodeling of Ticknor Hall which was dedicated in 1898, at a cost off $18,000.
This hall was a girl's dormitory until 1957 when it was converted into an office building for the faculty.
A portion of Palmer Hall, dedicated in 1904, was remodeled and new laboratory equipment was installed in the geology department, at a cost of about $25,000.
Jackson House at 1029 North Nevada Avenue was remodeled into office and classrooms at a cost of about $25,000.
Jackson House has been Colorado College property since 1914 and was closed down as a men's dormitory in 1958.
Seven offices and 10 classrooms are now ready for use in Jackson House.
The seven offices will provide office space for 11 professors and the classrooms range in size from 50-student to 10-student capacity.
Cutler Hall was touched up on the outside and a long-range program of changes for the inside was launched.
Cutler Hall is the oldest CC building, with ground breaking taking place on July 4, 1877, and its two wings being completed in 1882.
During the summer, a remodelThe Opening Convocation of Colorado College wrll be held Tuesday morning, September 27, 11:00 Shove Chapel.
Jack Real, president of the Associated Students of Colorado College, will preside and introduce Dr.
Presentation of the Present's Prize for Scholastic Improvement is also included in the program.
The event will be opened and closed by an academic procession and recession in full regalia.
This traditional ceremony is one which officially signals the opening of school by bringing the College Community together as a family for the first time.
Writers Workshop Held Week of October I The first Writers' Workshop Week is definitely scheduled for the week beginning October 1, continuing until October 7.
Saturday afternoon from 1:15 to 2 :45 three practical writing workshops will be held concurrently, dealing with prose, poetry, and technical writing.
From 3:00 till 3:45 a coffee break will be held during which time the editor of each student publication will present the needs of his particular publication.
Tuesday morning at 11, an off campus author will be sponsored by the Student Assemblies Committee.
Wednesday afternoon a foreign correspondent of the Denver Post will be sponsored by the International Relations Club.
Openings Vary for Talented Of Colorado College Campus CC students who are interested In speech, drama and radio classes are asked to see Mr W Woodson Tyree or Mr William E McMillen soon.
Annual awards are made for participation in speech, radio, drama, debate, radio operating, technical radio work or stage work.
The Talent and Speaker's Bureau is open to all students interested in school and community service.
Students who can perform in any way — sing, dance, act, read, debate or play an instrument — are invited to join.
Each year certificates of are given to graduating seniors who have given of their talents during their school careers.
The all school Variety Show, which will be presented November 1, 2, 3 and 4 this year, offers students the opportunity to display their talents.
JOHN HANEY Frosh Agitation Began faM Republican Convention Monday With a Bang J, ' r , . -„ Keynoter, Speaks to CC-ers on the CORNER ,.„ ,ho read something besides Oaasock X^to^^^Ss^f S^ act nss Managers of the publications that the money which wa C ' e Tdealisticallv speaking, the positions should be held witha financial bridge.
This committee 3d even take the initiative on inviting famous personages t0th How h ever, Dr.
Benezet's comments went far beyond the everyday talk of lecturers and assemblies.
He touched somewhat upon the responsibility of the school to motivate its student more than it is now doing.
C^trcek flews BY FRANNIE FERBSTE1N Friday will be a big day for all the sororities as they will receive their new pledges.
Each house will have an informal dinner to welcome the new girls into the fold.
The fraternities are winding up their fall rush schedule with preference dinners and the bids will come out tomorrow.
The class of 1964 will go down on record as one of the few classes to retaliate during the harrowing period known as Agitation.
Myrtle Slats, the all-American coed from such scenic spots as Prairie Dog, Kansas, has joined with the typical freshman man, Danny Dink , in composing new and interesting words to the dead, dreary CC Fight Song.
After a busy week of meetings, registration and banquets, the freshmen came sleepily to breakfast on Monday morning only to find themselves snake-dancing about the Rastall dining room singing the CC Fight Song.
Agitation started off with a bang as Tiger Club members invaded the dining room to question and agitate the Class of '64.
Freshman agitation will continue at the same pace until Satunday, October 1, at which time the freshman-sophomore fight will take place.
If the freshmen lose, agitation will continue until the Homecoming weekend.
Mr Booth Preaches First Sermon of Year The first Sunday morning service of the academic year will be held at Shove Chapel Sunday at 11m.
Mr Harry Booth, the minister of the chapel, will preach on the subject ""Peter and the Riddle of the Church""— a sermon on the unique fitness of Peter the Apostle to be both the leader of the Twelve and in a sense the symbolic Father of the church.
The ushers will be supplied by Blue Key and the Delta Gamma's will hostess.
GG Campaign Climbs With United States Steel Grant United States Steel Foundation has joined the roll of national contributors to the Colorado College Campaign.
Mr Harold C Harcon, national chairman of the campaign, recently announced a special grant of 520,000 from the foundation as part of its 1960 corporate of aid to education.
Colorado College is one of 31 colleges and universities selected for the special grants.
These grants were pai*t of a contribution program which totals $2,677,000 for various measures of aid to education.
In addition to the special grant, Colorado College will share from a contribution made to the Associated Colleges of Colorado of "" which it is a member.
Harmon said that the campaign is nearing the two-thirds mark in its drive for $6,000,000 for new facilities, renovation funds and other urgent needs.
Letters to the Editor The Colorado College Assemblies Committee would like to take this opportunity to call your attention to the fine programs that we will be sponsoring during this academic year.
As in previous years the programs will be held on Tuesday mornings at 11 and will be well publicized as to subject, time and location.
We will do the best job we can to bring programs of interest and enjoyment to CC and we are counting on you to give us the enthusiasm and encouragement we received last year.
The Assemblies Committee often works in conjunction with other student committees.
We would also like to invite any freshmen students who would be interested in working with us to contact either Dr.
Today's young people should study politics more than the people of any other generation before them, according to Dr.
Walter Judd, Republican congressman from Minnesota, who spoke on the Colorado College campus Wednesday, September 14.
Judd spoke to an overflow crowd in the WES room of Rastall Center at a meeting sponsored by the Colorado Col lege Young Republicans.
Senator Gordon Allott and Congressman J Edgar Chenoweth, both Colorado Republicans seeking re-election, also attended the meeting and were introduced by Max Power, leader of the CC Young Republicans.
Judd told the students, ""You young students should pay_ close attention to politics.
Judd told the audience that they must first know how to make a living and prove their abilities before enter-ing politics.
As young people study politics, they should also realize that objectivity is a means to an end.
Referring to his days as a medical missionary in China before and during the early years of World War II, Dr.
Judd discussed a Chinese military leader who is now minister of defense in the Chinese communits government.
This man knew all the answers in communism and the communists are eager to work with such people.
We taught them to read and the communists gave them books to read,"" Dr.
He pointed out that few Americans are prepared to argue with a communist because Americans do not bother to master the knowledge about their own way of life.
In many exchanges with the communists, Americans pit amateurs against professionals.
We let anyone go who has the money to go and the Russians always send pros.
We send Iowa farmers and the Russians send agents who look like farmers.
He pointed to American experiences with Hitler as an example of American inabilities to deal with professionals in politics.
In Opposi ti on '"" This article is intended to present the Republican stand in our great two-party system.
The one following this will be aimed at swaying the reader to the Democratic pomt ox view.
Government sets, or can alter, one's standard of living, field of endeavor, place of residence, ability to move about, etc.
In short, there are few if any, daily actions we take which are not affected by governmental influence from some quarter.
Politics is the means by which the people make their desires felt in the government.
Since the second administratinn of Washington, political par-ties have been the means for the people to make themselves felt in politics.
Therefore, it is indeed important for each of us to choose a party and to support our views and our candidates in that party.
It is also important that we support the party's choiceoften not identical with our ownof stands and candidates, for such is the method of promoting effective government in our system.
The man who disagrees with the stands taken by each major party can be much more effective in altering a party's position, and in promoting his own views, by working within the party than without.
In a twoparty system, compromises and coalitions are made prior to the election of one party or the otherwithin the party.
As a party it has made mistakes and its representatives have likewise succumbed to human fallacy.
But the constant interplay among elements and factions of the party works constantly to lessen the errors and to present a better, more stable and more progressive program.
The choice between parties ought not to be ,based on just certain stands or actions of a party — probably events of the past.
Rather, such a choice should be based on certain, basic, continuing principles upon which most all members of one party or the other agreeTo be sure, party stands and part}' actions will reflect these underlying principles, as indeed the castshould be.
Republicans believe that each individual should be as free as possible to realize his own potential — to attain or achieve whatever he is able.
Ht has a right to expect others to re' spect this freedom and an obliga-' tion to respect the freedom of others.
The function of government is to guard and enforce these rights and obligations.
Also, government should help thf individual when he is unable to help himself.
And, if at all possible, that help should be designed to f enable him to help himself.
Each problem faced by a governmental body should be handled at the lowest possible level; For example, if a problem arise; in a county, the individuals who are closest to that problem — the people of the county — have the largest voice in handling the problem if the county government deal; with it.
But more than that, thfj people have met the problem directly and have used their initiative to solve it.
Such would not M the case if the problem had immediately been referred to, say, thfl federal government.
At that level Colorado College Tiger • September 23, I960 In Opposition the people of the county would have had very little voice, and would have exerted far less initiative in solving their problems.
Republicans, then, believe that every individual should be aided and encouraged to develop his capabilities and reach his highest achievements, through his own initiative.
Such individuals as Franklin, Madison, Jefferson, Washington, Lincoln, Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson have been among the finest of men who used their initiative— used it to make our nation strong, bountiful and free for each of us to exercise as much initiative as we have.
Next week Mr Sieve Kushnir of the Young Democrn s will present the catie for the Deraocr atic Parly in the No!!-3igh Scholarship Won By Thetas, Kappa Sigs Kappa Alpha Theta, with an average of 2,824, and Kappa Sigma, with the fraternity high of 2.489, earned the highest scholastic rating for the second semester of 1960.
The Thetas were followed by Kappa Kappa Gamma, 2.749; Gamma Phi Beta, 2.
The all sorority average was 2.658 compared to the all women's grade average of 2.636.
Trailing Kappa Sigma were Phi Delta Theta, 2.473; Beta Theta Pi, 2.404; Phi Gamma Delta, 2.305, and Sigma Chi, 2.230.
The all fraternity average was LI.406 while the second semester all men's grade point average was 2.378.
Interested individuals please contact either George English or Jack Cashman as soon as possible, in the TIGER office.
We especially welcome letters about our publication as it's the only way we can give you the newspaper you want.
The FSEE is a recruiting program through which college seniors and graduate students may qualify for trainee positions following gradthe Federal Civil Service.
Approxiexamination is being offered six times during the 1960-01 school year in all college cities.
Civil Service Commission officials emphasized that the students who take the examination early during the school year will have the best opportunities for appointments following graduation.
Those who ap;j)y between September 29 and November 3 will take the test on November 19.
The TIGER wishes to apologize to two of the new members of the faculty whose academic achievements were not fully mentioned in last week's issue.
La9t yenr she was Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Agnes Scott College. uation in about six career fields in mately 5,000 nation-wide appointments are made through the examination each year in such fields as general administration, business analysis and regulation, social security administration, management analysis, personnel management, budget management, tax collection and administration, natural resource management, investigation and inspection, information, electronic data processing, procurement and supply and agriculture.
Management internships are also offered through a special option of the examination.
Mr Howerton said that by passing this one examination applicants in effect apply to many Federal agencies at the same time.
The TIGER Has Jobs for Incoming Students All Freshmen and upperclass students who are interested in working in some capacity on the TIGER are invited to stop in at the TIGER office sometime between 3:15 and 5:00 Tuesday afternoon.
You buy any 5 paperbacks and we give you one 50c Mentor book of your choice FREE!!! . . . every Friday evening from 5:30 to 9:00.
I960 16 South Walnut The first six ads presented by Students each week good for SI .00 Free Food Steak Shrimp Sandwiches NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME ' 6 E Kiowa Pep Club Started By CC Frosh Men The freshman men, hoping that they are setting a precedent for future classes, have organized a yet un-named pep organization.
The group, which has been approved by the ASCC, plans to make its first official appearance at the football game tomorrow.
A meeting of niterested freshmen will be held today at 4m. in Slocum Hall.
Don Lavers, Bob Kendall and some of the cheerleaders will be there to help the freshmen men plan their strategy for Saturday's premiere performance.
Clublicity Young Republicans The CC Young Republicans willl hold their first meeting Tuesday, September 27, at 4:30m. in Rastall Center.
Everyone who is interested in taking part in campaigning for the Republican ticket is urged to attend.
Max Power, chairman, said that the group will participate actively in grass-roots campaigning and will also schedule as many interesting programs concerning the election as possible.
Club Holds Organizational Meeting On Tuesday, September 27, at 4:15 in the WES Lounge, Rastall Center, the International Relations Club will hold a brief organizational meeting for the purpose of electing officers and planning a program for the year.
All interested students are welcome to this meeting and are urged to attend.
Clubs Conference which dealt with the topic of South East Asia; and a conference on the problem of overpopulation, which was held during the spring term.
Mahalia will be singing such greats as ""Swing Low-Sweet Chariot"", ""When the Saints Go Marching In"" and ""Motherless Child""-plus.
This concert promises to be a fine attraction with many moments of wonderful music, set in an atmosphere that has made American folk music so great and popular.
CATFISH ROW Speaking of American folk music, the immortal George Gershwin gave the American theatre its fullstatue folk opera.
The setting is Catfish Row in Charleston; the story is that of a crippled Porgy and his love for Bess.
For those of you familiar with the story of Porgy and Bess and did not get a chance to see the movie, various records of the scores, in part or whole, are available and should make nice additions to your record library.
One, in part, is an Andre Kostelanetz arrangement; while still others are taken from the sound track and original play.
I feel safe in saying that the music from P&B is of th. finest and will make those late music breaks a welcome occasion.
With the hectice beginning of school and such, one can still enjoy a few moments down the stream at the Alamo Hotel when.
Johnny Smith continues to entertain; and I use the word stronglyArt lovers can always find delightat the Fine Arts Center Museum, and dining at the Red Cloud Inn still makes for a pleasant evening In this bit of Universe, one i apt to do many things to break th monotony of a day; buy clothes have a few drinks . . . and watch the view.
The London Shop for Men is a place where college classics in clothes are key words.
EXCALIBUR blended scotch is something else, and if you are particular, the view in the quadrangle is quite nice this year.
For the first time in United States history two presidential candidates will meet face to face in public debates.
The Nixon-Kennedy debates will be one of the most controversial issues of this election year.
The Colorado College Assemblies Committee has reserved the WES Room for the viewing of these debates after which there will be discussions led by two faculty members.
The first of the presidential debates, that of domestic policy, will be shown over KRDO-TV Monday, September 26 at 7:30m. in the WES Room.
Everyone is invited to watch the debate and participate in the discussion afterwards.
Refreshments will be served. the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio ONE OF COLORADO'S FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-0518 UNor+h Cascade Ave.
Memberof the Colorado College Mountain Club will give a rock climbing demonstration in the ampitheater in North Cheyenne Canyon as a delayed feature of orientation week, sponsored by the Freshman Week Committee and the Mountain Club.
The area is the one used by the United States Army for similai shows during the summer and has seats for a large audience.
Tin place is unique in that no other area exists where spectators can see ""live"" climbing from comfort able seats.
All members of the College community are invited, but must sign up in order to procure transports tion.
After the one-hour show thosi who have watched will be invited to make a 45 minute trail hike to Mount Cutler, whose summit over looks the Broadmoor area.
Please make reservations fo both transportation and supper af Rastall Center Desk.
Warm clothing should be worn. 0v The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 I to 1 1 Daily W Colo.
In this non-conference game the favored Washburn Icabods were shown up defensively by the Tigers and could make no good offensive showing by Joa,m „ e Weigel the 1959 Home until late in the game.
The pep rally will be held Friday, October 27, and will feature rowning of this year's queen TIGERS play St.
PORTS DON WOLFGANG, Sport neither team could make much gain and it was begining to look like punting practice.
It was in the second quarter that the Tigers finally began a moving drive.
With 2:36 remaining until hatftime, Jim Blair kicked a 35 yard field goal to put the Tigers out in front.
The drive started when Ed Wujcik pounced on a Washburn fumble deep in Tiger tei-ritory.
Tony Sellitto as the quarterback connecting with Bob Calder, with Scott Tippin and Pete Pleasant rushing on the field accounted for most of the gain.
Early in the third period with the Icobods on their own 34, Chuck Henson picked off a Washburn pass and made it easily back to the end zone for a touchdown.
Later in the period Washburn retaliated with a touchdown of their own, but here the scoring ended.
Tomorrow afternoon at 2m. the Tigers play their second game of the season against St.
Saturday afternoon CC plays Western State from Gunnison as their Homecoming rival.
Each sorority and fraternity will decorate a float to form the main attraction in the parade Saturday morning.
Don Roll heads the committee made up of representatives from each fraternity and sorority.
Quofed from Freddie Fros/i ^ WRITE JPNYCft s105 N Tojoi Wallet Lost Reward Offered Ray Babb, Ext.
Same Bad Menu fe It's Still All the Same Hasn't Changed a BIT Still a BIG HELLO and WELCOME BACK from ffiMWlWi OPEN 7 Days Monday thru Sunday Monday thtu Saturday 9:00m. to 3:00m.
Pat Beaver— Roger Woodbury Married: Maryn Price — Leon Good son ASCC Notes By Betsy Gaskell Traffic Committtee Traffic warnings will be given until Monday and then tickets will ge issued.
Finance Committee Budget forms for funds allotted from the ASCC should be picked up from and returned to Mr John O Howard on the ground floor of Cutler or Chris Griffiths by September 30th.
Publications Board The allottment of stipends to be given to the editors and business managers of the Nugget, Tiger an<l Kinnikinnik has been approved.
Editors and business managers of the Tiger and Nugget will receive $350 per year.
The Kinnikinnik edito will receive $300 per year and the business manager $150 per year.
The Executive Council feels thai such stipends will raise the pres tige of these publications and en courage students of the highest caliber to apply for them.
Enthusiasm Committee Our first home football game is Saturday against St.
Benezet's speech, Dean Lloyd Worner, Dean of the College, presented the President's prize for scholastic improvement to Richard Dugdale, a Colorado College junior.
Benezet Speaks At Convocation About|rWorld We Never Made"" 'Education stands as a barrier against the herding force )f the totalitarian world,"" Colorado College Pres.
Benezet spoke at the annual Convocation held in Shove Chapel and attended by all students of the college.
The ser/ice was opened by an academic procession of college faculty and staff in their academic robes.
Benezet said, ""It tands out against the herding that is brought to bear by toil I itarians.
The replacement of inividual thought by the herd-mind in be a terrifying thing.
If it liould happen in America, through failure of education such as ■s, then we shall indeed be done."" le said that people who feel dessed at being lonely and afraid i world they never made, should tik of the* antidote.
That is, The thought that in America and rough liberal learning we still Lve that strength and freedom share in the process eof remak•r the world.
Benet said, ""Here at Colorado College lis past summer we have been too isy buildingto think much about irld disaster.
Jeserve the kind of educational ■ocess Colorado College thinks |st, he said.
Every year the Sigma Chi fraternity holds an all school function, the Watermelon Bust.
It consists of carnival booths, put up by the sororities and independent women, a beauty contest, a melon eating contest and various other activities.
Preliminary tryouts for the play, ""Diary of Anne Frank"", will be held October 5,6 and 7 at 3:00m. in Perkins Hall.
The annual production of the CC Players will be directed by Mr William McMillan.
It was produced on Broadway in October, 1956 with Susan Strasberg as Anne and Joseph Schildkraut as her father.
Interested students are urged to try out for any of the ten parts, which include five men and five women.
Stage and production workers are also welcome to help with the play which requires a simultaneous set of four rooms, one of them a second floor room.
We must learn new Stages ... and we need many lies foreign students,"" he said.
P a changing world, education tomes a matter of active search is in part at least a processing Miss Ellis Appointed As Writer In Residence Colorado College announced Saturday that Miss Amanda Ellis, associate professor of English, has been appointed Writer in Residence.
This new position, held concurrently with the appointment as teacher of English literature, will free Miss Ellis half-time to devote herself to an already notable career of published writing.
This appointment is effective the beginning of this semester and will allow her more time to complete the biography of Dorothy Wordsworth, which Miss Ellis is now working on.
Miss Ellis recently tackled a new field of writing by completing a television story for ""Alcoa Presents,"" scheduled for October 4.
Miss Ellis plans to devote more time to writing television stones and has been asked to write a book on creative writing.
In her combined career as a teacher and writer, Miss Ellis already has authored 15 books and more than 60 articles for scholarly magazines.
Three of her books have been of particular interest to local people and citizens of Colorado who want to read the interesting story of the development of Colorado Springs and early-day Colorado.
Miss Ellis launched her writing career with a book, ""Representative Short Stories,"" which went through 17 editions.
One, ""The Literature of England,"" was a balnced history of English literature.
It was about Queen Elizabeth the First of England and was highly lauded by critics.
Reviewers praised Miss Ellis' ability to present Elizabeth as a warm, charming woman.
Buses Chartered For Mines' Game Buses have been chartered to transport football fans to the Tigers' fourth game of the season against Colorado School of Mines at Golden.
The buses will leave the Rastall parking lot promptly at 6:30m. on Saturday.
Tickets to the game may be purchased for $2.50 from members of Tiger Club and Black and Gold or at the Rastall Center Desk.
Publications Board Sponsors First Writers' Workshop Week Three practical writing workshops which will be held tomorrow begin CC's first Writers' Workshop Week.
This week ""designed to promote writing in particular and campus publications in general"", will include, in addition to the workshops, various talks by off-campus authors and writers.
Beginning at 1:15m., workshops will be given on c "" poetry, and technical — ing.
The prose and poeti shops will begin with critiques of selected pieces from the last two issues of the Kinnikinnik.
Students planning to attend either or both of these workshops should pick up the necssary Kinnikinniks at Rastall desk and read the marked selections.
The end of each workshop will be devoted to the reviewing of the personal work of those attending the workshops if they desire.
Mr Robert Ormes of the CC English department will conduct the prose workshop, which will be moderated by Jim Scarboro.
The poetry workshop will be conducted by Mr David van Becker, also of CC's English department.
He will be assisted by Annie Hereford who will moderate the discussion.
Science Writing The third workshop, involving technical writing, will be conducted by Dr.
Richard Stacy, an alumni of Colorado College, now employed by the Lasdou foundation of Colorado Springs.
Al science students interested in learning the techniques of reporting their laboratory work should plan to attend this workshop.
These workshops will conclude at 3:00m., at which time a coffee break will be held, and the editors of the various publications will elucidate the needs and functions of their publication.
Interested students then will be given an opportunity to indicate their desire to work on the campus publications.
This talk, sponsored by the Rastall Center Board will be held in the WES room at 4:00m.
McCue is known locally as a stimulating book reviewer, and is hei-self the author of several books.
Robertson, a book reviewer with regional reputation, will talk ut the regular morning assembly at 11:00 m.
Coinciding with this first Writers' Workshop Week will be the television debut of Miss Amanda Ellis, writer-in-residenee at Colorado College.
Foreign Corerspondent ""Gathering News Abroad"" ■ill For further informati* Annie Hereford, X-396. ntact be the talk presented on Wednesday, October 5, by the International Relations Club.
Thev have secured the services of Mr Robert Hosokawa, noted foreign correspondent for the Denver Post.
This first Writers' Workshop Week is being promoted by the ASCC Publications Board as an attempt to further the cause of self expression and creative satisfaction.
Gary Gappert is director of this project, under the chairman of Publications Board, Annie Hereford.
After reviewing past records, talking to professors and looking at the exam scores, four boys and four girls were selected.
Yesterday the eight finalists went to Alexander Films to view two past shows and on Sunday, October 2, they will view the first TV broadcast of the show.
The two teams will be Gonzaga and California Tech., one of which we wil face on October 10.
On Friday, October 4, the eight will divide into teams of four in a closed simile of the program.
For this session Bud Edmonds of KCMS will fit a buzzer-light system simulating the one on the program.
Frank Krutzke of the English Department will watch this trial run through and then choose the four contestants and one alternate.
A candidate must make separate application for admission to each law school of his choice and should inquire whether it wishes him to take the Law School Admission Test and when.
Since many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding their entrance, candidates for admission to next year't classes are advised ordinarily to take either the November or the February test, if possible.
The Bulletin (in which an application for the test is inserted) should be obtained four to six weeks in advance of the desired testing date.
Completed applications must be received at least two weeks before the desired testing date in order to allow ETS time to complete the necessary testing arrangements for each candidiate.
Whether publicity would-be a good [Lf for CTL is almost a rhetorical question.
These limits ex st only insofar as a new policy or program may be misunderstood due to premature exposure, something which could be adequately thwarted with sufficient outlet to a communications media for the campus, tippp thromrh Further, it was felt that the editor of the TIGER, thiough virtue of his position and experience on the campus, could be a greater contributor to the Committee than a Freshman who as been on the campus only a relatively short time.
This above point is granted but it denvs the fact that CUL is not a school for potential leaders.
Rathe. -it is a committee which handles problems of concern which pop up from various sources.
It was suggested by the ASCC Council that the Atauub* tion consider the possibility of adding the Editor of the TIGER as a further voting member of the Committee.
Each student and/or other mother of this college has three alternatives.
He may stav and try to change, improve and better the climate and environment of the colege.
He may stay hiding his head in the Fikes Peak granite, oblivious to the inadequacies around him.
The 21 juniors on the Deans List included Jayme Begot', 3.62; Ronald Biodini, 3.42; Betty Burgoon, 3.62; Susan Cannon, 3.76; Mary Crenshaw..60; Cassius DeFlon, 3.56; Joan Eriksson, 3.68; Elsae Ganns, 3.75; Robert Hamel, 3.40; Carol Herndon 3.45; Karen Legg, 4.00; Jean Manly, 3.50, Frank Mesich, 3.41; June Mindock, 3.47; Sara Rivard, 3.75; Lor.nda Tavlor, 4.00; Sheila Toml.n, 4 00 Cecilia Travis, 3.62; Elizabeth Tucker, 4.00; Audrey Ward, 3.81, and Dorothea Jean Wlltor.fr, 3.62.
Sophomores included 28 students They were Judith Alt, 3.47; Sonja Bei'g, 3.41; Frances Buschke 3 69; Lvnn Carmichael..41.
David Logan, 4.00; Kathleen Lyons 4 00; Karen Min, 3.83; Dennis Mueller, 3 85' Donald Weber Norton, 3.65; Gav Petzold, 3.61; Nancy Powell, 3 40; Sandra Slough, 3.62; Ruth Snodgrass, 3.67; James Street, 4 00Martha Tilley, 4.00; Carolyn Troxell, 3.44; John Wickersham, 3.40; and Karen Williamson, 3.62.
They were Athenia Athey, 3 75; Karen Bessesen, 3.75; Jean Daniels, 3.94; Paulena Franklin.
Kidner, 3.70; Jerry Macon, 3.84; Mary Mathews, 3.56; Barbara Morgan, 3.44; Max Power, 4.00; Charles Puckett, 4.00; James Scarboro, 3.83; Anne Schneeberger, 3 56; Dale Shaw, 3.44; Bradley Snyder, 4.00 ; Barbara Standhardt, 4 00; Max Taylor, 3.41; Lynne Vincent, 4.00; Charlotte Wallace, 3.82; and Johanna Waller, 3.75.
The Publications Board will sponsor a writers' workshop speaker at the Tuesday assembly at 11m. in Perkins Hall.
Semantics, definition, ignorance prejudice and the old noon-day devil, laziness, present some of the many difficulties in the communication of ideas.
When people meet on the In Opposition By Stephen Kushn Many factors explain the election of the Eisenhower administration eight years ago.
One explanation is that the American people were tired of the tremendous sacrifices that had been demanded of them during the preceding 20 years.
They were tired from having rebuilt' an economy, from having saved the world for democracy for a second time and from having contained the Communists in Korea.
The American people sat back, fat, prosperous and lazy in their beautiful bubble of complacency, encouraged in this reaction by the administration.
Even so, occasionally some idea of world events would shoot into the bubble.
Headlines told the people of massive retaliation, Sputnik I, rolling back the Reds, the Hungarian revolt, brinksmanship, the Geneva Spirit, the Suez Crisis, Castro, Katanga, South America's friendly greeting of Nixon, failure at Canaveral, parts 1, 2, etc., the Spirit of Camp David, U-2's and other such minor problems.
They told the people of recessions, or ""readjustments,"" of Little Rock, of growing slums, of school construction and of falling farm prices.
In that statement John F Kennedy has articulated the Challenge of the Sixties.
On the one hand the uncommited new nations of the world are testing democracy and are watching our great experiment to determine whether or not rapid economic growth to meet the needs and desires of ever increasing numbers is compatible with the freedom and dignity of the individual.
On the other hand the Communist nations are challenging the very existence of democracy.
Because of this and because a strong society at home better enables us to check the Communist threat to the life of democracy, Senator Kennedy will lead America in the building of a better society at home through medical care of the aged, urban renewal, aid to education and increasing our rate of economic growth.
Senator Kennedy has made several proposals for countering the Communists.
The first is to increase our retaliatory power and to make our conventional forces more mobile and more balanced in the eventuality of ""brushfire"" wars.
His statement on space technology is indeed applicable to the entire Challenge of the Sixties.
How we wish this communication would carry over on the academic level; the level too often inclined to the difficulties that stand in the way of communication.
The writer of this article is a Catholic Priest, and I do not expect greement or compromise from anyone, only a spirit of communication.
A Catholic must communicate with Catholics, Protestants and Jews; just as Protestants and Jews must communicate with each other and with Catholics, A Catholic .may be guilty of the academic, ivory-tower attitude, as well as ,and more than, anyone else.
Reciprocal actions of academism and isolationism will always end in ignorance, prejudice and suspicion.
Most of us like the good, old, simple feet-on-the-ground attitude toward one another.
We do not appreciate cynicism and suspicion on the street, in the market-place or in the neighborhood.
These 'bad attitudes' are too • often, though, found in our books and essays and speeches.
I say these things only as an introduction to the prevailing thinking concerning Church and State.
Neither is it a part of the Church's doctrine to expect Papal jurisdiction exercised in the civil legislation of the United States, or even in Russia for that matter.
Senator John Kennedy does not want or expect Papal jurisdiction or influence in his political life in the United States.
Academically, it may be said that the Church is teaching a doctrine of separation of Church and State now; but then, this was not her teaching three centuries ago, when she had the upper hand.
Yet, in friendly fashion, can we not ask if it is not possible that history can easily be reconstructed from sources that really do not represent history as it was lived three centuries ago.
History was lived and realized in the individual persons in their individual times.
Our reconstructions of history will never indivate motives and personal thinking.
One man in history makes a mistake that is all too personal in its meaning, and his times and friends may suffer in subsequent historical reconstructions.
This article contains the thinking of the here and now, conditioned by my person; it is not an official document of the Catholic Church.
What is of the official Church i that the state rules the state, the Church rules the Church.
These societies are in constant danger of overstepping their jurisdictional rights.
To strive for the perfect parallel is a difficult task, considering the nature of each contingent and varying circumstance.
The contingent situation is always subject to' the law of experience, mistake and verity.
Tht contingent and individual situation is ornery, it always tries to slij through the necessary universalitj of the law or dogma.
Constitution in the United Stati 'i 1 ' that is universal, but its applica 1 « tion in the world of the contingen ° x takes men of experience and ge n nius.
A mistake in judicial jud • '""' ment does not invalidate the law or give right to suspect the law.
It is on the ultra-per co ' sonal level, how thoughts and idea c01 always strain for the freedom o '. the personal and how they woii Ca and toil and disturb until the thi reach the level of personal com cot munication.
Too often they ar tes confined and caged and angered i cor the verbage of the suspicious ac; demic atmosphere of unfriendl ness.
How easy it would I for a Catholic to become spitefi and suspicious of his Protestor friend when he hears that Senati Kennedy will not be voted for hi cause he is a Catholic.
He wonde whose conscience (political ci science) is being governed by ligion.
If tl were true, whose conscience, the would be guided by union of who Church and State.
If I were to vote for or agaii Kennedy because he is a Cathol I must 'then admit that I hold f the union of my Church and t state, what ever my religion woi be.
I would inclined to think that he believ in the union of his Church 3 State.
I know, however, that P testantism's leading theologi Reinhold Niebuhr, is not of same mind as Dr.
I can suspect Protestantism because one no-Catholic-for-President i ing.
Niebujg A little vision and a little conifl nication will teach us to re; the separation of Church State, no matter whose Chur is.
This is a problem for exan tion, the separation of Church | Continued Colorado College Tige September 30, I960 i [3 A Catholic Presents State or the separation of lse's Church and State.
Doctrinally, the Church is not juridically established to rule in secular sphere.
Besides, the Church can enter the secular sphere only via the individual free Catholic.
Richelieu) legislated in civil realms, but such action remains outside the risdiction of the Church, and en[■s the plane of civil society.
This Churchman then acts in the civil plane of society with civil jurisdiction regardless of the heirarchical function of his Church.
One aims toward the society of good Churchmen, and the other toward good statesmen.
We will forever be in greement as to matters that overlap in these two societies.
But never is it permissable to suspect • honesty and integrity of those who disagree.
Trust, friendliness and confidence must come from communication, i Catholic should ever violate i conscience as a political man, by creating a Church/State bloc for his own benefit or against the benefit of any other Church.
Like■ no Protestant should violate conscience by creating a Church/State bloc for his own benor against the benefit of any other Church.
Neither does a man have the right to compromise his easonable ""commitment to his Church or State.
The confession of the American 31 Catholic Hierarchy is no more a threat to Americanism than the confession of the American Protestant Churches.
Perhaps in the coming election questions of Church and State will be clarified.
But nach more importantly, there may be a great step forward in comer munication.
Time and patience, ht honesty and openness will do much to establish a magnanimity of outlook and understanding for everyof all denominations.
Monday to Friday 1:30 i Saturdaj to 12 pro B rnm, spuii«f>ri' students from all over the United States (» participate and she received full credit for her work.
They ""<*"" be seen wearing too brightly When asked what the Russians had done to the American image.
The image the Russians have tried to create is that of a Western capitalistic nation, which actually includes anyone on the other side of the Iron Curtain.
While in East Berlin, Siggi read many signs saying, ""Let's make an end to the provocations of Eisenhower and Adenauer,"" which typifies their way of thinking.
She says thatmany of the Germans are ""immune"" to Communist propaganda, which is not hard to see through when living as close to it as a European does.
Frosh Hold Meeting On Election Procedure This Thursday, following the second Kangaroo Court a freshman class meeting was held to explain the proceedure for the upcoming Freshman class elections, including qualifications necessary and the budgetary limits for campaigning.
To be considered a nominee, a candidate must submit a petition signed by fifteen members of the freshman class.
This petition is to be turned in at Rastall Center no later than noon October u\ The nominees may put up their campaign posters anytime between October 7 and October 12.
Short speeches of five to ten minutes will be given by each nominee at a Freshman class meeting at Perkins Hall October 11 at 11m.
One hundred years ago Abracolored or inappropriate clothes, dressed as if they were in their own backyards.
During the months of June, July and August, many Germans feel it is safer to leave -for the country is infested with ""tourists"" from everywhere who violate the hospitality of the country.
In direct contrast to the tourist, the traveler is usually overlooked, for he trys to make a good impression by being as inconspicuous as possible and to fit into the various situations which he encounters.
American students are always well received if they go to Europe with an open mind.
Some people of Jewish descent, whose relatives had sufferd under the Hitler regime, were out for revenge.
Many were not interested in Germany and made no attempt to hide their feelings.
As the United States realized that the ""American image"" in Germany was not very good, people of higher caliber were sent over and relations between the Germans and those Americans with whom they came in contact improved.
In the succeeding parts of his speech, Kennedy implied that he feels the nation is at a standstill as far as internal domestic matters are concerned.
He stated that he is not satisfied with only 50 per cent of United States steel mills functioning.
He does not like nine billion dollars of surplus food wasting annually.
He said he would like to see American schools turn out more scientists and added that Russia is presently producing twice as many as the United States.
In summation, Kennedy stated that he will not bo satisfied until every American can enjoy the complete constitutional rights which are his.
Vice-President Nixon answered Kennedy's statements by agreeing basically with tiie major goals he has set, ,but disagreeing with the methods through which he intends to realize them.
Nixon voided Kennedy's statement that the nation is at a standstill by presenting statistical proof to the contrary.
He stated that more schools have been built in the past seven and one-half years than the total built in the 20 years prior to Eisenhower's administration.
He ascertained that wages have gone up five times as much in the Eisenhower administration as in the Truman administration and added that the average family income is up 15 per cent in this administration as compared with 2 per cent in Truman's.
Nixon asserted that the Republican party is for a program that will expand education, improve upon medical care for the aged and benefit the farmer.
He said the Democratic party also has these goals in sight, but stated that the Republican methods of reaching them are more realistic and will better safeguard American free enterprise.
Nixon stated that the test of a program is not how much is spent, but how well the program works.
Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA CRuS.S FROM CAMPUS) GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL September 30, I960 Colorado College Tiger Nixon-Kennedy Continued from pafte 3 crease teachers' salaries and to improve educational institutions, direct government intervention is necessary.
He does not feel .that the state and local governments can adequately handle this problem without raisingtaxes to an absurd level.
Nixon, on the other hand, feels that' direct government intervention, especially in the area of teachers' salaries, will eventually result in the government telling the teachers how and what to teach, thus stereotyping all education.
He stated that such government intervention will also result in the American people's sacrificing their individual rights of freedom which have thus far served as the backbone of the nation's progress.
Nixon did assert that he felt federal aid was justified in the form of grants to the individual states, but that it should be up to the states to decide whether or not it would be used for teachers' salaries.
He stated that taxes will always be essential if we are to remain a free nation and that direct government intervention also cannot function without taking money out of the people's pockets.
In summation both candidates agreed that the United States, in order to hold its number one world position, must maintain a strong society, alert and ready to meet any outside threat.
Nixon stated that it is time that the Soviet Union is moving faster than the United States, but said it is because they are starting from a much lower base.
ASCC Notes By Betsy Gaskell Elections All petitions tor the freshman class commissioners to ASCC are due October 6.
There will be ., freshman class meeting October 11 at which time the candidates will give their speeches.
The elections will be held on October 13 at Palmer from 7:45-11:15 m. and at Eastall from 11:15m. to 4m. in Rastall. is only 44 per cent of American production.
Nixon stated that Kennedy's program says government insurance must be taken by everyone, his doesn't.
He also said that fixed incomes wouldn't guarantee people would be able to meet their bills as Kennedy seems to feel.
Kennedy opened his summation with the statement, ""Russia's 44 per cent of United States production is a threat whether Nixon thinks so or not.
In conclusion Kennedy said, ""If vou think things are fine as they are, vote for Mr Nixon.
A M. opportunity to end Agitation Period tomorrow morning at the freshman-sophomore fight.
At six in the morning there is to be a sock hop at Slocum prior to the fight at seven in Stewart Field.
At this time the assent up the greased pole will begin but will probably be interrupted by sophomore-flung rotten eggs and other garbage.
There is a ten minute deadline for the freshmen to get the flag from the top of the pole.
Bob Kendall, president of Black and Gold, has this to say about the freshman class, ""I am very pleased with the products of this agitation and orientation program the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio ONE OF COLORADO'S FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3.05 18 II North Cascade Ave.
Mr Kendall was chief justice of Kangaroo Court which has held sessions the last two Thursdays.
Some sentences meted out were confinement in football uniforms for three girls and leotards and shorts for one young man.
Although the Tiger Club and Black and Gold stirred up spirit in the freshman class through Agitation and Kangaroo Court, the freshmen created the spirit at the St.
A megaphone-manner crew of freshmen men dressed in wierd hats and tiger shirts helped the cheer-leaders support the team vocally.
This group was instigated by Tony Ayers and Miles Hopper and consists of John Levis, Dave Hayes, Steve Sabol.
In record time and with record enthusiasm the Tigerette Club of freshmen women formed a solid cheering section.
The spirit that is being so highly commended is in evidence in the class of 64's version of CC's fight song.
When the big brave freshmen fall in line We're going to wreck that court another time.
We're going to bury our dinks 'way under ground And when the Tiger Club begins to yell and shout Throw them out . . . out Yea Freshman Class.
COLLEGE STUDENTS SPECIAL RATES PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAM MASSAGE • STEAM BATH BEAUT SALON House of Health Acacia lintel Platte & Tejon MEIrose EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3 I 7l/ 2 N Tejon Colorado College Tiger • September 30, I960 I K^JLreek. fie liV KKANMK II HitsruN ;re most ew pledgirl Alphi Phi Last Sunday evening the Alphi phi actives honored their new pledwith a pancake dinner over at the house.
The new pledges are Dorothy Lynch, Margaret Parks, Susan Rowlette, Phyllis Rose, DonStory and Jo Ann Wallis.
These Suzanne Armstrong, Sally Blanehard, Seece Boyce, Jeanne Buffiim, Judy Dickison, Becky Dunbar, Susan Graham, ,anda Hamilton, Susan Heidel, ii Larson, Joyce Manning, SuMerrell, Sue Miller, Nancy Parker, Carolyn Pelly, Pauline Price, Lynda Rood, Nancy Schorling, Susan Somerville and Pene[ope Walholm.
Over the weekend the Delta Gammas and the Kappa Sigs got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs. imma Phi Beta Last Friday evening the Betas jnt over to the Gamma Phi house serenade the new pledges.
The >w girls are Jean Albrecht, Nan Augenstein, Sue Baily, Sally Blair, Susan Brackney, Judy Clark, Sher■e Crowswy, Lydia Dunham, Lini Foster, Linda Hamilton, Martha Jaffrey, Deirdre Jones, Mary-Emily Jones, Susan King, Margaret Kurasketa, Sandra Lazzari, Nan Lindsley, Leilani Markisen, Deborah Smith, Sandy Smith, Mary Tarr, Jean Torcom, Mary Turtle, Jill Vigial, Barbara Wadell, Susan Wiesendanger and Carol Wright.
Last Monday evening the Gamma Phis had a dinner at the house to honor their new pledges.
Kappa Alpha Theta The Theta chapter was on hand last Friday to greet their new pledge class and welcome them into the fold.
The new pledges are Susan Bigelow, Nancy Bowers, Nan Burroughs, Elizabeth Coleman, Dianne Frew, Ann Gourlay, Janice Hansen, Patricia Hay, Ann Herliby, Kathy Innis, Karen Johnston, Susan Kellogg, Sarah Mickelwait, Marsha Nye, Nancy Pettit, Susan Ross, Ann Trueblood and Debra Wood.
The Thetas got together with the Sigma Chis last Sunday for a picnic at Austin Bluffs.
Pledging for the new girls took place at the house last Tuesday evening.
Kappa Kappa Gamma Last Friday afternoon the Phi Delts were on hand to serenade the new pledges of Kappa Kappa Gamma.
The girls are Charlotte Alderfer, Catherine Anderson, Ann Barber, Laura Dearborn, Suzanne Edwards, Glennie Eisele, Susan Louthan, Karen Mcllvaine, Wendy Miller, Dana Rhodes, Stephanie Row, Jann Rowley, Ann Ruth, Mary Sartor, Kathy Symms, Shelia Watson, Melinda Wells and Ann Willumsen.
Saturday evening the pledges were honored at a formal banquet over at the house.
Last Tuesday evening the girls were formally pledged into the sorority.
Tish Arnberg, Sandy Ballard, Gretchon Fox, Anne Frey, Jo Anne Gray, Ruby Haslam, Jill Hicks, Fifi Maroney, Holly Menkel, Betty Rouse, Tricia Sohl, Sue Wahlberg, Nancy Rockwell, Diane Krushel, Barb Johnson, Nancy Hall and Georginana Mason.
On Sunday, October 1, the girls will sell smashers in the girls' dorms.
Pledging is banned until October 15, I960 when the fraternities that did not meet their quotas will be permitted to accept new members until their quota is reached.
Beta Theta Phi The new pledges of Beta are Gordon Axelson, Tony Ayres, Dean Behse, Tom Burk, Bill Casey, Spencer Cook, Charles DePuy, Andy Durban, Quentin Florence, Bill Greeley, Dave Hayes, Evan Heckel, Myles Hopper, John Levis, Henry Poole, David Shei, Charles Short, Jim Sperry, Cornelius Strakosh and Dick Woods.
Kappa Sigma Kappa Sigma's new pledges are Conan'Cantwell, John Collins, Dick Cholakian, Arthur Daily, Fred Golding, George Graham, Jim Haley, George Klein, Dave Krell, Ray Libonati, Gordon Price, Steve Sabol, Clay Sorrick and Bob Utne.
II EAST PIKES PEAK MElrose 4-5501 The new members of the pledge class are Jon Detrick, Tom DiMare, Jim English, Steve Frink, Ken Hanson, John Hocker, Brian Kellogg, Fred King, Karl Krauskopt, Harvey Lambeth, Charles Lawrence, August Meyer, Mancel Mitchell, Ray Mithumr, Bill Pelz, Henry Rase, Malcolm Richards, John Rowland, Steve Sabon, Tom Simensen and Charles Wadsworth.
Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams new pledges are John Bishop, Don Bradbury, Jeff Clark, Bill Grey, John Simus and William Stanisich.
Sunday the Phi Gams and their dates got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs.
Fred Ahlevs, Walter Brayman, Bob Bruce, Bill Bowden, Chuck Deaver, John Gaubatz, Dick Hunt.
Mary's of the Plains is coached by Jack O'Leary, a former CC student and athlete who coached the ends and slotbacks for Tiger Coach Jerry Carle before taking his job at St.
Mary's is the newest college in Kansas, being formed only eight years ago.
Even though the Cavaliers outsized CC their line did little to stop the Tiger rushes.
Scott Tippin and Pete Pleasant accounted for most of the rushing for the Tigers.
Halfback Billy Crockett accounted for the most exciting play of the game with a sensational 56 yard run in which he darted and dodged for a touchdown after seemingly being stopped threctimes.
But Crockett's efforts and the touchdown were nullified by a clipping penalty.
The GOLDEN DRAGON I4OT S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— II «. to II Daily W Colo.
Tareyton's flavor-balance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos.
NEW DUAL FILTER Product of Tareyton "" n September 30, I960 Colorado College Tiger OK *TOWN . . , ia mjfOnm, UUftiAe and Utcrfe Picture a moonlight swim without the champagne breakfast in a secluded resort, ai Las Vegas or Miami, a Cba-Cha contest at all night discussion of philosophy while sobi or a stolen kiss behind a potted palm at tnce of apparel, a impromptu plane flight to i lease-breaking party, an ng up on ""cafe Espresso,"" overcrowded cocktail party. orchestra seats.
Check the local if promptly filled out, These are some of the things which imaginative people might do just for kicks.
They are also the seasoning in the stew of life, the anchovies in this pizza pie of existance.
Altho not as imaginative, many exciting things are coming into view for those who find it hard to enjoy those loose haphazard hours.
Dazzling Delight One of Broadway's newest hits by the masterful team of Rodgers and Hammerstein is now showing the Denver Auditorium.
The play is ""The Flower Drum Song,"" a delightful story of a Chinese family in San Francisco.
This musical comedy is a ""dazzling delight"" to quote one Walter Winchell, and will continue at the Auditorium thru Tuesday.
Tickets range from §2.75 for balcony seats to $(5.60 for "" newspapers for the exact detail.
If the rush is on the week-end performance, phone the operator in Denver for information.
This overtone of the Orient presents some splendid music for the popular taste.
Alcoa Presents Play by Amanda Eliis K)*ice in a while one gets a chance to write a few words about something almost personal.
Under contract by MGM studios in Hollywood, Alcoa Presents has selected this play as 'their opening for the fall season.
In ABC Television Advance Programing, ""The Death Waltz"" has been acclaimed to be one of the finest attraction to be seen this year.
This, in my opinion, is one of the many great contributions that members of the Colorado College faculty have made and Miss Ellis is to be congratulated many manv times for making us so very very proud.
Behind the Turntable Ken Shaw, DJ and originator of ""Night Time Jazz— KRDO"" invites all jazz-loving CCers to listen each evening to the latest and greatest selection in jazz.
Also Wednesday nights have been set aside as request-night for all CC students.
CC's third touchdown came in the second period and was an 84 yard drive highlighted by an 18 yard dash by Tippin and a long Sellitto to Pleasant pass.
Mary's scored in the second period with a 65 yard drive accomplished in 16 plays.
Tippin came through with his second touchdown of the game in the third quarter after Joe Cordova had recovered a St.
He took a pass from Tony Sellitto for a 12 yard gain and then two more runs put him over the goal line.
The next Tiger TD was a long downfield attack which finally saw Pleasant doing the final running PuUTiwE W oijver your eyes, pardnerl This year's back-to-campus sweater is wilder, woolier and just plain wonderful.
Sandra Arnett— Lozi Torma Engaged : Angela Clifford— Tom Absher Valerie McNaught Davis— David Parker Joannie Mills — Leroy McClesky Married: Brenda Bishop— Roland Booma Susan Riley— Walter Hillis Pershing Rifles Holds An Informal Smoker On October 6 Pershing Rifles will hold an informal smoker in the WES Room of Rastatl Center at 7:45m.
Included in the program will be informal discussions about Pershing Rifles, and the members will answer any guestions raised.
There will be on hand an extensive assortment of weapons, radios and related equipment for the purpose of acquainting cadets with the equipment they will be using during the year.
Colorado Springs, Colo., October 7, I960 Colorado Co New Calendar Committee Formed To Coordinate Future Activities A new college coordinating body, the Calendar Committee, has recently been established by action of the Committee on Undergraduate Life.
The new committee is under the chairmanship of Mr Richard Blackburn, Director of Rastall Center.
With the continued increase in number and variety of allCITY firemen were called in to remove the freshrr flagpole in front of Cutler.
Especially needed are a slight boy for the part nf Peter, a friend of Anne's famI ily, and a small girl for the part I of Anne.
Mr William McMillen stated 1 that he hoped the cast would be chosen by next Friday so that rehearsals could begin bv October 15.
I ""Volunteers for the crew in all 1 areas are welcome,"" commented Mr McMillen.
Anyone who would like to work on back stage produc| tion should contact Mr McMillen I some time today.
The fall dramatic production will -. be presented on November 17, 18 J and 19.
David Jenkins Returns A Skating Champion Mr David Jenkins, Colorado iceskating champion, returned home this week as star of the ""Ice Fol-. lies"" at the Denver Coliseum.
Until he became a professional last he was the best amateur in the United States.
Mr Jenkins graduated from Colorado College with the class of 1958 and was a member of the national scholastic fraternity, Phi Beta Kappa.
While he was attending CC he gained the United States, North American and World Skating championships.
Last Winter he won a Gold Medal for the United States in the Winter Olympics at Squaw Valley, California.
Inter-American Cultural Convention awards for study in 17 Latin American countries have the same tiling deadline.
U S. citizenship at time of application; 2. a bachelor's degree or its equivalent by 1961; 3. knowledge of the language of the host country; and 4. good health.
A demonstrated capacity for independent study and a good academic record are also expected.
Friday, October 7 from any Black and Gold or Tiger Club member or at the Rastall desk.
Eight buses have been scheduled by campus fraternities and a possible total of 10 or 12 buses is the goal.
This afternoon the annual Watermelon Bust festivities will, with the traditional contests and new areas of competition, dole out fun and as much watermelon as can be eaten.
Booths constructed and operated by sorority pledge classes will be in business from 1 to 5m.
There is to be a trophy given to the booth showing the greatest originality and one for the most flourishing business.
The Ray Kranz band will play for those who wish to kick up some dust from 2:30 until 4:30m.
Robert Stabler, chairman of the Zoology Department, and Sergeant Johnson of the ROTC Department, will judge the Queen of Watermelon Bust.
Prior to this they will officiate at the watermelon eating contest between the sorority house mothers and a melon eating contest between representatives from each sorority pledge class.
All money earned by the booths is turned over to the Campus Chest Drive.
All these facts will be candidly revealed to you on Monday, October 10 when the film ""Africa Astir"" is shown at Perkins Hall.
This film is the first in a series of four ""Horizons Unlimited"" travelogues to be presented in cooperation with the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center.
This personally narrated series is similar to the ones annually presented by the National Geographic Society in Washington, D C., which are shown across the country by Burton Holmes.
Wakuta Members Set For Active New Year Wakuta, the honorary athletic association for junior and senior women, elected new members last spring.
Chessie Kemp, Beth Kendell, Mimi, Meek, Keekee Minor, Gwen Salisbury, Betsy Taylor and Connie Windle.
Jean Wilfong is president; Sue Evans, vice-president; Ginger Gail, secretary-treasurer and Mimi Meek, publicity. college occasions, the need has become increasingly apparent for some centralizing group.
A year of college occasions which has consistency, good timing and maximum impact, with scheduling conflicts being eliminated, is the principle aim of the Calendar Committee.
The Commitee will be especially looked toward to coordinate respective events planned by the Assembly, Public Lecture and Religious Affairs Committees, the ASCC, and other college agencies undertaking events which are allcollege in scope.
Included in this year's plans are an increased number of college occasions with topflight speakers, preferably with nationally recognized names.
A further objective of the Calendar Committee is to this year encourage accelerated planning for college events of the 1961-62 school Kinnikinnik Selects Board of Review The student Board of Review for the fall edition of this year's Kinnikinnik has been announced by the co-editors, Garv Gappert and Jim Scarburo.
The Board, which will pass on all the literary contributions submitted to the Kinnikinnik, consists of five men and five woThe members of the literary Board of Review are Emerson Ellett, John Ebey, Steve Sprague, Clay Sorick, Barbara Binns, Nancy Duncan, Jean Manly, Pat Swartwood, and Susan Wilcox.
It was felt that the Board, as chosen, represents a cross section of literary taste and background, and has as a whole, no initial prejudice towards any one kind of writing.
The art and photographic selections will be judged initially by Dave Dunlap, art editor, with the help of the art department.
Final selection of these contributions will be made by the editorial board.
The cash awards for the best contributions in each area will be made on the advice of members of the department of English, who will also make their own critical comments.
The remarks of both the student Board of Review, and the faculty judges will be returned to the writer on the critic's tally sheet that is attached to each piece of writing.
Additional information may be gained from Gary Gappert and Jim Searboro.
The original edition was issued in 1956 and had the largest advance sale in the history of the company.
This is one of the few books appearing on the recommended lists of almost every lifcrary and state geological survey.
There are 36 pictures in color in addition to a number of photographs and drawings.
College Bowl are Jim Floerchinger, Terry Kidner, Charles Greening, and Ann Wilcox.
Floerchinger is a senior chemistry major, and a member of Sigma Chi fraternity.
Kidner is a sophomore English major, and Greening is a junior history major.
Willcox is a senior English major and a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority.
On October 12, the team will face a team of professors in a simile of the program open to students.
The professors' team will include Professors Joseph Ball, Harry Booth, William Hochman, and Thomas Ross.
Malcolm Richards, father of junior Meredyth and freshman Malcolm Jr., will be in charge of the banquet.
Saturday the team will move into the Biltmore and that night free tickets to a Broadway show will be provided.
The program will be shown over CBS at 3:30 Sunday afternoon October 16, and the team will face the Universitv of Illinois.
KRCC Announces New Programming KRCC-FM, the student-operated radio station, has returned to the air with a regular fall schedule.
In addition to its regular programs of music, campus news and the Sunday morning services at Shove Chapel, the station will carry special broadcasts of outstanding programs, events on the campus and it has launched several new programs.
Each day, Monday through Friday, at 4 to 5:15 m. music will be played for dancing.
With the cooperation of Richard Blackburn there will be dancing in Rastall Center in room 203.
It is hoped that students will come in after labs or studying and dance and relax until dinner.
Also, each evening, dinner music is piped into the aRstall dining room during the dinner hour.
A new discussion program ""Freedom and Authority"" featuring professors and students is broadcast every Wednesday evening at 7:15m. it will be taped and rebroadcast on Sunday mornings at 9:30m.
Saturday afternoon features two programs devoted to jazz and conversation called ""On the Scene"" and ""Street Beat."" 0» cfe >l*o OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF Bum EDITORIAL STAFF ;hicf — J ACK CASHMAW Editor DAVE FURGASON Jr __ „ ELEANOR JONES Editor ' DON WOLFGANG ru h>lil'..r ■ WALIA rALIiWRLI. t» Ed y Morey, Wil nborn.
JOHN HANEY Printed Fridays by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Sprliu 8.
Colorado on the CORNER ASCC meeting last week was excruciatingly painful to all concerned, at least to those who took the time from the details of the meeting to view it as a whole.
The Executive Council argued for some 20 minutes about the possibility of sending the band to the Mines game with various members making comments (usually for the second or third time) about how much was expected from the band and how much they should be willing to pay.
Mr Race came up with one of the few intelligent comments of the meeting when he said he felt the band would add a great deal of spirit to the occasion and should not have to pay the full fare to Mines.
Later in the meeting, another mass of trivia was unleashed when the discission about the possibility of holding Parents' Weekend and a Leadership Conference in the spring came before the Council.
Moe and Levers felt that to hold the latter conference every year would be redundant.
They seem to forget that originality might possibly creep into* the program, and that the followers of one year would be the leaders of the next with the additional advantage of being able to look back upon past conferences in order to gain a better understanding of the younger members of the group.
In a summary, the meeting closed with an earnest plea from Mr Real who seems to feel that his position incurs no responsibility beyond attending a weekly meeting (judging from the number of invitations he had turned down) for the members to think of a goal for the coming year.
It would appear though, that ASCC is doomed to die in a swamp of trivial bits rather than realizing the Preamble to their Constitution.
First of all, I want to thank you for letting me help in your campaign.
During this process I learned a great deal about the workings of democracy.
I shall never again feel apathetic about my own vote for the candidates of my choice.
It is very simple — you decide what candidates or issues you support, and then you work for them with the other people who agree with you.
Not always on a lofty, abstract plane, but often with mundane activities like stuffing envelopes or making some phone calls.
Whether your side wins or not, you have strengthened your ideas, your political party, your democracy and your treasured way-of-life.
Someone said that the strength of a democracy depends on organized opposition.
In attempting to persuade partisans, both groups stimulate thought and activity in a way which strengthens both sides, as well as the whole idea of democracy.
Of course, I also learned much about the art of campaigning which will be useful in the future, and while working with some of the wonderful people who support you, I made many new friendships and cemented old ones.
We all owe you a debt of gratitude for your insights into the fundamentals of democracy and for your untiring, lifelong efforts to involve us all in exercising the responsibilities and privileges of ""popular sovereignty,"" without which it would wither and die.
Your enthusiasm, insight and wisdom succeeded in broadening the base on which political decisions rest in our state.
In regard to your editorial, of September 30th, in which you stated that it would be of greater benefit to have the editor of the TIGER a voting member of CUL than a freshman class commissioner, we wish to state our reasons for disagreement.
That one of the major defects of CUL has been the lack of communication to the student body, and that you as editor of the Tiger by sitting in on CUL could rectify this situation.
That the editor of the Tiger through virtue of his position and expeience on the campus could be a greater contribute!to the committee than a freshman who has been on the campus only a relatively short time.
That you as an i n d i v i d u a 1 grow tired of siting as an ex-officio member on committees without a vote.
We further agree that by sitting on the CUL the editor of the Tiger could rectify this problem.
We feel, however, that the function of communication does not require a vote; and further, that this vote might prove to be unsatisfactory in the form of bias communication.
The function of the editor in this instance should be that of an unbiased observer rather than that of an interested voter.
The Tiger editor is not a representative of any such segment, nor is its editor popularly elected.
Sitting as an ex-officio member on various committees is one of the responsibilities of the position for which you applied and for which you are being paid, In summary we feel that you as editor of the Tiger could best fulfill your function as a communicator by sitting without a vote on CUL, and that a vote is in no way necessary for the fulfillment of this function.
We feel further, that this vote would be a greater benefit if exercised by freshmen class commissioners.
Certainly you are entitled to your opinions, but some last comments are in order.
In answer to point number one, you seem to feel that the TIGER editor exists solely to report what is worth reporting and nothing more.
If this were the situation, I would hardly go to such length to secure a position on the Committee.
It is agreed that a Freshmen Commissioner would be more familiar with freshmen problems than the editor of this tabloid.
My point was that the editor could contribute more than the Freshmen, not that the Editor was more familiar with Freshmen problems.
I don't think you have given them adequate credit for their intelligence.
Further, President Benezet requested four more students for CUL, but his point about elected members escapes me.
Judicial Board of the Associated Women Students is accepting applications for the position of editor of an interdormitory paper.
Don't let yourself get upset if you fe that you are not ""pursuing,"" or that lifelong is a little too much of prison sentence to look forward to, or that ""self-knowledge and wisdoi are a little bit too far out of your reach.
There are more specific goals for us to pursue if th cloud of haze does not spur you on.
No longer are they humiliated by the chai of being told to sign in for a three minute late.
Now there is left only the humility of being told daily th the HONOR SYSTEM teaches us self reliance when we know dam w, that we still have to be in by 10:30 or whenever it may be.
We are learning the habit i self-control because that is undoubtedly what gets our girls in on tin every night, and we are learning consideration to others because t girls all realize that if they are late, someone has to stay up and unlo the door for them.
That is to say, the girls are learning the self contof adhering to the set of rules which they are told is best for them.
And then we have the war games, right here at our peaceful liberal arts oasis.
Colorado College, that fortress of learning and knowledge, has oi again demonstrated the value of compulsion in achieving its ends, means, or something, by leaving the required major in leadership in it curriculum.
Many a convincing argument has been given for this major in ROT( One is its disciplinary value.
Discipline, of course as defined by tti ROTC, includes the ability to shine shoes properly, and to do ungues tioningly that which you might not understand or agree with.
Another argument to qualitfy the compulsory nature of militai things is that each and every one of us knew, when we came to CC, thl ROTC was compulsory.
This by itself obviously justifies its being hi And besides ROTC is a good draft dodgering device.
It also helps avoid work, and as we all know, everyone wants to be a chief, and ni just one of the tribe.
But just as spare time soldi they could practice starting revolutions of something which Thomas ferson claims are valuable to a country.
Fifty minute intervals— your mind gets a seconds stretch about thinking preceding acting, and having the strengt to follow your convictions.
Like returning to the nunnery an obeisantly prostrating before the Apogee Which Synthesizes because y know the law of gravity.
Finally, you are taking a great liberty in defining the position of the TIGER editor.
My ""pay"" as you so bluntly put it is somewhat depleted by the hundreds of miles of driving done by the staff, the meals missed and the hellish responsibility of meeting a deadline every week.
The ASCC Constitut ion says that the TIGER Editf shall be an Ex-officio member the Executive Council of AS< nothing more.
JH Colorado College Tiger October 7, I960 [2 [ In Opposition in a democracy if we will take the trouble ami responsibility necessary to make it so.
I say you helped because your respect for the contribution of each of us makes us respect our own contribution and we can take it from there, and soon everybody is helping and you have achieved your purpose — not personal agreement, but good government.
We are apt to think of the government as ""they;"" to lose the meaning of the great words like freedom, democracy, civil rights, etc., and to be so bedazzled by the ""glittering generality"" that we forget the simple truths.
The only way it can become an unfriendly, outside force is if we neglect our responsibility of making our desires known.
You are vividly aware that the ""we"" is made up of many categories of people whose varying needs must be taken into consideration in solving government problems— ALL of them — not just labor, or management, or profssional men, or farmers, or housewives or oldsters.
In dealing with these varying needs, you exhibit an awareness that one reason the metal of our democracy rings so true is that it contains such a combination of alloys.
I want to thank you for teaching me the importance of working in the political party of my choice.
Working in a party makes it possible to ""vote for the person"" with more knowledge and intelligence.
Now, after helping do the work which keeps a party operating, the name means a person.
Often, I have met and worked with him, and know his family, and his principles and approximately how he will approach his job if elected.
In almost no ease is it just a name —a part of that ""they"" which makes voting almost meaningless.
As long as we contribute the money needed to keep them going, we retain their control.
I have learned to feel comfortable with its problems and responsibilities and personalities.
As one citizen of a democracy to another, I thank you, Mr Fred M Betz, for teaching me full citizenship — for making it possible for me to learn that we are not full citizens until we asume full responsibility of citizenship and that the exercise of citizenship is rewarding, indeed.
Sincerely, Martha Tilley Boderman Begins Faculty Lectures The professors who will give the three lectures in the annual Fall Faculty Lecture Series have been announced by Professor William Fischer, chairman of the lectures committee.
Milton Snyder, assistant professor of chemistry and Mr Bernard Arnest, professor and director of the school of art.
S2S wai ; the fevorous quest Wally Caldwell A soft light envelopes the earth with transparencies.
He listens to the vague stirrings; but neither sees, nor hears— he dreams.
The depth of his troubles but heightens the memory of his iost happiness.
Insensive desires possess him; he struggles against the grief that enfolds Oh unplaeable necessity to believe and to love — This whole being filled with sudden desires for pleasure.
Within echoing distance of the Colorado College campus comes entertaining delights for those who enjoy the art of keeping on their toes.
The famous Embers Steak House has added that pleasure as they now offer dancing nightly.
The Embers, located at 21 S Wahsatch is featuring tunes by the Embers Trio, and dancing is held nightly from 10m. to 1:30m.
The Embers still offers its traditionally excellent food at amazingly reasonable prices.
Their Martinis are nothing but great, especially when they're in abundance.
This seems like an ideal evening out on the town and is guaranteed not to put too much of a dent in your budget.
For the movie-goers who like the hilarious aspects of show biz, the Broadmoor Theatre presentation is first on the agenda.
Looking like a fanatical potato, ubiguitous Peter Seller is a union shop steward — a ludicrous but often petty-bourgeois Marxist, in an uproarious satire on labor and management.
Grace to Come The Royal Ballet of London will soon grace the Denver Auditorium Theatre.
Featured will be Margot Fonteyn and Michael Somes, two truly outstanding performers.
For those lovers of the ballet, I would suggest making reservations now.
I personally am looking forward to this performance and am convinced that it will make an enjoyable evening's entertainment.
Arty The Artist of Colorado Springs and vicinity Painting and Sculpture Show is now on exhibition at the Fine Arts Center.
The show is well worth an afternoon, altho some of the selections are arty miscarriages.
Through various contacts with the musicians of the Air Force Academy, an open Jazz Concert could likely be in store for the students of Colorado College.
The Falconaires, a 17 -piece orchestra, is composed of professional musicians, all of whom have played with some of the country's top name band; emphasizing Billy May and Stan Kenton.
These hired musicians by the AFA have organized a Jazz Orchestra that is undoubtably great and they want to play for us.
In an effort to better relationships between CC and the AFA, PERSHING RIFLES of Colorado College is trying to organize a night Jazz Concert right here on campus, presenting these men and some really fine music.
The idea of an admission charge of 50c a head could be put to good use as a donation to the Campus Chest Fund and will give a much better relationship between the two schools; besides giving all of us a ""togetherness night"" of swingin' sounds.
Soon a petition will find its way around campus for all students and faculty to sign if they think this is a good idea.
Believe me they're great and we would be only too fortunate to have them entertain us and at the same time be a service to the Campus Chest.
He listens to the vague stirring; but neither sees nor hears ... he dreams — This whole being filled with sudden desires towards the fevorous quest for pleasure.
Having been formed last year by the ASCC, the committee has as its purpose the continual betterment of Colorado College courses.
The functions of the Student Curriculum Committee actually may be defined in terms of four main areas.
First, the committee advises the faculty and administration about course programs which students have constructively criticized.
Second, it collects opinions and advice concerning courses required during the first two years in order to improve these courses.
The committee also offers opinions on matters on which the administration seeks advice from the students.
Moreover, it makes suggestions dealing with non-curriculum problems such as the scheduling of examinations.
Membership in the Student Curriculum Committee is composed of one sophomore, one student from each division , a member of the ASCC who serves as chairman and a faculty advisor if necessary.
Anyone wishing to serve on the committee may obtain an application at the Raatalt desk.
Selection of members will be made by the ASCC Executive Council, Academic Calendar 19ti0— Fall Semester Oct., Suturday Homecoming Nov., Thursday Mid-semester grades due from faculty Nov., Thursday Thanksgiving holiday Nov. to Dec.
Pre-registration for spring semester Dec., Saturday Christmas recess begins at Jan., Thursday Christmas recess ends 8m.
Jan., Thursday Mid-year examinations begin Jan.«, Thursday Mid-year examinations end Jan., Friday Mid-year grades due before noon Clublicity by Eleanor Jones Chess Club The Chess Club will hold its first meeting today from 1 to 4m. in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center.
The officers are Charles Puckett, president; Jack Cashman, vicepresident, and Max Power, secretary-treasurer.
The club sponsors are Mr Al Johnson, instructor in business administration, and Mr Woodson Tyree, associate professor of speech.
German Club On Sunday, October 9, the German Club will hold its annual fall picnic at ""Lazyland"" in Austin Bluffs.
There will be plenty of recreation and refreshments and each paid-up member is entitled to bring one guest.
Brandt and his wife have invited the German Club to their home for the evening.
International Relations Club The Colorado College International Relations Club held its organization meeting on September 21.
Margaret Speer was elected to succeed Stephen Kushnir as president of the organization.
Bob Kramer became vice president, Joan Bernau became treasurer and Margi Taylor was elected the club's secretary for the coming year.
Discussion of the annual Rocky Mountain conference followed the elections.
Those who are interested in joining the CC delegation are invited to contact Dr.
Colonial INN IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIJIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlllllllllB Breakfast Lunch Dinner Pizzas to go Steaks Sandwiches °„7m;77 Fountain Service NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOM'S BOOK HOME 16 E Kiowa j October 7, I960 Colorado College Tiger Greek Is Still Greek Even If You Know It A CC professor who teaches Greek had trouble talking to 20th century Greeks this summer.
Miss Dorothy Mierow, instructor in geography and museum curator at CC, traveled to Greece and other places in Europe during the summer.
Mierow found he cound read the newspapers, but had trouble talking to Greks.
The Mierows left Colorado Springs soon after the spring semester ended.
From the U S. the Mierows flew to Copenhagen, Denmark, and then North for a tour of Norway and Sweden.
Next they went to Oberamergau to see the world famous Passion Play, and from there to Switzerland, Italy and to Greece before returning home.
Of all the places they saw, one probably will remain more in their minds than any of the others, and that is Trier, the home of St, Jerome, a long favorite study of Dr.
Medical Test Given For 1961 Graduates Saturday, October 29 is the date for the Medical College Admission Test.
Students applying for admission to medical colleges in the fall of .1901 are to complete applications at least two weeks before the testing date.
The examination fee is $15 including reports for up to three medical colleges.
The tests will be given at Colorado College and other established testing centers listed in the October 29, I960 announcement.
The test is designed to measure general academic ability, understanding of modern society and scientific knowledge.
Those interested are to apply early as no application can be guaranteed acceptance after deadline.
SPEAKER The last program of Writers Workshop Week, ""Writing for TV and Radio"", will be held this afternoon at 4m. in the WES room.
Wally Caldwell, presently employed ' part time by KRDO-TV, will present Mr Singer.
The rest of Writers Workshop Week had been deemed a success by its director, Gary Gappert.
THE >ANCAKE HOUSE 1 6 South Walnut The first six ads presented by Students each week good for 51.00 Free Food Sept.
The program is open to college men and women graduates mainly in the humanities and social sciences and each elected fellow receives a $1500 stipend for living expenses plus full tuition and family allowances.
The program, designed to encourage college seniors of outstanding ability to study for advanced degrees with faculty jobs as their goal, is administered by the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation under a $24,500,000 five year grant from the Ford Foundation.
Every candidate for the award must be nominated by a faculty -member and the fellowship winners of this academic year will be made known by March 15, 1961.
Colorado College is proud that one of last year's graduates, John Sweney, was the recipient of a Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship and is now working toward his Ph.D. in English at Claremont Graduate School, Claremont, California.
The Fellowships are being offered in most of the popular sciences and in those social sciences which fulfill the requirements of basic scientific methods.
Dwane R Collins and his wife were guests and later on in the evening Dr.
Collins made a speech to Judy Gray who won the award for the outstanding scholastic achievement in the chapter.
Pixie Campbell and Barb Standhardt won the award for the highest mother-daughter Saturday will be a busy day for the Betas.
In the afternoon they will get together with the Thetas for a picnic at Austin Bluffs.
That night a group of Betas and their dates will head for the football game on a chartered bus.
The new pledge class officers are president, Jim Sperry; vice-president, Charles Short; treasurer, Tim Florence; secretary, Bill Greeley and sergeant at arms, Tony Ayres.
Delta Gamma Last Thursday the Delta Gammas held formal pledging for their new girls.
On Saturday afternoon the Delta Gammas and the Sigma Chis got together for a picnic at Austin Bluffs.
IWA The new members of the IWA are Carole Coffman, Jane Dawson, Denise Garriques, Nancy Kitzmiller and Sally Twaddle.
They have chosen Zulu Wahlberg to be their queen candidate and Nancy Kitzmiller to be their watermelon eating contestant.
Kappa Sigma The Kappa Sigs and their dates will also board a bus and attend the Mines game tomorrow night.
On Monday the Kappa Sigs will go to the Kappa house for the serenade of Will Johnson and Marcia Moses.
Gamma Phi Beta Last Friday evening the new girls were formally pladged into the sorority.
Monday evening the Gamma Phis will meet at the house for an informal dinner before the meeting.
Phi Delta Theta Tomorrow the Phi Delts and their dates will be off for the Mines game at Golden, Colorado.
On Monday the Phi Delts and the Thetas will get together at the the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio ONE OF COLORADO'S FINER :ONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-0518 1 1 North Cascade Ave.
ME 2-5867 GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL Kappa Alpha Theta Monday, October 17, the Ph Delts will go to the Theta Housi for the serenade of Kathy Bruci and Sam Coleman.
Phi Gamma Delta Tonight the Phi Gams and theii dates will get together at the Ph Gam house for the pledge dance.
The Phi Gams will also be head ing for the football game with theii dates via bus.
Mary Sue Hedrick won the award for the greatest improvement and Linda Christen sen and Eleanor Jones received the award for the highest mother' daughter average.
Tomorrow Judy Bensel and Ele;> nor Jones will become active mem bers of the chapter.
Sigma Chi This afternoon the annual Sigma Chi Watermelon Bus,t will take place.
Tomorrow night the pledges hold their pledge dance for the tives at the Hackney House.
A SCC Notes By Betsy Gaskell Elections On Tuesday, October 11, thi freshman class will hold a clas; meeting in Perkins at which time those running for class commissioner will give speeches.
Finance All budget requests for school committees should be turned int> Chris Griffiths as soon as possibb Social It was passed that ASCC wil sponsor parents' week-end annual ly.
Heads for Parents' Week End and Song Fest are needed Anyone who is interested may get an application at Rastall desk.
Kath Bruce-Sam Coleman Engaged: Darlene Thomas (Victoria Col lege)-Dave Sloane Lynne Wendelin -Mike Robbins Zan Zumwalt -Dick Davit Married: Denice Schacht Gary Thompson.
Colorado College Tiger October 7, I960 Intramural Board Releases Schedule The Intramural Board held its first meeting of the season on Tuesday, September 20, and announced the beginning dates for the various intramural sports.
Representatives from the teams on the board are Newell Bossart, Beta Theta Pi; Bruce Houghton, Kappa Sigma; Bruce Franklin, Phi Delta Chi; and Dick Givan, Zeta.
The 1960-61 intramural touch football schedule began Tuesday with the Kappa Sigs playing the Zetas.
The schedule calls for one game on each Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday for five weeks.
Sigma Chi The Christian, Science Monitor Subsr at Ht Now Mce* You con read this world-famous doily newspaper (or the next six months for $5, just half the regular subscription rate.
The Christian Science Monil One Norway St., Boston 15, Mass, Send your newspaper for the ti, checked.
After knocking off three Kansas teams so far this season, the Tigers enter Rocky Mountain Conference play tomorrow with a game in Golden against the Colorado School of Mines.
Eddie Kintz acted as quarterback through most of the game in the absence of Tony Sellitto who injured his ankle early in the game.
Neither team scored in the first period, but the second period saw the Tigers take a substantial lead with three touchdowns.
The first score came early in the period when Pete Pleasant drove over for a TD and then added his first of four conversions to make it 7-0.
Hays added their first score, made the conversion and the score became 14-7.
The final scoring for CC came in the third period when Scott Tippin ran over the line.
Hays began to threaten the Tigers lead with two touchdowns in the last quarter.
The team championship will be determined after the first round of medal play.
The nine low scorers in the first round will 'qualify for a second round, and the individual champion will be based on 36 holes of play.
Play will be governed by USGA medal play rules and contestants will play in threesomes.
Tippin skirts left end for a short gair as Sellitto blocks out an opposing player.
The flag was so close to the ground that the freshn it do the >rd in • of ; seconds.
The general opinion among the freshmen is that the sophomores should have had to polish the tigers since they lost.
Although some of it was stolen during the breakfast at Slocuni, there was plenty left, and when the sophomores had gone, the freshmen threw it at each other.
Most of the excitement took place after the fight when fist fighting broke out between the freshmen and uperclass boys.
Fortunately, due to the Blue Key members present, no one was hurt but only bruised up a bit.
MElrose 3-394(5 LOOKOUT yell the frosh as they charge into the defenses of the sophmores at the freshman-sophomore fight last Saturday morning.
Lunch Dinner Frosh Commissioners Start Campaigns Fri, Candidates for freshman coi missioners may put up eampai; posters from October 7-12.
Try Our Fresh PIZZA \i ROSS KKOM CAMPUSi REPRESENTATIVE WANTED in your territory From your desk you car earn a substantial additior to your income.
Kiep of the German Embassy Speaks on Berlin The Colorado College International Relations Club and German Club are co-sponsoring a talk by Mrs.
She will speak on the topic, ""Berlin/' on Thursday, October 20 at 4:15m. in the Shove Chapel Lecture Room.
Kiep is Women's Affairs Secretary of the German Colorado College Embassy in Washington.
This position was newly created in the German Foreign Service in 1051 and Mrs.
Her husband was a leading figure in the German resistance movement against Hitler.
He was executed in the Nazi purge thatfollowed the July 20, 1044 attempt on Hitler's life.
When the time came for rebuilding Germany, she was one of those who realized that the future of German democracy would depend on the extent to which German women associated themselves with public affairs in postwar Germany.
Kiep's primary function in the United States is to maintain close contact with American women in public life and American women's organizations.
On Saturday afternoon, October 22, from 12:30 to 4 :30m. the senior class will be at Washburn Field with paint brushes to paint the home bleachers in time for the homecoming weekend.
Louis T Benezet, Dean Lloyd Worner, Dean Juan Reid, Dean Christine Moon, Mr Richard Kendrick, and Dr.
Bentley Gilbert are helping the class with the planning and publicity of the project.
Seated from left to right are ""Willie"" Willcox senior and Terry Kidner, sophomore.
The team left this morning on a jet plane froi Tonight they will be guests of CC alumni at a dinner and Saturday night the teai Broadway stage production.
Each of the five Rastall Center I committees of Special Events, I Dance, Coffee Hours, Films and Publicity handles one phase of the planning.
On October 23 the board has scheduled a movie to be shown in the Center.
The feature to be shown is ""Wilson,"" starring Alexander Knox, Charles Coburn and Geraldine Fitzgerald.
The film is an historical account of the political life of Woodrow WilOctober 25 marks Rastall Center's first year as CC's college union.
Refreshments are to be served and favors will be given from 3 to 5m. in the Rastall lounge.
Double dip ice cream cones will be sold for a nickel that day in the Hub to help commemorate the first anniversary.
This rally is a search for the ""treasured keg"" in automobiles over an 80 mile course.
The car that travels the course in the time and mileage which most closely agrees with that of the officials who have pre-determined it will be judged the winner.
Details on other Rastall sponsored events will appear in the following weeks in the TIGER and on bulletin boards on campus.
ASCC Room— Rastall Center All who wish to protest tickets should attend.
Variety Show Tryouls Continue Next Week The Variety Show is underway and acts are being reviewed.
Any interested individuals or groups may arrange for an audition by contacting Sylvia Stenovec or Ina Begerow, X-296 or Mr Woodson Tyree, X-343.
The Variety Show is run in conjunction with the Colorado College benefit for the Community Chest.
Annual Smoker Held By Pershing Rifles Last week Pershing Rifles held its annual smoker in the WES room in Rastall Center.
M-l A-l carbine, two types of hand radios used on the battle field and dummy ammo for the weapons.
Captain Dale Dalby gave a short talk on what Pershing Rifles expects to accomplish this year.
Among these were the annual regimental assembly already held this year at Fort Carson with Co.
D-9 and CC Pershing Rifles as hosts, a dance this winter and other events to be announced later.
All ROTC cadets are welcome to our meeting next Thursday at 7:30 m. in the ROTC building.
Freedom and Authority Programmed by KRCC Discussions on ""Freedom and Authority,"" man's oldest political and social problem, will be heard during the present semester over the Colorado College radio station, KRCC-FM, 93. on the band.
Freedom and authority .will be discussed from three points of view, personal, social and religious.
Great books of western civilization will be used as a base for the discussions.
Foreign Service Exams Given on December 10 Foreign Service Officer Examinations will be given on December 10 in 65 cities.
To be eligible a candidate must be between 21 and 31 years of age on October 24 or be 20 years of age and a college senior or graduate, Students who have studied economics, administration, language, history or political science will find this a good opportunity for travel.
Candidates passing the written test will be given an oral test within 9 months.
After July 1, 1963 fluency in French, Spanish or German will be a requirement.
Those who pass the oral test will be given a physical checkup and background investigation.
Insurance, educational and retirement benefits are granted, as well as annual and sick leave.
Write to the Board of Examiners for the Foreign Service, Department of State, Washington 25.
Class members are workinj with Mr Kendrick and other members of the administration and they expect to see the class out ""in full force"" on October 22.
The faculty and administration plan to quench the seniors' thirst while they are working by serving them cokes.
Dean Worner and Dean Reid are urging all faculty members and friends of the college to lend their paint brushes for the afternoon.
They are to be turned in to Mr Kendrick's office any time before October 22.
Donators are asked to label their brushes if they wish them to be returned.
Not only will the senior class be working for the school, but in exchange, they will receive $225.00 from the administration.
It is in this way that the class hopes to pay for its class gift, senior steak and graduation party.
All sophomores, juniors and Reniors are eligible to apply for the Curriculum Committee.
Applications are available at Rastall desk and are to be returned to the desk or to Mariana Cogswell by noon, Monday, October 17.
Any professor who feels a student would fit the requirements may contact Miss Cogswell.
DON WOLFGANG _WALLY CALDWELL PENNY DAVIDSON __JOAN ERIKSON ■Vicky Morey.
Unfortunately for the American people, the two presidential candidates declined to take specific stands on many of the pressing campaign issues, preferring to answer questions on the civil rights issue, the Cuban question and the problem of ecoKennedy said, ""I think it unwise to take the chance of being dragged into a war which may lead to a World War over two islands which are not strategically defenswhich are not, according to nomic assistance to depressed segments of our economy by haggling and exchanging bitter, often caustic remarks.
Both men committed themselves to a Summit Conference if and when Mr Khrushchev provides tangible evidence that he is willing to negotiate and not just ready to grind out more propaganda.
Both men agreed that an increase in taxes might be a necessity in the future.
Each agreed also on the economic means of decreasing tax revenues if our economy should experience a recession.
On the preceding points, both men were in agreement but on the following questions where they assumed a specific stand, their opinions were as different as their personalities.
Mr Nixon pointed to the current United Nations session and particularly the continual defeat of the question of seating Red China to prove that United States prestige abroad was at an all time high.
Mr Kennedy also pointed to the United Nations but to the vote of the five neutral nations and to the increase in votes on Red China's side in the seating question to prove that United States prestige was at a new, all time low.
However, the question posed by Mr Morgan of ABC News gave rise to the biggest difference of opinion involving foreign affairs.
This question dealt with the defense of Formosa and the islands of Matsu and Quemoy.
Calling for a ""clearly defined line of defense,"" Mr He said, ""These two islands are i the area of freedom.
We should not force our Nationalist allies to get off of them and give them to the Communists.
If we do that, we start a chain of reaction, because the Communists aren't after Quemoy and Matsu.
It is really too bad that both men could not have been as specific on all issues discussed as they were on these I have enumerated.
However, even though both men desire the presidency because they believe that their ideas are the best for the American people as a whole, both are faced with the necessity of playing politics.
Consequently, only after we have associated the remarks made on the debates with the proposals found in the platforms and with the remarks of both men to certain groups will we be able to gain a clear view of which man is better.
Rehearsals for the production, ""Hansel and Gretel,"" have been underway for several weeks.
On April 20, 21 and 22 ""Cavalleria Rusticanna"" by Mascagni will be given.
The Association, now in its second season, is under the directorship of Miss Edalyn Burger and Dr.
Talent for the Association comes from Colorado Springs and the outlying community.
Letters to the Editor Excerpts from a letter from Birgitta Nachmanson, CC's foreign student from Sweden in 1959-60. 1 think very much of niy marvellous year at CC and the rest of the States, and very often long to go back there.
I learned very much both in regard to actual knowledge and in way of living.
I was met with an overwhelming friendliness, especially at the College, from both faculty and students, but also everywhere else I went in the States.
You have a kindness and helpfulness that is so spontaneous that I don't think anyone that comes to the United States can help liking it.
Parkudden Djurgarden, Stockholm, so that anyone who comes to Sweden can look me up.
Best wishes, Birgitta Nachmanson A Challenge We, as members and volunteers of the Young Democrats of Colorado College, challenge the Young Republicans of CC to debate the facts and issues of this momentous presidential election.
Everywhere, in cities and towns and on college campuses throughout the nation, we issue this challenge.
We believe that our candidates, our record and our platform can easily withstand the arguments offered by Nixon and his supporters.
I should like, subject to the approval of our organization at its next regular meeting, to accept your challenge.
I would suggest that arrangements be made through the Citizenship Club, which is the appropriate coordinating and sponsoring body for such activities as soon as possible.
I would further suggest that these debates be publicized and open to the college community and the townspeople.
I too am confident that our platform, progi'ams and our entire slate of candidates can withstand the vigorous and necessary, if poorly founded, opposition to which they have often been subjected.
Finally, I would urge our opponents to remember that there is a distinction between fair-minded conviction and rabid bigotry.
We shall endeavor to maintain fairness and to adhere to the objective of enlightening those who audit the debate, rather than that of. partisan bickering.
Very truly yours, M~ax S Power, Chairman Gayle French Plays Lead in ""Anne Frank"" The cast for the ""Diary of Anne Frank"" has been chosen.
Gayle French will play Anne Frank with Jim Fox, Donna Duncan, Peggi Benham, Leonard Dalsemer, Carol Elfring, Robert Halsbaiid, Richard Rundell, Liz Quint and Doug Cowles in the supporting roles.
A cast meeting was held Thursday and rehearsals will be every night starting Monday.
Girls are needed to help with the fitting and boys to help with set building.
There will be a meeting for all seniors interested in graduate work Tuesday.
Oaaaock Spengler, Tornybee. and Oasock The history of this hemisphere as it exists today, begins circa 2 A.G with the old woman who lived in a shoe.
As th. scribes have recorded it, she had so many children she didn't know wha' to do so she moved most of them into a shoebox.
They adjusted very well to shoebox living because they were represented on the Snowshoe Board which made it very democratic and everyone always lives well in a democracy.
In fact they adjusted so well that most of them lived in the shoebox for 3 years and that third and last year was the best of all.
You could pretty much determine if you wanted to live in the toe or the heel and if you were really lucky you got a bit of sole all your own.
And to top it off, your bedtime was a little later than the younger's which meant they really looked up to you.
The third year children still knew that Someone cared and if you got that ""emergency long-distance phone call"" the old woman in her pink and yellow slip would run upstairs, downstairs, all thru the town to give you that message.
There is only one thing that doesn't seem true to life in this history — there were no wars.
But then this shouldn't be so strange; after all, this was Mother Gooseville.
But that day and those people and those cares are little more than myths now.
You'd laugh and say that no one lived like that ever, except maybe during the backwards times of the Spartans or Russian communists.
You can go over to the new reference library, the one down on Pikes Peak and Cascade, and somewhere you'll find all the old papers and things and can read about it for yourself.
At one time on this campus they practiced confinement for a punishment.
It is not too clear what crime this punishment was for, but apparently it stemmed from being a girl, as it was equally distributed to women students.
Strangely enough, it only applied at night, as though they distinguished between the degrees of misdeameanor that Colorado College Tige could be committed between the afternoon, and the aftermidnight.
However many of the girls which could have leases which allowed them outside for certain short periods of time, if they told their masters who they were.
We are proud of our maturity and the education .we are getting, and can'; imagine going to class with any kind of Traditional inhibition.
Yet there is even a funnier tradition that was practiced in those ancient days.
This consisted of a group of women students who took it upon themselves to further confine students who tread on tradition.
Someone got up on their puppet stage with them and severed their lines . . . they collapsed to the stage, falling apart at the seams, spewing out sawdust . . . these were the hollow women.
She ordered strawberry ice cream with Chocolate sauce, and then ate it with her left hand.
We lead, we march, we sing: Onward Christian Soldiers, spying as in war, with the cross of psycho, slandering as before.
Young Republicans The CC Young Republicans will hold their next regular meeting, Tuesday, October 18 at 4:30m. in Rastall Center.
There will be a discussion of the proposed debates with the Young Democrats Club and a discussion with local candidates, including popular State Representative Norman Ohlson.
October 14, I960 Foreign Correspondent Speaks On ""Gathering News Abroad"" The International Relations Club, participating in last Leek's Writer's Workshop, brought to the college campus Wednesday afternoon, Mr Robert Hosokawa, foreign correspondent with the Denver Post, Students heard Mr Hosokawa .aneak briefly on the subject ""Gathering News Abroad,"" describing his field and offering views on aspects of American ' ioreign policy «r*TOWN . . t& injptm, i+t&ftiAe and incite Mr Hosokawa explained that mere are two kinds of foreign correspondents.
First, those who are "" «ciated with the national wire Services an dthe major newspapers, jving permanently or semi-permaLntly in the locale of their tour \i duty.
Secondly, there are those ake himself whom he called ""fiasco [ditors"" that are assigned specific \oblems in foreign relations.
Mr Mr Hosokawa pointed out that some of the coverage of Premier Khrushchev's press conferences was inadequate .because Communist interpreters soothed over some of the more violent and ""earthy"" language of the Russian leader.
Although command of languages is essential to accurate reporting, more is demanded of today's press than precise statements about bj Wally Caldwell Espresso — A Way of Life You may recall that not too many years ago, the art of coffee drinking started a national institution.
All forms of coffee were given a contemporary touch as more and more coffee-lovers called for the immortal espresso.
Mr Hosokawa pointed out that vith the present plurality of diponiatic languages, the corresponlent must have at his command at east one or two.
To present this feature adequately, the correspondent has to supplement his first-hand observations with firm background konwledge of the people and events in his assignment.
Citizens can no longer afford to maintain only a passing interest in international relations, Mr Hosokawa said.
Seated from left to right are Nancy Cox, Judy Alt, Francie Glasscock and Mr Don Oden.
Not to be completely outdone by the clammering big cities, Colorado Springs has its house too — coffee house that is.
Maybe not as bohemian, in fact somewhat elegant. but it presents itself as a place well worth visiting — Michelle's.
Here the pseudos, beats and boherns congregate with those of savoir-faire to drink all types ofcoffees and teas.
Foreign coffee recipes have clasped to the red, white and blue bosom of the western world and has in fact become a way of life.
Perspective A most distinctive and unique, array of paintings and sculpture are still on view at the Denver Museum of Fine Arts.
Presently the ""66th Annual Exhibition of Western Art"" is on exhibit and will continue through October 23.
Speaking of sculpture, our won Fine Arts Center Museum has a small, but worthy collection too.
One in particular is that by Harry Bertoyia, found in the Art Center Music room.
This first in the series will run from Oct.-22 and should prove to be delightful evenings as have previous performances.
Also a few familiar faces will be seen — one Doc Stabler, who is great anyway.
Season membership J KRCC presents i JAZZ I Nows the Time EVERY THURSDAY— 8-10:00 P is §7.50 and all performances take place in the Fine Arts Center Theatre.
This is the first of a series of four plays which will bring such actors as Brian Donlevy, John Carradine and Edward Everett Horton within echoing distance of Colorado Spgs.
That man of wit and instinct, Shelley Berman, is scheduled to appear at the Denver Auditorium, Oct. and 30.
This advanced notice is for you Berm anlovers to make reservation soon.
A sell-out is predicted by those of cool, so one had bolter get a move on it quick.
The striking cover photo was done ,by Fine Arts Center staff member Myron Wood.
Delta Gamma, first; Kappa Alpha Theta, second; and Gamma Phi Beta, third.
When the sun goes down behind the mountains, the world holds its breath a moment.
Your heart quickens as you watch the trails ignite, then breatlessly see the fiery color extinguish itself, softly slipping your Western borizon into gentle darkness.
The remains of a day can be seen in the foot prints of the hills and you reach out, trying all you can, but never touching the bounds of your new horizon.
Body & Fender Repairing and Painling Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St.
Advanced as it may be, this airplane has one thine in common with the first wargalleys of ancient Egypt. ..find with the air and space Vehicles o( the future.
For certain young men this presents a career of real executive opportunity.
S Air Force, To qualify for Navigator training as an Aviation Cadet you must be an American citizen between 19 and 26/2-singlc, healthy and intelligent.
A high school diploma i^ required, but some college is highly desirable.
If you think you have what it takes to measure up to the Aviation Cadet Program for Navigator training, see your local Air Force Recruiter.
AVIATION CADET INFORMATION B OX T '760 C a L ° WASHINGTON S O.C. i am between 19 and 26 1 /?, a citizen ol Ihe United States and a hlgti school gradate liege.
EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3171/j N Tejon Each day of the tour was carefully planned.
After entering through Finland they stopped in Leningrad where Miss Bohlke and some of the girls attended a dance.
She was ""surprised to hear the band playing jazz,"" but the two step was all they danced to any type of music.
Everywhere the people are extremely proud to show something given them by an American as they were when Miss Bohlke gave a young man a pack of American cigarettes or when she gave an older woman a tube of lipstick, some earrings and perfume.
Always something is given in return for a gift of any type, no matter how insignificant it might seem to us.
All through Russia Miss Bohlke found that they have ""the most terrible food I've ever eaten"" with i exception of their bread and ice cream.
Milk is impossible to get so the students had ice cream IT TAKES TWO Namelyi shirt/skirt . . . pullover/pants.
One geologist from a un sity told Miss Bohlke that his dream was to go to America because there he could find freedoi.
When the group left, the people waved good-bye, saying the word meer, meaning peace.
During the tour pictures could' L be taken of everything exceptlr, bridges and soldiers.
Onpi the way out of Russia their lug gage was not searched very cart fully.
We Are Completely Stocked with the FINEST SKI EQUIPMENT Also ALL KINDS OF SPORTING GOODS AND OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT BLICK s P or t'ng Goods Co.
MHro.e 2-3393 the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio OWE OF COLORADO'S FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-05 18 || North Cascade Ave.
When it was explained that none had applied, the opinion was still that these students were prejudiced, the styles improved slightly.
ThAmerican Embassy in Moscow referred to the travelers as the ""Adventure Group"" because they did tour Southern Russia.
While ii> Moscow the Embassy gave thgroup copies of the United States magazine Amerika to distribute among the people.
The Russians are always eager to read and look at pictures concerning the Americans.
The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 1 .. to II Deily W Colo.
Former Fitter for Stars Al Tailoring nd W01 Alteratio Specialist in WHITE TUX $30.00 DARK TUX $35.00 TUX RENTAL $7.00 ME 3-1824 1'h E Colorado Ave.
Since this was the first lonf'erence game of the season, the Tigers hurt their chances K the Rocky Mountain Conference crown. i Saturday night the Tigers traveled to Golden to open Wference play against Colorado School of Mines.
Uthough the second half remained or the Miners, CC finally ;ded a tally to the game and red a TD with but two seconds lining in what almost turned to be a scoreless first half. :te Pleasant went over from the yard line and then made the version.
However, a penalty ainst the Tigers nullified the and the second attempt by [easant was short, ilarly in the second half the ners retaliated after interceptone of Tony Sellitto's passes, ey fought their way down to the yard line and then ;er the Tigers held them for plays, the Miners went over id added a conversion.
Later in the quarter the Miners reatened again but the Tigers covered a Miner fumble on their n 20 to end that threat.
The jers were forced into a punting nation but the pass to Billy ockett who was back to kick s far over his head and he was >pped on his own four after revering the ball.
But then it was • Miners' ball, . and they soon aped over the line with less than ninute to go in the quarter.
The final drive of the game came the closing minutes of the last arter when the Miners worked jir way deep into Tiger territory where they were finally stopped on the one yard line by a determined CC defense.
But Sellitto was unable to get the ball out of this precarious position and on the second play he was dropped in his own end zone for a safety and the final score of the game.
Several busses of avid football fans from CC were there to cheer for their team and to uphold the rivalry between the two schools.
At times the school spirit reached a physical point and the Tiger fans proved the victors in at least one respect — their prize of a miner's helmet.
KEN WISGERHOF, number 81, is shown seconds before catching a pass and successfully completing an 87 yard touchdown run against Mines.
Intramurals Start With Three Games Last week the first three games of the intramural season took place.
In the first game held on Tuesday, score was initiated in the game with an eight yard pass play from Hanks to Johnson.
The Zetas retaliated with a draw play which resulted in a 20 yard touchdown run by Dutkowski.
What looked like the turning point in the game was when Hanks intercepted a pass late in the second half.
On the next play, the Zetas quarterback mishandled the hike from center and the ball went into the end zone for a safety.
In the second game the Phi Gams initiated the score with a 15 yard TD pass from Bergman to Parkow, The Sigma Chis retaliated with a pass which covered 20 yards for a TD from Floerschinger to Rhoades.
They completed the extra point with a pass from Floerschinger to Art Ackerman.
The Sigma Chis intercepted a pass from the Phi Gams and Floerschinger hit Ackerman for a 40 yard TD pass play.
In the second half the FloerschingerAckerman team took over again on a 30 yard TD pass play.
Later in the half, Bishop intercepted a Phi Gam pass and lateraled Simus who scooted 50 yards for When It's Music It's Miller-, Miller Music Co.
The first score came when Lurie made a two yard touchdown plunge and then passed to Lawrence for the extra point.
All freshman men interested in playing on the freshman basketball team are asked to meet Tuesday, October 18 at 4 m. in the gymnasium at Cossitt Hall.
Men interested should contact either Coach Leon East lack, X-20G or Coach Gary Cook, X-305.
Then Lurie and Lawerence connected for a 40 yard TD pass play, and Lurie and Florence connected wih a pass for the extra point and the final score of the game.
AMSON TOBACCO CORPORATION YOU FEEL A NEW SMOOTHNESS DEEP IN YOUR THROAT TOBACCO PRODUCTS Clreck rle\ E FERB3TEIN Beta Theta Pi Last Tuesday evening the Betas had the Alpha Phis over for an informal dinner.
Awards for outstanding scholastic achievement will be given at that time.
Phi Delta Theta Last Monday evening the Phi Delts played host to the Thetas for an informal dessert.
The new pledge class officers are president, Hank Rase; vicepresident, Eav Mithun; social chairman, Bill Pelz; warden, Steve Sabom; and song leader, Chuck Lawrence.
Kappa Kappa Gamma Tonight is the Kappa pledge dance and open house combined.
On Monday eveing, the Kappas will have the football team over for an informal dessert.
They are president, Don Bradbury; social chairman, Rick Carrol; secretary-treasurer, Bill Gray and song leader, Tony ShaKappa Alpha Theta The Theta pledge dance and open house is tonight.
Last Saturday the Thetas got together with the Betas for a picnic at Austin Bluffs.
Sigma Chi This weekend the Sigma Chis will play host to the Sigma Chi chapter from Greeley.
On Saturday both chapters and their dates will get together for a picinc.
The officers of the pledge class are president, Chuck Beaver; vicepresident, Fred Luft, social chairman, Pete Law; secretary-treasurer, Dick Hunt, and house manager, Bill Ward.
Alpha Phi The Alpha Phis will hold their annual pledge dance and open house tonight.
Kappa Sigma The new officers of the pledge class are president, Dick Cholacian; vice-president, Bob Anton; and social chairman, George Klein.
Tomorrow night is the pledge dance which will be held at tbe Saturday afternoon is the annual Kappa Sigma-Gamma Phi Beta footbal game.
Delta Gamma The Delta Gamma pledge officers are president, Many Hamilton; vice-president, Sue Heidel; secretary, Joyce Manning; treasurer, Suzanne Armstrong; song leader, Ellen Price, and junior Panhellenic representative, Nancy Parker.
Thursday the chapter will give a SHOWN ABOVE are the candidates for fresh, dinn in ho ■ of the pledges.
ASCC Notes ASCC is going to allot $100 to the radio department so that the F.M. radio station can be carried to the different buildings in the school.
Enthusiasm All boys who are interested in becoming cheer leaders should get in touch with Don Lavers.
Senior Class The senior class is going to paint the home bleachers in Washburn Field on Saturday afternoon of October 22.
Old Business Anyone interested in heading Parent's Week-End, Song Fest or the All College Conference should pick up an application blank at Rastall desk and turn it in before Monday, October 31.
Tareyton's flavorbalance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos. — NEW DUAL FILTER Product of <Jnt.
The candidates in the order which they spoke are Sue Heidel, Susan Hile, Dave Holdorf, Hybl, Lynda Johnson, John Levi^ Al Loosli, Mancel Mitchell, William Pelz, Ann Ruth, Coleman Travel stead and Dick Woods.
II pr 'b iliirl • Freedom and (Continued from i Authority study program as part of the Colorado College curriculum.
The discussions will be between faculty members and students cur rently enrolled in the Freedom an Authority classes.
Colorado College faculty mem bers who will be in charge of thi discussions will be Mr Harr; Booth, head of the religion depart ment, Mr Glenn Gray, head of thi philosophy department.
Wright of the physics department, Mr Carleton Gamer of the musk' department and Mr George Mill of the fine arts department.
ME 2-1277 Colorado College Tiger October 14, I960 Tl ilidu emp 1 unio gait crac erat try torii thei ther Boderman Says Bureaucracy And Bigness Are Here to Stay Bigness and the bureaucracy that accompanies it are here ,o stay, according to Colorado College professor, Dr.
Boderman, society could not abolish bigjess if it tried because it needs bigness and its bureaucracies o attain the high standards of life Americans are demanding.
Colorado Springs, Colo., October 21, I960 Colorado College CC Students Adventure Into Homecoming Fairyland Today the first posters for the Homecoming Queen of 1960 will appear.
The crowning ceremonies will take place at Washburn Field, Friday, October 28.
Boderman used the word jureaucracy to refer to the big uanagement operations of government and business, with their big porations and big unions, and ixtended it as well to include such big operations as fund raising.
He pointed out that all have problems and are organized Harry with a core of experts.
It needs .bureaucracy for the high standards of living the organization makes possible.
As long as people want production of automobile; for instance, we will have big organizations and their as,"" Dr.
Big Corporations Produce Changes The growth of big corporations such as exist in the steel and auto industries have changed employeemployer relationships, and it k longer possible for the employei to know the employee on a perplane, Dr.
Boderman said, and he added that unions now also use the organization techniques g business.
Even the most successful agriiltural ventures are big and organized with their own bureaucracies, he pointed out.
Some operations found in the fruit indus try in California are simply ""factories of the field,"" and depend their own bureaucracies to run them, Dr.
All big organizations have thenselect corps of experts and manwho make the decisions.
Most decisions can not be revoked without having already had a great impact on the American scene, Dr.
The question of public interest vesus private interest must be considered and government must be the referee.
Bureaucracy, a Dilemma Bigness is not an unmitigated evil, but the bureaucracy that accompanies it presents a dilemma, said Dr.
The United States has benefited from these big corporations and their big production, but who controls rporations the power of these * Dr.
Boderman pointed to General Motors with 750,000 stockholders and American Telegraph with 1,100,000 stockholders.
They have the real power and can control areas of economic health in the U S.,"" Dr.
Boderman pointed out that only in politics does the United States have two parties.
Even generals are turning in their stars so they can write books to present the opposite view,"" he said.
Boderman said he did not know where today's trends will lead, and added, ""One thing for sure, you can't go home again.
Hochman Discusses Convention System Tuesday at 11m. in Perkins Hall, Dr.
He will give us an insight into the Stevenson program and strategy as well as a behind the scenes report on the preparation and planning that goes into a convention Dr.
Hochman will also point out a few of the abuses of the convention system which he thinks should be corrected.
A dinner for the College Bowl team is to be held Tuesday, October 25, 6:30 in Bemis.
There will be a 50 cent charge for those paying college Board and $2 for all others.
Due to the rain, the bleachers are too wet to be painted by the Senior Class this Saturday, October 22.
All members of the faculty and friends of the college who loaned paint brushes for the afternoon are asked to pick them up at Mr Kendrick's office in back of the ROTC building.
The Commissioners apologize for any inconvenience which may have been caused by the cancellation, but definitely plan to carry out the project at a later date.
Watch for further information concerning this will be found in next week's issue of die TIGER, We of the TIGER wish to apologize for the erroneous hours of operations mentioned in the advertisements about Howard's Bit and Bridle Restaurant.
Monday thru Saturday, 9-3, Sunday 9 to midnight. 10 per cent off on Sundays for CC students with activity cards.
Rastall Celebrates First Anniversary Tuesday, Rastall Center .will observe its first anniversary as CC's student union.
To celebrate the event the board will hold a reception in the main lounge where refreshments and an anniversary cake will be served.
There will be a special display on the bulletin boards in the lobby depicting the dedication of Rastall.
The student union is fast becoming the focal point on the college campus.
The queen and her attendants will ride as honorees in the parade the following morning.
Floats from all Greek organizations and the Independent Men and Women will compete for first, second and third place.
Floats this year will center around the theme of Fairy Tales and Folk Lore.
The Alpha Phi's float will bo ""Aladdin and His Lamp,"" Delta Gamma's will be ""King Midas and the Golden Touch""; Gama Phi Beta's, ""Little Black Sambo""; Kappa Alpha Theta's, ""Peter Pan""; Kappa Kappa Gamma's.
Beta Theta Pi will have ""Brer Bunny""; Kappa Sigma, ""In the Days of King Arthur""; Phi Delta Theta, ""Seven in One Blow""; Phi Gamma Delta, ""Tom Dooley""; Sigma Chi, ""St.
Floats must be at the line up area, between Cascade and Tejon at Vermijo, by 7:46m.
Bob McGrew with an 11-piece orchestra and a vocalist will provide the music for the Homecoming Dance at the Broadmoor Hotel from 9m. to 1m.
Tickets may be obtained from Blue Key members or purchased in Palmer for $2.50.
Two years ago Homecoming marked the ground breaking for Rastall Center and last year the Center was dedicated.
Pep Rally— Crowning of Queen— North End, Washburn Field SATURDAY, OCTOBER 29 7:40m.
Ground-Breaking for the new Libi and San Rafael St, 12 noon Homecoming Luncheon and Rally— Rastall Center Dining Room.
Special tables for classes holding reunions, 1944, 1945 and 1935 (1935 Silver Anniversary Reunion) 2:00m.
Reserved aeats in Section 17 for alumni and parents of students, $2.00— Washburn Field 4:30m.
Benczet and members of the Faculty will greet alumni and friends of the College — Rastall Center Dining Room 5:00-0:00m.
Open House — Fraternities, Sororities and Independent Men and Women 9:00m.-l:00m.
Presentation of trophies, Broadmoor Hotel Ballroom HOMECOMING QUEEN candidates are from left 1o right Elizabeth Quint, IWA, Betty Bungener, Theta, Linda Cray, Alpha Phi, Abett Icks, Delta Gamma, Meredyth Richards, Kappa and Ina Begerow, Gamma Phi.
OFFICIAL COLORADO OOLLEtit; STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF Fine '\rtF Editovi "" WALLY CALDWELL PENNY PAVIflSON Copy Editor JOAN ERIKSON ^TAFFVicky Morey.
Co lor:i .to on the CORNER We are agreed that it was a pleasing weekend.
If the welcome which was afforded the team is any indication, then we might be safe in saying that this is one of the few times in the history of one's career which was dedicated to the achievement of brains rather than brawn.
While we do not wish to detract from the football team who certainly are most deserving of plaudits in their own right the enthusiasm was good to see.
This is not by any means a half-cocked idea but one which could provide some measure of entertainment on the campus.
They discussed the value of a degree from the ""right"" college and one of their comments is quoted below.
Oaasockian Reflections It would appear in the light of the past articles of Mssr.
We Who Observe and Speak on Campus Kulture that all is not right with the world.
This in itself is not to be chastised for the world is far from the garden of perfection we would have it be.
However, when an entire newspaper begins to be known by one column rather than the column for the newspaper, then it is with sadness and mixed emotions that we send the lad off to the land of nod for a quick forty.
Anyone interested in heading any committee, except the Blue Key Dance Committee, should pick up an application blank at Rastall desk.
Clubiicity By Ginny Metcalf Geology Club The Geology Club held a meeting in Palmer Hall last Tuesday, October 18.
This was for the purpose of introducing the new foreign students attending Colorado College to the committee's members of the faculty.
Other officers are Steve Kushnir, vice president; Tina Stonorov, secretary, and Bob Thrasher, treasurer.
The senior class will paint the bleachers tomorrow at 12 The seniors will also prepare a skit for the Variety Show.
The freshman class commissioners, Dick Woods, Sue Heidel and Mancel Mitchell are planning a class meeting soon.
Voting for the queen will be Thursday and FriSmith, Jazz Guitarist, Plays in Perkins Hall The CC convocation was treated to the sounds of the Johnnie Smith Quartet last Tuesday in Perkins Hall.
Residing now in Colorado Springs, Johnnie Smith is one of the contemporary jazz greats.
The Quartet is composed of Johnnie Smith, guitar; Dave Timmerman, bass; Sammy Colon, piano and Micky McPherson, drums.
They are currently appearing nightly in the Springs at the Alamo Hotel.
The quartet played ""Prelude to a Kiss"" and ""Satan Doll,"" reminiscent of Duke Ellington.
L^reek flews BY FRANNIE Fi Sigma Chi The Sigma Chis have received five new pledges.
These boys are George Burmeister, Chuck Cornell, Bob Pinger, Doug Shaw and Dave Waif eld.
Phi Delta Theta The Phi Delts have two new pledges to add to their group.
The pledge dance will be held tomorrow evening in the Crystal Room at the Alamo Hotel.
Tomorrow afternoon a group of Phi Delts will take some boys from Hope House bowling.
Beta Theta Pi The Betas are on the look-out for their exchange student from Italy.
Kappa Kappa Gamma Last Tuesday the bi-annual mother-daughter banquet was held at the Village Inn.
After the banquet the Kappas hurried back to the house for the Founders Daydessert which was given to them by the alums.
Sunday, the Kappas will entertain the Phi Gams at an informal dinner at the house.
Kappa Alpha Theta On Saturday afternoon six girls will become Theta actives.
These girls are Stephanie Ames, Marti Breternitz, Betsey Campbell, Susan Connelly, Nancy Heitz and Margie Taylor.
Delta Gamma During the week six girls were initiated into the sorority.
These girls were Susan Block, Diane Johnston, Sharon Lindsey, Mimi Meek, Portia Van Meter and Kiki Minor.
After initiation a banquet was held for the new initiates at the Hackney House.
Sunday the Delta Gammas will have their faculty picnic at Monument Creek Park.
After the speech an informal coffee was held and a questions and answer period followed.
On Friday, October 21 at 89 there will be a TV viewing of the last KennedyNixon debates in the WES lounge of Rastall.
This will be followed by commentary by adhere n(s to each party together with questions from the floor and general discussion.
Cassius De F| Ushers: Phi Delta Theta Hostesses: IWA Broadcast over KRCC Happy Birthday vTOne year ago next.
Tuesday, Rastall Center was officiall opened under the direction of Richard Blackburn, center direi tor, and Gary Esch, Rastall Center Board chairman.
They er deavored, alongwith the Rastall Center Board, to create new center of campus activity.
There we half a million meals served in the dining room and 150,00 cups of coffee served in the Hub.
A 20 per cent rise in book sales ii Jol the book store indicates a new interest in reading (or in stocli ing one's shelves with pleasing looking books). 1,200 meet ings held in the sundry nooks of Rastall reveal a new out look on campus responsibilities for many of the students.
Th 3,400 record check outs show something too, either a new av. preciation of music or the discovery of a new way to ""cool it.
The ever-changing art exhibits offer opportunity for ey exercises, chuckles, and new understanding of the arts.
Room, Rastall Center has made its place on the CC campus Even the college discontents use Rastall as a gayly colorei soapbox for their self-enforced bitterness.
The fraternities have seen the prediction by some tha J Rastall would herald the end of their peculiar life, fall flat oi 7 h its face.
The same groups have just extended their uniqui personalities to a larger arena, and their increased interactior ,, with other group members has just reinforced their own grou; personality.
All in all, the heterogeneous, cosmopolitan CC image has been expanded and extended by Rastall.
It has not been a melting pot but rather like a pot of stew, where every constit uent has retained its own identity but has picked up the flavoi and seasoning of the others.
Do somethin; with your campus center. — GMG New Poetry Workshop ' starts Tiies., Oct.
Cap and Gown A series of poetry workshop sessions to be held monthly for the remainder of the 19(10-61 academic year is being planned for all CC students interested in the composition of poetry.
The workshop, which grew out of interest shown by students in the Writers' Workshop Week held recently at CC, will be led by Dr.
Although partly sponsored by ASCC Publications Board, the workshop will have no official connection with either the English Department or any particular ASCC publication, but will be devoted solely to analysis and discussion of poems written by workshop participants.
Poems to .be discussed should be left at Rastall desk by the Thursday evening before the workshop.
The poems .will be mimeographed and copies will be available at Rastall desk on Friday evening to allow ample time for reading.
Future dates for workshop meetings are tentatively scheduled for December (!, January 10, February 21, March 14, April 18 and May 16.
VThe purpose of this weekly art cle is to inform and inspire th members of our college commun ity.
Each week we shall recom mend books, certain campus activ ities, and various events in th Denver and Colorado Springs ai eas, which we feel are most worth while.
Denver Symphony Concert Sei ies : November 9 — Jaime Laredo, The youngest violinist to win the Queen of Belgium's Award ternational competition.
Denver Symphony Concert Series, Kitredge Building, Denver, Coloradi Colorado Springs Opera Associa tion: November 3, 4, and 5 — ""Han sel and Gretel"" by Humperdinck.
Motivations — maybe, common interest — perhaps, a need for leeding each other — possibly. would like to think that these ingredin ts blended sucessfully with enthusiasm promotes the spirit of a town.
First of all we note that the roaring traffic, the steaming lights jul mass of people that fills the streets of our large cities are subtituted for a more relaxed and subtle terrain.
The symphony, the gal;ries, the opera and the ballet are replaced by . . ., come to think they are not replaced at all, They are here and as big as life taelf.
One walk past the Fine Arts Center tells us that the Civic Players still giving a brilliant performance of ""The Gang's All Here,"" contining through Saturday, October 22.
Jolorado Springs Symphony conductor, Walter Eisenburg, undergoes x tensive rehearsals before each performance with his orchestra, com,osed only too often of housewives, doctors, and garage mechanics, all whom have a common love for music that unifies their efforts and hose of their conductor.
The next symphony is scheduled for November 0, and believe me, they sound real good.
Traveling on we note that the fascinating world of opera comes o life November 3, 4 and 5 when the Colorado Springs Opera Associaion presents ""Hansel and Gretel,"" under the direction of Dr.
The dance also makes its Christmas debute as Dorthea and Norman Jornick rehearse with the Colorado Springs Symphony for the ballet presentation of ""Peter and the Wolf,"" scheduled for December 3.
A invple reason can be that there is more here than meets the students' Oret|ye.
I find it hard to believe that such ambitious efforts come from a all town.
Most of these things are 'en to us free as compared to the many hours spent in preparation. 1 'his is not a hick town, rather a town rich in the things that make life lorth living.
If we could enjoy some of these assets, our four years at Colorado allege would in turn be much richer.
I find it enjoyable walking through is small town watching the people combining their efforts towards common goal.
Try it, you o might find that there is a certain spirit, a great spirit — shall we y— The Spirit of a Town.
Either may be used in any college or university where there is a chapter of Alpha Lambda Delta.
Any member of Alpha Lambda Delta who graduated in 11)58, 1959 and 19fJ0 and who has maintained the scholastic average throughout her college career is eligible.
Graduating seniors may apply if they maintain this average to the end of the first semester of this year.
Applicants will be judged on scholastic record, recommendations submitted, the soundness of the applicant's project and purpose and, to some extent, on need.
Application blanks and information may be obtained from Miss Christine Moon, dean of women.
The application must be completed by the applicant herself and submitted to the fellowship chairman by February 15, 1961.
Two Sophomores Pledge Alpha Lambda Delta Alpha Lambda Delta, the naional scholastic sorority for freshnen women, has pledged two new lembers.
Miss Wallaci ;econd semester Miss Bessesen and will be initiated on November 15.
If you've married, moved, or come of age since the last eSectfoa, read this BRIDES Even if yon were a registered voter under your maiden name, you have to register under your new '""married"" name.
If you have ""turned 21 M <or if you'll be 21 by Election Day), register now.
The KINNIKINNIK co-editors, Gary Gappert and Jim Scarboro, in making this announcement, expressed the feeling that the interest of area writers in encouraging the development of young college writers reflects the growing need for more and more people able to express themselves creatively.
Gappert and Scarboro also expressed the feeling that the young writers of the college could profitably benefit by having their works exposed to the critical eyes of professional writers.
His main achievements lie however in relating of western history in book form.
The first issue, with Sprague's forward will be published the first week of December.
It will be smaller than last year's book but only because two issues are planned.
One reason for this is so that the student has a better chance to absorb the contents of a smaller book.
The deadline for all material, prose, poetry, photography and art is November 1.
These three former candidates were elected from a slate of thirteen ,who campaigned and presented their individual stands last week with the election climax on Thursday and Friday.
Africa is the subject of the regional conference of International Relations Clubs, which is taking place this weekend at Westminster College in Salt Lake City.
A delegation from the CC club, headed by Bob Draggon and John Hammer, will attend this meeting.
They will report on the discussions in Salt Lake City after which there will be a genei'al discussion by members of the local group.
Former Fitter for Stars Al Tailoring ind Women's Alteratiot alist WHITE TUX $30.00 DARK TUX $35.00 TUX RENTAL $7.00 ME 3-1824 9I/2 E Colorado Ave.
In a bitter battle of acrid political jabberwocky in which each man obviously attempted to say a great deal but mean little, the two candidates found common ground on only two issues — defense of Berlin and condemnation of religious bigotry.
Calling for a united front of Republicans and Democrats on this question, Mr Nixon concurred with Mr Kennedy.
Both men dropped political fronts to join ranks in enthusiastically condemning the religious fanaticism of the Ku Kluv Klan, emphasizing their hope that the presidential race would not be decided on religion.
Kennedy, testifying to the record of the indefensible nature of these two islands, wants the United States to urge Chiang Kai-Shek to evacuate these islands for defensible positions on Formosa proper.
In opposition, Mr Nixon reiterated his argument that these two islands are in the zone of freedom and consequently they should bt defended.
This issue is important beeaust it provides a focal point or point of departure from which we must decide which man's views are correct.
In itself, the Quemoy-Matsu problem is just one of many issues but this issue involves a future decision.
Consequently, no one can say for certain whether Mr Nixon or Mr Kennedy's position is the correct position for the welfare of this country.
Because this decision involves the future, we may able to answer this question on ideological basis, but never oi practical one.
Likewise, the farm program, federal expenditures, and all other important issues of this campaign involve the future.
Thus, as with Quemoy and Matsu, we must divorce idealism from practicality in deciding which man's views are right for our country as a whole.
For remember, each man is playing the role of idealistic politiciai par excellence.
Thus, to discover. who should be our next president, we must look entirely to the prac tical aspects of each man's pro grams. the WHICKERBILL art and glass studio OWE OF COLORADO'S FINER CONTEMPORARY GIFT SHOPS ME 3-0518 I I North Cascade Ave.
GG Talent Featured In '60 Variety Show Curtains open on the 1960 CC Variety Show at 8:15m. on No-ember 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Perkins Hall.
This year's show not only features student taient but is produced, directed and promoted entirely by students. ia Begerow and Sylvia Stenoare the directors.
Business and promotional managers are Doug Norberg and Rod Peck who are candling the publicity, tickets and programs for the production.
The Tiger Club will be ushering ihe CC students and faculty as ■ell as other show-goers into this year's Variety Show.
Membership on the committee is open to representatives of organizations and to any other students interested in the work of the group.
On Thursday, October 27, the Foreign Student Committee is sponsoring a reception for the foreign students on campus in order to give them an opportunity to meet members of the faculty, administration and interested townspeople.
This reception will be held from 4 to 6 p-m. in the Kappa Kappa Gamma Lodge, 1100 Wood Avenue.
CSC Bears Hand CC Second Loss CC lost its second conference game of the season last week by being downed by the Bears of Colorado State College.
Besides the loss of the game the Tigers lost their great ground-gainer, Pete Pleasant.
With that the Tigers lost several yards for all of their remaining games.
The Tigers took the initial lead in the first quarter when Pleasant scampered across the goal line from five yards out.
In the closing seconds of the second period, the Bears scored on a 16 yard pass play and they tied the score.
It was the Bears turn to score again in the third quarter and they went over from one yard out, converted the kick and made the score 14-7.
With four minutes remaining in the third quarter, a CSC man intercepted a pass in his own end zone and was immediately downed by Jack Real for a safety.
In the final period the Bears took advantage of a Tiger fumble to work their way down to the goal line and make the score 21-9.
An aerial attack, climaxed by a three yard plunge by Scott Tippin, was the final scoring of the game.
Tomorrow the Tigers play their third conference game of the year when they meet Idaho State Colat Pocatello, Idaho.
The team of Hanks to Northern accounted for two touchdowns in the first half.
Kendell took a pass from Hanks for another Kappa Sig TD and at the end of the first half the Kappa Sigs hud a substantial lead of 190.
In the second half the Phi Delts retaliated with a TD pass from Weld to Case.
But the Kappa Sigs came back to score again when Johnson intercepted a pass to make the final score 25-7.
The first score of the game and the only one for the Phi Gams was a 50 yard run for the TD by Simus.
The Zetas scored two TDs in the first half, one on a pass from Batley to Love and one from Batley to Dutkowski.
In the second half Boychuk passed twice for touchdowns, once to Fordyee and once to McAlpine.
Floerchinger passed to Rhodes for another TD in the second half and Ackerman took the pass for the extra point.
Once again Floerchinger connected with Ackerman for another Sigma Chi score.
The last and tying score of the game was a 30 yard run by quarterback Hanks, First Aid Course Open to Sturents The Mountain Club in conjunction with the American National Red Cross is sponsoring a course in First Aid.
The course will be taught by Mr Stuart Richter, a qualified instructor from the Red Cross, and will be held on Friday afternoons from 3-5m.
Students who will be taking the course are required to have a Red Cross First Aid Manual.
SScp Traffic Committee Announces Revisions and New Regulations By Betty Gaskill The Traffic Committee, with the approval of ASCC, has made several important revisions in the campus traffic regulations for 1960-61.
The first two parking spaces in the parking area immediately in front of Montgomery on the north end are reserved for non-student visitors from 7 to 6 seven days a week.
The remaining spaces are reserved for student visitors to the girls' dorms.
There is a 10-minute loading zone in the area from McGregor to the main door of Bemis Hall.
The Alpaca sport jacfcet with suede elbow patches — Light weight and comfortable.
In the Slocum Hall area there is no parking on the east side of the east entrance of the parking lot Also a no-parking area is marked on the west side of the parking lot next to Perkins Hall.
The driveway which is parallel to the west wing of Slocum is a service drive only.
If the fine is payed within 48 hours at the Treasurer's Office, a $1 discount is allowed.
Traffic hearings take place every two weeks on Tuesday evening in Rastall Center.
Late registration or a change in registration should be made at the Rastall Center desk.
With these immortal words Ann Willcox greeted the crowd of enthusiastic students that braved the rain to meet the victorious College Bow] team.
Louis T Benezet spoke of the needs of CC and so started a state-wide campaign drive for funds.
Both Vice-President Brossman and Mr Wynn of the Olin Foundation also made brief speeches, and slides of the new science building were shown.
After the banquet the team took a midnight subway ride to Times Square and ate roasted chestnuts before returning to the Biltmore.
On Saturday they had some free time and the team members went their different ways.
Charles Greening went to visit his home in New Jersey, Jiaii Floerchinger went sightseeing and ""Willie"" Willcox and Terry Kidner, like girls everywhere, went shopping and ""window snooping"" along Fifth Avenue.
Of course, all went to Rockefeller Center and then lunch at Schrafft's.
The afternoon was passed in the Guggenheim Museum then a dinner at La Vert Galant.
Sunday was spent in what the team came to regard as a second home, studio 52.
After lunch the teams went into warm-up sessions, practiced using the buzzers and they got used to lights, cameras and the manner in which the program was presented.
There was a final dress rehearsal with make-up and timer and then the show was on.
Willcox, went to Leone's for dinner, complete with fiddling gypsies and naming desserts.
The team left at 11 Monday morning and arrived here at 1:50 to be greeted by an enthusiastic crowd of students dismissed from classes to greet them.
Sidelights of the teams' trip include the acquisition of Albert La Douce, the small tiger that is literally worshipped by the team ami which had a prominent spot on the first part of the show.
G.E. also handed each team member a list of eight appliances and told then, they could have their pick of one to take home.
Without his staunch support and iron nerves the team felt it would have been far too tense and nervous to do the program as a game instead of a death struggle.
Bowl"" is a GAME, and whether we win or loose next week, we have already proven ourselves to the world.
Anyone wishing to serve on the Student Curriculum Committee should obtain an application form at Rastall desk.
NEW DUAL FILTER Product of <Jfik ■J'/mL.ituan Uo€ajeso~<£mpa<w — UuVa££& is our middle name <o a t < 1.
Tareyton's flavor-balance gives you the best taste of the best tobaccos. — ■-•-% Tareyton Colorado College Tiger October 21, I960 — Dump Western State, Tigers Vol.
I960 Colorado College Snake Dance and Bonfire Start Homecoming Tonite Voting for the 1960 Homecoming Queen will be from 9 to 4 today in Palmer or Rastall.
Tonight a bonfire and pep rally will be held to start off the homecoming weekend.
About 8:30m. a truck and band will go to each dorm and fraternity house to pick up people and lead the snake dance down to the north end of Washburn field.
Tigerettes March THE PROPOSED CC library as depicted in a water color painting. lew Library Has Four Floors, 48,000 Sq.
Ft., Sunken Courts The design of Colorado College's new library has been completed by the Chicago firm of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.
The first level will be below ground and will contain a core of book stacks surrounded by two seminar rooms, a smoking study, a microcard reading room, a typing room and several lounges.
The main floor will be enclosed jy four glass walls and will house the card catalog, the circulation e desk, the reference irea, a periodical room and the new Jbook shelf.
The rest of the loor will be devoted to technical work \ spaces and the librarian's iffice.
The upper two levels will house ;he bulk of the book stacks plus the reading areas.
These levels ""11 also contain the special collections rooms, four conference rooms and a typing room.
There will be a slightly sunken paved memorial court on the west side of the library extending to within eight feet of the sidewalk on Cascade Avenue.
To the east of the building will be a sunken garden court flush with the lower level of the library.
Floor space in the new building will be approximately 48,000 square feet compared to Coburn Library's 13,000 square feet.
This ^increase will provide space for iOO.OOO volumes and seating for )00 readers.
Construction is scheduled to begin in early January near the present site of West Hall.
Homecoming Features First Ground Breaking The ground-breaking ceremony for the new CC library will take place Saturday, October 29, at 11 m. as a part of the homecoming weekend festivities.
Those participating in the ceremony will be President Louis T Benezet, Mr Armin Barney, chairman of the CC Board of Trustees, Mr Charles Tutt, chairman of the El Pomar Foundation of Colorado Springs and Mr Richard Beidleman, chairman of the library committee.
This is the first of three groundbreaking ceremonies to take place during the year, according to Mr Robert Brossman, vice-president of the college.
The fraternity housing project will begin some time around the beginning of 1961 and ground-breaking for the science building will be in the spring.
Actual construction for the new library is scheduled to begin near the first of the year in order that the building will be ready for the fall of 1962.
Funds for the construction of the library were given by the El Pomar Foundation.
Alpha Lambda Delta is having a meeting of all women students who live off campus on Tuesday, November 1, at 4:30 in the WES room in Rastall.
KINNIKINNIK NOTICE Students are reminded that the Kinnikinnik deadline for material is next Tuesday, November 1.
Contributions of art, prose, poetry and photography may be turned in at Rastall desk.
Olin Hall Described As Blend of Designs By Charles Puckett Olin Hall, Colorado College's proposed science building, was designed by the Houston, Tex., firm of Caudill, Rowlett, and Scott.
Its outer architecture is designed to blend with the solidarity of Palmer Hall and yet give the impression of modernity.
The lecture room will be surrounded by a cantilevered platform 10 feet above ground level.
The first level will be devoted to storage space, classrooms, and service areas.
Chemistry classes and laboratories will be found on the third level, while the biological sciences will reside on the fourth floor.
Also on the fourth floor will be a greenhouse and housing facilities for the Warren-Aikens collection, a research colection of animals found in the Rocky Mountain region.
Olin Hall will be an artistically pleasing addition to the campus as well as a function one.
It has been designed with both the science and non-science major in mind.
The interior of the building will be furnished with this wide diversity of users in mind, but the overall effect will be one of unity.
Don Roll acting as master of Dean Juan Reid has a short speech planned and then Coach Gerald Carle will introduce the football team and the cheerleaders.
Lynne Vincent and her baton twirling act will follow the introductions.
Next the captain of the team, Jack Real, .will light the bonfire and burn a mountaineer in effigy.
Finally, the queen candidates will ,be presented and the Homecoming Queen crowned.
Saturday morning the parade starts downtown at the courthouse on Tejon at 9:30m.
A dozen floats made by the Greek and Independent organizations along with bands, Tiger-Tigerettes and twenty Oskasita members will participate.
During half time, the Tiger-Tigerettes will drill and the winning floats will be announced.
Afterwards, the Greeks and Independents will hold open houses for everyone.
Bob McGrew's eleven piece band and vocalist are providing the music for dancing.
Kennedy said that the present administration has lacked new ideas and has allowed the American position in the world to lag because of its paucity of ideas.
Hepointed out that President Eisenhower has had no counterpart to a Marshall Plan . or a Truman Doctrine.
There has been a deterioration of foreign policy and of American prestige, Kennedy charges.
He pointed out as examples President Eisenhower's canceled trip to Japan and Nixon's South American trip.
Kennedy said that the United States is not using its §9 million food surplus properly.
He thinks the government should give more for school lunch programs and to underdeveloped countries.
If these countries have food, they can afford to take more chances, pointed out Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy's critical attitude of the nation's military strength is based on the judgment of Gens.
Gavin, Gruenther, Ridgeway and other leaders who differ with Eisenhower on basic points.
The girls are not learning how to protect the campus from invasion as rumor has it, but rather the Tigerettes and Tiger Clubs are learning their drills for the Homecoming game tomorrow.
Buffie Buffum, president; Jann Rowley, vice-president; Mimi Jones, secretary of minutes; Janice Collins, secretary of attendance; Kathy Innis, treasurer; Mary Bardone, social chairman; Susan Hile, sergeant at arms; Susie Merrell, representative to the AWS Activity Council; Susan Bigelow, Tigerette of the m o n I h chairman and Margaret Kurashita, poster chairman, The Tigerettes, wearing black skirts and sweaters and carrying black and gold shakers, form an impressive block at the games.
However, the enthusiasm shown at these games is oidy a part of the enthusiasm of these girls.
They make posters advertising all the games, signs for the field and decorations for the goal posts.
Soon they will plan a money making project comparable to the spaghetti dinner of last year.
The indicator now reads high and the Tigerettes plan to make it read even higher in the remaining months of this year.
Reunions Will Keep CC Alumni Active Several reunions are planned as part of the 1960 homecoming festivities, according to Miss Lorena Berger, secretary of the Alumni Association.
The class of 1935 are commemorating their 25th silver anniversary reunion.
Special activities include a cocktail party Friday night and the silver anniversary banquet at the Broadmoor Saturday night.
William O Lennox, the former Betty Foster, and the Kappa Kappa Gamma homecoming queen of 1935, will ride in an old La Salle in the homecoming parade.
Something new in the line of reunions is the ten year anniversary of the Freedom and Authority course.
Fifty people who have attended classes in this course over the past ten years are expected to return.
Two other reunions, one a combined reunion of the classes of 1944 and 1945 and the other a championship football team reunion of the classes of 1949 and 1950, are planned as other highlights of the homecoming weekend. e*» *Uu OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF Buainct ^°r-in-Chie^_ JACK CASHMAN Co Editor PENNY DAVIDSON v VWV -Vicky Mor Cmrria Sanborn. stain, Sue Tayl Will J Marty Br obnson.
Marcia Moaes. stetnite, Krannje FerbSluckton, Mimi Jones, Letters to the Editor _, B Tonflkemper, Morcarct t'.u-lo.
Unless the ASCC as an organization, furthers the goals, or better yet, furthers the chances of each student to succeed in reaching his goals, it is sealing its own fate for ASCC must serve to survive.
They are not as diverse and polyglot as one might imagine, for if one measures the long term, more general goals of each student and disregards some immediate, very transient goals, one will find a great similarity among students' goals.
Most of the CC student body, in coming to CC, has declared itself, at least implicitly, as favoring the ideal of the WHOLE MAN, the ideal of the broadly and liberally educated person.
This broad education does not solely mean an appreciation and education in the various academic disciplines, but very definitely infers an education from A to Z from Asquith to Zen.
Beyond this lies the idea that a college, especially one like ours, should turn out a mature person; a mature person being one who has realized both his potentialities and his limitations.
Perhaps not in all but each student surely expects some measure of success in at least one of them, and if he is a voluntary member of this liberal arts school, the chances are that he wants quite a bit of success in all three.
The idea behind our government, as behind all governments, is that the function of government is to do for the people that which they cannot do as well for themselves.
Thus the goal of ASCC is the helping to fulfill for each of its constituents, the goals he has set, or is setting for himself.
It should readily be agreed that without ASCC the individual would experience more difficult attainment of his goals.
If not, then ASCC is either not doing its job, or else has lost its justification for existence.
The ASCC then, if it accepts the above, must consider everything that comes before it in that context.
That is, whether or not a particular event or action will directly or indirectly aid the fulfillment of student goals.
The various committees of ASCC have been set up to insure that proper attention is paid to special areas, to wit, the social, the intramural, the publications, the curriculum, the assemblies, and committees.
Other committees of ASCC, constitution, goals and election are striving most particularly to insure that the ASCC develops the necessary efficiency to be effective.
The finance committee has the responsibility of financially sponsoring and promoting those activities that the students want, or should have.
The enthusiasm and communications committee has the most responsible administrative position of all, it must seek to create and promote an atmosphere and climate where each student will want to, and be able to, be a significant and contributing member of the ASCC in its full sense.
The area in which ASCC has the most indirect power, and the least direct power, is in the area of the ex-officio.
The various ex-officio, almost wholly autonomous bodies of ASCC, are to a great extent laden with responsibilities that are implicitly given to ASCC in its guardianship of the student college welfare.
The power and responsibilities of these groups is best left where it is, provided that ASCC serves as a watchdog for student interests in these areas.
In sum, let it be said that ASCC has the heavy responsibility of the welfare and freedom of all the students in all the corners of campus life.
In those areas where students are able to insure their own welfare, the ASCC has no more than a watchdog role.
But in those areas where the student interests are being abused, or left unfulfilled, the ASCC must take corrective action— Gary Gappert.
Dear Editor, I would like to congratulate your column writer of ""On the Town"" who writes so constructively.
Wally Caldwell is doing much to counteract the asinine cynicism that is so prevalent.
Colorado Springs does have a lot to offer as does Colorado College and it is good to hear credit given where credit is due.
I am writing as a rank newcomer to the CC community, and in so doing may step on a few established toes, but I feel the fact that I have recently come from another college may lend a certain new point of view to what I see about me.
If I am, in my ignorance, simply trying to revive dead issues, please excuse my efforts.
As I see it, one of the major aspects of a college is its cultural contribution; it is in part a justification for our existence.
We maintain that the presence of a college is good for a community as a whole, as we are, in a sense, in the culture business.
It is particularly in its offerings in the public arts that the college carries on its task of bringing culture to the community; music, the drama, fine art, the radio station, public lectures, etc.
The biggest single feature in the college's public arts program is undoubtedly the Fine Arts Center, and here there have been some impressive offerings indeed.
The Hirschhom collection of modern sculpture is without a doubt the finest of its kind in the world, and the community owes the Center a debt of gratitude for the opportunity to see it.
I submit that while these may be fine pictures (or, given a set of values characterized primarily by a certain absence of taste, they might be so considered), they are not art, and have no business in the offerings of an institution ostensibly devoted to art.
The problem is that every ""Swan"" precludes the possibility of a ""La Strada"" being shown; every ""Some Like It Hot"" a Cocteau or an Eisenstein.
It may be objected, by the committee of one which chooses the films, that art films are not commercially feasible, that they will not draw the crowd that ""A Man Called Peter"" (or, by a relentlessly logical extension, u l Was a Teen-age Werewolf"") will.
The Drama Department is offering ""The Diary of Anne Frank"" as its first selection this year.
This was an enormously successful production on Broadway, and millions have had the opportunity of seeing the movie.
It should take advantage of this fact, and instead of watching cautiously for things which will sell, should produce things which are too risky for Broadway or even Civic Theater production.
Jonesco or Sarte or Beckett or Pirandello and a host of others may never father wide-screen movies or make their producers rich, but they are the sources of the greatest vitality in the modern drama.
I had been told of the excellence of the CC dance program long before I came here, so I expected that the talents of students and teachers would result in exciting events.
I am sure that an enjoyable time will be had by all, but I am equally sure that there are many more exciting offerings which would be just as enthusiastically supported by the community as a whole.
The radio station seems to be under the impression that it is directly competing with the local stations, and seems, at times, to be trying to outdo them in their output of drivel, The shame of this is that the BBC Third Programs, the Northwestern Reviewing Stand of the Air, the Pacifica Foundation, tapes can be had virtually for postage.
If I may prolong an already over-long letter, I would like to say simply that the college has the facilities, the talent, the heritage and, most important, the obligation to make a positive cultural contribution to Colorado Springs and to its own student body.
As nearly as I can determine, this is not being done, but I .believe that if there were enough interest evidenced by the student body and the faculty, something might be done.
IWA Ushers: Phi Delta Theta B pri Un Cap and Go wi the This week Cap and Go sents: Jose Iturbi, concert pianist.
Thursday, November 10, Palmer High School Audit oriur For tickets, phone ME 3-1602.
Don't forget to gf your tickets for Hansel and Grete ASCC Notes By Betty Gaskill Enthusiasm : There will be male cheerleadi for homecoming.
Rastall Board Attend i Region 10 Conference On October 20, the Rastall C ter Board went to the Region 1 ACU student union board confet ence that was held at the Un versity of New Mexico at Albi querque.
On Oct. the delegates he a speech on ""Brainwashing"" by Mi Fred Clarch of Boeing Aircrafi He said that this could be used solving the problems of a studf union.
Sure, I gripe about being ""forced"" to take rot-c, everybody does, but I really wanted to take it.
Whatever people say, they do sort of look up to the man who protects them, especially the officer.
Guy came up to me the other day, said ""You're not really defending the country, you're really preparing to go out and destroy in the name of the state.
Better to push the buttons — plenty of people would be killed, but the rest of us could rebuild what's left.
Can't stand these guys always harping about government forcing them into the army, officers forcing them to take orders.
Nobody likes it, but we've got to do it to protect our freedom from force.
Sometimes I wonder how I will be any moro worthy of taking other men's lives into my hands in combat than those under me, but this is why I'm training.
These pacifists talk about new approaches to solving problems instead of war, but I don't see much action.
Non-violei resistance, just let 'em coi . . . but bi-lateral disarmamei seems a better hope.
Nobody do it, though, while negotiate go on at the same time, sides are arming to the teeth.
Alumni Pat Willi and Sue Day held a cocktail rty for the team that afternoon.
The team dined in the Garden Room of the Biltmore before goto the theater with Mr and Mrs.
The teams went through the usual warmups and dress rehearsal, and then right before the show, alumni Jack Tench, Kirby and Dottie Howlett, John Bellis, Dan CrecelJohn Frenkel, Jo Anne McLaughlin, Sue Day and Sally Post along with Dr. and Mrs.
Albert pointed out that both the teams enjoyed themselves tremendously during the warm-ups, before and after the show.
He swears heard the Vanderbilt team offering to do a soft shoe routine during the half time, and the CC team offering to contribute folk songs.
After the show the Vanderbilt l invited the CC team to dinner, but CC had to decline both this generous offer and the offer for Terry Kidner to return this week as the Vanderbilt mascot.
The team arrived back on campus Monday, October 24, at 1:30 and were very pleased with the warm welcome afforded by the students.
Both semesters of the beginning course in general geology are covered in 24 chapters.
Most of these were obtained from the United States Geological Survey's photo library and were individually selected by Dr.
Field retired he suggested a new author and Professor Pearl was selected for the task which he began five and a half years ago.
Next week, Vanderbilt faces Franklin & Marshall College of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
An interesting sidelight is that this school is the one attended by the brother of team member Ann ""Willie"" Willcox.
He also stated that America is seen as a nation with ""all the power, but also the biggest help for Western Europe.
Karel attended the Institute for Representation Abroad in the Netherlands where he was president of the student body.
The school is only a two year institution, but students carry about 30 hours.
Karel has now graduated, and when he returns home he will be ready to take up a profession there.
A few teachers, the president of the college and the foreign advisor made the selections for exchanges with various universities in the United States Before a student leaves on the exchange, he must know something about the country which he is going to visit and speak its language.
Karel says that he still has difficulty in understanding the professors in some of his courses.
The opinion is that Americans are ""very noisy; there is always a lot of talk,"" Karel stated.
Bus drivers remember regular passengers and will often wait for them if they are late.
Karel thinks students of college age here are more mature because they break away from the home earlier, whereas in the Netherlands the parental influence on the children is extended to a later age.
College life is much the same, but the student-teacher relationship is less formal here.
There are no women at Karel's school in the Netherlands but many do attend universities.
He mentions also that he is ""happy to live in the Kappa Sig house"" because he feels this gives him a better picture of campus life.
Jack Walker and Max Power, chairmen of the Young Democrats and Young Republicans respectively, announced this week that representatives of their clubs will meet to debate issues and candidates in the current campaign for the presidency.
The debate will be held in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center at 7:30m., Tuesday, November 1.
Each debator will make an opening statement of about five minutes duration, then each will have an opportunity to ask questions of the opposition, and in turn, comment on the answers to his questions.
The debate is open to the public and every interested person is invited to attend.
Clublicity By Ginny Metcalf Alpha Lambda Deltu Alpha Lambda Delta is having a meeting Tuesday, November 1, at 4:30m. in the WES room in Rastall for all town girls.
For private tutoring, girls should contact Sandy Weir or Ann Armstrong.
Black and Gold The Black and Gold Club will be selling excess sweatshirts at $3 on Friday, November 4 in Rastall from 4-7m.
Mountain Club The Mountain Club is sponsoring a first aid class in conjunction with the American Red Cross.
The classes will be held in Rastall from 3-5m. on Friday afternoons beginning October 21.
Pershing Rifles The first in a series of training lectures was given to the new plebes of Pershing Rifles at the meeting October 20.
The pledge dance was held in Rastall on October 22, The next meeting will be held on November 3.
They are Marty Breternitz, Nadine Chang, Kay Mathews, Ann Seely, Carol Swartz, Lynne Vincent and Isabel Williams.
Wakuta Jean Wilfong is the new president of Wakuta, the honorary athletic association for junior and senior women.
Other officers are Sue Evans, vice president; Ginger Gallalee, secretary-treasurer and Mimi Meek, publicity chairman.
New members elected to the organization include Pixie Campbell, Jan Fry, Kris Hoof, Abett Icks, Joan Jilka, Chessie Kemp, Beth Kendall, Keekee Minor, Owen Salisbury, Betsy Taylor and Connie Windle.
Young Republicans On October 24 the Young Republicans heard James A Braden, candidate for the Colorado House of Representatives and Don W Higby, candidate for the ofTice of District Attorney for the 4th Judicial District.
The Young Republicans will have a debate with the Young Democrats on November 1 at 7:30 m. in the WES room in Rastall.
REPORT OF GOALS COMMITTEE OCTOBER 17, 1960 report of goals sugge ASCC meeting ASCC itself and bercomplished by any or KAREL LEEFLANG, foreign student from Holland, and Alexe ""Boots"" Stockton, TIGER reporter, discuss the American image abroad.
Need for better communication both withir tween ASCC and the student body.
A report made by the secretary of ASCC at the end of each semester to the student body telling what ASCC has done . during the past semester.
A permanent agenda to be kept in the ASCC files for reference purposes.
To better facilitate weekly announcements of ASCC, such announcements should be broadcast over KRCC and the dormitory intercommunications system.
Personal appearances of members at special events of interest to the school.
Issuing invitations to leaders of various campus organizations to attend a Council meeting and discuss with the Council their function on campus.
An ASCC Banquet at which recognition is given and introductions are made of the new ASCC officers.
October 28, I960 • Colorado College Tiger HOMECOMING I960 FRIDAY, OCTOBER 28 2:00-5:00m.
Lounge, Rastall Cente, lu Registration— Pick up tickets— Rastall Center 9:00-11:00m.
Ground-Breaking for the new Library and San Rafael St. ■ of Cascade Avenue Five Receive New Promotions *ive members of the Colorado College faculty received new titles during the summer as they received promotions.
The five are Robert Z Brown, George S McCue and Wilber H Wright, all promoted to full professor from associate professor, and Bentley B Gilbert and William R Hochman both promoted from assistant professor to associate professor Two other members of the faculty also were promoted but they are on leave of absence and will not teach at CC during this school year.
Reinitz is teaching in Finland this year on an exchange arrangement under the Fullbright Act.
Professor Brown is a member of the Zoology Department staff, coming to CC in 1954 as an associate professor.
Professor McCue has been teaching at CC since 1935 when he joined the faculty as an instructor in English.
Bentley Gilbert has been a member of the history faculty of CC since 1955 as an assistant professor.
He came to CC as an instructor and was promoted to assistant professor in 1956.
He was promoted to assistant professor in 1957. 12 noon Homecoming Luncheon and Rally— Rastall Center Dining Room Report to Alumni by President Benezet.
Special tables for class a holding reunions, 1944, 1945 and 1936 (1935 Silver Ann, versa -,' Reunion) J 2:00m.
Reserved seats in Section 17 for alumni and parents of students, $2.00_Washburn Field 4:30m.
Benezet and members ot the r acuity will greet alumni and friends of the College— Rastall Center Dining Room 5:00-6:00m.
Open House— Fraternities, Sororities and Independent Men ar, Women 9:00m.-l:00m.
The Phi Delts are trying to put their frame together while the Gamma Phis are occupied with the beginning busy work involved with every float Again this year some of the organizations got their usual late start The cry 1, always, Well never make it,"" but they do, and the results are well worth the effort.
If only homecoming and mid-terms did not come at the same time, wouldn't life be great.
I960 GC Student Body Hails from 46 States Forty-six of the nation's 50 states and 15 foreign countries are represented in the Colorado College student body this year.
Colorado College has a total of 1,346 students this year with 1161 undergraduate students.
These figures represent a total increase of 61, with an increase of 93 in the undergraduate student body and a decease of 32 among other students.
States not represented are Alaska, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Vermont.
Foreign countries represented are Canada, 36; Chile, 3; The Netherlands, 2; and Australia, France, Germany, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Panama, South Africa, Spain, Taiwan, Thailand and LAST CHANCE to buy sweatshirts.
Kappa Sigma The new pledges of Kappa Sigma are Ted Uline, Pat Smith, Ed Mason, John Barker and Ed DeGeorge.
The boys will serve dinner for their dates which will be followed by the traditional champaign party.
Gamma Phi Beta Last Friday evening the Gamma Phis had a most successful pledge dance at the house.
Last Saturday afternoon the Kappa Sigs played against the Gamma Phis in a football game out at Lazyland.
Refreshments will be served, Kappa Alpha Theta Last Saturday afternoon six pledges became Theta actives.
These new actives are Stevie Ames, Marti Bretemitz, Betsey Campbell, Sue Connelly, Nancy Heitz and Margie Taylor.
The most improved were Susan Riley Hillis, Linda Robeson and Sue Connelly.
Ruth Snodgrass presented Lynne Vincent with the Theta pin for the highest scholastic attainment.
Polly Franklin presented Marti Breternitz with the ring for outstanding pledge.
Beta Theta Pi Last Monday evening the Beta^ had President Louis T Benezet foi dinner.
The chapter will ' receive a silver tray which will be presente.l at a luncheon on November 12 at the Hilton Hotel in Denver.
Phi Delta Theta The Phis have added another new member to their chapter.
Delta Gamma Last Saturday afternoon the pledges had a luncheon for the Anchor Girls at the Village Inn.
Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams wish to thank the Kappas for the very nice dinner last Sunday evening.
Alpha Phi Last Tuesday morning was the mother-daughter breakfast over at the house.
The first interview was conducted with Eugene Lyons, special assistant to the president for personnel management' and the second with Dr.
In the interviews it was brought out that these two men favor their respective candidates for different reasons.
Freed feels that in forthcoming election the no great diqerence between the two men and thus he favors the party which has the platform most in line with what he thinks is best for the country.
Mr Lyons, on the other hand, seems to base his choice on his own personal knowledge of the ■andidates.
His feeling that Richard Nixon is better qualified to lead the United States than John Kennedy is based on a number of ■easons.
Mr Lyons feels that Nixm's experience is of great value o a president of the United States.
As he pointed out, Nixon has shown the country how he can handle himself in various situations, and Mr Lyons feels that Nixon's actions have been mmendable.
When asked his opinions on Kennedy, Mr Lyons itated that he felt Kennedy was prone to make rash statements that he later regretted.
He feels that a man holding the highest office of the land should not be one speaks with little reflection, especially in dealing with unfriendly foreign powers.
Also, Mr Lyons feels that Henry Cabot Lodge is well qualified to assist the president.
Experience seems to be a strong point in favor of both Nixon and Lodge.
Now the oters must decide whether or not they approved of the actions taken jy the team of Nixon and Lodge. opposition to Mr Lyons, Dr.
In the interview he stated that the important differences between the parties are the domestic programs and not so much the foreign affairs policies.
Freed estated that the Republican viewpoint on aid for the aged was one of limited government interference, and that according to this feeling, the only freedom would be from government control.
The Democratic party, on the other hand, offers freedom from worry and fear in regards to sickness.
Freed feels that the private sectors of the economy have shown themselves incapable of dealing fairly with the schools and the local governments are in need of assistance.
It is his opinion that the national government should undertake to better the schools in line with the Democratic plank designed for this purpose.
It cannot be said whether one should vote on a basis of what the party policies are rather than the qualities of the man seeking the office.
The important thing is to seek knowledge about both the party and the man.
Then and only then .will the voter have rational grounds for his choice.
MOHL'S BOOK HOME BOOKS IAR9EST SELECTION IN TOWN USED 16 E.Kiowa The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Stylo Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 1 to 1 1 Daily W Colo.
Russell Johnson, who has served twice as an ROTC instructor at Colorado College, leaves CC this week for regular duty with an Army field unit once more.
Carson where he wilt be a platoon sergeant in the Second Missile Command.
He expects to serve the remaining years of his Army service with field units.
While serving out one career, Sergeant Johnson has made up his mind about a second career.
He decided a few years ago that when his Army career is finished he wants to teach school.
Sergeant Johnson plans to attend what courses he can during the next three years to earn more credits.
The show will include 22 separate acts representing a number of individual groups and several Greek groups.
Various guitar numbers are scheduled in the program including—the group known as Folk Singers, Inc.
This act is led by Ray Chatfield who has been appearing professionally in Aspen and has come to CC for the show.
Ray and the other members of the group, Mike Grace, Edith Fulton and Pat Swartwood will sing folk songs of all types.
Student directors of this year's production arc Ina Begerow and Sylvia Stenovec, aided by faculty advisor Mr Woodson Tyree.
Ron Peck and Doug Norberg are acting as business managers and Betsy Foote is in charge of tickets.
Bartlett's Quotation Quiz Can you match , id usually under ten come up with phrases.
Dr, Glenn Brooks, instructor of political science, will speak to the First Congregational Church Social Action Committee on Sunday, October 30, at 7:30 The meeting is open to the public and will be in the library of the Christian Education Bide-, 20 E St.
Please return to Bemls Desk lS YPFWRITER lUPWCO. fa * Kennedy Campaigns medical aid under the social security system because private insurance companies have failed to form adequate programs for our senior citizensKennedy said that the differences between the two candidates are sharp.
During the question and answer period, the speaker said in regard to making Stevenson a member of the cabinet that Senator Kennedy does not think it is a good idea to name any possibilities for the cabinet before the election.
To help restore American prestige Kennedy believes in long-term grants, a strong military position and serious efforts toward disarmament.
He thinks that the TV debates have had a great effect on the American people.
Hana Rosenhaupt, national director of the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, will present an assembly.
Rosenhaupt, a former teacher at CC, will remark on the opportunities and demands of graduate education.
Although of particular interest to upperclass college students headed for graduate school, his talk will be broadly gauged to interest both underclassmen and the general public.
The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation offers 1000 fellowships each year to cover the first year of graduate study for persons generally interested in teaching careers.
The program is underwritten by the Association of American Universities, Carnegie Corporation, General Education Board and the Ford Foundation.
One of the brightest attractions to be viewed this season unfolded in all its granduer last Monday as the Folk Music Society currently presents the Colorado Folk Festival in Denver.
Odette, acclaimed by critics and folk singers alike as the most exciting folk performer of this generation, will give her striking arrangements of ""Water Boy,"" ""Take This Hammer,"" ""Midnight Special,"" plus a host of others.
Among the 12 performers to be viewed, Peggy Seeger, Ed McCurdy, Oscar Sladek and Jimmy Driftwood are among the top.
Tickets are $2.50, $3.00 and 53.50 and may be purchased through the Folk Music Society, 1723 East 16th Ave., FLorida 5-2397, Denver.
These entertainers typify the personality and 'presentation of American folk songs and should highlight the weekend for you lovers of folk music.
I have a program listing of the complete show and will leave it Eastall Center desk for any of you wishing to note the entire concert.
Perhaps the freest, most intuitive expression of pure fantasy is found in the work of Swiss, Paul Klee, who, like the German expressionists, is the heir to Gothic linealism as well as Gothic fantasy.
This show is well worth an afternoon's viewing and is one of the many quality shows presented by the Fine Arts Center.
HANNA KIEP, with the ai Putkammer, speaks to the CC Ge of Margaret Speer and Peter Von nan Club and the IRC about Berlin.
In 1959, Yale students reactivated the long-dormant Yale Bicycle Club and held an Invitational Bicycle Championship at New Haven .with approximately 18 colleges and universities competing.
In May of this year, sprint racing was added to the competition and the event spread over two weekends in Hartford and New Haven.
Included in entries were Princeton, Harvard, MIT, Newark Engineering and the Academy of Aeronautics.
The Yale Bicycle Club has scheduled seven meets for the fall, climaxing in the Northeastern Intercollegiate Open at Manchester, Conn., on November 24.
Old EH is also planning to host once again its Invitational races in May of 1961.
The road championships will take place at New Haven at the 6^ mile Olympic distance.
In her speeeh on Berlin, Mis Kiep expressed the optimistic attitude with which she said the West German people regard ths possibility of German reunification A Berliner herself, Mrs.
Kiep als< spoke about the refugee situatioi in Germany today, particularly oi the border of the Iron Curtain, ai well as many informative fact; about the city of Berlin itself.
VOTE first thre the Satt Pi t Cha The Christian Science'; Monitor , SubscrH Now at rk Price* You con read this world-famous daily newspaper for the next six months for $5, just half the regular subscription rate.
M ed £ care forrr then The Christian S ience Mon tor P-CN One Norwoy St.
Sports EdiUir NTRAMURAL s After going six over par on the first four holes Sky Lyon fired three .birdies to shoot a fine 82 at the Patty Jewett Golf Course last Saturday.
Yesterday and today, the nine low men in the tie for ninth place play the second 18 holes to determine the individual championship.
Art Berklund, Bill Casey, John Gray, Rich Love, Tim Florence, John Rinderknecht, Tom Coit and Bill Pelz.
The examinations will be given December 10 in Albuquerque, Denver, Salt Lake City and Phoenix.
This is the only time they will be offered during this school year and this is the only entrance route for liege graduates into trainee positions with the United States Information Agency.
In addition to qualiing on the written examinations testing English expression, general ability and public affairs background they will later be required to pass an oral examination emphasizing American culture, history, geography and government, take a physical examination, a psychiatric-psychological examination and undergo pre-employment clearances.
Junior officers are appointed as Foreign Service Career Reserve Officers, Class 8, $5G25 to $6345, plus overseas allowances.
After orientation in Washington, D C, training is conducted at various overseas posts throughout the world.
ME 3-0075 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St.
Pleasant's college football career ended in the CSC game when he suffered a broken ankle.
Before his injury, Pleasant was second in the conference in scoring, second in rushing and , third in pass receiving.
Tippin, who with Pleasant was gaining much for the Tigers by rushing, was out of the game be' cause of back injuries which ho too acquired at the fatal CSC game.
Also missing were fullback Billy Crockett because of a leg injury, guards Dan Kaltenbaugh and Gail Bundy with knee injuries and center Joe Cordova with an elbow injury.
Still another injury resulted from the CSC game;' halfback Vince Greco suffered broken bones in two fingers of his right hand when his band was stepped on late in the game.
Larry Bowman played for Pleasant in the Idaho game and Reuben Trinidad started in place of Tippin.
The Tigei's' scoring spree came in the third quarter when quarterback Tony Sellitto fired a pass to Terry Halloran for a 24 yard touchdown play.
This had been set up by a 22 yard pass to Ed Kintz and by two short passes to Halloran.
The Tigers made a two point conversion with a Sellitto to Kintz pass play, This made the score 40-8.
The Bengals scored 28 points in the first half and then added 28 more in the third quarter and 21 in the fourth.
The Tigers with so much of their strength and scoring potential missing just could not get in the game.
So far the Tigers have an 0-3 record in the conference and a 3-3 overall record, but there are several Tigers who stand high in the Rocky Mountain Conference standings.
Sellitto is second in the conference in passing and third in individual total offense.
In addition Sellitto is first in overall ground gaining for the Tigers.
Besides his passing, Sellitto has accounted for two touchdowns on short rushes.
Last week's game was a good example of how he is relied upon for passing, especially since the injuries of Pleasant and Tippin.
The Tigers threw 3S passes, completed 13 and had intercepted in the Idaho game.
For the Tigers Pleasant and Tippin are number one and two in rushing and Pleasant is third in pass receiving while Tippin is second in punting.
In addition, Pleasant is the leading scorer while Tippin is second in scoring.
Pleasant leads hi extra point conversions for the Tigers, Ken Wisgerhof is the leading punter on the team and is second in pass receiving.
FOR RENT 1124 N Weber SCOTT, ME 4-7350 .jiEiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiiiiiniiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiijiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifc, When Its Mulic Its Milieu Miller Music Co.
In fact, the governor of Colorado narrowly escaped the anger of an unruly mob which besieged him in Palmer Hall.
In May of 1894, an organizer of the Western Federation of Miners by the name of John Calderwood precipitated a strike in the Cripple Creek basin which soon developed into a class war.
As a matter of fact, the situation became so grave that Governor David H Waite decided to send the Colorado Militia, under the command of Thomas J Tarsney, to the Cripple Creek district to enforce law and order.
But from the Unii>ersit£ <SAqp Governor Waite was a vociferous Populist, as was General Tarsney, and their idea of justice was not that of the mine owners in the district.
After a cooperative endeavor between the militia and the striking miners gave the appearance of law and order the militia was recalled.
Several hundred miners held Bull Hill, crowned by the camp of Altman, as a military force.
Sheriff Bowers, of Republican EI Paso County, lined up an army of ""deputies"" which was composed mostly of ex-policemen and ex-firemen from Denver who had lost their means of livelihood at the behest of Governor Waite.
During the violence that ensued, William S Slocum, CC president, was asked to go to the Cripple Creek district to try to obtain a settlement.
As the situation worsened, Governor Waite again decided that he should take action.
But this time, he himself decided to obtain a settlement — favorable to the miners.
The governor went to the district and was given full power to negotiate for the miners.
This was not a particularly desirable situation as far as the mine owners were concerned.
The governor and the leading mine owners assembled in Palmer Hall at Colorado College in order to reach an agreement.
The mine A sporting proposition, Gentlemen \ rather paradoxical espresion, meant to inform you of he lush plush quality end lardy durability of these conulity They have a smart in fori that places you at ease whereever you feel the urge to go.
They agreed to the wage and hour demands of the miners, but Governor Waite insisted that the strike leaders must not be prosecuted for criminal acts.
This condition was unacceptable to the mine owners and it resulted in the collapse of the conference.
But if the mine owners were grimly upset by the insurgents and their Populist leaders, the people of Colorado Springs were honestly terrified.
The strike was ended, after nioti violence and the return of thi militia, on June 10, 1894.
The Poetry Workshop meeting will be held Tuesday, November 1 at 7:30 in the ASCC room of Rastall Center.
Copies of poems to be discussed will be available at Rastall desk Friday evening, October 28 for those who want to read the poems before the workshop meeting.
Lit combines a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL... definitel y proved to make the taste of a ci g arette mild and smooth . . , 2. with a pure white outer filter.
The segregation question she ,ys is ""all a matter of politics,"" ;ith the two main pai'ties being asically language groups.
The tationalists, the i-uling party, are omprised of Afrikaaners, whites jrhose descendants are primarily hitch.
They believe strongly in 'suppressing the blacks"" while the Jnited party, comprised of Engspeaking whites, supports ■quid opportunity for blacks.
Nationalists hink that if the blacks were put ui an equal basis they would soon iverrun the country.
Often uneducated themselves, ifrikaaners are very narrow-mindid in their thinking.
Along with he racial problem, they are velemently opposed to the idea of ■ule from a foreign shore.
It is polish for any one to think that he situation will continue because Pi other parts of Africa there are forceful leaders among the blacks |Vho will eventually reach the point Inhere they will be able to help ■heir own kind in other provinces >f the continent.
The government lannot ""combat the whole of Af'ica,"" in trying to suppress the 'lacks forever.
All proofs for the class section of the 1961 NUGGET must be turned in to the Rastall desk no later than Monday, November 7.
Those who have not as yet picked up their proofs, please do so and also return.
A Traffic Committee hearing will be held Tuesday, November 8, at 7:30 p in the ASCC room.
Applications Applications for the Student Curriculum Committee are open to juniors and seniors interested in science.
Applications for Leadership Conference and Songfest Weekend are due this week.
Joseph Moore, sophomore, was the winner for the drawing for the 10 volume Popular Science series sponsored by the Encyclopedia Americana.
Fall Lectures Give View of New World Man inhabits a new world, according to the conclusions drawn by the participants of the faculty lecture series, concluded October 27 by Dr.
Man's new world is not new in a physical sense but in a cultural and intellectual sense.
The lecture series, entitled ""The Consequences of Complexity and Communication"" featured Dr.
He stressed the need to further the documentation and distribution facilities of our country so that senseless duplications will not occur.
The community of scientists must also be able to keep in touch with each other, and not get misled by the jargon of the various disciplines.
Man is forced to become a specialist in his own field, and his capabilities are no longer able to meet the demands of being universally informed.
Both Snyder and Arnest mentioned the new aid provided to man by various electronic memory devices but these do nothing to help man synthesize new thesises from the data being collected around him.
Arnest asked the searching question of whether or not the i n a t e capabilities of man could be improved through genentics.
Bodermann, on being asked of the value of our small school in the big world, replied that such schools are the periphery of the new world, and hel;j those in attendance by exposing them to fields in the humanities in which they can flee momentarily for relief.
Will our new world bringa revival of art as a accessible Shangrai-La for both them asses and the elite to commute to, or will the people flock to art, as the Beats did, and use art as a permanent escape from our new world.
The small school, it seems, holds the answer to what kind of leadership our new world will have.
Snyder mentioned the need of colleges and universities to encourage more students to study our new world, and to devise ways and skills of better documentation and assimiliation of new data.
Bodermann proposed that bureaucracy, with its widespread influence, and relatively small concentration of power, is not inherently bad because it does bring many benefits with it.
It becomes bad only when the individuals kept from being an effective part of it.
Among the cast are 14 students from the Colorado College Dance Studio under the direction of Norm an and Dorothea Cornick.
The dancers are Judy Hawthorne, Susan Hughes, Cynthia Lamb, Susan Lobaugh, Judy May, Holly Menkel, Cynthia Morin, Rita Osburn, Paula Peake, Sarah Reeves, Terrie Reeves, Davey Ann Singer, Marietta Wilhelm and Alicia Young.
These dancers have been studying dance at Colorado College from two to six years and have appeared in various Colorado Springs productions.
She has sung in church choirs, operettas and has been soloist for many womens and social clubs.
She placed first in a contest in Chicago sponsored by the Society of American Musicians.
First Spadeful Turned For New Tutt Library The first spadeful of earth was turned Saturday mornine for the new Colorado College library.
The new library will be named the Charles Learning Tutt Library, according to Mr Armin B Barney, chairman of the Colorado College Board of irustees Mr barney made the announcement of the name during the traditional and symbolic ground-breaking ceremonies on Saturday morning, October 29.
Kennedy A recent study was made of the political preference of the faculty at Colorado College concerning the two major candidates for President of the United States— Senator John Kennedy and Vice-President Richard Nixon.
This study was sponsored by the Young Democrats of Colorado College and was carried out by Marine Randol and Harris Sherman, both members of the Young Democrats.
The results of the study are as follows; Total results John Kennedy — 46 Richard Nixon— 19 Independent or undecided— 14 Results by departments Natural Sciences Kennedy — 6 Nixon — 10 Independents — 3 Social Sciences Kennedy — 19 Nixon — 6 Independents — 3 Humanities Kennedy — 12 Nixon — 1 Independents — G Pine Arts Kennedy — 8 Nixon — 2 Independents— 2 Variety Show Termed Rousing I960 Success by Vicky Morey.
The annual CC Variety Show opened Tuesday night, November 1, with a rendition of ""There's No Business Like Show Business,"" done by the CC dancers.
After such a brisk start, a change of pace was provided by a suavely elegant young man, Hank Poole by name, who made ""St.
Betsy James and Alexe Mr Charles Learning Tutt .„ former Colorado College trustee and is president of the El Pomar Foundation.
The new library was presented to Colorado College last year by the El Pomar Foundation, which gave the college $1.25 million to help launch the Colorado College Campaign, a S12 million fund drive.
After the ground breaking, Tutt was presented with a small silver shovel in memory of the occasion.
Tutt, who was with her husband for the event, was presented with a large bouquet of roses.
Colorado College President Louis T Benezet presided over the ceremonies which were held on the northwest corner of the campus square before students, townsfolk and alumni of the college who returned for homecoming.
Bid letting is expected to be completed soon and construction will begin on the new library about the end off the year.
The building is scheduled to be ready for use when the fall semester opens in September of 1902.
The new library will be built at the southeast corner of Cascade Avenue and San Rafael Street on a site now occupied by West Hall, a onestory wooden building.
West Hall is scheduled to be moved from the site early next month so that earthwork for the new library can begin.
The Charles Learning Tutt Library is one of two new buildings to be built soon on the CC campus.
Stockton, looking quite demu and innocent, then told ALL about Aunt Clara, who apparently was anything but.
The Alpha Phis folk songe .were well done and were arranged by members of the group.
Mary Elizabeth Bradley performed with her usual excellence and savior faire.
After watching Frances Audier, I personally will never be able to look a room service waiter in the face again.
Kappa Alpha Theta proved that lovely legs and lovely voices don't necessarily have to go together.
Julia Anderson with a uch tha (Continued o gave her folk songs rhythm and charm The drum duo of Bill Fisher and Dick Brigham make one wonder why we ever left the jungles.
Pete Cheney started off the second half with two unusual numbers, accompanying himself on the guitar.
Lynn Vincent needs no praise, everyone knows how thrilling her twirling can be.
A taltened job of ""Johnny Smithing"" was done by Bill Oakes and Dean Roath.
If barber shop quartets were in danger of coming back, they need have no fear for the Kappa Sigma fraternity's rendition of ""Sweet Adeline"" proves the art is dead forever.
Louis Arietta and Friends proved there is nothing quite as exciting as well done Latin music.
Those of you who are familiar with the show, as most of you are, I'm sure, will realize that three numbers have been left out.
The class of '01 is likely to go down as the most notorious in the school's history.
Their portrayals of various CC professors, along with dialogue and lyrics, were not only hilarious, but managed to be so without being nasty and hurting peoples feelings.
They deserve all praise and plaudits for being the highlight of a great show.
Kappa Kappa Gamma, if little else, proved that Ann ""Willie"" Willcox has much more to her than just brains.
Editor _DAVE FUTtGASON _JELBA*J0R JONES Letters to the Editor OFFICIAL COLORADO OOLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF BuuinesB DON WOLFGANG -WALLY CALDWELL PENNY DAVIDSON JOAN ERIKSON De; •AFF— Vicky Morey.
Will Jol Carrie Sanborn, Marty Brctcrniti, Frannii.FrrbBtein, Sue Taylor.
Colorado on the CORNER Monday a gentleman from the National Student Association visited the campus and spoke during ASCC meeting.
Other criteria upon which we based our decision were the fact that dues alone would cost a little under one hundred dollars a year.
This does not include the cost of sending delegates to the conventions or regional meetings and such participation must be considered if any real benefit is to be obtained from the organization.
Hence the conclusion that the organization would cost more than it is worth to the school.
The gentleman who spoke Wednesday mentioned the availability of programs by which we could avoid the mistakes other schools have made should we ""wish to set up an honor system"" ""improve student-faculty relations"" (sorry, we can't see referring to the Deans by their first names) and a host of other helpful hints.
What NSA seems to forget is the fact that the purpose of these programs is twofold.
First, is of course the program itself, but second is the experience gained by the people who have set it up.
It was stated that the students of this campus had a responsibility to consider people and students abroad and to act with our fellow students and let the Department of State know when and where we disagree with its practices.
This is undoubtedly where NSA received its label of ""leftist"" from many groups.
Frankly, we feel that the students have a larger responsibility to themselves on this campus.
Certainly, Colorado College does its share where the foreign students are concerned.
It is doubtful as to how much more we could do where organizations outside the campus are concerned.
Last, one criticism has been written of NSA which this column heartily subscribes to.
It has been said that NSA tends to do the thinking for the groups rather than act as an organization which collects the thinking of the groups and acts accordingly.
November Eighth While we wish to avoid showing leanings toward one candidate or the other, we will go out on a long limb and predict a victory for Vice-President Nixon on November 8th.
Although ""Newsweek,"" ""Time"" and "" United States News and World Report"" have conducted polls which show Kennedy out in front, their polls are commonly lacking in two facts.
First, the religion of Senator Kennedy, painful though it may be to consider where voting is concerned, has not been a factor of any of these polls.
Second, Mr Nixon has a long record of defeating Democrats, many of whom were considered more firmly entrenched in the hearts and ballots of the people than is Mr Kennedy now.
Further, should Mr Nixon carry California which at the last report was for Senator Kennedy by a margin of one percent with some people abstaining, and should he carry three of the eight states now considered a tossup, he will have enough votes to win the election.
A candidate must hold a baccalaureate degree prior to the beginning of his law school training and be in the upper quarter of his graduating class.
He must request that his score on the Law School Admission Test be sent to the School of Law for consideration in conjunction with his undergraduate record.
Arrangements for this test should be made through the Educational Testing Service, 20 Nassau Street, Princeton, New Jersey.
Ideas, reactions and a fresh approach should always be welcome, however, they should be presented only after o fair and thorough knowledge of the situation has been acquired.
Certainly in the case of Mr Racey's uninformed criticism of both the Drama Department and the Dance Department, it would seem more gracious of him to wait until he had attended at least one performance of each department before firing such a salvo of buckshot.
The problems faced in production, not to mention costuming, casting, etc., by Mr McMillan and by Mr and Mrs.
Cornick are monumental—as is usually the case when operating on a very limited budget with a group of amateur performers — and not the least of their worries is the vitally important matter of giving the participating students the interest, enthusiasm and sheer determination to give of their time eagerly.
The Fine Arts Center came in for its share in the form of Mr Racey's personal objection to the selection of films shown each week for the public.
Mr Racy has obviously missed the pleasure and the headaches of serving on a selection committee that is trying to ""make ends meet"" and at the same time please the varied tasts of the public in an organization of this kind.
His own choice of ""La Strada"" as a supreme example of ART in this medium, leads us to believe that were he allowed to program the movies there would be even more left to be desired.
Criticism is excellent when wellinformed and there is no doubt that improvements could be made in all areas mentioned, as well as in every department at Colorado College, but perfection is hard come by and it seemed to us that these particular criticisms were too freely given, too broad in scope and showed a great lack of understanding of the existing problems.
In reading Mr Racey's letter last week I agree with his thesis ""one of the major aspects of a college is its cultural contribution; it is in part a justification for our existence,"" but I cannot agree with his statement that the radio station is under the impression that we are competing with any of the local broadcasters in output of drivel or anything else for that matter.
In order to enlighten him , I would like to mention that KRCC has consistently programmed for the past 10 years of our existence over 50^ of its air time on cultural activities.
This year they include, but are not limited to, classical music (which includes French, Dutch and American production), opera, BBC tapes , freedom and authority (produced by eight members of the faculty) and that very low class culture from Shove Chapel, the Sunday morning sermon.
We average 46 hours on the air weekly and of this over 20 hours are devoted to cultural broadcasts.
The remaining hours are devoted to public service (news, debates, lectures, special features and interviews with prominent people) and what Mr Racey in his ""highbrow"" attitude probably objects to, popular music.
We, as every radio station in the United States, play this pop music, which may disgust Mr Racey, because the majority of the students on campus want to hear it.
I have forgotten to mention one other vital aspect of KRCC's function and that is to train students who may want to go on into professional radio when they finish college.
This means that the student must learn how to run a Disc Jockey Show, write the scripts, commercials and other lowly mundane trivia that is required in the professional field.
This can only be learned by practice, not by theory, and KRCC is proud of the students who have gone on into this field and have made a success of it.
As I mentioned above, we do program the BBC tapes and we would enjoy airing more of them along with the the countless other ""canned"" shows that are available to us (which we are well aware of ) and which just drrip with culture, but we students must team more than how to run a wireless tape recorder or record player.
However, in all fairness to you Mr Racey, KRCC will allow you all the time on the air that you wish if you will care to put on a series of programs to raise our cultural level to your cultural level.
This, I can say, is a lot more than some of the other groups or organizations on this campus have done.
It has been so, in past years, that our group has fallen to many insults and embarrassing situations not because we plan it that way, but because a few students take it upon themselves to make insulting remarks about the Zetas.
Our group has been classified upon such things as good-time boys, drunks and the attitude of ""what the he -"" let's live it up.
But these are individuals and if this instance were to happen to other organizations on this campus, nothing would be said.
But let a member of the Zeta organization err in life and it becomes a big item of talk here on campus.
Our group is superior in that a group must be strong in order to fight these accusations and we have done so in the past and will do so in the future.
We do not wish to accuse any person or organization for wrong doings against our group, but I would like something claerified as to certain standards required and to this point I would like to indulge.
Reid, who was instrumental in helping us draw up a recognized constitution.
We have as our advisors Mr William Barton and Mr Alan Johnson of the Business Department.
We have gone through all the formalities binding an organization together such as the Zetas.
As many professors, alumni and students can tell you, this has never been done before, but it has now happened.
The major factor with an organization such as ours is that we pay no dues and any social function or otherwise that the Zetas participate in is solely by money out our pockets for that event.
M ; of our group are here on scholi ships and would not be hi were not for these gifts.
The subject or main objective this letter is in reference to Homecoming parade.
I hope a all that you do not take this ter as a letter of protest, comply or the like.
It is a letter requ, ing clarification by the organic . that headed the parade.
Wi oth tended the meetings and such events to do with participati the parade.
Our ideas conce floats as well as those of othgroups and organizations sented at this meeting.
Our groi of representatives explained plan for our float in this para and it was said at the meeting th this would be accepted becaui Capone"" is a legend just as Crockett or the rest are.
We went through much trout and toil, trouble in rinding mom to start and trouble in getting | gether authentic dress.
We did mi work and when the final monn came we were as ready as others.
We went through the wh parade and we know that we i joyed ourselves as much as I spectators enjoyed us.
When I shouting was all over, here where we received our kick in l pants.
After the parade, we were ti by a member of the Homeconiii Parade Committee that we entered as a novelty act or have you.
My main argument is that group should have been told at t meetings before Homecoming, which we were represented, as our status in the parade.
We s very disappointed and disgusted the way our newly formed groi the Zetas, were treated.
If you have been wanting to ski, but are not sure aboul how to go about getting started, or if you are just beginning, then there is a nighl planned j ust for you.
Plan now to attend a ""Skiers' Evening"" on Tuesday, November 15 at 7:30 in the WE> room of Rastall Center.
All the dope will be given about the nearby areas along with the common terminolog) of skiing.
Colorado College Tiger • November 4, I960 L MA I Fre This to tl Janet Gretc Dona] No i you Dr.
Glenn Gray Discusses Ways of War and Peace Despite ominous threats of war, mankind may be nearer to true peace than most people suspect, according to Dr.
Glenn Gray, professor of philosophy and head of the Philosophy Department at Colorado College.
He made his observation on possible peace in the lead article of the October issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.
The title of the article article is based on the final chap> ter of his book, ""The Warriors; Reflections on Men in Battle,"" which was published last year.
Admitting that it is speculative to believe Armageddon may not be a certainty, Dr.
Gray wrote, ""One may wonder if men could not be lastingly untied by great expectations, great adventures, and great projects.
If through listening devices, already in operation, or space exploration we establish communication with other beings, the effect will be profound,"" wrote Dr.
The change to peace would be great because man has always had war and has even glorified war, Dr.
Even allowing for a certain exaggeration in the literature about war, Dr.
Gray commented, ""I fear that war has made many men feel more alive than any peace we have so far devised.
Gray added, ""For the ordinary man of Western society the twentieth century has provided security from want and physical comforts to an extent unheralded in earlier times.
It has hardly fulfilled other needs of his, less clamorous needs, but perhaps equally important.
I refer to the needs of adventure, of risk, and hardship in the search for personal significance by way of supra-personal goals.
I think that the nation which finds the courage to risk greatly in the cause of peace will not only be educationally advanced, but also religiously aware of man's intimate connection with the rest of creation,"" Dr.
The realization that we are not alone in the vast cosmos would have on some of us at least, a greatly cheering effect.
Muelder Visits Campus for 3 Days Theology, science and politics will be the topics discussed by Dr.
His visit is sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee and the Assemblies Committee.
Will anyone who knows the whereabouts of JoAnne Weigel's wallet kindly return it either to Loomis or Rastall desk.
Pixie Campbell, Nadine Chang, Sue Evans, Chessie Kemp, Mimi Meek, Keekee Minor, Jean Torcom and Jean Wilfong.
Members of the reserve team are Tish Amberg, Sue Bigelow, Annie Hereford, Debbie Smith, Donna Story, Bonnie Toxby, Sandy Williams and Carol Wright.
German Club Tuesday, November 8, at 7:30 m., the German Club will have a meeting in the WES Room at Rastall.
A special feature of the program will be some choral music under the direction of Mr Jenkins and solos sung by Mr Harrv Booth.
The main festivities were launched Friday night at the annual bonfire rally held on Washburn field.
After the bonfire had been lit, Lynn Vincent, who ranks seventh in the nation as a baton twirler, gave a performance with fire batons.
From the queen candidates nominated by the five sororities and the IWA, the student body selected Meredyth Richards of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority as the Homecoming Queen of 1960.
The traditional Homecoming parade down Tejon highlighted Saturday morning's events.
The parade included marching groups from the ROTC, Tiger Club and What every college man should know about diamonds Lucky man — you've won the girl.
With an Artcarved engagement ring you can be sure you are getting your full diamond's worth.
Every ring is guaranteed in writing for cut, color, clarity and carat weight.
And only ArlcarveeTs® Permanent Value Plan — gives you nationwide proof of value.
As for design— you'll find the newest, brightest diamond ideas in town.
MEIrose 3-6069 Tjgerettes; floats representingthe Greek and independent organizations and a ridinggroup from Oskasita Riding Club.
Twirler, Lynn Vincent, led the parade to the music of the CC Band and the Homecoming Queen and her attendants, as well as queens of other years, rode as honored guests in the parade.
At 2m., the CC Tigers faced the Western State Mountaineers on Washburn Field.
At half time, in spite of a sudden dust storm wtih strong winds, the winning floats were presented to the spectators.
Second prize went to Delta Gamma for ""King Midas and the Golden Touchdown"" and Gamma Phi Beta's ""Little Black Sambo"" and Kappa Kappa Gamma's ""Pied Piper of Pike's Peak"" tied for third place.
The cross-country race following the parade of floats was won by Jeff Clark of Phi Gamma Delta.
The Tiger Club and Tigerettes, under the direction of Sue Evans, with the cooperation of the CC Band, presented a formation drill based on 1960 as an election year.
As a special item of the half time show, ""Rosie"" Collins was honored for his 25 years of service training CC teams and was presented with a transistor radio by Dr.
Although a sudden snowstorm discouraged some rooters, heartier fans stayed throughout the game to cheer CC to a 17-3 vietory over the Mountaineers.
Searching for some Colorado Springs charm, we find ourselves on the outskirts of town at a somewhat intricate dinner spot — The Out Post.
In a setting of the gay nineties, with old-time piano and all, The Out Post has an atmosphere that is rare for most clubs and a menu that meets the standards of the finest gourmet.
You will not want to miss their selections of lobster, curry dishes, roast Long Island duck with orange sauce and beef ka-bobs.
The Out-Post is located at 3840 North Nevada and is open daily except Sundays.
The immortal monster, better known as the witch in Hansel and Gretel, has a special message for opera lovers at Colorado College, her sly cunning way, she reminds you of the opera presentation, at the Fine Arts Center tonight and a matinee tomorrow.
A reminder that the Symphony presentation is November 10 at the Palmer High School Auditorium.
Willi Are prts Wl vork iew t ogs ife, i ■est 1 of thi j-.al.fe md t ruiiv< vhich iave, icqui; mast* Shi as t etres al -In and Around the Quadirul i The ive co volut iition Leaves are vastly falling from the trees on our campus to. give ;in mrsel almost gloomy landscape.
The final presei tation of the Variety Show is tonight and some worthwhile acts may befctions i-ed.
Mary Elizabeth Bradley are to be congratulated for truly fine performances.
The abundance of guitars are accented by Luis Arrietta, the Folk Singers Ina and Julia Anderson who are especially good and worth the price admission alone — 75 cents.
Dick Brigham should gain a note of appn for his versatile use of the conga dram.
MEIrose 3-3946 NEW BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME honoring Dr.
They receive engraved silver dishes, and Di Seay was presented with a sllve ice bucket.
The Ray Chatfield sing ers provided light enterrainmeni which was followed by a short tal by President Louis Benezet.
All three of the speakers ;ee the individual losing his sense ,f active, significant participation the world around him.
Our olution has placed us in a portion to alter both ourselves and selves and our world.
Mr Wally Caldwell as master of ceremonies was his usual urbane self and provided just the right touch and direction while announcing the acts.
By working 32 hours per day for weeks on end they put together a show that was a delight to the eye, ear, and all the senses of humor imaginable.
I realize very well that musical instruments must be in tune, but tuning should be done off stage, not during an actual performance, it only ' distracts the audience and annoye's them.
All in all, the I960 Variety Show could be termed nothing less than a success, and a huge success at that.
One could only wish that the money that went to the Campus Chest could equal the pleasure received from the performances.
The new plebes are Robert Straight, Bill Lang, Dean Roath, Drane Wilkinson, Jay Vickernian, Coleman Travelstead, Jim Talman Dennis Suave, Charles Rowland Russel Olds, John Morgan.
Bruce Lew, Charles Ladd, Donald Jones Bill Hybl, Eric Hsfjard, Bob Halsband, Jeff Goulart.
Bruce Lew lias been elected by the plebe class as their plebe leader and his assistant is John Morgan.
These two competant men have the job, among other things, of assigning' plebe privilages.
On Sunday, November 13, the Pershing Riflemen and plebes will go to Fort Carson for an intensive field problem.
The exercise will To Pershing Rifles cover several miles of terrain under simulated battle conditions.
Many types of weapons will be used, among them are B.A.R.'s, M-l's, 3.5"" rocket launchers, calibur 30 machine guns, etc.
Abett Icks— Terry V/hiting En gaged: Martha , Lockhart— David Hmiet YOUR OLYMPIA AGENT service to au. ujumj or typewriters BARNETT OFFICE EQUIPMENT CO 12 E,,t Klow « MHrow 2-3393 ""T""r+^ Ta^HIOYOASlT StRiP When things get too hot for it, this fall's coat , , . like a cocoon . . . sheds to reveal the smartest set of undercover agents ever: a suit, an overblouse and skirt or a matching dress.
NEW DUAL FILTER r middle nam"" r < Tareyton November 4, I960 • Colorado College Tiger Tigers Score First Conference Win; Beat Mountaineers 17-3 A CC football team whittled down in size from 42 to 28 men upset the Western State College Mountaineers of Gunnison, Saturday, in the annual CC homecoming game.
Both teams were looking for their first win in the Rocky Mountain Conference.
The large homecoming crowd was greeted with ideal weather during the first half of the game, but almost as soon as the halftime cereblizzard conditions arose and the game took on a different atmosphere in the second half.
The Tigers were forced into a punting situation but Ken Wisgerhof could not get the kick off so he threw to Vince Greco, who was dropped by the Mountaineers on the CC 44 where they took over.
From here they worked their way down to the 14 where CC defenses halted them.
They made a successful held goal attempt which was to be their only tally of the day, and made the score 3-0.
The Tigers retaliated when Western State was held deep in their own territory after receiving a punt.
After getting as far as their. they attempted to punt but the ball sailed far over the kicker's head.
He picked it up behind the goal line but was immediately downed by some Tigers for a CC safety .making the score 3-2.
Then with only 3:28 remaining in the half Terry Holleran took a punt on his own 49 and ran it all the way back for a CC touchdown.
Jim Blair converted the extra point and going into the second half, the score read 9-3 in favor of the Tigers.
Ringing the bell with the authority of Big Ben is the achievement of those who are soundly attired for campus life.
Our selection of sweaters in orlons and wools, crew neck, shawl collars, *■ andhigh V's, sues as pictured are all . . . for the betterment of man.
Apparently the Mountaineers were confused by the blizzard as they watched the ball roll dead without attempting to get it.
But the Tigers could not get anywhere with the ball and the attempted field goal was short.
Then once again history repeated itself, when the Mountaineers were forced into a punting situation.
Again the ball sailed over the kicker's head, and again he was downed behind the goal line for a safety making the score 11-3.
Still in the third period the Tigers added another three points, when Blair kicked another field goal.
Western State then had the ball on their own 20 but another bad center resulted in the Tigers getting the ball on Western's three yard line.
Sellitto sneaked across for the touchdown, but it was nullified by an illegal procedure penalty.
Unable to get any further, Blair came in for the Tigers to get another three-pointer to make the final score of the game 17-3.
Tomorrow the Tigers travel to Alamosa, Colorado for another conference game against Adams State College.
A pass from Lurie to Lyons set up the only Beta TD play in the first half.
Ackerman opened the scoring by pulling in a pass from Floerehinger and running 10 yards for the touchdown.
Lurie again took over when he intercepted a Sigma Chi pass and ran 30 yards for the touchdown, Ward then intercepted a Beta pass and ran to score.
Weld passed to Case the . nveri Q VICK UALITY S ERVICE ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/; E.St >che La Poudre COLLEGE CLEANERS Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEIrose 3-7883 ■tllllllll When If, Mmic It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Weld came into the spotligj again in the second half as j threw two scoring passes.
Golf Sky Lyon of the Beta Theta team won the individual g championship when he shot an in the second 18 holes of the tramural tournament held at Patj Jewett Golf Club.
Bill Casey of Beta team copped fourth place Hockey Practice Now Under Way Hockey practice began last w for the Tigers with 29 men ti_. ing out for the first praetia Coach Tony Prasca said he work that group for about r* weeks and then cut down to ab 18 men.
They are Wayne ( Bill Goodacre, Stan Moskal, Br™ Dutkowski, Larry Gilber son, Bob Curfee, Edie Boychuc Ken Hartwell and Gordon moth.
There will hi lot of new faces on the club, don't know how we will fare in i season, but we should have an teresting club,"" he said.
After th game, the Tigers will go to Pi ver on the night of December to play an exhibition game again the Denver Pioneers, last year NCAA champion.
The building was presented to the college by the Olin Foundation N which granted the college $$1,490,400 for the structure.
The structure probably w,ll be of red brick and will have four floors with about 65,000 square feet of space Geology Department Attends Convention Three members of the Geology Department of Colorado College and four students from the department participated in the recent activities of the annual meet' ig of the Geological Society of merica and Associated Societies Denver.
The three members of the faculty were Professor William Fischchairmau of the department, Mr Trowbridge Grose, associate professor, and Mr John Lewis, instructor.
The four students were Robert Schock, Ted Callender, Fred Peel and Cecilia Travis.
Several geologists from all parts of the United States and a number from foreign countries were in attendance at the meetings held in the Denver Hilton Hotel.
Talks were given at a number of stops en route to Castle Rock, Palmer Lake and the Perry Park area.
The group also visited the Garden of the Gods and the site of the first oil well in Colorado, drilled in 1862, on the bank of Oil Creek.
The last stop was in Red Canyon at the famous dinosaur quarry discovered in 1877.
CC will enter two two-man 'earns in the Senior Division and one four-man team in the Novice ivision.
Members of the Senior -on teams are Max Power 'TO Charles Puckett, and Chris '1'iffiths and Jack Cashman.
Derating the affirmative case in the Novice Division are Jack Walker Wd Dave Furgason, while the negative issues will be debated bv Max Jaylor and Dave Bitters.
The sponsors of the Debate Club re Mr Al Johnson of the Ecoomics Department and Mr R M. udoff, instructor in history.
For students only, this meeting is designed to answer student questions on the place of the gifted student in today's world, both in higher education and the society at large.
Professor Cohen will meet with interested faculty in Bemis Hall to report on honors programs in many leading institutions in the nation.
On November 17 in Palmer 210, Professor Cohen will meet with one of the Freedom and Authority classes, from 10 to 12m.
Students who are unable to come on Wednesday evening are invited to attend this class to hear and discuss with Professor Cohen.
Cohen has in recent years been the leader in the promotion of honors seminars for gifted students.
Cohen has gained national distinction as the foremost authority on Honors programs at the state universities.
He is in great demand as a consultant in establishing such programs at hundreds of universities.
The growth of concern and courses for superior students is perhaps the outstanding new feature in American education in our time.
Professor Cohen is rapidly becoming our national leader in this movement.
Students are urged to hear this frontier in education from the man who knows most about it.
Coach Jerry Carle and Captain Jack Real of the CC foothall team wish to express their thanks, on behalf of the whole team, for the fine support given them by the student body and alumni despite the adverse weather conditions during the CC Homecoming game against Western State.
By opening night Thursday, November 17, our very able CC Players should have a first rate play.
Seeing but a small preview of the play, I definitely want to go back and enjoy the rest.
Gayle French is very convincing and puts much feeling into the part of Anne.
All of the cast has had previous experience either in CC productions, summer stock or other.
Last year's lead in ""Brigadoon,"" Leonard Dalsemer, is back as Mr Van Daan this year.
Bob Halsband, a freshman, has had much experience in high school productions and is very good in the part of Peter.
Although far from elaborate, much time has been spent in getting the appropriate period outfits for the various characters.
Such things as brown oxfords and long 1940 European skirts are not too easy to obtain.
After exhausting CC's collection of costumes a search through the Salvation Army and Thrift House was made.
Professor McMillen, his associate director, Georgia McClay, and the whole cast and crew are presently rehearsing nightly to bring us a truly great CC production.
At this time, New Mexico still hung in the balance and although Senator Kennedy had won the popular vote in Alabama and Mississippi, the electoral delegations of these two states remained unpledged.
Only five of Alabama's 11 votes would go to Kennedy and all eight of Mississippi's electoral vote remained on the ""unpledged ticket"" under Governor Ross Barnett.
The only thing that rang clear in this confusion was that Senator Kennedy with 33-1 electoral college votes at minimum would be the 35th President of the United States.
The trend for the rest of the nation to follow was established early in Connecticut where Kennedy won by an even bigger majority than ' expected.
Swinging to the Midwest and a rainy dav, Kennedy ran surprisingly well in the farm belt but he lost Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Ohio, and Wisconsin while winning an extremely close race in Illinois, Michigan, and Minnesota.
Clear skies greeted the Southern voters where the name of Senator Lyndon Johnson carried the traditionally ""Solid South"" again for the Democrats.
Snow fell in the Rocky Mountain area but the majority of the states here went to Vice-President Nixon while in the sunny West, Kennedy won California and Nevada but lost in Washington and Oregon.
Kennedy won in the three most populous Catholic states of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut; but he also carried the four most heavily populous Protestant states of North Carolina, West Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia.
Kennedy expected to win Ohio as Nixon expected Delaware but both states did switch around.
Kennedy won the key industrial states with large Catholic population and lost in the states of Kentucky, Tennessee and Oklahoma where Pundavery mentnlist Protestantism strong.
Fourteen of these gubernatorial positions were Held by Democrats and 13 bv Republicans.
Unofficially, 17 Democrats were elected and 10 Republicans Tims, the status soon to be wil be 36 Democratic governors and 14 Republicans.
In the Senate 34 seats were contested, the Democrats i unofficially winning 21 and the Republicans 13.
For the first time in our' history, a Roman Catholic was elected to the most powerful office in the land.
Regardless of their undergraduate major, students who expect to receive the bachelor's degree or its equivalent are eligible to apply for admission to the school.
Sho from left to right are Dick Rundell, Donna Duncan, Leonard Dalsem Gayle French, Carol Elfring, Dud Coles, and Jim Fox fit* •tf**' -DAVE FURGASON ^ELEANOR JONES OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF Bualnet _DON WOLFGANG _WALLY CALDWELL PENNY DAVIDSON JOAN ERIKSON Letters to the Editor Carrie Sanborn, Marty Brotcrnitz.
Colorado on the CORNER If it is possible to judge from the recent flurry of letters from members of the Colorado College faculty and from several other indicies on and about the campus then it is possible to conclude that ""Changes in the Wind"" is entering a new phase on the Colorado College campus.
Certainly it is not the place of this column to judge the comments which have been or are being printed, but we must say that we view this more obvious concern of the school's efforts and achievements with pleasure.
There has been a rumor that these letters are only the beginning of many and if they follow the same theme as the others, they are more than welcome.
Undoubtedly, the building program has had the effect of a shot of adrenalin.
Now, a second or third and certainly more careful look is being taken at the status of student government, the construction of some courses (one department has admitted its courses need improving and is now engaged in overhauling them) and the level of extracurricular entertainment available on or about the campus and the results are bound to be gratifying provided what momentum that now exists is not allowed to dissipate into empty words which were written and read and forgotten.
It is with hope and perhaps a little apprehension that we watch for the continuation of a more obvious participation in campus affairs than has been apparent in the past.
Senator 3Jorjn ISenneoo fu the office of iprss&eni of the lilnrtcu States.
I hope that others — especially students — will participate in what should be a continuing debate about our cultural program.
The replies to Mr Racey's letter were nothing but offended defenses 'of the status quo as such.
I seriously doubt that ""don't make waves"" and ""whatever is, is right"" are good mottoes for a college of liberal arts.
Both reply letters stressed the practical obstacles involved in raising the level of our cultural programs.
Many modern plays, such as some by Beckett and Sartre, can be produced with much less expense than ""Brigadoon,"" and, I should add, so can those of Shakespeare and Webster.
Incidentally, I question whether vocational training should loom so large in KRCC's activities.
Surely radio technique can be learned more efficiently in six weeks at a good . trade school, which Colorado College is not.
A high level cultural program is expensive— not in dollars, but in imagination and efforts.
More important, both answers implied that students would most readily respond to such forms as Broadway hits and popular music.
The liberal arts college, as the guardian of ""that ""highbrow"" culture at which Mr Meuhlbauer so childishly sneers, must not cater to existing taste, but cultivate new , tastes for the excellent, wherever it appears.
I hope that members of the academic community will join me in demanding that"" Colorado College be satisfied with nothing less than excellence.
Boyce has been involved in the mechanics long enough to know all the good reasons why the status must remain quo, and he objects that Mr Racey's comments were made before he had been here long enough to know the same good reasons.
If he is serious in his statement that improvement could be made in all departments of the college, he should welcome remarks made by someone who has not been submerged in the mechanics as long as he has.
The significant thing about it, although technical objections have been made about its manner of presentation, is that a young instructor as good as Mr Ed Racey, who has come from one of the fine colleges of liberal arts with which we like to compare ourselves, finds a lack of concern for excellence in our aims, although we have the potential for excellence.
The college has changed so rapidly that we have forgotten many things in a short time.
We have gotten remarkable things moving in so short a time that we do not notice that we are paying for it with our life's blood— measuring out our life, not in coffee-spoons, but in committee meetings, compromises, plans, programs.
Those of us who seemed so young just five years ago now seem so decidedly middle-aged.
Mr Racey will learn the good reasons in time — the people who are so nice that they shouldn't be criticized, the engulfing nature of committees,the practical facts that lead us to do so instead of so, just as we do, but if our aims are to remain true it will ,be the youngsters who come in who will keep them so, not those of us who by a monumental effort are making the concern go.
If we find someone who is willing to talk out, for heavens sake, let us welcome the shout and encourage him to speak his piece loudly.
The Zeta entry was listed on the parade judges' score sheets, and I, at least, was never informed that it was not a qualified entry.
When and how the Homecoming committee reached its decision I have no idea, but on the basis of Mr Boychuk's letter I would sug. gest that the final standing of the Zeta entry might well, and most wisely, have been left to the parade judges.
I, for one, not enjoyed it immensely, but gave it the second highest rating of entry on my own score sheet.
I would like the Zetas to know thi I do not, however, speak for ar other judge.
Honesty, humility, morality and honor are character traits that we all admire.
Their qualities have intrigued philosophers, writers and theologians through the ages.
You can tell the character o every man when you see how h receives praise.
Cap & Gown Cap and Gown will periodically present for publication in the TIGER short reviews of books suggested by the members of the faculty.
The books chosen are not technical and detailed, but understandable and interesting to the layman.
Fred Sondermann entitled, ""Internationa] Politics in the Atomic Age,"" by John H Herz.
Professor Herz deals with the fact that the modern state has really become an anachronism, but that we seem unable to think of alternative forms of organization.
Dear Editor, SO many of you Americans have real interest in foreign students and our respective countries.
The main reason for our being here is to compare cultures— not to be prize exhibits of the International Relations Club.
I am suggesting that you inhibited Americans should not leave all the work of contact between Americans and foreigners up to us alone.
Tell us how to run our countries, ask tions about those countri thing, only do help us to come into contact with more of you than our close friends.
How often when you have heard foreigners say they dislike Americans, have you wished they would go back where they started from.
Following the Homecoming parade, the question arose as to the status of the Zeta entry.
Since the Homecoming weekend, I have attended a Zeta meeting where the situation was discussed and settled.
It was decided that it would be a good idea to inform the student body as to the status of the Zeta entry in the parade.
The Zetas were judged on exactly the same basis as all other entries in the float competition.
Their entry came under the classification of legends— the validity of which was never in question.
Some mention I think should be made of one of the better acts in the Variety Show, that the critics seem not to appreciate.
The Gamma Phi act was one of the .best and most entertaining I have seen since the Silver Follies were closed in Chicago in 1951.
Gary Gappert Frosh Pep Clubs Honor Tiger Team The Tigerettes and the Bengals, the freshman pep clubs, are holding a reception for the football team Saturday, November 12, after the game until 6 This reception will be held in the WES Lounge.
Truth is the trial of itself and needs no other touch, And purer than the purest gold.
Morality knows nothing of geographical boundaries or distinctions of race.
The difference between a moral man and a man of honor i^ that the latter regrets a discreditable act, even when it haworked and he has not been caught.
Arnest Featured In Tuesday Assembly Tuesday at 11m. in Perkins Hall, Dr.
Mr Arnest spent the summer in Afghanistan on a cultural exchange program with the Department of State.
He traveled around the country and painted as well as earning the distinction of being the only United States artist to have an art exhibit in Afghanistan.
The topic of his talk relates his experience with the foreign service offices, some of which he found to be very similar to those mentioned in ""The Ugly American."" i Mr Amest's talk is being sponsored by IRC and the Assemblies Committee. twirl the fire.
CC's Lynn Vincent Highlights Twirling Leading the CC Homecoming parade is only one of the many pportunities in baton twirling, ccording to Lynn Vincent, a sophomore from Casper, Wyoming.
Miss Vincent who ranked first in theWyoming state competition for six years and placed seventh in the entire nation in 1959, also twirled in the Variety Show and the Homecoming rally and bonfire.
Since she entered college, Miss Vincent has dropped out of competition because of the hours of practice necessary to keep in shape.
However, because she is a tered judge and teacher, and so listed in ""Who's Who in Baton Twirling,"" Miss Vincent , up to $40 a day for judging.
This group, which goes by the name of the ""Lyn-ettes,"" placed second in the state competition this fall.
Few people realize how organized baton twirlers are,"" comments Miss Vincent.
Each contest must be approved by the National Association of Baton Twirlers and must certified judges.
Contests are leld on a local and state level and the national competition in Januis held in conjunction with the Paul Winter Carnival.
Miss Vincent, who has gone to the nacompetition five times, noticed that most of the girls in ■mpetition started twirling at the je of four or five.
He stated that there are conflicting strains and stresses in our political system.
A candidate may take one position in one part of the country an another position in another part of the country.
A loss is bearable if the rules of the game are followed, but in the final days of a campaign the field values are often put aside.
Muelder felt that the television debates made performers, rather than campaigners, out of the candidates.
The debates also caused issues to be made of situations (such as the offshore islands of Matsu and Quemoy) that are not really fundamental to the campaign issues.
If the debates are to be used again a definite format should be set up.
Muelder regrets that the American people are not well prepared to understand the relationship of church and state.
The separation of church and state does not mean the religious leaders can't discuss politics and state preferences.
Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St.
They will work with the Tigerettes to make an organized and effective cheering section at as many of the college's home athletic events as possible The eBn.gals' main objectives are to instill and bolster school spirit and enthusiasm within the student body as well as to get more students to attend the college's many athletic functions.
One of the activities of the Bengals will be to provide some function honoring the players of the various teams at the end of each season.
This Saturday, after the football game with New Mexico, the Bengals in conjunction with the Tigerettes will hold a reception for the football players in Rastall Center.
In addition to their activities at college sports events, the Bengals will initiate or participate in other constructive projects which will be beneficial to the college.
In order to operate most effectively, the Bengals have limited their membership to not less than 20 nor more than 30 people.
In the years to come their constitution provides for the election of members of the freshman class at the time of freshman class commissioner elections by a three fourths positive vote of the retiring sophomore members.
The Bengals have elected Bill Greeley, president; John Lewis, vice-president; Ed Loosli, secretary; Bill Hybel, treasurer, and Steve Sabol, sargent-at-arms.
Pershing lifles Plans Geremong and Meeting Today the Colorado College Pershing Rifles Company is taking part in ceremonies at Fort Carson to rename the parade ground to General of the Armies John J Pershing Drill and Parade Ground.
On Sunday the Pershing Riflemen will again return to Fort Carson for a field problem using full battle dress and weapons for small engagements over about the same terrain that the juniors used last Spring.
The next meeting of Pershing Rifles will be on Thursday, November 17, in the ROTC building at 7:10m.
Heavy coat, gloves and boots, and slide out on the tosvp , „ Koffee A place I ve keen meaning to mention for some time now has added' omethmg ; r* w One of the most delightful cotTeo shop, „™ °' tn ™ 1, f ""'i 18 I""*' PikM P<Jak S "" w "". '•<*""ve<l and elegant me but a few assets of this comfortable hideawav.
The Krusl ',„, K ee has some of the best coffee and home-made pies IV eve, ha 1 an 1 snack or luncheon engagement.
Springs Sings The Colorado Springs Chorale will present Brahms' ""Gvpsv Songs"" s, Re"" V ,K F T, Arts C """" ter ' TI,PV wi "" '""' accompaSed by the Use Reese Dancers and directed by Walter niton.
We haye been informed by many sources that this production was viewed by some 10 mi , „,le and is considered to have been one of the top full attractions.
Being strongly impressed, MGM has asked Miss Ellis to write anothe, v for their Alcoa series.
From all of „ s t „ Miss Ellis congratulations and good liFMH-Khie Arts Guide For the last live months, a magazine has been put on the stands especially for those of you interested in the cultural events of Colorado springs.
It's the KEMH Fine Arts Guide, a guide to regal entertainment each month.
The purpose of this meeting is to find ways in which women living ofT campus can feel more a part of college life.
IRC Last spring the national convention of the International Relations Club met at Harvard.
The main discussion at the convention is at present being carried out throughout the Uaited States and college campuses.
This movement is to set up a civilian foreign service corps to be sent to other nations for the purpose of training.
A follow-up discussion of the assembly will be held that night at 7:30m. in Rastall, room 207.
All college students are urged to attend and take part in the movement of the civilian corps.
Students are also asked to give their opinions on the subject to the International Relations Club.
French Club The new olFieers of the French Club are Renita Appel, president; Mary Rardone, vice-president, and Diana LeBosquet, secretary.
The French Club will sponsor a French table in the Rastall cafeteria every Wednesday at 12 noon.
Oskasita In the near future, Oskasita is planning to hold a ""Dinner Ride"" for all members.
Liz Coleman George Toffel Jan Hansen Jim Dyson Nelle BonfoeyEd Starr Engaged: Bonnie Smith Kenneth Allen Jo Flower Gordon Axelson Barbara Brown Charles Rowland Married: Jane Thompson Ben Norris TYW YPEWIUTEEl SUWYCOt S3 3] November I I , Colorado College Tiger K^Areek flews B\ t'HANMi: HKUS1 I IN Alpha Phi Last Monday the Alpha Phis went to the Kappa house for an informal dessert.
On Wednesday the Alpha Phis had a tea for the national officers that are visiting the chapter.
On Sunday evening the Betas will go to the Alpha Phi house for an informal dinner.
Beta Thcta Pi Last Tuesday the Gamma Phis went to the Beta house for dinner.
It will be held at the Alamo Hotel from 8:30m. to 12:30 Last Saturday the Betas and the Gamma Phis got together for a picnic out at the Star Ranch.
Delta Gamma The football game of last Sunday between the Kappas and the Delta Gammas was quite a game.
The Delta Gammas won by one touchdown, while putting two of the Kappas out of circulation.
Tonight the Delta Gammas and the Thetas will get together for their costume dance at the Patty Jewett Golf Club.
Fred Sondermann will give a lecture at the house on the election returns.
Gamma Phi Beta Last Saturday the Gamma Phis had a picnic with the Betas out at the King Ranch.
Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams will have their annual Bowery dance tomorrow night at the Apache Inn.
Kappa Alpha Theta Last Tuesday the Thetas had a party for the girls in the house and their guests to watch the election returns.
Edward Cass, district president, will be visiting the Theta chapter on the first of next week.
Phi Delta Theta On November 19 the Phi Delts will replace their traditional PhiDelt She-Delt dance with the Flintstone Rock.
Charlie Greening, a junior from Mahwah, New Jersey, is a new Phi Delt pledge.
Kappa Kappa Gamma Last Monday evening the Kappas had an informal dessert for the Alpha Phis and Thetas.
The Kappas had a party for the girls in the house and their guests to watch the election returns on Tuesday.
On Sunday the Sigma Chis will go to the Kappa house for an informal dinner.
Bill Fisher played for the occasion and the chaperones were Professor Paul Jones and Mr William Barton of the Economics and Business departments.
German Club Features Music and Pictures By Marcia Moses Whether you call it a song or a ""lied"" it was well done by Mr, Harry Booth who sang ""Der Neugirige"" and ""Ungeduld"" by Franz Shubert at the German Club program last Tuesday.
Booth was followed by the Madrigal choir directed hy Mr Donald Jenkins.
The group, largely exposed to the German language only two weeks ago, beautifully performed Brahm's ""Liebeslieder"" and other numbers.
Another focal point was Siggy Hepp's narration of her slides taken in Munich, Germany during her stay there last year.
Adjournment of the club meeting followed its usual form of group singing and refreshments.
Rocky Mountain Conference Now in Its Fifty-First Year This is the 51st year for the Rocky Mountain Faculty Athletic Conference, which was formed in 1909 to replace the old Colorado Intercollegiate Athletic Association.
Colorado College was one of the founding schools of the conference and has been an active and competing member ever since.
In fact, Dean Edward Parsons of Colorado College took the initiative in organizing the conference.
Merv & Hazel Isaac ME 3-2354 GANO DOWNS MIEN'S CJOTHINQ _ FUBMiaHINOS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES > II Daily OPEN— 1 1 W Colo.
This brought order to what had been a pretty free-wheeling approach to collegiate athletics in the Rocky Mountain area.
The athletic boards of the colleges were composed of students, and the student managers for each sport were responsible for the administration and financing of athletics.
Cries went up of professionalism, campus raiding and low eligibility standards.
Since the invitation was ignored, they decided to boycott the two"" schools until they did join.
Because of the size of the conference, a round robin schedule was next to impossible in most athletics.
Therefore the conference was divided into eastern and western halves for basketball, track and baseball.
In 1937 the schools that had come to be called the ""Big Seven"" of the conference withdrew to form the Mountain States Conference.
This left the ""Little Five"" of Colorado College, Colorado School of Mines, Montana State, Colorado State College and Western State College.
They were left with the conference title, records, and a less than fat treasury.
After World War II, Idaho State College joined in 1949 and Adams State College in 1954.
Montana State College withdrew in 1956 leaving a six-school loop in a fairly well defined geographic area.
Colorado College football teams have fared well and enjoyed many successful years as a member of the Rocky Mountain Conference even when the Tigers played Trip lo Mexico Planned During Spring Vacation The first meeting to discuss tl spring vacation trip to Mexico wj' be held Tuesday, November \; 3:30m. in Hayes House 14.
Stu dents unable to meet at this tiro may get in touch with Miss Lauri Perry of the Spanish departmen at Hayes House 14, X-234.
The price of the trip will b S130 which includes round-trii transportation and all expense while in Mexico for the 10 day trip There will be visits to th, pyramids, Chapultepec, Cuernevaca Taxco and possibly Acapulco Other activities will include visit] to museums, a native dance exhibition and meals in typical res. taurants.
It appears now thai Governor Rockefeller has just assumed control of the Republican party and as time passes, will con--,,, tinue to solidify his holdings ir* that party.
The election of 1960 will be re memhered as one of the closeever but whether or not this elec tion signifies the ultimate decisiur remains to be seen.
Colorado College Tige ACCO PRODUCTS November I I, I960 I In DG Wins Over Kappa Powder-Puff Game Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the Powder-Puff which finds Delta Gamma in contest with Kappa Kappa Gamma.
Tins annual game between these two sororities is a traditional event on many campuses across the country.
This Sunday afternoon, November 6, 1960 is the first time jn CC history such an event has been featured and by the looks of things it will not be the last. look across the field on -;3PB this chilly-nippy day, we see a crowd of avid fans gathering and jur memories recall that this •rowd is comparable to CC foot>all game attendances.
Our vision s not limited to the east stands [S we also see the hundred-yard football field cut in half to lessen he odds of possible touchdowns.
The pre-game festivities include the Kappas in white sweat-shirts mining through passes and practice drills at the north end of he field and the DG's in navyilue sweatshirts likewise running hrough passes and practice drills it the south end.
We in conerence in the announcers' booth iecide the reason to be the final adjustment of uniforms and the ipplying of make-up in typical einale fashion.
The flags, scarfs, hankies and what you dangling from the playirs' back pockets are the tackling evice.
The play formations are ilaimed and plotted ,by each team, 'he extra single after-touchdown loint will be made by running or lassing over the end line.
The last nd by no means least difference the fact that the players' staistics are not for release.
Eddie Kintz and Kent Vick, both f the CC varsity football team, today's referees and we now them on the field talking to the team captains— Abett Icks for Delta Gamma and Chessie Kemp and Meredyth Richards for Kappa Kappa Gamma.
The DGs first eleven are Sally Adler, Sue Block, Buffie Buff urn, Nancy Dehlin, Becky Dunbar, Sue Evans, Patsy Griswald, Diane Johnston, Keekee Minor, Lynn Pelly and Portia Van Meter.
Kappa's starting line-up is Kay Anderson, Ann Barber, Linda Christensen, Mariana Cogswell, Joan Jilka, Chessie Kemp, Mai-da Moses, Stephanie Row, Ann Ruth, Jan Sarder and Susie Stonefield.
Coaching Kappa Kappa Gamma are Chuck Henson and Ken Wisgerhof while Bob Broyles and Jack Lutz are coaching Delta Gamma.
Ladies and gentlemen turn your eyes to the field — the game is about to begin.
Delta Gamma kicks off as Kappa Kappa Gamma receives the ball and before we know it, Kay Anderson has crossed the line for the first touchdown making the score 6-0, Kappa.
Kappa now kicks only to see the DG's fumble as they retrieve the ball and in a matter of minutes Connie Windle is over for the second Kappa touchdown.
The DG's now get the ball on Kappa's kick as Ginger Gallalee plunges over for Delta Gamma making the score 13-6, Kappa.
Excitement and enthusiasm run high for the Kappas, again in possession of the ball, but it must be too high.
Look, Eleanor Jones now in the game attempts a pass, ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION high and short into solid and crowded territory only to have Mimi Meek, in for Delta Gamma, intercept.
It is now half time and four cheerleaders in red innovations are noticed cheering the crowd on hi the east stands for Kappa Kappa Gamma.
Information here tells us they are Lynn Carmichael, Jo Keiser, Sheila Watson and Jill Tyler.
Now in the fourth quarter, Mimi Meek in a ""snake play"" plows through the Kappa line and with Abett Icks they bring the DG's out in front lp-13.
Spectators, Delta Gamma and ASCC Notes By Betsy Gaskill Kappa Kappa Gamma members are invited to be the guests .if Kappa Kappa Gamma at an open house, A bulletin lias just been handed in and with one glance it can be seen that this contest reaped soniccasualties.
For Kappa Kappa Gainma, Linda Christensen has suffered two sprained wrists while Joan Jilka suffers a torn ligament in her shoulder.
Chessie Kemp is a victim of a casualty in her right foot and Ann Ruth is nursing a cut tongue.
Patsy Griswald now lias a torn cartilage in her nose and Barb Justis a torn ligament in her knee.
They finished with a 1-4 record, beating the Mountaineers of Western State at Homecoming (or their one conference victory.
Curriculum Paul Jenson is the new science member of the Curriculum Committee.
Any unaffiliates interested in this program should contact the athletic office.
In last week's game, the Tigers were scoreless throughout the first three periods while the Indians scored a TD in the first quarter, one in the second and two in the third, doing into the last quarter, the Indians were ahead by the wide margin of 28-0.
Then in the last quarter, the Tigers finally held the Indians and made some touchdowns of their own.
One came when Reuben Trinidad went over after a CC drive from their own 27.
The next I'll came when Joe Cordova ran over the goal line after the Tigers had intercepted an Adams State pitchout.
Kintz threw to Chuck Henson for the two point conversion which ■ final score of the game.
Free Malts This week we give free malts to the following — William Hunter Charles Ritchie Richard Croll Jo Anne Lewis Judith Gray Elizabeth Tucker No strings — just call and get your FREE MALT this week.
NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN j MOHL'S BOOK HOME 16 E Kio SHEUJIMEB's • CAMERA SHOP 9 30 NORTH TEJON STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store Photographic Equip Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
I 5 ] November I I Colorado College Tiger Board of Trustees Awards Plaque to Roosevelt Collins ifie Oldiumvc Mr Roosevelt Collins, Colorado College's wellknown athletic trainer, received an award Saturday duringthe halftime ceremonies.
Louis T Benezet, president of the college, made the presentation of the plaque and a transistor radio as a token of the college's recognition.
Collins, who for 23 years has been trainer at Colorado College, probably has had as much to do with the shaping of the spirits of CC players as he has thenbodies.
A one-time pre-medical student, Collins is one of the most welt known and respected athletic trainers in the country.
He has one of tlie best sets of hands in the business, but even more -important is his vast knowledge of how to take care of injuries.
He not only takes care of CC athletes, but the faculty and staff, and often thenfamilies.
His physical therapy practice extends to assisting one of Colorado Springs' leading orthopedists.
A former CC player, who also played service ball, says ""Rosie"" is the best knee man in the country.
If Collins does anything better than taking care of the physical and mental pains of his athletes, it would be cooking.
Collins is known affectionately to everyone as ""Rosie,"" a nickname for Roosevelt.
He was born 56 years ago in Baton Rouge , Louisiana, and his mother named her only son Roosevelt in honor of the president of the country, FOR SALE Excellent, black 2-door 8-cyl.
He and his wife have a daughter, Natalie, now married and living in California.
After high school he went north to try to obtain his youthful ambition.
But things were tough for me, and so I had to quit there,"" he explained.
Although Collins had to give up his desire to be a doctor, he was determined not to go back to Louisiana without some sort of professional training.
The athletic director there then helped Collins land his next job, the one he still holds at Colorado College.
When Collins came to CC in the fall of 1935 he brought with him his knowledge, experience and hands.
With that equipment, and his personality, he went to work and today he probably is one of the most widely-known men on the CC campus.
Sometimes he is remembered by graduates after those former students have forgotten many of their professors.
A few years ago, a young political leader from California checked into the Broadmoor Hotel and there confided to one of his fellow Republicans that he had a stiff neck.
The fellow Republican was Attorney Leon Snyder, then Colorado's national committeeman.
So on Sunday morning, Collins went down to his trainer's room in Cossitt Hall and readied his equipment.
Collins took the stiffness out of Nixon's neck and has been an admirer of Nixon ever since.
He can reeite the strengths and weaknesses of many of them, but does not have a favorite.
Some were great, but others were just as great considering the amount of natural ability they had,"" he explained.
Collins figures that football causes more injuries than the other sports.
When a man with a bad ankle reports, Collins goes to work and soon is probing the injury with his fingers.
The patient is in no mood to look at broken, cells and probably is flinching from Collins' probing fingers.
But the next week, when he is getting around on the ankle almost as well as before the injury the man is likely to drop into Collins' office to thank ""him for the treatment and kid Collins about those strong fingers.
Collins in turn is likely to return the kidding anil josh the man about flinching when Collins' fingers probed into the sore ankle.
Oh, I would like to ho finished medical school, of. cour But, that is true, it has be pleasant here.
It combines a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL definitely proved to make the taste of , cig arette mild and smo oth"" ' \ 2 . with a pure white outer filter.
Arnest Speaks About Foreign Service in Afghanistan Homesickness is the first malady to strike Americans when they o serve their country in a land such as Afghanistan, according to ft-of.
Arnest, chairman of the art department of Colorado College and e Fine Arts Center School, talked Tuesday morning at the regular ..■i^mblies session on the campus.
Arnest spent most of the summer in Afghanistan on a cultural mis"" State DepartThere will be a meeting of all individuals who would be interested in applying for Editor-inChief of the TIGER this Friday noon in the TIGER office in Rastall.
Included in his duties |he painting of 10 works of art iring his time there.
The picres were presented to the Aflanistan government by the United States ivernment.
Arnest said, ""The first thing that its Americans is a savage homeickness.
The Voice of .meriea radio is jammed by the [ussians, and all that we had to ead were bulletins put out by the irious governments with agencies Afghanistan.
Arnest explained that the bulleiis mostly reported what various olitical leaders around the world id about a given problem.
Their brand Persian is little known and re are almost no teaching aids ull for it.
He pointed out that the booklets sued about the Afghan language 'ere written by linguists and are Imost useless.
Most Americans in Afghanistan tve a dazed look on their faces oon after they arrive there.
Arnest pointed out that while merica and Russia may each have delegation living in the same otel, the members of the two jelegations do not speak to each ther.
Like roads, flour fills and such thangs that have a eginning and an end.
But on the ther hand, the Afghans will ace Pt educational help only from America,"" he said.
PR Hurls All-College Jazz Concert the 22nd By Wally Caldwell ""Birds 'N Tigerland"" is the name given to the all-college jazz festival scheduled for November 22.
Pershing Rifles of Colorado College are pleased to present the fabulous Falconaires, a 17-piece orchestra composed of professional musicians of the Air Force Academy music staff.
Some of these men have played with such great name bands ""as Stan Kenton, Les Elgart and Billy May.
They, are pros from the word go and present an evening of music that is guaranteed to keep jazz and contemporary music lovers pleased.
The concert is absolutely Free to the students and faculty of Colorado College and will begin at 8-30 at Perkins Hall.
With ""A"" number of plans made, the concert should prove to be as professional a production as the musicians themselves.
Ken Shaw of KRDO's ""Night Time Jazz Show"" is the business manager of the Falconaires and is excited about the scheduled performance.
The Falconaires have been booked almost solid for the last five months and are happy to make an appearance at Colorado College.
Wally Caldwell, executive officer of Pershing Rifles, and jazz concert program director, will act as master of ceremonies and official PR host.
Anyone who can legally drive a car in Colorado or who has a friend who qualifies can enter this rally in which the automobiles travel a pre-planned course of 80 miles or more, on which the riders are guided solely by hints listed on the rally sheet.
Arriving at the secret destination, there will be lots of food, dancing, music, and — the KEG, contents unknown, for the winners.
The winners will be that driver and navigator who arrive at the destination with an average speed closest to that pre-determined by the rally officials.
The winners, and their friends, will have the privilege of emptying the contents.
Their names will be engraved on a plate on the KEG which will stand in Rastall Center to inspire future entrants.
The rally will start from Slocum parking lot at 4:30m., Friday, November 25.
All participants must register at Slocum or Rastall desks on or before November 23.
Conduct Committee Publicizes Its Decisions and Jurisdictions jurisdiction on the campus.
Four student members of the committee are elected each spring from the sophomore class and they serve during their junior and senior years.
Authority is delegated by the president of Colorado College ami the Executive Council of ASCC which gives the Student Conduct Committee the power to sit in judgment on cases.
These involve student misconduct, except for cases ordinarily handled by the Honor Council, the residence hall councils or other bodies.
Cases may be referred to the committee by anyone in the college community— students, 'faculty, administration or supervisory personnel.
Until recently the committee's action on individual cases has not been publicized.
This year, however, all decisions will be published in the TIGER in order thai the student body will be aware of the committee's function.
Last year the committee acted on nine cases which involved 11 students.
Drunk and disorderly and use of vulgar and profane language in Loomis Hall.
Damaging of private property in downtown Colorado Springs while under the influence of alcohol.
Unauthorized presence in the women's residence hall area after hours while under the influence of alcohol.
Resisting arrest, as a result of driving at an excessive speed, while under the influence of alcohol.
Violation of a state law involving ""joy riding,"" which is the unauthorized use of a privately owned vehicle.
Decisions in two of these cases resulted in dismissal of two students from Colorado College.
Leaser penalties included probation, fines and in some cases personal counseling was directed.
It is interesting to note that six of the 11 students involved are no longer at Colorado College, five of them were suspended for either disciplinary or academic reasons and one graduated.
The remaining five students have made the readjustment and are recognized as good citizens on the campus.
Curtains open at 8:20 ni Diary of Anne Frank"" is a direct recount from the diary „f a V ou„g g'rl winch has been dramatized by Francis Goodrich and Albert Heekett.
Anne Frank, Gavle French is the young girl , v |, t , Iivos j„ hi jduring the Jewish persecutions of the early 1940's with her mother Mrs.
Frank, played by Donna Duncan; her father, Otto Frank, Played by Jim Fox, n „d her sister, Mm-got Frank, played by Peigi Benlmm.
They are in recluse above a business owned by Mr Kraler, Doug Ciwlos, and his secretary Miep, played by Liz Quint.
Van Daun and their son 1 eter, played by Leonard Dalsomer, Carol Elfring and Robert Hnlsband, respectively.
These overcrowded quarters are occupied with the addition of a stray dentist, Mr Dusscl, Richard Rundell.
Tln> simultaneous set of four rooms with one second floor room was slaved over by the production and acting classes under the supervising eye of director, Mr William McMillan.
Associate director is Georgia McClay, while Roger McKee is the stage manager Prompting the CC players is Gerri Gene Bnrtz following their costuming by Carol Elfring and make-up application by Mrs McMillan.
This is excluding CC students whose activity cards can be punched in return for a ticket.
Jill SWINGETH THOU FALCONAIRESsounds to be the featured attraction -This is the big band with big it PR's ""Birds in Tigerland JaziCo present a panel dis ject ""Reflections on Defection,"" Tuesday in Perkins Hall.
The discussion will cover the nature and techniques of brain washing in the' 20th century, the causes and qualities of defection both from the East to the West and the West to the East.
Other aspects which will be discussed are the relationship between psychological and sociological abnormality on the one hand and principles and ideals on the other hand to the decision to switch sides, the relationship between sides at all and any purposes which may transcend sides.
Mr Edgar Racey, instructor in English, will act as questioner and moderator.
Editor _ News Editor Sporte Editor JACK CASHMAN OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF Business PENNY DAVIDSON Copy Editor JOAN ERIKSON STAFF— Vicky Moroy.
Denny Prior, Jeff Goulnrt, Charlie Rowsitpr, Max Power, Linda Haneborc.
Henry Leoper Smith in his ""World In Mtiniature"" has compressed the world's population of 2% billions of people into a town of 1000 population and he comes up with this cross section of people.
The Americans would produce 16 per cent of the town's total supply and would eat all but 1% per cent.
The lowest income groups among the 60 Americans could have more than the average in much of the rest of the town.
As we count our blessings, (and our precious few hours of relaxation) perhaps we should wonder whether Tom Turkey is a blessing or a curse.
The discussion of Edgar Racey's opinionated letter is the most interesting thing the TIGER has run since it so unwisely dropped Oaasock.
Boyce are quite right in noting that Professors Cornick and McMillen must mount their productions on astonishingly small budgets.
Messrs Racey, Van Becker and Mason are equally right in insisting that we need not be held back by the cultural level of past performance.
The fact, as Professors Cornick and McMillen are quite willing to discuss, is that both of them must sell tickets in order to break even.
The college allows a budget for the spring dance program, for instance, which is roughly one-third the amount Cornick estimates he must gross in order to pay expenses, and of course all CC students and staff get in free.
Dance and drama are consequently limited to productions which are reasonably sure to be popular as well as artistic successes.
Experimental works would be expensive, not because they are intrinsically extravagant, but because the producer would have to take the risk of being patronized only by a non-paying audience.
One must live in Colorado Springs a little while before he realizes that the wealthy and the well-to-do, who make up so conspicuous a part of the city's national reputation, are by and large willing to pay only for arts with mass appeal.
The tastes of the student body are shifting faster than the administration can keep up with them.
Fire could destroy four-fifths of the bleacher seats on Washburn Field, and everyone who wanted to witness one of our surviving gladiatorial contests would still be comfortable.
But there were not enough TV sets to serve the audience for the College Bowl, Last year a few student songsters on their own hook performed Heinrich Schutz's exquisite ""Passion According to St.
This year the Variety Show displayed talents ranging from excellent folk singing to serious ecstatic drums.
I am confident that the administration is willing and capable of responding to the upward shift in student taste, whether the rest of Colorado Springs is prepared to go along or not.
We have financial Merlins who have already pulled millions out of hats; surely hundreds for experiments in art will not strain their talents.
This is the best time in decades for any member of the community to give the college a shove in the direction of creativity, experiment, and — let us wave it like a gold and black banner — highbrow culture.
Members of the faculty have given a few pushes already in these columns.
I want to make a public acknowledgment of appreciation to those students who have so wonderfully labored in the UN spotlighted areas of theatre to put ""Diary of Anne Frank"" on the stage.
Groups of volunteers stitched and lengthened and shortened and dyed costumes day after day; groups of volunteers showed up to crawl under and around the two grand pianos on stage helping to build and paint the attic set; other groups stepped in on properties at technical rehearsal, bewildered but generously willing.
Many of these workers arrived after program copy had to ,be at the printer.
The cast has worked diligently, often under trying rehearsal conditions, long and hard.
It is the crews, however, programmed and un-programmed, who have made it possible for them to act out their play.
With ash-strewn tongue and sack-cloth cow], I must admit we all feel we have had a rewarding— and cultural — experience.
It is to mildly question the statement of Mr Van Becker that vocational training should not be too important a part of KRCC's activities.
I am sure that everyone will agree that every college graduate does not go on to get his Master's or Ph.D. anymore than every high school graduate goes on to college.
If, with a liberal arts education as a background, a student has learned the fundamentals of being a radio engineer, an ad salesman or an announcer, it could be the ""open door"" to a job.
In a society such as ours, we must always remember the importance of earning a living.
Colorado College is not a teacher's college, but a student who has included getting a teacher's certificate along with his degree in whatever his major is, will have a better chance of getting a job if his original plans do not work out.
I do not mean to sound mercenary, but I feel there has to be a practical as well as idealistic side to an education.
We need your informative and ""cultural"" programs actually done not just talked about.
We wait with breathless excitement your brave offer to actually participate.
Running tapes from other sources is a poor substitute for our own college inventions.
We are contrite for our one hour ""pop"" music but we also feel the loveliness would be Van-RaceyMacey.
Much more courageous if the fresh breeze could crystallize into something of cultural consequence.
By Wally Caldwell —OTHER COOLNESS— Entertainment is the big thing this week as Colorado College unf. some evening entertainment wonders.
The fabulous FALCONAIRES scheduled to perform at the all-college ""Birds In Tigerland Jazz ("" cert"" on the evening of November 22.
Members of PERSHING RIFI are in the midst of a publicity campaign to secure a full house for occasion.
The concert is scheduled to start at 8:30m. and last until m. or until everyone leaves.
Accents of the wild"", the conservai the sweet and provocative will plague the minds, the fingers and feet all present.
Yours truly will act as maof ceremonies so please do not throw tomatoes or stones.
This pre-Thanksgiving celebration should prove to be an excit event and I hope to see as many students and faculty members there possible.
ODETTA TO STAR IN FAULKNER'S ""SANCTUARY"" I just received some first hand information from St.
This is something watch for and more information will be given when received.
This is a play where all th emotions and sentiments of oppression are no longer inward, but out ward and on the surface.
This message is conveyed in the clothing, th $ walls, the lights and all means by which the sensitive eye and ' can translate. n) jcul The set deserves special comment for it reeks with poverty, mension and sensitivity.
The interior may not be common to many us, but oppression, in one form or another, is.
Miss French is not only convinci but conveys her message in a way that unifies the actors with the an ence.
After the curtain opens, the barrier between the stage and audiei is broken and you become an invisible part of her diary.
Herlado the qualities of an elderly lady living the period of Jewish persecute L is played with grace and skill.
Tenderness and temperament combim with wisdom present themselves in the form of a good actress.
His part as relatively wealthy man, now in poverty, is a hard one to execute hi fortunately his -ability proves itself as he renders a fine performance.
Mid-way through the play they start giving exceptional pel mpn formances that unify the sentiments and personalities of the time.
The real stars are, as usual, behind stage in the forms of Mr an as 1 Mrs.
It will probably ,be one of the best evening's entertainmei this season.
Student activity cards will gain admission; SI. 25 for th general public.
Mr Jenkins, a baritone, who received his musical training at Oberlin and the Julliard School, will give a concert of arias and songs.
Carlton Gamer, composer-in-residence and a regular faculty member of the music department.
Mr Jenkins has chosen arias by Handel and songs by Purceli, Brahms, Faure, Charles Ives and C Armstrong Gibbs.
In addition, his program will also include a song by the local composer, Jean Miller.
Colorado College Tiger The Sunday afternoon concer in Perkins Hall have been pr sented for the last 12 years by tl music department as a gift to th community and a contribution the musical life of this city.
Tli are given free of charge by t performing members of the mu faculty, artists of the region a master students of the music d partment.
As in former years there will one concert every month fr November through May, all them on Sunday afternoons al The program will be i nounced each time in the lo newspapers.
Life in Afghanistan hiscussed by Arnest I Tuesday's assembly, which was Resented by Dr.
Bernard Arnest, IjrL'L'tor of the school of art, was an Interesting look at his experiences t Afghanistan during the past iUinnier.
Arnest showed slides jid gave a commentary on the sola!, political and economic situajon in Afghanistan.
He lives in a very primiive state, and because of this, editions are very unsanitary and [sease is common.
Hardship posts include lose places where it is difficult adjust to unusual customs, lanuage problems and more primiive living conditions.
In the adustment, man faces an ""unbelievble and almost savage homesickand a feeling of remoteness rhich is fostered by the environlent and isolation.
However it is very dificult for an individual with a famly to feel these ""theoretical comensations"" when the living condiions are poor, the educational faes are not good and children lly do not have many friends heir own ages.
Lanner Attends jCi ivention in Chicago ■ nc | Professor Max Lanner, chairman if the music department of Cololeifado College, will leave on Novem1 for Chicago to represent he college at the annual Convenion of the National Association of Ichools of Music.
The Colio College music department an ibs been an accredited member of his association since 1941. addition to attending ail erlneetings of the convention, Dr. tli janner will also hold several relearsals with the eminent violinist md concert master of the Chicago Symphony, Sidney Harth.
Mr will appear in Perkins Hall m Sunday, January 15, in a solata recital, with Dr.
Greek ^\f[i BY FRANN1E HEKBSTEIN Delta Gamma Last Monday evening the seniors took their sneak at the Spruce Lodge.
Tomorrow morning the D.G.'s will have breakfast from 8:30 to 11m. for all women.
Gamma Phi Beta Last Monday evening the Phi Gams went to the Gamma Phi house for an informal dessert.
On Saturday afternoon the Gamma Phis will have a Thanksgiving for the cerebral palsy children.
Helen Moxen, province director, visited the chapter last Monday and Tuesday.
Cass, the district president, had a very successful visit during the first part of the week.
Next Monday evening is the serenade for Janice Hansen and Karen Johnston who are both pinned to Sigma Chis.
On Tuesday the Thetas and the Betas will get together for an informal dinner.
Kappa Kappa Gamma Last Sunday evening the Kappas had the Sigma Chis over dor dinner.
The Gamma Phi-Kappa costume ball will be held tonight in the Crystal Room of the Alamo.
Beta Theta Pi Last Tuesday evening the Betas had the Kappas over for dinner.
This afternoon the pledges and the actives will battle it out in a football game.
Phi Delta Theta Last Saturday afternoon the Phi Delt pledges took their sneak with the Thetas.
It was so well planned that the actives spent about two hours covering almost every inch of the Black Forest.
It will go from 8:30m. to 12:30 Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams will donate food to the Union Rescue for Thanksgiving.
The Phi Gams had a very good time at the Gamma Phi dessert last Monday evening.
The new officers are Eric Hender, president; Jim Dyson, vice president; Bill Grabowski, recording secretary; Mark Weber, corresponding secretary and historian, and Dale Dalby, treasurer.
The Sigma Chis had a most enjoyable evening at the Kappa house last Sundav evening.
Alpha Phi The chapter has just gained a social affiliate in the person of Judy Alt, and the pledge class has added Clay Towne to its ranks this week.
Last week, 27 records were purchased, including Tchaikovskv, the Hollywood Bowl Symphony Orchestra, show tunes, Ray ConifF, The Kingston Trio, Stan' Kenton', Gene Krupa and Dave Brubeck.
Equipment was on display, a ski patrolman was present and movies and refreshments topped off the evening.
Siggi Hepp and Bob Selig told of studying their junior year abroad at the ""Coffee Hour"" held Wednesday afternoon.
GAY GIBSON \ Brocaded Opulence Exciting late-day fashion . . . unbeatable when it's shaped this lean, this lithe, this lovely.
Palmer, Gone But Not Entirely Forgotten By Max Power The name of William Jackson Palmer is a far-from -forgotten one here at CC, but, I fear, the man who belonged to that name is quite forgotten.
William Jackson Palmer, 18361907; Union cavalry General, pioneer railroad builder, prophet of Colorado's greatness.
He mapped the route of three transcontinental railways, supervised the building of the first road to Denver, organized and constructed the State's industries, cherished its beauties, founded Colorado Springs, fostered Colorado College, and served our Sister Republic of Mexico with sympathy and wisdom in developing its national railways.
This inscription at once reveals the General's career of accomplishment and something of his characit's easy as P.V.P. to recognize true diamond value Even the boldest con become o bit bewildered when choosing o diamond engagement ring.
Only Artcarved offers P.V.P the exclusive Permanent Value Plan that gives guaranteed proof of the enduring volue of any Artcarved diamond ring you choose.
It is interesting to note, also, that similar plaques can be seen in Denver Union Station, at Salt Lake City, in the Colonial Railway Station of Mexico City, and Palmer Hall, at the Hampton Institute for Colored Students in Virginia.
Needless to say, many volumes could be written about the undertakings and the personality of General Palmer.
I shall, however, confine this article to a brief discussion of the last years of the man's life which, I hope, will give the reader an insight to his character.
At the turn of the century, General Palmer ended his business career with the sale of the Rio Grande Southern Railway and his interests iii his Denver and Rio Grande.
But he did not end his active life, and the benevolences which he poured out to this community during those ensuing years still have great meaning to us here.
Among others, he gave Monument Park, Palmer Park, land for the Public Library, the landscaped parkways, the High-line Drive, and Palmer Hall.
It is said that he could have had a brilliant career in politics — there is much evidence that this is true — but that his dislike of public functions and of public speaking, which was always quite a strain, kept him from seeking high office.
He spent his years of retirement at Glen Eyrie, at the mouth of Queens Canyon.
There he read widely and carried on voluminous correspondence with friends and business associates.
His extravagance was easily seen there in the great stone mansion and formal gardens, One visitor, Mr Hamlin Garland by name, has left accounts of Glen Eyrie and also of a camping trip which he took as the General's guest.
Each day a programme was laid out in ""orders"" issued in due form by the head of the expedition, and this arrangement held.
On October 27, 1906, the General was thrown from his horse near Glen Eyrie.
A man of his age might well have succumbed to a broken neck, but not William J Palmer.
His active life commenced once again, although he was now paralyzed from his waist down.
The two events late in his |jf whieh show most clearly hi ous qualities of generosity, ization, and extravagance ai humane and, indeed, a touching ture.
After his paralysis prevei him from riding and hiking the mountain areas which he lov* so much, he had a large st^a, car specially fitted with a bed. | was not an uncommon sight in ft hills around Glen Eyrie to see ft General's car, loaded with servant > 01 and children— particularly the lat »n ter— making its way up and do^ "" n the most rugged trails, with ft General shouting eneouragemen to the driver.
General Palmer had alwaj maintained an active interest t his old Civil War outfit, the Fif teenth Pennsylvania Cavalry, had always tried to attend its am nual reunion in Philadelphia. [1°, the summer of 1907, unable "" 1 travel to the reunion, the Genei resolved that he would have travel to him.
But the outstandin event was the reception given fo them at Glen Eyrie.
His generosin extravagance, and vision can be perceived in his many gifts „,,, projects which still stand.
Perhap we can find something of an ample for our own lives in spirit of General Palmer.
Mason Susan King, David Logan No strings — just call and get your FREE MALT this week. at IS YPEWRPTfH Colorado College Tiger • November 18, I960 [4| Football Players Ravish Steak Miile Women Skip Breakfast Under the management of Miss Evaline McNary and the eaiirection of Mr Robert Torrens, the Colorado College dining c1 I alls are a self supporting enterprise.
Their onlv source of in-' ,me is from student tuition which covers the expenses of ,od, heat, light and general maintenance.
Aside from the stue nt employees and the Hub, the dining halls employ 50 perms.
These employees are paid social security and other benets, In effect the dining halls Pif in very similar to a restaurant.
In Oeber of this year the amount lent on meat was $7,000 and for ilk and cream, $4,000.
Vegetables are jually pre-packaged or canned. mits are also canned, but when season they are served fresh.
The problem of keeping co-eds im and athletes fat can only be lived by the women using selfstraint on the portions, since e meals are geared to the men. lie football, hockey and basketill players have their own train""j*j (g tables.
These open on the first * ' ' September for the football playand continue to the end of the ockey season.
They have a spemeal before a game which ;ually consists of an eight ounce canned vegetable, baked itato, toast and tea.
Their other the same as those for ie other students, except for the rge amount consumed.
According to Miss McNary, if you are trying to maintain a trim figure, eating a good breakfast prevents snacking on fattening things the rest of the day.
Clublii lublicity By Ginny Metculf Alpha Lambda Delta The initiation of new members ot Alpha Lambda Delta will be held Tuesday, November 22 at 6 P in Rastall.
This is a monthly listing of interesting events for students in Colorado Springs.
Spanish Club The Spanish Club will bold n meeting Tuesday, November 22. in Hayes House Library at 7:15 in.
The program will consist of a film, slides and music on Mexico Dues are Jl, Tigerettes The Tigerettes, along with the Bengals, held a reception last Saturday in Rastall for the football team.
At the meeting on Thursday, November 10, Kitty Tytler was chosen as Tigerette-of-the-month.
She was chosen on the basis of attendance, enthusiasm and service and she was given a stuffed tiger.
Tiger Club The Tiger Club is having a party for the Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind in Rastall Recreation Room, Sunday, November 20 from 4 to 7m.
Linda Robeson is m charge and Nadine Chang Barbie Lambie and Marty Breternitz are assisting.
Pan-Hellenic There will be a breakfast at the Delta Gamma house Saturday morning from S:30m. to 11m.
The purpose of the meeting will be to discuss the election and its results ;tnd to plan the club's calendar for the remaining part of the ;chool year.
In a typical storybook finish the Tigers almost ended up victoriously as they scored three TDs in the last quarter of play.
Throughout the game the Highlanders had outplayed the Tigers considerably, but all of a sudden the Tigers got a tremendous spark of life and they had pulled within two points of Highlands.
New Mexico scored seven points in the first quarter, seven in the second and twenty in the third quarter, and were held scoreless throughout the last quarter while CC added twenpoints that period.
One minute later Sellitto scored on a three yard quarterback sneak after the Tigers had recovered a fumbled kickoff.
Then there was no more scoring until with two minutes left in the game, Bob Calder scored on a 28 yard pass play.
With ten seconds left in the game and with the Tigers on the 42 of Highlands, Jim Blair at' tempted a long field goal on the third down.
Thus the Tigers ended their football season with an overall 4-5 record. ^r JACK REAL, CC end, closes in on a Highlands ball carrier dur, Saturday s game.
Dan Kaltenbaugh is shown trying to keep the mi from turning the corner and breaking away.
In the first game of the last week of intramural football, the Betas romped the Phi Gams 40-0.
In an aei'ial play Lyons made another conversion* The Betas opened the scoring in the second half when they recovered the ball in the Phi Gam end zone.
The Sigma Chis beat the Delts in the other game, 18-6. ' first score came as Floerching hit Ackerman with a 15 yard 1 pass.
The Phi Delts got their i score when Weld passed to ( for a 60 yard touchdown.
Fl chinger then threw two n touchdown passes, one to Ward the other to Trotter.
ANTON, AUSTRIA Ned Lawrence, Beta, ■ on ; Whiting and Jorgi ire doubles chi Army-Filled Weekend Experienced by PR's Last week-end was a busy time for the Colorado College Pershing Rifles members.
On Friday they left the ROTC building at 7:45 m. and were taken to Fort Carson by military transportation.
There they participated in unveiling ceremonies of a granite marker and bronze plaque donated by the First National Bank of Colorado Springs, changing the Parade Ground to General of the Armies John J Pershing Parade Ground.
A short speech was given by Major General William H Gill, Retired, to dedicate the grounds.
A 19 gun salute was given to General Pershing in tribute of his work in the Army.
On Sunday, November 13, the Pershing Rifles company went to Fort Carson for a field problem devised by P/R Captain Dale Darby.
The Red Army was an attacking force from the Gulf of Mexico moving north into North America.
The Blue Army -was finally able to stop the advance of the Red Army and to launch a counter attack themselves.
Decker and Captain Pistone of the Colorado College ROTC staff were present as advisors and judges.
The staff at Fort Carson supplied the material for the field problem and the training ground.
They in turn gave the orders to the squad leaders who were sophomores and the bulk of '.the squads was made up of plebes.
The P/R staff is very proud of the performance by the whole company, especially since they had never been in the field before,"" Dalby said.
Oanforth Foundation Offers '61 Fellowships The Danforth Foundation, an educational foundation located in St.
Louis, invites applications for the tenth class of Danforth Graduate Fellows.
These must come from college senior men and recent graduates who are preparing themselves for a career of college teaching, and are planning to enter graduate school in September, 1961, for their first year of graduate study.
The Foundation welcomes applicants from the areas of natural and biological sciences, social sciences, humanities and all fields of specialiaztion to be found in the undergraduate college.
Lloyd Worner has been named as the liaison officer to nominate to the Danforth Foundation two or not to exceed three candidates for these 19C1 fellowships.
These appointments are fundamentally ""a relationship of encouragement"" throughout the years of graduate study, carrying a promise of financial aid within prescribed conditions as there may be need.
If a man receives the Danforth Appointment, together with a Rhodes Scholarship, Fulbright Scholarship or Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, he becomes a Danforth Fellow without stipend, until these other relationships are completed.
Reserve books may now be checked out for overnight use one hour before the library closes.
This policy, which has already gone into effect, means means that reserve books may be picked up a half hour earlier that was previously possible.
JERRY NORTHERN HOLDS FORTH at a parly given by the Tiger Club for the School for the Deaf & Blind in Colorado Springs.
GG Players Produce Success in ""Diary"" The Colorado College Players again hitched their wagon to a star and came out with a success.
Miss Elizabeth Quin in the part of Miep appeared stiff, trving to put her best foot forward ""and finding the decision hard to make, leaped.
As the play progressed, Mlep overcame the leap and the part came across, Miss Texas, Donna Duncan, surmounted the ""ya all"" drawl to portray Mrs.
Doug Cowles in the character of Mr Kraler depicted a helpful, sincere gentleman but sloppily overdid it at times.
Jim Fox, Otto Frank, brought out the character in earnest amateur style.
The tonality of her voice brought forth a heartwarming young girl who created an uncomparable mood from beginning to end.
Van Daan, Leonard Dalsemer and Miss Carol Elfrlng, were excellent and challenging parts met well by the actors.
Despite a well performed sister role, her age was constantly fluctuating.
A professional air was given to this frustrated mother's boy who lightened the oppression of the play.
Young 'Peter Van Daan, Robert Halsband, was truly a delightful youth who grew up and awakened to reality.
The confession scene contained a note of insincerity, despite the strong and powerful performances of all, as did Otto Frank's last words, ""She puts me to shame,"" — too booming a tone to end an oppressive drama.
Hours of work went into a magnificent set, costumes, makeup, lighting, sound and props.
Just one note — ""Silence is a virtue"" — especially applies to backstage transitions.
Those of you who saw ""Diary of Anne Frank"" witnessed the best production yet seen on the stage of Perkins Hall.
Because in this play were all the human emotions and thev were portrayed in ..•very light.
College Contributes to Chest and Cal Poly Colorado College recently made charity contributions to the Colorado Springs Community Chest and to the California Polvtechnical Institute, according to Chris Griffiths, ASCC treasurer.
A contribution of $84 was made to the Colorado Springs Community Chest for general use.
This money was drawn from the campus chest fund which is in turn made up of profits from the variety show each fall and the campus chest auction later in the year.
The second sum of $25 has been sent to the California Polytechnicai Institute to be contributed primarily to a memorial fund in memory of those team members who died in the recent airline crash at loleda airport.
IRC Discussion Held On Soviet Education The Coloi-ndo College International Relations Club will sponsor nn open meeting on Thursday, December 1, at 8 in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center.
Mr Shockley was one of 21 American school superintendents who recently made a trip to the Soviet Union, under the sponsorship of the American Association of School Administrators, to study the Soviet educational system.
The group spent more than three weeks in the Soviet Union, and they traveled extensively in the Russian, Ukrainian, Georgian and Lithuanian Union Republics.
The major cities in which they inspected schools were Leningrad, Moscow Tbilisi, Kiev and Vilna.
Prior to assuming his present position, Mr Shockley served as District Superintendent in Georgetown, Colorado and as County Superintendent in Clear Creek County.
Following Mr Shockloy's talk, there will be opportunity for guestions and discussion from the door, Highest College Board Scores Held by Frosh Although statistics cannot completely measure any group, groups are always being analyzed to gain information about their ability and aptitudes.
Such has been the fate of the classes at Colorado College, and most recently the freshman class, In analyzing the freshman class many things were taken into consideration, but the College Board scores showed the most about the class ability.
This freshman average is the highest received by any class at Colorado College.
Concert Series Begins With Jenkins, Gamer The first concert of the annual winter concert series was performed Sunday, November 20, by Mr Donald Jenkins, baritone.
The first part of the program consisted of selections from Handel and Purcell and four pieces by Brahms.
Carlton Gamer of the CC music department then performed ""Six Little Piano Pieces"" by Arnold Schoenberg and ""Aria da Capo,"" an original composition.
Mr Jenkins followed with three selections by Faure and three English selections to finish the program.
When called back for an enclore, Mr Jenkins sang a musical version of a Milton poem.
Grand Rally Today; 4:30 Begins Search reward— the keg. s The starting point for the race S0 e 'mL P , re ' P -n""'; letl C0UrSe of ab °ut SO miles wdl be Slocum parkin,' lot.
I've at the destination with an av Basketball Season Opens December 2 The mco-Gl basketball schedule h»8 been released.
Idaho State la been dropped while the Air Force Academy has been added to h va.-s.ty schedule.
The IFC should demand certain standards of performance from all chapters.
It should be a responsible organization facilitating communication of understanding between the college administration and the students.
It should not overemphasize judicial functions in too many instances, nor should it be thought of by other organizations as strictly a punitive organization.
These are some of the ideas that we feel are the basis of our operations.
Although many feel that we, or more correctly I, am not fulfilling any of the responsibilities that are required to insure those ideals, I and we are trying.
At present we are engaged in formulating a system of rush that will be acceptable to all chapters on this campus and the college administrators.
This is not an easy task, and can't be handled overnight. feel that we are handling the problem very well, and making much progress toward that objective.
In the past, we have had the problem of lack of good public relations, but this in time may be alleviated.
Ted Worcester of the Sigma Chi House is our public relations representative, and although we actually have done little so far to achieve merit, I'm sure that in the near future, we may start to balance our public relations to a favorable light.
We feel that perhaps the weakest link in the IFC is lack of attendance of regular members.
The presidents of each house and an elected member from each house sometimes have trouble making all meetings, and as a result we sometimes meet with entirely different personnel, which of course, makes it much harder to transact old business.
We feel that Major Johnson will be able to help us considerably this year.
One thing that we are thinking about that might interest you people, is the relationships between house-mother and fraternity members.
Major Johnson feels that there is a definite problem in this area, and the IFC also is aware of the problem.
We don't know exactly how to go about solving this problem of lack of respect toward these women, but we are at least thinking about it.
If I can fill any one of you in on any further actions of our group, please let me know. — John Reynolds ""Ski-Ditioning"" Grows From ""Skiers Evening"" Due to the success of the recently held ""Skiers' Evening,"" Rastall Center will sponsor a coe-d ""SkiDitioning"" session in Cossitt GymOne hundred twenty people attended the ""Skiers' Evening"" program which included a description of nearby ski areas, costs involved in clothing and equipment, fees, the purposes and duties of the ski patrol and ""do's"" and ""dont's"" for the beginning skier.
An introductory movie was shown which highlighted CC students in Aspen.
Sheets of valuable information to the beginning skier were made available to those in attendance.
The next day 27 ski pole given to interested students by Rastall Center.
The interest shown at this meeting has resulted in the ""Ski-Ditioning"" program to be held in Cossitt Gymnasium December 1 from 7:45 to 8:30m.
The purpose of this session is to provide some effective exercises to help condition beginning and all other skiers for the physical fitness necessary to enjoy the sport and participate safely.
Harry Fontius, Bob Kendall, Beth Kendall and Annie Hereford will instruct for the session.
SKIERS AND POTENTIAL SKIERS attended the ""Skiers Evening"" which was held recently in the WES room.
Speakers included Harry Fontius, Abett Iclcs, Beth Kendall and Bob Kendall.
Obviously a creative, demanding atmosphere is as crucial for a college's success as the intellectual midwife for her students.
However, it loses its real meaning when the students do not bring it out of the classroom and into their lives.
Paradoxically a good college will alway ask the students to become their own creators, their own atmosphere.
Fraternities and sororities notwithstanding, college was never meant to become a dozen pages in our mental scrapbooks to chuckle over in our middle years.
My misunderstanding of the removal of board table for the hockey team Thanksgiving Day brought about concern among the students and an injustice to you.
Signed by 49 students, the fact must be shown to them that the administration and you were not removing the board table.
Sincerely, Stephanie Ames Clublicity By Ginny Metcalf Alpha Lambda Delta Last Tuesday, November 22, Alpha Lambda Delta held initiation for the new members, Karen Bessesen and Charlotte Wallace.
Miss Christine Moon, dean of women, was initiated as an honorary member.
Now that mid-term grades are out, it might be a good idea for many students to take advantage of the Alpha Lambda Delta tutoring system.
Shove Vesper Service Scheduled December 4 An advent vesper service will be held in Shove Chapel Sunday afternoon, December 4 at 5m.
Knapp has selected poems dating chiefly from the sixteenth to the twentieth century, and ranging from those of Shakespeare and Milton to those of Auden and Eliot.
The college chapel choir, directed by Mr Donald Jenkins, will perform a late seventeenth century mass by Marc Antoine Charpentier.
The choir of 25 voices will be assisted by a small string ensemble and organ.
November 29 Van Cliburn with the Denver Symphony Orchestra.:30m.— Denver Auditorium Arena.
December 8, 9 and 10 The American Shakespeare Festival Acting Company presenting ""A Midsummer Night's Dream."" starring Bert Lahr as Bottom.:30 m.
Evenings, Orchestra, $4.95; mezzanine, $4.40; balcony, $3.30, $2.20 and $1.65.
Matinees, Orchestra, $3.85; mezzanine, $3.30; balcony $2.75, $2.20 and $1.65.
This month's Rastall Center movie will be shown Sunday, November 27 in the WES room at Rastall Center.
It is on epic treatment of human jealousy and the dangerous limits to which it can run.
Bring a flashlight and there is dinner and dancing at the end of the road.
Christmas is coming to Rastall with a Christmas party from 7:30 to 9m. on Thursday evening, December 1.
Watch for the following Rastall Center events — — ""Othello"" will be shown in the WES Lounge at 7:30m. on Sunday, November 27, with no admission charge! — Wednesday, November 30, Dr.
Ne w s Albert Seay will spoak at the coffee hour from 4-5m. on ""The History of Jazz"" in the WES Lounge. — ""Ski-Ditioning"" class for CC men and women will be held from 7:45-8:30m. on Thursday, December 1, in Cossitt gymnasium.
Handouts and instruction to help you become physically fit for the sport of skiing, so you can begin the season safely. — On Friday, December 2, there will be a tea in the WES Lounge for all Rastall committee members.
Brainwashing"" was the topic discussed in the assembly held Tuesday, November 22, in Perkins Hall.
Membe of the panel were Mr Gler Brooks of the Political Science hov Department, Lt.
Arthur Decker of the Military Science Department and Professor Carl Roberk of the Psychology Department.
Roberts defined brainwashing as a negative term for extreme forms of control.
Many such attempts go on in our society, but brainwashing is an extreme and undesirable form of this.
The Communists achieved a small amount of control in 95 per cent of the American prisoners in the Korean War.
They brought this about by utilizing the re-enforcement 6t motivational variables and through intense stimulation (punishment | and deprivation.
The prisoners' pei'ception and discrimination were decreased, and when complete control of the environment is present there is no limit to the possibilities.
The war was sudden, the training hasty and the education level of the men was ninth grade The military hopes that such i situation as Korea, never happen again and it will try to maintaii itself so that it does not.
If il should, a code of conduct for military personnel has been devised to confirm American standards and beliefs.
The fact that behavior is irrational anil change can be made must be accepted.
The fanatic nature and effectiveness of Communist ideology must also be accepted.
The Communists even use brainwashing to train their own leaders and agents.
Concerning an effective counter resistance, Mr Brooks suggested a subtle indoctrination on our part, Our citizens should be armed to resist mass persuasion — brainwashing.
We would then he better able to resist the Communists Our society should concentrate on the facts that make values less firm.
Professor Roberts concluded by stating his belief that rational education will not work by itself There is not enough emotional conditioning concerning our country, flag and principles.
A patriotic reaction is not learned rationally as walking and talking are, and it is unfortunate that flag waving is looked down upon.
There will be a junior -neeting, Tuesday, November i at 11m. in the WES room [' Rastall Center. phomore: The sophomores are jving their class meeting in iove Chapel at 11m. on Nomber 29.
Tomorrow afternoon the girls are having a tea for ""Mom"" Russom, the former housemother for their chapter and for the CC chapter of Beta Theta Pi.
Russom, who is in Colorado Springs over the Thanksgiving week-end, is now a sorority housemother in Fort Collins.
Delta Gamma Last Friday evening, the Delta Gammas had the Betas over for dinner, and on Tuesday the girls went to the Sigma Chi house for dessert.
Gamma Phi Beta The Gamma Phis had a very successful 1920's Costume Ball with the Kappas last Friday evening.
On Saturday afternoon the girls had a party at the house for the cerebral palsy children.
TilK Christian Science Monitor Subscribe Now at Half Price* You can read this wortd-fomous doily newspaper for the next six months for $5, Just half the regular subscription rate.
Send your newspaper for the Hrr* Q 6 months $5 □ 1 yeor $10 □ College Student Q Faculty M*r*be» |3] November 25, I960 Kappa Kappa Gamma A mother daughter breakfast was held at the Kappa house last Saturday morning, and Sunday morning all members and their guests went to the house for breakfast.
Kappa Alpha Theta Next Monday evening the Thetas will go to the Phi Gam house for dessert, and on Tuesday the girls will have dinner with the Betas.
The Independents will have their grades given along with other social organizations at the end of the semester.
Last week Vivian Arviso, Miss Indian America, visited the Observatory and presented the group with a picture of herself in full costume.
LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINGS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MEIroie 4-7744, Ext.
Kappa Sigma Last Friday the Kappa Sig pledges took their sneak and went to Denver.
On Sunday afternoon at the annual Toilet Bowl game, the Kappa Sigs will elect a Toilet Bowl Queen.
Phi Delta Theta The Phi Delt Flintstone Rock last Saturday night was a huge success.
Next Monday evening the Phi Delts will have a dessert with the Delta Gammas.
Phi Gamma Delta The Phi Gams are having the Thetas over for a dessert next Monday evening.
Sigma Chi Last Monday night the Sigma Chis had a double serenade with the Thetas.
Beta Theta Pi After a pledge-active football game last Friday afternoon, the Betas went over to the Delta Gamma house for dinner.
Zeta The Zetas have completed the arrangements for their semi-formal dance to be held at the Hackney House on November 26.
S EISHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Style Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— I I to I I Daily W Colo.
Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA ACROSS FROM CAMPUS Colorado College Tige ASCC Announces Events' Chairmen Chairmen have been chosen to head the committees for the AllCollege Conference in February and Songfest in April.
Tom Rivers and Janet Fry head the committee for the All-College Conference formerly called the Leadership Conference.
Consisting of panel groups and discussions, the conference will be for the purpose of discussing problems of the college and promoting interest in college affairs.
Songfest chairman, Jerry Northfin, will meet with the social chairmen of all organizations on campus to decide on the categories for the songs.
The judges will then give a decision based on a definite point system set up by the song committee.
In connection with Parents' Weekend, the Songfest will be one of the scheduled events for the two days.
Anyone interested in announcing for the Songfest should contact Northern.
Since a Parents' Weekend chairman has not been chosen, any junior or senior interested in this position should see Tim Moe.
ME 3-0075 Call Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop Colo.
The two men closest to Sellitto in ground gaining were Pete Pleasant, halfback, and Scott Tippin, senior fullback.
He suffered a broken ankle a short time before the halftime gun in the fifth game of the season, against Colorado State College, and spent the rest of the season on crutches.
He scored four touchdowns and kicked seven out of eight attempts for PAT conversions for a total of 31 points.
Finishing right behind Pleasant was Tippin, who played about 30 minutes more than Pleasant.
Tippin caught the opening kickoff in the sixth game of the season, against Idaho State College, and suffered a severe back injury as he returned the ball 10 yards.
We are completely stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment SKI RENTALS New Boots, Skis and Poles $2.75 BUCK Sporting Goods Co.
Wisgerhof punted 31 times, had one blocked, and kicked for a total of 1,154 yards.
He scored four touchdowns, all on pass catches, for 24 points, and he passed twice for 68 yards and one touchdown.
Total statistics show that main offensive weapon of the gers over the season was pas The Tigers ran a total of plays for a total net gain of yards.
Colorado Springs, Colo., December 2, I960 Colorado College Friend' Gives Viewpoints In Non-Violence to Peace Tuesday morning at 11m. in Perkins Hall, Mr Cecil nshaw, Peace Education Secretary of the North Central Reon of the American Friends Service Committee will speak, s a well and widely known traveler and lecturer and a devout riend, Mr Hinshaw spends his time presenting the Friend's ewpoint on problems of war and peace.
Mr Hinshaw is the author of a pamphlet entitled ""Nonolence, A Nation's Way Gay Ballets Presented By CC Dance Theatre Three ballets will be presented by the Colorado College Dance Theatre under the direction of Norman and Dorothea Corniek and the full Colorado Springs Symphony Orchestra under the direction of Walter Eisenberg.
The two performances of the ballets will be presented tonight at 8:30m. ;md tomorrow nfl-aceY"" Mr Hinshaw is particuinterested in the life and oughts of Mohandi Ghandi and the possible applicability of landi's non-violent techniques of rtitical action as well as personal tion to the Western scene.
Also, Hinshaw is a teacher, ister, author and former presiint of William Penn College.
He is traveled in major areas of the arid and brings to his current leaking the knowledge and int of his talks with leaders and iacemakers in various parts of e world.
Mr Witte is both a source < information on and a recruiter r AFSC work and study projects, th here and abroad.
On Tuesday niiing there will be descriptive ■ature available and Mr Witte 11 have lunch at Rastall Center persons interested in such '""ftojects.
Such persons should conlet either Mr Carleton Gamer of Music Department or Mr v Booth of the Religion Detriment.
There will also be a h for those who wish to purthe discussion of the assembly i Mr Hinshaw. ugget Features icrease in Pages new concept in yearbooks 11 be apparent in the 1961 NUG5T,"" promised editor Doug Norrg.
More of the campus and its acities will be featured in the 25 ditional pages.
Anne Wilson serves as astant editor, Linda Haneborg as iss editor, Sue Igelsrud is l in ai'ge of campus life, Paul Kileath is business manager and the otography is done by Bill Stafrd.
Services, Vespers Highlight Advent ""Words and the Flesh,"" the last in a series of three related sermons, ""The Gists of Christianity,"" by Mr Harry Booth, will be given Sunday in Shove Chapel.
This message will be especially meaningful in preparation for the Christmas season.
The sermon will discuss the difference between being a Christian in words and living as a Christian.
Those who think ethics is at the heart of Christianity; those who believe in theological doctrine as the defining characteristic and those who feel devotion and piety is the essence.
Blue Key will usher and members of Cap and Gown will hostess at the coffee hour following the services.
To add to this Advent season, readings from Isaiah, caroles, the poetry of Shakespeare, Milton, Auden and Eliot, and a mass by Marc Anton Charpentier will be featured in the CC vesper program this Sunday evening.
Mr Wallace Caldwell will open and close the service with readings from the Messianic sections of the book of Isaiah.
Lewis Knapp will read selection from the great poets relevant to the Christmas season, The chapel choir under direction of Mr Donald Jenkins and assisted by Harris Sherman, Jackie Ives and Barbara Morgan on violins and the cello will perform sections of the Charpentier mass published just two years ago by the Colorado College Music Press.
The Poetry Workshop will hold its second meeting on Tuesday, December 6, at 7:30 Pin the ASCC Room in Hastall Center.
Copies of Poems to be discussed will be available at Rastall desk, Saturday, December 3.
Next Thursdav, December 8, DER DEUTSCHE KLUB will have its Christmas party.
There will be plenty of entertaininment including caroling, and refreshments.
The first issue of this year's KINNIK1NNIK, the campus literary and art magazine, will be distributed sometime next week.
This issue consists of over 40 pages of prose, poetry, art work and photography.
The cover was designed by Frank Banihiira, who presently has an art show in Rastall Center.
The second issue of the KINNIKINNIK is scheduled to be released sometime in April.
College Debators Head for Contests Members of the Colorado College Debate club will participate in two forensic meets before the Christmas holidays.
Jack Walker and Dave Furgason; Max Taylor and Dave Bitters; and Robert"" Thrasher and James Spenser.
Accompanying them as coach will be Mr Robin Rudoff of the history department.
These teams will participate in two rounds of discussion, one round of extemporaneous speaking and two rounds of debate.
All topics in the tournament will be directly related to the general debate topic of compulsory health insurance in the United States.
Members of the CC group will participate in extemporaneous speaking and debate.
The topics for extemporaneous division will be drawn from world events of the past six months.
The teams in the six-round debate event will debate the national topic relating to compulsory health insurance.
Pearl Elected To Position in NAGT Professor Richard Pearl of Colorado College has been elected bymail ballot as the secretary-treasurer of the Southwest Section of the National Association of Geology Teachers for the year 1960-61.
The Southwest section embraces 28 colleges and universities, and includes some retired professors and members of the National Park Service.
A J Budding of New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, vice-president, and Dr.
There are many skaters — some amateurs, some experts, the inevitable lovers and an entertainer.
The narrator for ""Peter and the Wolf"" will be Mr William McMillen, head of the drama department at Colorado College.
Based on old minstrel tunes by Louis Gottsulialk, Hershey Kay has arranged a .ballet in the style of Old New Orleans.
The dancing is reminiscent of the days of ""end men,"" minstrel entertainers, top hats and the Cakewalk.
Costumes for the three ballets have been designed and executed by Dorothea Corniek who has also choreographed all the dances.
Mr Favre will be assisted on stage production by the members of the Arena Players and the Wasson High School stage crew.
Mr Larry Heller is responsible for the set for ""Peter and the Wolf"" and will play the role of Grandfather.
CAKEWALK, a ballet by Hershey Kay to be held December 2 and 3, features Cynthia Lamb as the Queen of the Swamp Lily and Norman Cornicle.
The applicant must meet the requirements for admission to the Law School.
This cholarship will provide full tuition for one year and will be renewable upon satisfactory completion of the year's work for the next two years.
Applications should be made to Professor J Douglas Mertz, Political Science Department. ilastall Presents Faulkner Movie ""Intruder in the Dust"" is the next movie sponsored by Rastall Center.
This film is taken from the book by William Faulkner and features David Brian and Claude Jarman, Jr. in the leading roles.
It concerns a Negro blamed for the murder of a man and shows how his innocence was proven after many exciting incidents.
Due to the large crowd at last Sunday's movie, this month's showing will be in Perkins Hall.
Kintz and Ullman are correct in that they were not informed the letter would not be printed.
I replied that after speaking with Deans Moon and Reid I had changed my mind about the manner in which the incident should be handled.
Further, facts had emerged which were evidently not known by the writers of the letters.
An example of these is the fact that the administration has always reserved the right to review two types off cases rather than release them to the Student Conduct Committee.
One type is concerned with psychoneurotic students The other is where moral standards are concerned, further, from what I have learned, violators of similar standards have been equally punished when the administration had been aware of the transgressions.
The decision was my own and I take full and sole responsibility for it.
It has been the past policy of the TIGER to print all letters, regardless of the controversial topic of the letter.
However it is within the power of the Editor to change this policy as h'e or she sees fit, subject to the approval of the Publications Board which felt that I was right in refusing to publish the letters.
I will not under any circumstances print letters in bad taste, nor will I permit subjects to be undertaken by this newspaper which I feel have no business in a newspaper or which can be better handled in another fashion.
It is my feeling that the letters submitted for publication were guilty of both of the above errors.
Ullman, Kintz and Gappert would care to submit an article or a series of articles on the larger concept of what denotes a gentleman or a gentlewoman and who in the liberal arts college should be responsible for determining the standards of propriety, they are more than welcome.
Such articles should be welcomed by the administration which in the past has even shown a reluctance to accept the reports of the students as to the manner of conduct inherent on the campus.
Such articles will, however, conform to the standards of good taste as determined by me and the Publications Board.
The new Editor and Business Manager of the TIGER will be announced in the December 9th issue of this paper.
For the first time that can be remembered there is a rather pleasing number of applications for the two positions.
At last count we had almost four per cent of the student body working on the paper at one time or another.
If we should include the number of students who work on the NUGGET, the KINNIKTNNIK, or any of the other numerous organizations on the campus, the percentage of the student body which is participating in extracurriculars reaches rather astounding proportions.
This from a campus where apathy is supposed to be rampant, where complaints and criticisms about student government circulate freely.
It is the comment from this column that if the readers think this campus is bad, they should try some others.
I had an occasion to talk to several students from other schools during the summer while at Fort Riley.
One boy referred to his school as ""suitcase U"" because so many students went home over the weekends.
Another student said participation and interest in extracurricular affairs was so poor the administration was forced to cancel many planned programs.
A glance at the editorial columns of the exchange papers received from other schools reveals that there are several institutions which are considering disbanding student government completely.
Students from CC sent to regional conventions have reported on occasion that other schools were amazed at the amount of power wielded by the people on this campus.
This is merely to point out that conditions here may not be as bad as we would sometimes believe.
Certainly there can be improvement, and a great deal of it will come from the students in one form or another.
However, we have quite a start on other schools. — JHC To Mr Racey and Mr Absher, Now that the angry young men of Hayes House, Coburn and all places 'cultural' have had their say, it behooves this complacent fraternity man to have his say too.
This fact has been long lamented by many, but gripers come and gripers go, but the cultural sins stay on forever.
Because you very people who creatively and glibly attack our cultural lag, or gap, do not follow through with any action.
The democratic senator from Pennsylvania, Joseph Clark, professes that ""in America sometimes a lot of talk is a prelude to action""; but here at CC it seems ""a lot of talk"" is a prelude to more talk.
No, we of fraternity alley have not come here to learn to walk into a room properly, to make floats, to pour tea and smile, etc.
We are here though to have FUN . . . academic fun, social fun, cultural fun, athletic fun.
The world is .basically a 'fun place' you know, with the above kinds of fun being important, and we intend to experience all these kinds of fun before we make a decision as to which is best.
When the majority of the delegatt •e liberal, we are going to 1 When they are conservative and culture, which despite all its many sins, still has given more access to more culture to more people, and more time to enjoy more culture.
We also think a few other things, like if the world, nation and school needs reform, these reforms still have to be accomplished through people, and it may behoove us to acquire a few social techniques along with our intellectual stimulations.
It is its members that are either good or bad, and they are good or bad according to their enviroment, which they never made, but now can, and are, changing.
Yes, we in the fraternities have decided that it may be a far better thing to stay in the fraternities and change their ""evilness"" into ""goodness"" rather than to stay outside the Greek system, and watch a potentially good force falter and die.
We also feel that in our heterogeneous Greek groups, we have, for our own cosmopolitan benefit, access to a greater range of thought than if we remained content with the security of the fellowship of others just like ourselves.
It is wondered whether or not you have evidence with which to back up your near-slanderous accusations which appeared at the bottom of the published letter by Edward Kintz and Donald Ullman.
As a leader of a major publication on this campus, you have shown gross inadequacy in your ability to arrive at a rational conclusion concerning ""a group"" of which you know absolutely nothing.
We hope that your egregiously asinine statement is no reflection upon ies1 <et b tli 'dents I'iim.
Thank you for your letter notifying me of the action of Coloraij College in relation to the United States National Student Associate It is unfortunate that these questions about the Association were n , asked durink our meeting with the Executive Committee.
It is important to note that USNSA is neither liberal nor conser tive by conception nor by structure attending our legislative Congres liberal resolutions and liberal offii will have the opposite.
The HUAC resolution is based upon the same premise as a bj soon to be considered by the United States Congress.
Vice-President, the President-Elect and the Secretary of Health, Edi cation and Welfare.
This is not to say that all the positions taken by the Congress at ones that you would agree with.
No membei is in any way committed or bound by any resolution passed by th Congress.
If you are not, if your point of view heard, then you have only yourself to blame.
Students are freely chosen by their own studi governments and they come to the Congress to debate and vote freel according to the rules of parliamentary procedure.
I have no sympatl with anyone who complains that the USNSA does not represent the position when they have made no effort to have their opinions hear within the Association.
Democracy is based upon the premise that people who have a t of view will offer it in the open market-place with all the rest ti tested and either accepted or rejected.
On the other hand it does not feel that you should have to spi your time on matters that have already been solved when there others that need attention.
Permit me to quote from a report prep:t by Harry H Lunn, Jr., for the American Council on Education.
I merely quote Lunn in regard to the statements y made in the editorial.
In this day we need to develop students to provide leadership things that matter.
This does not mean that problems on your camp are not important and should not be dealt with by student governme It means that it should deal more with problems that are important the education of students to make positive contributions to their societ I submit that solving problems that have already been solved elsewhi does not do that.
At no time during my presentati to the Executive Council did I state that one of USNSA's major fui tions is to criticize the State Department.
Nor do I know of ariyoi else in the Association that holds such a view.
On the contrary, I sp of USNSA moving to make a contribution in the increase of Ameri prestige internationally.
Perhaps you would like to clear this matter up in tl interests of responsible journalism.
Your student government could be an active member for than $200 a year.
Yet he stated that dues would be in the neighborhood of $100 a year and to send a representative to a national convention would cost around $70.
Thus, for $170 we can send one representative to a convention and receive NSA publications.
I feel that the money could be better spent on the Colorado College campus.
Finally, the students of the t lege have a larger responsibility fulfill on this campus.
So long such problems as now exist on t campus are still in evidence, tl to become members in NSA wo be to take on an additional sponsibility when we are not r fulfilling those we already have ""In the interests of respond journalism"" may I say that it \ (Continued on pnge 3.
Colorado College Tiger December 2, I960 [l[3; Letters to the Editor . it (Continued from page two not my intention to infer the fact that NSA had as one of its major functions the criticism of the Detriment of State.
Mr Johnston Mentioned that one view of NSA :as concerned with the Algerian question and was different from that of the Department of State.
I had mentioned that the organization did take exceptions to policy set by the Department and did so the interest of people and students abroad.
Sandy Ballard — Tom Rhoades Anne Wentland — Dick Dugdale Engaged : Hazel Haigh — Gary Mertz Linda Robeson — Dave Baker ASCC Notes By Betsy Gaskill Publications The KINNIKINNIK will be givi out next week.
Traffic There will be a traffic hearing Tuesday, December G at 7m. in ■ ai fhe ASCC room.
Constitution The name of the Freshmen Hen's Club has been changed to the Bengals.
The film was apparently rather elderly, but the sound came through reasonably well considering the halt in which it was struggling to make itself audible.
The photography was good too, and was obviously so, when one had the opportunity to view it.
It was pointed out by a faculty member at the end of the performance, and, indeed, I noticed myself (though 1 was lucky enough to be seated in the second row), that a much more suitable place could have been found in which to show the picture.
Shove Chapel lecture room or Perkins Hall seem, to me, to be eminently more suited to this type of presentation.
The Rastall Center Program Council is responsible for the selection and showing of the monthly movies.
We felt that since the movies are a Rastall Center event they should be shown in Rastall Center.
We have already considered CC's Fulbright Scholar Looks at American Life By Carrie Sandborn One of our foreign students attending Colorado College this year is Peter von Puttkamer, a Fulbright scholar from Freiburg, a charming city in the Black Forest.
Students generally live either in a small private room or in an apartment, or even with their parents if possible.
It is cheaper for a student to live in a dorm, which makes a dorm system advantageous in that respect.
There are no restrictions whatsoever for inhabitants of this ""Island of Hope"" or for any other dormitory—men's or women's— in Germany.
All that Peter heard about America stimulated his interest to the point of wanting to come to the U S. with an open mind and experience it for himself.
To the question of how he would compare CC with German Universities, Peter replied that it is very difficult to judge fairly two such different types of environment.
The atmosphere is more conducive to studying here than at a large university and there is also a greater personal contact between a student and his professor and likewise among the students themselves.
In Germany, a student knows his professor through little more than his classroom lectures.
Peter has been particularly impressed by one of the CC faculty members who even plays a clarinet in a local dance band.
Favorable in Peter's opinion is the fact that all buildings of the college are close together.
The main university building often is located in the city while the chemistry, physics and other institutes are frequently on the outskirts of the city.
One big drawback that Peter observes in our college system is have not grown up with this tradition as the Germans have.
Peter briefly mentioned other points concerning student life in Germany.
It is entirely up to the individual whether or not he attends classes, He can do most of his studying at home as long as he prepares himself for the final examinations.
Another point mentioned by Peter is that students in Germany learn to manage on much less money than Americans usually have.
Peter brought the interview to a close with his observation that in Germany students are more independent and possess more individuality as a result of their freedom.
Center Activities On Monday, December G, nine records will go on sale at the Rastall Desk for fifty cents apiece.
There is only one copy of each and the sales will be on a ""first come, first served"" basis.
There will be a tea for the Rastall Board members and the Program Council at 3:30 in the WES Lounge Friday, December 2.
The movie, ""Intruder in the Dust"" will be shown on Sunday, December 4, at 7:30 in Perkins.
There will be no charge, Jazz Concert Rocks Staid Old Perkins Hall ""Music hath charms to soothe the savage beast"" — or so they say.
The Falconaires, a jazz band from the ""hundred million dollar toy"" north of town, proved the hundred million was well spent.
Wally Caldwell introduced the leader of the band, Mr Al Tronti, who in turn introduced Mr Ken Shaw, of KRDO who acted as master of ceremonies.
Despite Mr Shaw's rather feeble humor, the band's numbers were announced with a minimum of useless chatter.
The numbers ranged from Basic to Blues, ""Stardust"" to ""Mack the Knife,"" with each selection being done masterfully.
It would be less than useless to say any one member of the group stood above the other.
In fact, one feature which made the group so great was the way in which the band remained behind a solo performer, never overshadowing him, but never letting him down. 1 think it should be mentioned that Mr Wallace Caldwell is fairly well responsible for ""Birds N' figerland"" and both he and Pershing Rifles deserve a great many thanks for a really fabulous evening of entertainment.
Cap & Gown For the book recommendation this month we have two unusual books suggested by Dr.
The first is ""The Evolution of Physics"" bv Albert Einstein and Leopold Infeld, Simon and Schuster, 1938.
This book's outstanding feature is that it combines academic respectability with lay accessibility.
Too often scientifically respectable books are incomprehensive to laymen, and those books which are comprehensible are not totally respectable scientifically.
This is a common occurrence in books utilizing gimmickry, which in an attempt to elucidate concepts only obscures them.
The Rise of the Mechanical View; The Decline of the Mechanical View; Field Relativity, and Quanta.
Wright considers the first three sections of the book excellent, but he feels that the discussion of quanta does not measure up to the other sections, probably because Einstein was not an adherent of this theory.
This is ""The Strange Story of Quantum"" bv Banesh Hoffman, Dover Publishing, Inc., 1959.
This book is unusual from the standpoint of its literary nature, noted in the book's divisions and chapter headings.
Such headings as ""Tweedledum and Tweedledee,"" ""The Exploits of the Revolutionary Prince,"" ""Laundry Lists Are Discarded,"" and ""The Asceticism of Paul"" are a strange contrast to the usual scientific style.
This book was designed as a guide to those interested in exploring the theories behind which the scientist seeks to comprehend the mysterious world of the atom.
The mass of the student body is composed of separate groups who go separate ways because of common interests.
The activities of many of these groups are stepping stones in communicating the Colorado College way of life, but are only too often unheard of.
The interest of many groups are appealing to other students and faculty members but are often not publicized until the last minute if publicized at all.
The mass of this college is composed of these groups such as the athletes, joined together for sports sake, the art students together perhaps for a coming exhibition, the musicians for a coming concert or simply for their love of music and the dancers for the dance.
Put all of these active groups together with other groups and you have the well rounded Colorado College.
Down the drain maybe — There are many benefits to be gained from a liberal arts education.
Communication is an important medium to all of us for without it we stand to lose the benefits of the talents and ideas of others— we lose our sense of knowing what is going on.
An example can be found in the publicity of the Dance Concert scheduled for this evening.
After talking with many people, it is apparent that very few knew of the concert, which has been in the preparatory stage for some four months.
Exactly who is at fault is not the issue, the' issue is how can we prevent this from happening again.
This concert will undoubtedly be the dance attraction of the year and it seems a waste that more people do not know about it and more enthusiasm was not given it The Dance Department is just such a separate group whose talents are wasted because they are unknown.
We all agree that our purpose for being in college, this college, is to learn about all things or as many as time permits.
Don't you feel that if an important event is being prepared and you are aware of it, you can plan your time so that these things can be taken into consideration.
Because this is such a late date to be hearing about a dance concert, it is within reason that other plans have been made for the evening and many of you miss out because you would have attended had you been notified.
This goes for athletic programs, field trips, as well as activities from the Committee on Assemblies.
Like most gripes, they are put in a fashion of what can we do about it.
Perhaps a new section in the TIGER apart from ""On The Town,"" which deals with these events in data and character.
This section, which could be removed and placed on bulletin boards as reference would be in such an abundance that each student would have one.
It would not only list the events, but give their characteristics and purposes.
Another suggestion would be to have an events display case in Rastall solely for the purpose of displaying material for forthcoming events.
This could be made a point of interest by working on display principles, using photographs and other eye catching materials.
I do not feel that this is something that can be tossed aside as another gripe, for here are bases for a beginning improvement.
I would like to hear your comments on the situation, both student and faculty, and maybe we can improve our campus relationships simply by knowing what each other is doing.
Whether we are interested in other activities or not, I cannot help feeling that we would still gain just by knowing what is going on.
Shall we say what is going on in the town and on the li ' When It's Mudc It's Miller, Miller Music Co.
LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINSS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MEIrose 4-7744.
Q U1CK UALITY 'ERV1CE BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" -I BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning Qreek Vi FRANNIE FEHBSTEtN ng the DCs t house for Delta Gamma On Monday will go to the Phi D« dessert.
Gamma Phi Beta Last Saturday, the Gamma Phis gave their annual Thanksgiving party for the cerebral palsied children of the region.
This year's party was organized by Miss Johanna Waller, Philanthropic Chairman, and supervised by Miss Waller, Miss Karen Williamson, president and Mrs.
Tomorrow afternoon the Gamma Phis are having a bridge benefit to raise money for Hope House.
Kappa Kappa Gamma This Sunday a dinner will be given for the actives by the pledges at the Kappa house.
Kappa Alpha Theta The Hackney House is the setting for the Theta Christmas formal which will be held from 9-12 m. tomorrow night.
Next Thursday the Thetas go to the Beta house for din Alpha Phi Tomorrow night the Alpha Phis will have their Christmas formal at the Valley Hi Country Club from 9-12m.
A tree trimming party will (j t held at the house next Thursday afternoon for the member their guests.
Phi Delta Theta Tonight the Phi Delts will hav e their annual Christmas dance the Hackney House from 9 p until 1m.
Sigma Chi Next Tuesday the Sigma 01 Mothers Club will serve a dinnt for the pledges at the fraternitj house.
Kappa Sigma Tonight the Kappa Sigs wi] have their annual Christmas din ner-dance at the Red Cloud Lin Miller and Roberts will provide th> music.
Because of bad weather, the toilet bowl game has been postponed and will be played at a late date.
Tie I bis v ' re as Intr 23 Plebes Receive P/R Cords on Sa This week-end the Pershing Rifles pledges will be initiated into D-9.
Last Saturday night the plebes started their initiation with an extensive physical hazing program in Monument Park and by guarding the women's dorms.
On Friday evening they will have a dance at the Fort Carson Officer's Club where they will receive their P/R cords.
NEW BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME 10% CASH AND CARRY M7l/i East ach.
Kappa Sigs took first place jis year winning four, losing none (id tying one.
Fencing Looms As CC Sport Activity Won Lost Tie Kappa Sig 4 1 Beta 4 10 Sigma Chi 3 1 1 Phi Delt 2 3 Zeta 14 Phi Gam 5 On December 0, the annual baseball tournament will begin.
Exchange tickets, in addition to the presentation of the activity card, are required for admission to ice hockey games.
These exchange tickets must be secured at the Athletic Department office not later than one day prior to the date of the contest.
Tickets for the Varsity-Freshnan game, December 3, will be available at the Athletic Department office until 4:30 today.
The office is closed on Saturdays. :ing, the art or sport of fighting with a foil, sabre or epee, originated from the word meaning to protect or defend.
Today we know it as a game of out-witting the opponent, as well as one of skill and precision.
The challenge comes in ""feeling out"" your opponent, determining how fast and in what wav he will react.
There is also the everpresent challenge of perfection — perfection in hand movement, point control and footwork.
The many attacks and combinations of attacks have just as many parries to go with them.
A bout is made up of a series of such actions, both offensive and defensive.
The bout is scored by the number of successful touches made on the opponent.
But each point, won or lost, represents the experience of facing a new personality on the sti-ip— someone with a new idea, a new scheme or characteristic, Each bout is a new learning experience — psychologically, physically and mentally.
There are many puzzles in fencing left unsolved in each fencer's life-time — and each different for the individual fencer.
But the added beauty, grace and poise, and smoothness of lines and strokes make fencing truly an art.
For the first time, fencing has been added to the Physical Education Department.
Presently CC women arc fencing at the YMCA and using their equipment Some people ask if fencing is dangerous.
It meets on Thursday afternoons at 4:00 in front of Rastall Center and from there to the ""Y"" to fence.
There will also be the chance to see the more advanced fencers in bouts.
There is now preparation for competition as well as the coaching of beginners who look forward to the day when they will be ready to compete.
The hours spent on the strip are filled with thrills and excitement for the spectator as well as the fencer, gratification of success and the drive towards improvement with each failure.
For more information, contact Miss Mary Jane Brown at ME 2-9845 or Miss Roberts in the Physical RALLY FOR THE KEG winners, Jir their new-found refreshment.
At the Air Force Academy last Sunday, CC was represented in the Fencing Competition.
Arriving closest to the official time and mileage were driver Al Peterson and his navigator, Jim Dyson.
Hats olf in congratulations to Cordon Allott, Cinny Hampton, Warren Fordyce and Jim Spencer who made this event possible.
The Rastall Center Board plans to make the Rally an annual affair according to Gary Gappert, chairman.
ME 2-1277 ado College Tiger Prospects Good as Tigers Open ' 60 Basketball Season Prospects for the coming basketball season look good at Colorado College.
Last year, the CC Tigers were invited to participate in the small college NCAA playoffs (they lost both games) and Coach Leon Red Eastlack hopes to get his team back in the playoffs again this year.
Pucksters Open Season at World Arena with Freshman Opponents Coach Tony Frasca expects to start four sophomores and two seniors when the Colorado College hockey season opens tomorrow night in the World Arena at the Broadmoor.
Last year the freshman team skated to a last minute tie with the varsity by outspeeding them and refusing to admit defeat.
Saturday night, 10 of those Eastlack expects his crew to be scramblingagain for the Rocky Mountain Conference crown.
He figures he may be a little weaker in the back court than last year, but hopes that extra strength up front will compensate for that.
The one thing most likely to be missed from last year is the floor leadership furnished by Dave Parker, captain and guard.
Eastlack frankly admits he does not know if the team will have a good floor leader this year.
There are five returning lettermen and three of those are expected to be starters, The five are Jim Hanks, Jim Wexels and Paul Mott at forward, Art Ackerman at center and Tony Sellitto at guard.
Howell is up from the freshman squad, and Thompson came to CC after completing his junior college studies.
Hanks and Wexels were starters on last year's team and were the two scoring leaders as well.
Hanks shot at a .430 average, while Wexels had more shots but hit on only .376 of his shots.
They were Tony Sellitto, first string quarterback, and Dan Wright, third string quarterback and deep man on defense.
Wright has the extra handicap of having suffered a broken wrist in the eighth game of the football season and may not be ready for much action when the season opens.
Dave Krell a junior who came to CC from Pueblo Junior College is counted on to be the reserve man at center.
Mott and John Reid, another sophomore, are the reserve forward strength.
The two football players, Wright and Sellitto, are the only two who do not reach 6 feet.
It will be preceded by a preliminary game with the CC freshmen playing Lowry Air Force Base.
Dave Krell will start as center and Eastlack is undecided as to which two will start as guard.
Tony Sellitto, Dan Wright and Farrell Thompson are the three he lists as possible starters.
One of these three will be eliminated. scrapping freshmen will be members of the varsity squad, which is rounded out by three juniors and two seniors.
The sophomores do not figure to let this year's greenies pull the same trick they pulled off last year.
While the varsity will be out to put the freshmen in their place, the first year men will get some help from three men who still are shooting for a spot on the traveling team.
The three were members of the squad during early practice, but were cut when Frasca had to trim the squad down to 18 men.
All three have indicated they do not like playing in the ""minor league"" competition and intend to place themselves on the varsity list if possible.
Laurence has been in a tight fight with Pete Doyle this fall for the starting call in the nets.
These two hard checking men have earned their starting job by outplaying a defense unit that was put together late last season.
Those two were formed into a unit in the second semester of the season last year and saw their share of play.
Skating with him will be Bill Goodacre at right wing and Danny McGill at left wing.
Skating with him will be Ed Boychuck at right wing and Brian Dutkowski at left wing.
Ken Cairns will center with Doug Hill at right wing and Alex Yankovich at left wing.
Varsity • CAMERA SHOP* 30 NORTH TEION STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store IGonnon %\}ap FOR MEM . . . suggests the following gift items for the Holiday Season For That OFF-CAMPUS SNACK TRY LENEDA DAIRY SHOP r . . . -p.
ME 4-9B92 Mufflers i, i, „ Wo oi 1 -~| With Cotton Leather Gloves K „it Bocks Gant Dress Shirts In Button-Down Collors C QC And English Tobs J # J \j 5.95 5.95 MALTS ICE CREAM HOME-MADE CHILI SANDWICHES Free Malts This week we give free malts to the following — WE WILL BE HAPPY TO GIFT WRAP AND MAIL TOUR PACAKAGES FOR TOU Noncy Heitz, George Graham Suzanne Edwards, Wm.
Edward Plummer OPEN EVENINGS 19 East Colorado Avenue Til 9.00 No strings — just call and get your FREE MALT this week.
This exclusive Artcarved ""Evening Star""-design dramatizes the diamond as other rings can't do.
It is your assurance of a genuine ""Evening Star"" engagement ring by Artcarved.
And only with Arfcarved do you receive a written guarantee for diamond quality — plus the protection of the nationwide Permanent Vo L ■«* Plan.
Discove' more about this exciting ring and other valuable tips on diomond fing buying.
The squad attending this tournaw as composed of Bob sher, Jack Walker, Jim SpenDave Furgason, Max Taylor, ave Bitters and Robin Rudoff, sistant coach.
The speakers each articipated in two rounds of dislssiorij one round of extemporanipeaking and two rounds of ebate.
Dave Furgason received a iting of superior and Jim Spencer id Max Taylor received ratings f excellent. ead coach James Johnson reked that he thought the club off to a fine start by placing lil'd at Fort Collins.
Louis Benezet will fesent the keys of the radio staion to its student manager.
An open house for students will held Monday from 3 to 6m. ie purpose of this will be to bett orientate the students to the' ■ -W communication facilities of IRCC in Rastall.
Students living off c impus and in fraternity house s will be able to pick up the r copy at Rastall.
Choir Presents Annual Xmas Concert, Sunday The annual Christmas Concert by the Colorado College Choir will be presented both on Sunday, December 11 at 4m. in Shove Chapel and Tuesday, December 13 at 11m. in Perkins Hall.
The program is sponsored by the Music Department and is the second concert in the Colorado College Winter Concert Series.
The choir will be directed by Mr Donald Jenkins, the new choral director and voice teacher at the college.
The concert will open with an organ prelude and a candle-light procession by the choir singing two fourteenth century carols.
The third selection will be a longer work, the ""Magnificat for Double Chorus and Organ"" by Charles Theodore Pachelbel.
The choir will next sing the ""Gloria"" from the Schubert Mass in G and ""And There Were in the Same Country,"" a composition by Miss Jean Miller, a resident of Colorado Springs.
The choir will conclude the program with some traditional carols and a recessional.
The Editor and Busings Manager of the TIGER for the year beginning February, 1961, will be announced in next week's paper following approval by the ASCC Executive Council.
The magazine, consisting of 48 pages, received as many contributions as last year's 80 page magazine.
The expectation of a second edition, and financial inadequacies however limited the size of this fall edition.
Rejected contributions will be returned this week end to the contributors, along with a' tallv sheet of criticism by the KINNIKINNIK Board of Review.
Students are urged to express their reactions to their literary and art magazine to the editors, Jim Scarboro and Gary Gappert.
Students should also consider submitting manuscripts for publication in the second edition which will be published some time in April.
KRCC began as a two room public address system in the basement of Bemis in the old Cogswell Theater, and with occasional interview shows carried by KVOR, the only local radio station at that time.
Because of his varied experience, from carpentry to college teaching, Tyree was able to build a radio station, bpth in a tangible, physical and in an intangible sense.
CC acquired several GI buildings from Peterson Field, among them South Hall.
Thomas Rawles, at that time treasurer of the college, arranged to provide the station with some extra money, and John Fundingsland, at present a Teleprompter researcher, made a sizable contribution so that in 1947 KRCC was able to move into a remodeled South Hall and have their own studio.
This w the air with its own transmitter. , on the left, looks over some of the of KRCC located in South Hall with pictured are Larry Kelley, Jan Van ante 1951 when the station went on Ctly from its own studios and have to rely on transmitter, via telephone lines, to the stations downtown.
Since 1951 KRCC has undergone many minor improvements aided by the time, efforts, and money of many others.
The last major"" innovation for KRCC came just recently with the transfer of the radio studios to the new Rastall Center.
Herbert Schubnrth, chief engineer for KRDO, and Mike Cook, CC student, provided invaluable technical assistance, saving the station much money, ASCC also provided funds to extend broadcasting lines from Perkins to Rastall.
As Tyree says, ""Everybody benefits from Benezet, and KRCC is no exception.
Now that the station has become full grown, it only needs to consolidate its position.
Tyree suggests that with the proper interest and co-operation, new and better programming and increased public knowledge of the KRCC potential could be achieved.
He mentions the possible development of a fullfledged Communications Center that would be^able to use to the fullest audiovisual techniques as devices to further education and culture.
This Center, like KRCC does now, would attempt, not only to further the cultural life of the college in the present, but would also serve as a laboratory for those who wunted to familiarize themselves with these ""cultural techniques"" for use elsewhere.
Coburn Library announces that books Hint fall due during the Christmas vacation will be due the tirst day after vacation ends.
P /R Silver Ball Held As Inspection Ensues On Dece liber 2 the Pershing Rifles held their fi rst ann ual Silver Boll it the Port Carson Officer's Club.
December 15 is the last meeting for Pershing Rifles in 1960. -•*79 m Mi RASTALL CENTER— As Mike Cook handles the engineering, Woodson Tyree, somewhat changed, still looks over station material.
Monday marks the official opening and reception of the new KRCC with studios in Rastall Center and transmitting facilities in South Hall.
Colorado on the CORNER Two articles came across our desk recently which we felt were worth passing on.
A letter from the NSA closed with the comment that Mr Johnston had written the main office in Philadelphia about Colorado College ""lying at the foot of historic and scenic Pike's Peak.
Letting Pikes Peak fall where it may, there can be little doubt in anyone's mind that the scenery is inspiring, even though the nearness of the ski slopes may not be an example of the scholastic inspiration of which the above gentlemen were speaking.
In fact, if the poll were as crass as those conducted by the tourist industry, one might even place a dollar value on it.
If the meeting between the administration and the Greek powers-that-be were to be summarized in any way, it might be condensed to the point that the administration is concerned with making Colorado College, a school which has committed itself to being a fraternity school, the best of all possible worlds.
The administration has long made its desires known insofar as deferred rush is concerned.
Unfortunately, IFC and Panhel have long done everything possible but approach the problem realistically.
The fraternities were unable to decide upon a plan workable and acceptable to all concerned.
The sororities have claimed that the added financial burden will drive them into bankruptcy and hence off of the campus.
Of course, when this was mentioned at the meeting last week the administration claimed that the financially hit houses would be covered by the school for a year during which time the plan would be tested.
There has been some comment, and there is an element of truth in it, that if deferred rush is installed, certain houses will suffer because in essence they are afraid that if the Freshman see them at their daily best, they will be disillusioned and go to another house or worse yet, remain unaffiliated.
It is true that the installation of deferred rush is receiving its major impetus from the administration and certainly a case can be made against the administration for telling a student body what it will do.
However, the case against the student government bodies is even stronger, for there has been little concerted effort on their part to present views opposed to those of the administration, or even to define their own values.
Now that President Benezet has seen fit to do some of their work for them in setting forth some principles and proposals to offset declines and spur improvements in the fraternity system, it is hoped that they will be able to agree among themselves to such an extent that they can come up with a deferred rush program for next year.
However, they will have to work with IFC if anything approaching an effective rush program is to be inaugurated.
Ski Clothes Exhibition Presented by Panhel ""Schuss in Style,"" an exhibition of new ski clothes and equipment, will be presented by the Panhellenic Council next Tuesday evening, December 13, at 8m. in Perkins Hall.
The equipment, courtesy of the Don Anderson Ski Shop, will be demonstrated by representatives of the Greek organizations.
Last week in your regular column you pointed out a fact which is often all too true: namely that many of the events which could or should be of interest to the campus are unattended due to a lack of publication.
However, I should like to point out something which is new, and therefore has perhaps escaped notice.
Alpha Lambda Delta, the freshman women's honorary fraternity, publishes a monthly listing of cultural events on and around the campus.
This list, ""Alpha Lambda Delta Recommends,"" can be read ir, all the freshman dorms and on the Rastall bulletin board.
The critic is the standard-bearer, tearing us down when we need building up.
In the first place, this is a horrible use of such an innocent word, for although academics may bring pleasure to some, real study has always been hard work and always will be and you know it.
They are inseparable, Mr Gappert, and I maintain they are very rotten, Mr Gappert.
In America we struggle to get 10 students into a phone booth, and think it cute.
Any organization which invents four years of nonsense to entertain its idle members is not neutral but is as outdatea as the Racoon coat.
Mr Gappert, the world may be basically a ""fun place"" for you and the gang, but it is not going to be for long unless we take an interest in the more serious and even crucial things on our shrinking fuseridden cannonball of a globe.
You and Barry Goldwater notwithstanding, my last comment is that I think (at the expense of the Fun-God) students without fraternities would have more time and more unbiased opportunity to make more serious, productive and meaningful lives for themselves.
In your comments to Mr Racey you criticized him as being a man of all talk and no action.
I sincerely hope to see you at the performances of Strindberg's, ""Miss Julie,"" Sunday night in the WES room.
This reading is being sponsored by Mr Racey, who, in case you were not there, was the moderator of a panel on brainwashing.
If our cultural events are so few and far between I feel that one hour or so of one's study time per week for attendance will not affect a grade average in the least.
The material to be reviewed for a test on Wednesday can be grasped by spending time on Friday, Saturday or Sunday studying instead of procrastinating.
The fraternities will be represented by Rick Carroll and Don Ullman, Phi Gamma Delta; Charlie De Puy, Beta Theta Pi, and Bob Kendall, Kappa Sigma.
Entertainment will be provided by the Alpha Phi Singers, Pixie Campbell, Beth Kendall, Margann Parks, Sue Rowlette, Phyllis Setter, Donna Story and Julie Thomas.
Admission to the show is a 50 cent donation which will go to the Scholarship Fund.
Tom Absher Ushers: Blue Key Hostesses: Panhellenic Letters to the Editor ""Cocktail diplomacy"" does r*. main a potent force.
I am sorry but not at all surprised, to sef the stereotype you hold of an in. dependent.
I cannot comprehend why stu. dents would be more desirable, m shall I say individualistic, if thej are in a fraternity.
FRATERNITIES AT COLORADO COLLEGE Some Principles and Proposals to Offset Declines and Spur Improvements INTRODUCTION: Intellectual and social changes in modern students A What does the Fraternity owe to itself: 1.
Constructive campus citizenship:g. encouragement in extracurricular activities.
Support of the fraternity idea; self determination within agreed bounds.
Physical support; maintenance and management services; financial credit; food services.
Annual Fraternity Leadership Conference, with Administrative and Faculty participation.
A new Calendar of fraternity orientation, pledging, initiation, and other key activities.
In the years that lie D head I hope that we shall have a opportunity to be associated o many occasions for a cause w both believe in.
Forty children from the Chad bourn Spanish Mission will gathr around the Bemis Commons Chris' mas tree tomorrow afternoon froi 1:30 to 3:30m. fo AWS orphan's party, The children, ages three to l 1 will participate with the CC won en students in games and carol Santa is scheduled to arrive v presents for all the children.
December 9, I960 V Hack and Gold CC sweatshirts are now being old by Black and Gold for $3. rench Club There will be a gathering of members of the French Club and ther students of French on Tuesvening, December 13, at 7:15 in Hayes House Library.
LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS Non-Violent Resistance Advocated By Hinshaw Mr Cecil Hinshaw, the Peace Secretary of the North Central District of the American Friends Service Committee, spoke in an assembly presented by the Student Assembly Committee Tuesday.
He spoke on an aspect of pacifism as the possible solution to the current world problems.
Clublicity By Ginny Metcalf Recreation at 6:30 Tigerettes The Tigerettes held a meeting yesterday and tossed around ideas for the money-making project with the Bengals, to be held January 8.
Mr Hinshaw's theory is that a ""continental divide"" sometimes curs in history.
Today the developments of science have made our wo a con ipletelv different o le.
With the cc ming of the atomic and hydroge i bomb the re has been a great increase m the amount of explo we power av ailable, and added to this pro Wen is the problem of radiation.
Some people say that the deterrent power of these weapons is so great that there will never be another war.
This is based on the belief that people are rational and assumes that no mistake that has been made in the past will ever be made again.
A recent Rockefeller Report says that the possibility of a large thermonuclear war is greater than the possibility of no war.
Meanwhile, people go on looking forward to a future that probably does not exist.
The hard realities of our times must be realized and there must be a division in the intellectual and the emotional attitude toward war.
One of the greatest fears now is that a small war will develop into something more.
Considerable expansion will take place in the next few years in the number of nations that are capable of producing atomic weapons.
There are even thoughts in the Pentagon of not retaliating in the event of a nuclear attack.
Because there is no absolute guarantee that we would retaliate and if there were it would mean an accident could cause the end.
Non-violent resistance on an organized national level might be the answer.
An English militarist, King Halle, advocates this since war can no longer be conducted as it was in the past.
Psychological warfare, as a deterrent to occupation, should be prepared as carefully as nuclear warfare is being prepared now.
Modem weaponry has brought us to the point where its use is no longer moral or practical.
If we could transfer the money 'spent on nuclear weapons to a world aid program through the United Nations the situation would be greatly improved.
Drama Group Presents Reading of 'Miss Julie' ""Mis Julit ' the first i of student productior seated by CC, students Sunday at 7:30m. in the WES room of Rastall Center.
This student experimental dramatization will be presented as a style of productive reading in the round.
Following this first performance will be a discussion and coffee hour for those interested.
Cap & Gown This week Cap and Gown recommends ""A Raisin in the Sun,"" a play by Lorraine Hanaberry, which is to he presented Thursday through Saturday, December 15, 16 and 17, at S:20m. and Saturday, December 17, at 2:20m. at the Denver Auditorium Theater.
Claudia McNeil plays the part of Lena Younger, a mountain of strength and a strict disciplinarian, who presides over the household.
The Younger family believes that the receipt of an insurance legacy will provide the opportunity for them to escape the poverty and social restrictions under which they live.
Mail orders with a check or money order and a selfaddressed stamped envelope to Hugli Hooks Entertainments, P 0.
Pre-registration is not completed until each student lias returned his or her pre-registration card to the Registrar's office.
Students may complete pre-registration before noon, Saturday, December 10, without the payment of a fee, Students prc-registering during the last three days of the pre-registration period, December 12, 13 and 14 will be required to pay a fee of $3.
Students pre-registering after December 14 will be required to pay a fee of $10.
During the period January 9-13, students should obtain their registration cards from the Registrar's office.
The number placed on each curd at the time it is picked up will be used to indicate priority of admission to the gymnasium on registration day.
Students are requested to fill out their registration cards before appearing in the gymnasium to complete their registration.
MEIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Pc-udro Visit OPEN ' Seven-Day s-aWeek THE PANCAKE HOUSE 16 South Walnut 40 VARIETIES OF PANCAKES AND WAFFLES Steak Shrimp Sandwiches ■■■■ When It'i Miuric It's Miller* Miller Music Co.
They will be Nancy Bowers, Kappa Alpha Theta; Diane Robertson, Alpha Phi; Mary Lou Spry, Delta Gamma; Kim Hall, Kappa Kappa Gamma, and Trish Adams, Gamma Phi Beta.
Sue Bmckney, Mary B Tonakemper, Margaret Parka, Anne Wilson, Denny Prior.
This list, ""Alpha Lambda Delta Recommends,"" can be read in all the freshman dorms and on the Rastall bulletin board.
Any organization which invents four years of nonsense to entertain its idle members is not neutral but is as outdated as the Racoon coat.
Mr Gappert, the world may be basically a ""fun place"" for you and the gang, but it is not going to be for long unless we take an interest in the more serious and even crucial things on our shrinking fuseI'idden cannonball of a globe.
However, there IS something being done about it. ultur; ternity m zation he ""fun"" foi this is i innocent demies some, re hard wor you know lenge you in all hor nyt> ultu gentlemai are not d Some Pri INTROD A Wha 5.
Tom Absher Ushers: Blue Key Hostesses: Panhellenic Letters to the Editor ""Cocktail diplomacy"" doe main a potent force.
Too often, howevt social techniques tend to becor animal instincts and all diploma is lost when a casual beer beconi a six pack, and a six pack a cas and a case a keg, and so on.
I am sorr but not at all surprised, to si the stereotype you hold of an ii dependent.
I cannot comprehend why st dents would be more desirable, i shall I say individualistic, if tht are in a fraternity.
Myles Hopper Mr Jack Walker \ [31 little MAN on campus Non-Violent Resistance '""capTTown Advocated By Hinshaw Mr Cecil Hinshaw, the Peace Secretary of the North Central District of the American Friends Service Committee, spoke in an assembly presented by the Student Assembly Committee Tuesday.
Mr Hinshaw's theory is that a ""continental divide"" sometimes s in history.
Today the developments of science have made our w :ompletely different one.
Clublicity By Ginny Metcalf Hack and Gold CC sweatshirts are now being old by Black and Gold for $3. ench Club There will be a gathering of ambers of the French Club and ther students of French on Tuesay evening, December 13, at 7:15 in Hayes House Library, e will be French Christmas s and Captain and Mrs.
Refreshments will be iger Club The Tiger Club will go caroling jnday at St.
We ore completely stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment SKI RENTALS New Boots, Skis and Poles $2.75 BLICK Sporting Goods Co.
Tigerettes The Tigerettes held a meeting yesterday and tossed around ideas for the money-making project with the Bengals, to be held January S The final idea has not yet been decided.
WAA The intra-mural swimming meet will be held today at 3:30m. at Palmer High School.
Young Republicans The state executive board of the Colorado League of College Young Republicans will be at CC Sunday.
Spanish Club The Spanish Club will hold a Christmas Fiesta Sunday at 6:30 m.
Transportation will be provided. the coming of the atomic and hydrogen bomb there has been a great increase in the amount of explosive power available, and added to this problem is the problem of radiation.
There is not as much guarantee that a small nation will be as responsible as larger nations in handling these weapons and that their selection of leaders is good.
Effective control of armaments should be achieved in three to five years or there will be no need for it at alt.
Another frightening prospect is that as the probability of war increases, the probability of a preventative war increases even more.
LETUS WRAP UP CMRtSTfAAS FOR YOU . . . every gift gets a gay wrap-up, mailing too, if you require itl X $JW^ * Kiowa & Tejoc \ ME 3-3S89 IN COLORADO 3PRTNGS SfNCE 1872 Nuclear war cannot even be threatened.
Modern weaponry has brought us to the point where its use is no longer moral or practical.
If we could transfer the money 'spent on nuclear weapons to a world aid program through the United Nations the situation would he greatly improved.
Drama Group Presents Reading of 'Miss Julie' ""Miss Julie,"" the first in a series of student productions, will be presented bv CC, students Sunday at 7:30m. in the WES room of Rastall Center.
This week Cap and Gown recommends ""A Raisin in the Sun,"" a play by Lorraine Hansberry, which is to be presented Thursday through Saturday, December 15, 16 and 17, at 8:20m. and Saturday, December 17, at 2:20m. at the Denver Auditorium Theater.
Pro-registration is not completed until each student has returned his or her pro-registration card to the Registrar's office.
Students may complete pre-rogistration before mion, Saturday, December 10, without the payment of a fee.
Students pre-registering during the last three days of the pre-registration period, December 12, 13 and 14 will be required to pay a fee of $3.
The number placed on each card at the time it is picked up will be used to indicate priority of admission to the gymnasium on registration day.
ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre Visit OPEN «a Seven-Days-a-Week 8 oo THE PANCAKE HOUSE 16 South Walnut 40 VARIETIES OF PANCAKES AND WAFFLES Steak Shrimp Sandwiches Whm Il'i Uulic lis Mlllen Miller Music Co.
December 9, I960 • Colorado Colleqe Tiger PORTS DON WOLFGANG, Sports Edltoi JIM HANKS drives through the St.
Mary's defense for a two point lay-up shot in the basketball game played alst Friday night.
Any member of last year's ■ _ ■ _ ■ ■ choir who are not in choir this year — and who would be interested in going to California on the spring tour, please contact Bob Littell or Mr Donald Jenkins, before January 31, 1961.
CC basketball team got off to a good start in what looks like sing season by winning their first two games of the season last d Saturday in Cossitt Hall.
Mary's of the Plai Friday night in the season opener, the Tigers dumped St.
In Friday's game the Tigers started off with a 6-0 lead in the first two minutes of the game, and they never fell behind.
With eight minutes gone in the game the Tigers were still maintaining a comfortable lead, but then St.
As in the first half, the Tigers opened up the second with six points while St.
In the first half the lead constantly see-sawed back and forth and the score was tied eight times.
The leading scorer in both games was Jim Hanks, scoring 21 points in the first game and 25 in the second.
So begins the case history Chow Yin Ling, the nine year girl third floor Loomis has adopt, through the Foster Parents P| a For $180 a year the child is giv, $8 a month in cash plus food ai clothing.
A certain amount is t lotted for medical expenses cliu neled through a local hospital.
Chessie Kemp, president of thii floor and originator of the proji hopes that it will become a tradi tion for third floor to continue i ^ care for the child.
There is no particular reason for making this point, except that whenever I think of Fort Lauderdale, I think of rye bread.
There is no particular reason for that either, but I have been thinking >f Fort Lauderdale.
But, for two weeks twenty thousand collegians descent on this peaceful community and tak< it apart, peace by peace.
They cal it Spring Vacation, but it's more like amateur night at Cape Canaveral They capture Florida and throw the Keys away.
If you look Jong enough, you reach an advanced stage of dizziness called aphrodizzier.
Everywhere you turn — beaches full of them, motels and hotels full of them, cars full of them, pools full of them, bathing suits full of them.
Ah, bathing suits . . . when the man said, ""It's the little things in life that count,"" he must have been thinking of bathinij, suits.
Girls in love, girls in trouble, bright girls with a future, not-so-brig h I girls with a past, rich girls in the lap of luxury, poor girls in any lap that'll have them, girls of every size and discretion.
M-G-M calls it ""Where The Boys Are,"" starring Dolores Hart, George Hamilton, Yvette Mimieux, Jim Hutton, Barbara Nichols, Paula Prentiss, with Frank Gorshin and introducing popular recording star Connie Francis in her first screen role.
Screenplay by George WellsJ$ based on the novel by Glendon Swarthout, Directed by Henry Levin.
Last year the Freshman team surprised the Varsity with a 6-6 after taking a 4-1 lead in the first period.
In the traditional season opener, Eddie Boychuek slapped in two | s with five other varsity — (, adding one goal apiece.
Both ■tie Freshman scores were made Wayne McAlpine and both ased by Art Berglund.
L fter a slow starting opening, varsity finally added a tally t almost nine minutes had jsed in the period.
This was one Boychuck's goals, and was asacled by Brian Dutkow'here was no more scoring in first period, but in the second iod play began to pick up, and the game went on it became rensingly more exciting.
Then Alex Yankovich eil a solo tally, and two minutes Boychuek and Dutkowski fain teamed up for a goal.
Ih three minutes left, Goodacre Gee once again teamed up, this time with Goodacre making the assist, and the score was 5-0.
But the Freshmen came right back and retaliated with a goal in the closing moments of the second period.
The Freshmen added their other goal in the middle of the last period, but the Varsity came back with two more to assure themselves of a sewed up victory.
One was an unassisted goal by Dutkowski, and the other was slapped in by Doug Hill with Denny Cairns assisting.
Goalie Norm Laurence showed great promise in the game of replacing last year's top-notch goal keeper.
And Laurence was ably replaced in the last half of the period by Pete Doyle.
Along with an excellent goal keeping, a strong defense unit also makes the prospects for the Tigers look somewhat better than some had expected.
The defensemen, Paul Kilbreath and Bill Dixon, show great promise of being a hard to break unit.
Although Kilbreath was plagued by three penalties which would be fatal in a crucial game, this unit may make the difference in future games.
The official season will open here next Friday and Saturday with games against Michigan State.
Center Activities TRY A HUB DE-ICER Rastall Center Games Area promises to be the scene of a lot of fun activities as the winter season arrives.
Prior to Christmas, Eds and Coeds alike will be slipping down for a relaxing break.
A Giant Ladder Tournament in table tennis with a winners' play-off at a basketball halftime, moonlight bowling (this is great!), and many others to make this winter's recreation on campus really swinging.
More and more girls are finding it fun to participate in the onetime man's sport of billiards.
Now a nationally recognized women's recreation, it is gainging popularity steadily.
Watch for announcements of special activities, but most of all, enjoy yourself regularly at the Rastall Center Games Area.
Siggi Hepp will show slides of Russia with her own wonderful narration.
EATMANV |--THE VEHi| FACULTY33^ F r$^,M$% ""mm I| 't -■WOgTUAk-^ 1 Xmas Carol Sing Sponsored by IMA On Wednesday, December 14, the IMA is sponsoring a Christmas carol sing in the Loomis Hall parking lot at 9m.
This is planned as an all school function and it is hoped that everyone will attend.
Mr Donald Jenkins will lead the songs and most of the members of the choir will attend.
Special thanks to all those who helped with the Rastall Center Christmas decorations.
This meet is Sponsored by the Colorado College Debate Club and the local chapter of Tau Kappa Alpha, national forensic fraternity.
Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA (ACROSS FROM CAMPUSl ""Call Me Mr "" Versus ""A Dr.
Recently this problem has come to the attention of the TIGER, which decided to see what the professors on campus thought about the matter.
After a long, careful and exhaustive study one can only come to the conclusion that all our beloved professors are modest, retiring individuals who would be delighted to have a student call them, ything, anything at all.
Many professors on campus do not hold Thi ee-month course leads to a con mission as a Second Lieutenant If you are graduating this June, you may be eligible for admission to the new Air Force Officer Training Sch ol.
Successful completion of the thre e-month course wins you a commiss ion, and a head-start on a bright, rew arding future in the Aerospace Age.
The School is open to men and women college graduates with certain technological and administrative skills.
If you are selected for the School, you will receive Staff Sergeant pay while a trainee.
Graduated officers may later apply for advanced training and graduate study at government expense.
Male officers may also apply for flight training as pilots or navigators.
For the career-minded young officer, the Air Force way of life can be stimulating, exciting and full of meaning.
It is a time when a career in Air Force blue has so much to offer the young man or woman who qualifies.
The Air Force is seeking only a select group of college graduates for admission into Officer Training School.
However, we'd be happy to send detailed information to any senior who is interested.
I ^^ Air Force the Ph.D. degree, but are held in equal respect with those who do.
One solution suggested is that campus publications refer to the teacher by his appropriate title, but in conversation he be addressed as ""Mr "" A flaw exists in that campus publications are issued by students, who are never any surer than anyone else of a title.
One can refer to a teacher as ""Mr "" in publications too, but parents of students receive these works of art and so do other schools.
The call is out to each and everyone of the CC student body for the Sophomore Winter Carnival.
This affair is one for spectators, participants and anyone who is out for a rousing time.
This is to be followed by a CC skater in the form of Lynn Carmichael who will spin and twirl the ice off the Ice Palace.
Then CC's varsity team will demonstrate their Canadian ability in a skit on ice.
Spectators can now jump into their skates and stay in the palace for a skating free-forall.
CC'ers will then journey back to the campus for an open house at Rastall Center.
The Folk Singers Inc. will entertain for folk fans while others eat goodies, dai sport it up at cut prices games area.
After a night of rest, Satur ( ] a events will begin at 11m. ^ competitive skiing among claJ in beginner, intermediate and ; vanced divisions.
And for thr who want to give the sport a n ( competitive try, there will be ti dom skiing afterwards.
An _ inary trip to Alaska will follow"" racers don snow shoes for a \v| and woolly trip on the RanipRange.
At this gala climax, <Jj ner for two, a show for two A\ a car will be raffled off, to only a few.
The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Sfyle Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 I (o 1 1 Daily W Colo.
Washburn Speaks On Human Evolution ght :15 Ground Made Ready For New Tutt Library A£2 C*. ol.
Colorado Springs, Colo., January 13, 1961 eclure Series Brings lufhor Vance Packard An author and lecturer who has keen ability to analyze American fe will be the next speaker in , e annual Free Public Lecture eries at Colorado College.
William Fischer, chairman f the Geology Department and | s0 chairman of the 'lecture comlittee, announced that the lecturer uld be Mr Vance Packard.
Mr Packard is a former newsaper man and author of three oolts, ""The Hidden Persuaders,"" Status Seekers,"" and ""The Waste lakers,"" all books that reflect a iarp insight into Americana of day.
Mr Packard's books have sold iore than a million copies and ave been translated into at least ine languages.
The topic of Mr Packard's talk ill be ""Changes in the Character i American People."" iki Train to Aspen .eaves January 26 January 18 is the deadline for [gning the list in Rastall Center jr the ski trip to Aspen.
The rain sponsored by the Colorado lollege Railroad Club, will leave lolorado Springs at 4 :20m. 'hursday, January 26 and will arive in Aspen late that night.
The passengers nil board the train at Glenwood Iprings, which will arrive in Coloado Springs at 10:40 a,m.
The cost of $19.50 will include inner on the way to Aspen and veakfast on the return trip.
Lrrangements for accommodations it Aspen should be made by the ndividual parties.
A meeting will >e held a week before departure or those who are interested.
Skiers Compete in 61 Winter Carnival Competitive skiing will be featured at the all school Winter Carn'val sponsored by the sophomore 'lass on February 17 and 18.
The first will be intradural skiing with each Greek organization competing.
The second iivision will be open competition in which anyone may participate.
The skiing competition will take place Saturday afternoon at Ski Broadmoor and trophies will be awarded at the dance to be held that night in the ballroom of the Broadmoor Hotel.
Registration for the skiing competition will be at the first of next semester.
There will be exhibitions by CC skaters and a skit featuring the varsity hockey team.
There will be a cut-rate fee charge for both the skiing and the skating.
Everyone is invited to take part whether they enter the competition or not.
There will be a meeting of al 1 members of the present TIGEK staff, including reporters and members of the business staff and all people interested in working on the paper next semester.
The meeting will be held in the TIGEK ofoffice in Rastall Center on Tuesday, January 17, at 4:15 and will last only a short time.
Anyone who wishes to work in any capacity on the paper is encouraged to come.
John Fetler, Art Chronicle editor of the Gazette-Telegraph, appeared in the December 25 issue.
Mr, Fetler devoted his entire column to favorable comment of the magazine in general and to the individual contributions.
Copies of the KINNIKINNIK are still available at Rastall desk to students and faculty who have not picked their copies up yet.
The next star to appear will be Adele Addison, American sopi-ano, who will be soloist with the orchestra on Tuesday, January 17.
She will be heard in Lukas Foss's ""Time Cycle"" for soprano and orchestra, which was commissioned by the Ford Foundation and may be sung only by Miss Addison for two seasons.
The concert on Tuesday, January 24, will spotlight ai-tists of the orchestra.
Russian piano talent will be presented on Tuesday, February 7, when Dimitri Bashkirov will be the guest artist.
The famed Bach Aria Group will make a first Denver appearance with the orchestra on Tuesday, February 14.
The stellar group includes Eileen Farrell, soprano; Carol Smith, contralto; Jan Peerce, tenor, and Norman Farrow, bassbaritone.
Lorin Hollander, teen-age pianist, will eappear with the orchestra in a concert on Tuesday, February 21.
Brown Receives NSF Research Grant The National Science Foundation has announced the award of a research grant of §12,800 to Dr.
The grant is to finance research on the effects of behavior changes in patterns of energy flow in populations of mice.
The research is a combination of field and laboratory work and will extend over a period of approximately three Dr.
It is the most recent in a series of studies he has conducted over the past 12 years on the forces controlling populations of small animals.
Charles Mierow, professor of languages at Colorado College, recently collected a royalty check on a book he had published in 1915.
Mierow translated the book into modern American-style English from the original Latin.
The book is now being published in England by the English publisher, Speculum Historiale.
Jordanes was a Goth who had a firm conviction in the greatness of the Goths and saw a great future for his part of the world in a merger of the Goth and Roman peoples.
Mierow received his B.A. degree at Princeton in 1905, took his M.A. a year later, and was awarded a Ph.D. in 1908, with all diplomas signed by Woodrow Wilson.
He came to Colorado College in 1916 after teaching at Princeton for seven years.
It was published last year and was a climax to a life-time of study about St.
Senior Class Sponsors A Flunker's Fun Nile Flunker's Fun Nite, held in Perkins Hall last night afforded a quick refreshing study break for all students who attended.
Cartoons, including ""Ballet Oops,"" ""Gerald McBoing's Symphony"" and ""Destination Magoo"" were shown to entertain the flunkers who donated 35 cents.
Funker's Fun Nite was presented by the Seniors as a class money raising project.
The talk will concern implications of primate social life as it refers to human beings.
Admission is free and a reception will follow in the WES Room of Rastall Center.
He has received the Viking Fund award, the highest award given in Anthropological circles.
Washburn received his Ph.D. at Harvard and received a Sheldon traveling fellowship to Oxford in 193<i-37.
This school applies genetics and bio-chemistry to the field of anthropology.
From these techniques, more and more evidence of man's evolution from primates becomes available.
Then in the afternoon he will speak to the CC Delta Epsilon Society at 4:15 m. in Palmer 201.
This will be preceded by a coffee hour at 3:45 Father Ryan Speaks On Church and State CC was privileged to have one of America's Catholic speakers, Father William J Ryan speak here last Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.
Father Ryan is president of Seton Hill College in Greensburg, Pennsylvania.
He has .been on many campuses across the country taking part in religious emphasis weeks.
He explained that the Church's understanding of how to deal with civil society has grown over the centuries.
He traced the various Church-State relationships Work began at Colorado College Monday to clear the site for the new Charles Learning Tutt Library which is scheduled to be built on the campus during the next year and a half.
A crew from the CC grounds staff began the job Monday morning by cutting down 12 trees that had to be cleared out before work could begin on the new library.
The library will be built at the southeast corner of the intersection of San Rafael Street and Cascade Avenue, on a site now occupied by West Hall.
West and East Halls have been sold to the Boyce House Moving firm of Pueblo, which will move both from the campus by spring.
East Hall is giving way to a new science building which is scheduled to go under construction this spring.
The library is a gift of the El Pomar Foundation which gave CC $1.25 million for the building, which was designed by the architectural firm of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.
Oificial ground ceremonies were held at Homecoming in October, ' The new science building is a gift of the Olin Foundation which gave the college approximately $1. million last year.
The library and the new science building are part of a $6 million improvement program on the campus.
Funds for the improvement program are being raised by the Colorado College Campaign.
A N nrro educator, many of whose s 3 participated In the Atlanta sit-in i, Dean Brazeal by reason t f bis . i m to the situation \ oicetl autlioiiiative information n the topic.
PORTS Tiger Pucksters Clash with Foes In Thrilling WCHA Holiday Play The Tiger hockey team played in several Western Collegiate hockey games over the Christmas recess, and provided many thnlls for the <£ fans who happened to be around Tigerland for the holidays.
Two of the games went into sudden death overtime, with the Tigers ending up on the top side of both encounters.
The first night CC fell 10-5 to the Wolverines, but they came back the next night to beat Michigan 5-4 in another overtime thriller.
Dixon pushing in the decisive goal, it was Doug Hill who pushed in the winning goal.
After a brief holiday, the Tigers came back after Christmas to meet Michigan Tech December 29 and 30.
As in their previous games, CC just didn't seem to have a defense comparable to that of their opponents and also had trouble setting up key plays.
The Tigers lost this game 6-4 after holding a 4-3 lead going into the final stanza.
The Tigers next opponents were the Gophers of Minnsota who whipped the Tigers 9-6 in their first outing.
Kenny Cairns didn't want to let them have it though, as he pushed in three goals for the Tigers within three minutes.
The next games will not be until after finals when we meet DU Friday, February 3 at DU arena.
Ask about our RENTAL PURCHASE PLAN RESERVE EARLY and AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT LUCAS SPORTING GOODS 1 20 N Tejon St.
SATURDAY-FEBRUARY 4Registration for Upperclassmen, graduates and specials. to 11:30m. and 1 to 4:30m.-Cossitt Hall.
E del norte SUNDAY— JUNE 4— Baccalaureate sheroei MEiroa.-m MONDAY-JUNE 5Commencement THURSDAY-JUNE 8All grades due at noon.
ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING fYPEWMTEIt 10% CASH AND CARRY I 171/, East >che La Poud.
Two Vacations Colorado College is once again In response to the concern of alive with learning.
Hockey games several students to participate are being played, dunces planned, more directly in social projects, plays rehearsed, and, of course, the Religious Affairs Committee classes have resumed.
Let's look reservations over the 1%1 spring back on those singularly carefree vacation. days of semester break.
Julius Baird played an organ prelude, Shove pel filled even up to the balconies with students, faculty nbers and administrators for the All-College Convocation Tuesday, February 7.
In traditional eonvocational style, Harry Booth opened the meeting with an invocation and choir sang the anthem.
Louis T Benezet, President of Colorado re. as the convocation speakguage . ]eal . ning devices _ vequire still more money.
AH these improvements go toward an overall physical improvement of the college and a rise in the standard of education as well.
In the ""stadium"" part of his talk, President Benezet explained the values of a college sports program — to improve the physical condition of the students and to add zest to campus life — and suggested that the actuality of reaching these goals diminishes as professionalism and high costs squeeze out enthusiasm for college games.
He further explained the high cost of athletics to CC by pointing out that CC takes in $40,000 less than is paid out for athletics.
Since the students pay 70 per cent of college expenses, the question of how much should be spent on athletics needs to be considered by the students.
In the new gymnasium, a final addition under the expansion program, the lack of physical fitness of which ""we are intellectually aware"" can be corrected.
A wide variety of indoor sports including a swimming pool will be offered.
In this way the CC administration hopes to avoid making CC attendance available only to students from high income families, and to maintain its appeal to students from Colorado.
This balance in the CC student body will become more important, and more difficult to maintain, as the cost gap between state-supported schools and private schools becomes greater.
He went on to speak of individual commitment to the life ruled by the intellect sing the tuitii s of his talk, President Benerelated forthcoming instrucal and campus improvements j Colorado College's need for lore money.
Our Future and Its I rice,"" suggests, the talk broke ■ self down into a discussion of » sing costs and needs in the areas 12 f instructional improvement, cam— us improvement, and athletic dh ^derations, r In the area of instruction, Present Benezet explained the need Jth for an increase in the salary Jp faculty members, and for an Icrease in the number of faculty jembers to meet the demands of ftudent academic interest and ris-^■mff academic standards.
Next n fact, faculty salaries will ft raised, and additions will be Bade to the staffs of the mathematics, foreign language, and Engph departments.
President Beneit said that he hoped that CC [pukl have a full-time professor Russian next year.
Along with these acac stimulations, CC hopes to ase support for co-curricular itivities such as drama, publicaB>ns, lectures, symposiums, con■fts, choir, debate and student Bvernment.
H^ges, such as a renovation of ;B""kins and further use of indi■dual teaching machines and IanAll-College Conference Every other year ASCC sponsors an All-College Conference for the impose of discussing campus solutions and problems.
This year, un.ler the co-chairmanship of Mr Thomas Rivers and Miss Janet Fry, mother All-College Conference is being planned.
This year's conference will take place ut Star Ranch on the weekend of February 25 and 26.
Buses will be provided Saturday afternoon for any students needing transportation.
The ASCC sponsored program is arranged so that students will spend Saturday night at the ranch.
The Saturday night meal, Sunday breakfast, and Sunday lunch will rved there.
Five dollars, to be paid at Rastall Desk between the 13th and the 17th of February, will be the only cost of the confeience to the student.
As a general airing of problems and situations which in one way or another affect the whole campus and every student, this conference hopes to attract as many students as possible and to arrive at some specific opinions in regard to some of the questions to be taken up.
Not only does the conference involve the students, but the faculty and administration as well.
The program includes several discussion groups in which various faculty members have agreed to participate.
Although the weekend centers around the six discussion groups, other activities have also been planned.
The conference, in short, promises to be both valuable and entertaining for all participants.
The conference officially opens at noon on Saturday, February 25 with an introduction stating its purposes and aims.
Following this general introduction, the students will break up into two discussion groups, each student attending that discussion which especially interests him.
One group will take up questions concerning the foreign student program, that is, problems such as the effectiveness of the foreign student program, whether Colorado College should be taking in more foreign students each year, or less, and whether more formal opportunities, such as coffees and discussion groups should be set up to provide contacts between the American student and the foreign student.
After dinner, Folk Singers, Inc. will entertain at an informal party in the lodge.
Mr Harry Booth will give the Sunday morning service after breakfast on the 26th.
Kinnikinnik contributions for the 1960-61 Spring issue are being accepted now, at Rastall Desk.
The sport of skiing, which also has strict dating and drinking requirements, was most popular.
Aspen, as always, had its economic standards justified by CC students, who in several cases spent as much as $200 in rive days.
These students will be seen carrying their plaster burdens about the campus for the next few weeks.
There were, too, those who stayed behind, whiling away the hours in the dorm.
Loomis became a haven for potential housewives as the girls gathered to gossip at the laundromat or the ironing rooms.
Three bold young ladies reached the 4,000 mile mark on an auto trip which took them through both San Francisco and Los Angeles.
But now we are all once again curtailed by scholastic requirements and must end our wanderings.
Everyone now able to relate tales of new adventure is pleased with how they spent their time, and those who did little will perhaps plan more carefully for the future.
To these people we suggest a contemplative look at the Indian Reservation Work Camp opportunities for this spring.
Three of Sunday's topics will concern the lines of authority judicial, social, and governmental — in campus organizations involving such questions as the amount of authority students have in various areas of campus life, and where their limitations lie.
A fourth group will discuss the apathetic student, his role in the life of the campus, and more importantly his role in the lift' of the nation, how common tins particular character is on campus, and what the ratmifications of the apathetic attitude are.
Louis T Benezet will conclude the conference with a summation Sunday afternoon.
Registration for the conference (Vill be during the week ol February 13th.
At registration the student will specify the one discussion group each day in which lie is mosl interested and which he will want to attend.
The five dollar fee will pay for transportation to and from Star Ranch, three meals ,an overnight stay, and attendance at all the weekend activities. projects is in Hue with the Religious Affairs Committee's traditional policy of using the Shove Clmpel offerings in some constructive social work.
This support does not replace, but extends (Inpresent maintenance of a Korean child adopted through the Foster Parents Plan, Inc.
For the period April 1 to April •.) two projects are currently being planned.
One of these, a work camp, has been arranged by Mr Bruce Grace mid Miss Kari Dunn and will be held on the Navajo reservation near Cnllup, New Mexico, The other, still tentative, would be a study project on Blackfoot reservations near Sheridan, Wyoming.
The Gallup work project will present ten to twelve students and faculty with an opportunity to become acquainted with the way in which Navajos live and with their problems.
They will work with the Navajos at the Gallup Indian Community Center nnd on the nearby reservation.
During the wurlc camp week participants will visit neighboring reservations, attend council meetings and perhaps speak with Indian lenders.
Those attending will stay at the Indian Community Center and will be asked to cover ten dollars of their own expenses.
The Sheridan project will be under the guidance of Miss Vivian Arviso, formerly a CC student, and currently Miss Indian America.
More in the nature of a seminar, this group of up to ten persons, will visit several reservations in order to learn more of Indian culture and ways.
The purpose of these projects is to give both .students and faculty an opportunity to express their social concerns in a constructive way, and to gain first-hand knowledge of the lives and the challenge lacing American Indians.
Interested students and faculty should contact Mr Carlton Gamer or Mr Grace.
All interested students are invited, whether or not they submit poems; English majors and Kinnikinnnik contributors are especially urged to attend.
Poems to be discussed should be submitted to Rastall Desk by Wednesday, February 15. wherein one values beauty and order and realizes his responsibilities to his fellow man.
This acceleration was made apparent this week with another tuition increase, this time of $200.
This is not oratory, or an excerpt from the catalog, or propaganda from a fund drive; it is a fact; a fact that anyone with four years experience on this campus must acknowledge.
It presumes a knowledge of where one is now, what his capabilities are and what is the best way to achieve that goal.
Movement ahead also presumes a dissatisfaction with the present and a willingness towards sacrifice and just plain hard work.
This is the attitude that it takes to move ahead or better to accelerate.
Old problems need more than old guesses; new approaches must not be feared if they set new precedents.
We feel the TIGER has the potential of putting this attitude to work perhaps better than any other campus institution whether it concerns the future of the school as a whole or the goals of a single campus unit.
We of the TIGER recognize this potential and are willing to take the step that may or mav not fulfill it.
By attending the All-College Conference, the students of Colorado College have an excellent opportunity to start exhibiting this attitude of growth.
Lectures On East Asia Study A .7-week study of East Asia will get underway at the beginning of the second semester.
The study features lectures on seven areas of Chinese and Japanese life to help develop an understanding of their modern societies.
Lecturers have been drawn from Colorado College and the Universities of Denver and Colorado.
The series begins February 8 with an explanation of the people and locations by Miss Dorothy Mierow, lecturer in geography and curator of the Colorado College Museum.
It is necessary to register in advance for the series at the Rastall leception desk.
Tuition fee is three dollars and includes a bibliography of selected readings for students who wish to do further individual study.
Doctor Crofts was reared in China and later served on General Mac Arthur's staff in Korea and Japan.
Professor Booth will lecture on Budhism and other religions, and Mr H Medill Sarkisian, who completed graduate studies on Asia after graduation from CC, will lecture on Oriental arts and crafts.
Donald Jenkins English, in Philadelphia, Professor ing All-College Conference.
Amanda M Ellis of Colorado ColHinds, Betsy Gaskill, Don WolfJohn H Lewis lege was signally honored.
At the gang, Brad Chase, Julie Bohlke A boy, David, to Mr and Mrs. meet i n g of these three groups, and Hank van Arsdale have Douglas Freed.
With equal enat the CC-DU hockey game. vcrsi ty chairman of the Commisthusiasm, Jan Fry and Tom RivTo claim it, see Dr.
Juhas at siQn on Eng ]i s h of the College ers have spent a great deal of time Perkins Hall.
These three In realizing the work and time Sophomores and to Jan and to English Associations are jointly that have gone into both the WinTom.
Let's replace criticism and seeki gmn ts totaling a half milter Carnival and the All-School disregard with praise and enthusimprove English Conference, we should be all the ,asm when such recognition is due. ion dollars improve Lngus more certain of their success, and Annie Hereford teaching.
To be sure, the earth has had more pressing problems to consider from time to time, and even now there is no great urgency about settling the question.
Indeed, we doubt whetha it is really going to be settled; a very dull world this might be if it were.
This note of music greets all as we return to the Colo. rado College way of life for three more months.
Music is play ing an important part on the town this month as we find many workshops and organizations rehearsing for concerts asprings.
OPERA ERA ""The Medium"" and ""La Serva Padrona"" are being pn sented by the Colorado Springs Opera Association Februar 9, 10, and 11.
When first written, its official rote was that of an intermission note between the more serious Baroque operas.
People during this period of transition thought that the Baroque operas were much too serious and followed an almost stag. nate quality in growth; hence the Buffas became popular.
Tickets are $2.25 and are on sale at the music department in Perkins Hall.
WINTER CONCERTS CONTINUE February 12 marks another Colorado College Winter Concert.
Martha Booth, soprano, Mr Harry Both, bar tone and Henry Margolinski, pianist, will be seen and heard at 4:00m. in Perkins Hall.
The concert will center around German and French art songs and arias by Mozart and Verdi.
The concert is free to the public and presents itself as another achievement by CC music department.
MILSTEIN-EISENBERG-DVORAK Nathan Milstein, violinist acclaimed the ""Reigning Master of the Bow,"" will appear with the Colorado Springs Symphony Orchestra, under the direction of Walter Eisenberg, Thursday, February 16, at Palmer High School.
The violinist, a Russian by birth and American by adoption, has chosen the beautiful Dvorak Violin Concerto in A Minor.
LOOKING AHEAD Another interesting performance to watch for is tin opera ""Dido and Aeneas,"" scheduled for February 23 and 21 This opera is staged by Mr William McMillen, musically di rected by Mr Donald Jenkins and choreographed by Mr Nor man Cornick.
This is a full staged, costumed production an' has an overall cast of forty, dominated by CC students.
Tin opera was written by Henry Purcell in 1689 and accents I landmark in opera history.
More about the history, develop ments, casts, and production next week.
This week's final note for our month of music is the Jazi Jamboree, scheduled for February 26 at the Fine Arts Centei The two sessions on this day will feature such personalis as the Falconaires, Johnny Smith, Max Morath.
Martha f DO th, soprano, and Mr Harry ,tli| baritone, on Sunday, Febrv 'l2, at 4m. in Perkins Hall.
Booth majored in music at adcliffe College and the Harvard ■aduate School of Education. fijjle at Radcliffe, she was soloist [ the Choral Society there.
After her masters degree she supervisor of music in the jhools of Lincoln, Mass.
This lent and training enabled her conduct the Shove Chapel Choir iring 1958-59 when the services Ere first introduced on the ,mpus.
This lecture is part of the annual public lecture series offered to Colorado Springs by Colorado College and is open to the public.
The familiarity of the terms ""hidden persuader"" and ""status seeker"" in our society attests to the renown of Mr Packard.
Although best known for his The Hidden Persuaders, The Status Seekers, and more recently The Wastemakers, he has written many articles for newspapers and magazines ranging in subject matter from national to family problems.
Rather he is a reporter, in the best sense of the word, for he seeks to inform the public objectively and thoroughly with an aim to improvement.
At forty-six Mr Packard spends much of his time near Martha's Vineyard, Mass., writing extensively. unusual pieces as a Psalm setting by the 17th century German master, Heinrich Schutz, and an anonymous religious French song, ""Chant des Croises"" from the 12th century.
Beethoven, Richard Strauss, Brahms, Faure, Duparc, Mozart and Verdi are the other composers to be represented.
MElrose 3-3946 K i n n i k i n n By Mr D Bishop Stephen Neill The Religious Affairs and Assemblies Committee of Colorado College are sponsoring Bishop Stephen Neill, formerly bishop of what is now one of the dioceses of the Church of South India, presently Associate General Secretary of the World Council of Churches and"" well-known author and preacher, as a guest speaker from February 12 to 14.
Such writing implies two prior requirements, that student writers be able to distinguish the trivial and the important and that they know enough about past writing to recognize the new and the notso-new.
With some notable exceptions the writing in the latest Kinnikinnik does not show these requirements being met.
Probably the most disappointing feature of the current issue is the many snippets of two to eight lines; although they are fewer than those of the previous issue, the persistence of these frivolities signifies a continued domination of the trivial and a lack of the artistic seriousness usually characteristic of beginning writers.
I am against neither humor nor epigrams, but both Alexander Pope and Ogden Nash can show us how difficult they are to do well.
On the second point, that student writers ought to know something of past writing, 1 read only spent twenty years in India as a missionary, the latter six years being spent as Bishop of Tinimevelly.
LA JUNTA COLORADO SPRINGS College Liaison BONNIE WHITELEATHER MElrose 4-7744, Exr.
ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY-OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY Cache La Poudr.
Writers, especially of poetry, must be readers; if not, it is something like trying to write a foreign language using only a dictionary and a grammar.
To return to the problem of significant form, I see, particularly in the longer works, a constant wavering between prose and verse.
In general, the poems should be more poetic (condensed, allusive, rhythmatic, concrete) and the stories more developed in plot and character.
Perhaps I should not say ""stories,"" for there are no real stories in the issue — they are fables or fragments (call them what you will) which lack plot, character, and social context.
I do not know why more and longer prose is not written at Colorado College, but I suspect it has something to do with the same dilettantism that results in bad light verse, Perhaps also the writers feel that their background has not given them enough material for realistic short story writing.
I am sure that a devotion to writing and careful observation can cure both ills, More and longer stories would both balance the magazine and eliminate the verse deadwood.
The absence of short stories connects with the issue's prevailing lack of concern for the pressing issues of the day; with the exception of the slight ""Progress"" and the trite ""Berlin,"" there is little to show a participation in the growing social and political consciousness of American students.
To leave off general damns and faint praises, -I should mention other pieces which seem to me to have real merit.
What it shows is MElrose iL beginning of that seriousness 3-7883 anu "" study which is the way for young writers to find significant form.
Each week a different area of study concerning world affairs is taken up.
The method of study is to form small groups to meet once a week in someone's home, business, office or shop.
After each discussion the participants are provided with opinion ballots and are asked to cast their votes on these important topics.
The Great Decisions Statistical Center in Boulder tabulates the ballots and sends the results to Colorado congressmen and the Department of State.
A person interested in starting such a group begins by inviting six to 10 other people to join Mm one evening a week for eight weeks.
Fact sheets, the only expense in a ""Great Decisions"" group, may be bought by students for 75 cents in room 301, Jackson House.
These sheets come in a kit containing an introductory booklet, eight fact sheets, eight opinion ballots, reading lists, discussion questions, tips for discussion leaders, and tips for discussion participants.
After a Fact Sheet Kit has been made available to all participants so that they might become familiar with the program and a regular time and place has been arranged for meetings, the group runs itself.
Newspaper features and radio and television programs will make additional information on the subjects available each week.
Mr Peter Von Puttkramer will speakon ""Deadlock Over Germany,"" with Mrs.
Dave Fletcher Leaves To Coach at Golden Mr David E Fletcher, Assistant Director of Admissions at Colorado College since his graduation from CC in June 1957, will leave the school March 1 to take a job at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden as business manager of the athletic department and freshman football coach.
A native of Denver, Mr Fletcher graduated from East Denver High School in 1949, then enrolled at Colorado College and played halfback for two years on the football team before enlisting in the Navy.
He was in the Navy from 1951 to 1954, played football with Navy service teams, and in 1953 was all-Navy while playing fullback with the Bainbridge Naval Training Station team.
In the last game of his career, he set a modern-day CC record by running a kickoff back 83 yards against Adams State College to help CC to a 36 to 8 victory.
Directories of summer jobs in 1961, including international opportunities, are now available at the reserve desk in Coburn Library.
Students interested in hosteling may obtain a ""Hostelers' Manual"" from Miss Joan Shinew at the deference desk.
Winter Carnival Dance And Activities Planned For those who did not find their fill of winter sports over semester break, the Colorado College Winter Carnival, February 17. 18, is providing a weekend schedule of events with something for everyone, even those who, due to getting 'plastered,' have become better spectators than participants, Undoubtedly the biggest event of the weeeknd will be the climatic dance at the Broadmoor ballroom Saturday night.
If you don't get your money's worth in fun you may be one of the lucky to win door prizes of dinners for two.
Saturday afternoon at 1:00 rrt. on the Broadmoor ski slopes, there will be skiing for everyone at a 20% discount.
For the more talented. races will be held later in the afternoon with prizes for the best five times per academic class.
Winter Carnival festivities will begin at 6:30 Friday evening, February 17, with a figure skating exhibition by Miss Lynn Carmichael.
During the evening a carnival queen will be crowned from nominees Miss Jane Alderson, Miss Lynn Ballard, Miss Martha Bretemitz, Miss Nadine Chang, Miss Julianne Rolfe, and Miss Joan Seelig.
Place your vote for the queen of your choice when Slocum Hall Schedules Semester's Diversions Slocum Hall, dormitory for men, is starting off the second semester with some different activities, promoted primarily by the Hall Council, the governing body of representatives from the different wings of the building.
The Slocum Basketball Tournament begins this Saturday afternoon in Cossitt Gymnasium with four games scheduled.
Seven teams have entered involving sixty men or more and. the team names have taken on an original tone; the Slocum Trotters, Fighting Five, Untouchables, Mountaineers, Spastics, Crosstown Betas, and the Wampies.
These informal gatherings take place in the Slocum Lounge and exhibit you pick up your dance tickets from cither the representatives in the fraternity houses or at Rastall Desk.
Senior mathematics majors ar* automatically entered in the com. petition, and other students m a j enter by making the necessary \ (""'enter. ngements at the Counsel areas of varied and special interest.
Various othei things were given by the Athleh'i Department to help provide a place for brief physical workouts The new punching bag, bar-bells, dumb-bells, matts, and other equipment should be ready for very soon.
Tareyton's Dual Filter gives you a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL, definitely proved to make the taste of a cigarette mild and smooth.
It works together with a pure white outer filter — to balance the flavor elements in the smoke.
DUAL FILTER 1 QV€y lOYl —, ACTIVATED CHARCOAL inner filler Pure while ouler filler Colorado College Tiger • February 10, 1961 In inter Carnival Begins Tonight Six thirty tonight lines will queu up for the ice show, first event of the CC Winter Carnival takingplace this weekend.
Highlighting the entertainment will be the solo on skates by Lynn Carmichael and the crowningof the Carnival Queen.
Lynn Ballard KKG, Joan Seeling Alpha Phi, Marty Breternitz Theta, Julie Rolfe Gamma Phi, Jane Alderson DG and Nadine Chang, IWA are the candidates for royal honors.
Also slated for tonight is a comedy skit by our limping hockey team and then everyone can glide onto the ice.
Rastall is holding Open House tonight from 8:00 to 11:30 featuring the Folk Singers, Inc.
Schushing the Broadmoor slopes begins tomorrow at 1:00 along with races.
Those who have signed up to be amateur Stein Ericksons will be competing for two trophys; one for the fastest man and another for the fastest woman.
A complete change of pace will come about in the eveningwhen the rigors of outdoor sports are changed for the atmosphere of mood and music.
Bob Bishop's band will play from 9:00 to 12:00 in the Broadmoor Ballroom.
Door prizes of dinners for two are to be given by many Colorado Springs restaurants.
For the delinquents who have failed to buy tickets on campus, selling for $2.00, the price at the door is $2.50.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 17, 1961 Colorado College VANCE PACKARD Tuesday night in Shove Chapel Mr Vance Packard deed a lecture entitled ""The Changing Character of the merican People"" as part of the Colorado College Public LecSeries.
Adopting the thesis that we are undergoing an (tensive change in values, Mr Packard maintained that priarily these changes are the result of the impact of growing immercialization in our society.
Since the child of mass prois of necessity mass adirtisiug the problem which arises how to persuade the public to insume at a rate proportional to nc leasing production.
According to Mr Packard, the ethods by which advertising ieks to increase our consumption n the chief sources of change ontemporary society, Advertisis promoting self-indulgence, :raving for newness, impulse lying:, the desire for products ith strong status overtones, in lort, a ""thing-minded"" culture. ickard pointed out that adirtising has left no stone unfiled in seeking out new markets iew techniques to promote For example, teenagers lately proven themselves to i'ast, accessible and lucrative ild for exploitation by the adviser and manufacturer.
Packard indicated that as a ssult of the high pressures of immercialism we are emphasizing importance of material possestins over the value of the human J i'it.
To cite two examples, he to that we spend three times 1 much money on chewing gum J We do on education and that e spend nine times as much on ]itor as we do on books.
Bishop Neill Though a series of four lectures sponsored by the Religious Affairs and Assemblies Committees, Colorado College was exposed to a most beautifully articulate spokesman of Christianity, a bishop in the Anglican Church, Bishop Stephen Neill.
The list of activities and accomplishments that appears in any thumbnail sketch of this man only serves as reinforcement to the less objective but more vivid impression with which he left his listeners.
Bishop Neill, the Irish Anglican, the missionary, the publisher, the author, the speaker, showed a charm and a humility which added interest and effectiveness to his presentations.
In an engaging British accent, Bishop Neill lectured both formally and informally on various aspects of his Christian career, dealing most particularly with questions of Christian and Anglican theology, missionary work, and the world church movement.
Four lectures revealed a man, a bishop, who could talk effectively on Christian metaphysics, as he did Sunday at the Shove Chapel service; on the ecumenical movement, as he did Sunday night in the WES room; on the theroretical and practical positions of the Anglican Church, as he did Monday afternoon in the WES room; and on problems and approaches to missionary work in India and Africa, as he did Tuesday morning in Perkins Hall.
The unifying factor in the series of lectures was not so much in the subjects dealt with, but rather in the manner of presentation.
Always without notes, he worked into this organization a few jokes, many specific examples of the points he was making marked by subtlety and precision.
Dido , Belinda, standing, , Aeneas , and witches (Joan Brenoau, Polly Franklin, standing, and Maxine Barbre}, coach by William E McMillen.
Josephine Estill, a resident of Colorado Springs, Mr Harry Booth of the college faculty, and Mrs.
Arlene Kushnir. a resident of Colorado Springs, The roles of the sorceress, first and second witches, Mercury, and a sailor will be sung by students Miss Paulent Franklin, Miss Joan Bemau, Miss Maxine Barbre, Miss Jean Daniels, and Mr James Dabels.
Musical direction is by Mr Donald Jenkins, stage direction by Mr William E McMillan, and choreography by Mr Norman Comick.
English Opera The opera ""Dido and Aeneas"" is His talks, in short, were masterpieces; because of this mastery of presentation, his talks defy the simple summarization of main points. unique in music history, standing alone (save for Blow's ""Venus and Adonis"") as the only English opera of any great merit in a period when many masterpieces were being written in Italy and France.
Not until nearly sixty years later with the operas of George Frederick Handel can anything be found in England of comparable stature.
The chorus of 26 voices for the Workshop production is drawn from the college madrigal group.
Dance, for centuries an important aspect of opera and a vital jart of this production, is being choreographed by Mr Norman Comick.
As does the chorus, the eight dancers must assume at different times three identities as court people, witches and sailors.
The two piano accompaniment will be provided by Mr Jenkins and Miss Jill Tyler.
Dido, queen of Carthage, and Aeneas, a Trojan prince, destined to found Rome, full in love.
They are both aware that fate has decreed responsibilities for Aeneas other than marrying Dido, but the prince is confident he can defy his destiny.
The sorceress and witches, jealous of anyone who might prove both prosperous and happy, know Aeneas' fate and conspire to send him toward Rome before he and Dido can be married.
A spirit, conjured up by the sorceress is disguised as Mercury and appears to Aeneas, deceiving him with a mandate to embark immediately for Italy.
Judgement and Love Dido's suicide, and ""unreasonable"" act in twentieth century eyes, was fully understood by the Elizabethan audience of Purcell's War, Motivation for the suicide lies partially in Dido's defying her fate.
A woman's disappointment in love was complicated by her pride as a queen who ruled majestically without mistake.
Tickets, on sale at the Rastall desk, may be purchased for fifty cents plus an activity ticket. *4t7&**' OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION EDITORIAL STAFF ors-in-Chief STAFF— AnsolH Abahi-r.
Mapper _ JfflW TORMBY uiM.i Printed Friday* by PEERLESS PRINTING ' Of the many parts of college life that enter into one's education, that of 'extra-curricular activities' plays a debatable role.
An education, a superior education, can be obtained by sitting in classrooms for a certain number of hours per week, per year, or per four years.
It seems there is nothing specifically necessary or sacred about the time American students spend outside of class hours.
In the past week the CC student has had an opportunity to hear and meet two outsttanding members of this last category.
Bishop Stephen Ieill, a world leader of the ecumenical movement, and Mr Vance Packard, a popular and prolific meta-sociologist.
With Bishop Neill, students had an opportunity to hear an extremely well-versed and eloquent presentation by a devoted member of the Anglican Church, the only church which is founded on a readiness to compromise itself out of existence in the event of the formation of a World Church.
The frank and intelligent attitude of this gentleman inspired a realistic optimism in mankind that is as rare as the personality itself.
Mr Packard, on the other hand, with the astuteness of a studied gadfly and more humor than eloquence, projected an incipient social doom with, what seemed to us, a sad lack of the frank specifics of cause and correction.
We feel that CC is progressing well in maintaining its status as an educationally liberal institution, but as in all things, time is precious in its rarity, especially extra-curricular time if Mr Packard's judgement of how we spend our leisure is correct.
We feel it is sad but not surprising that students would be more attracted to a session on a public psychoanalist's couch than to talks on church union, the Christian life and Christianity in Indo-Africa.
There are important value judgements which must be made carefully, whether speakers which are coming to the campus have enough to add to our educational process to balance the time and expense involved.
The All-College Conference, the Science-Humanities Symposium, and the Colorado College Lecture Series to the point.
Sign Up NOW for All-College Conference Our foreign students and their place on the Colorado College campus will be one of the many topics discussed at the All-College Conference on Saturday, February 25.
Sunday's discussions will begin concerning governmental authority in college organizations and the student leader's position in this government.
Also during the weekend will be a discussion of the apathetic college student and hopefully some solution as to how to integrate him into campus activities.
Faculty members are invited free of charge if they will registetr at Rastall Desk.
AWS Elections The five executive officers of the Associated Women Students and the class representatives the Advisory Council will be elected during the next two weeks for the coming year.
Nominations have been made in the various council and dormitory meetings.
Polls will be open on February 20 in Loomis Hall from 9 to 11 and from 2 to 5 and in Rastall Center from 11 to 2 The first, second, and third run-offs are scheduled for February 23, 27, and March 2 at these same times.
All women students, including those who do not live on campus, are urged to vote in this very important election.
KRCC Begins Series ""The Great Religions"" KRCC-FM, Radio Colorado College, announces a new lecture series beginning Wednesday evening at 7:45, which will be heard exclusively over this station.
John M Morris will conduct a lecture series entitled ""The Great Religions,"" which will pertain to the different religions of the world, including their historical background, philosophical and moral grounds, and their actual usage.
Among the religions to be discussed will be those of Hinduism and Buddhism.
Editors Seek Material For Spring Kinnikinnik Contributions are now being . sought for the spring edition of the 19G0-61 KINNIKINNIK, the college literary and art magazine.
As with the 'fall edition, §15.00 cash awards will be made for the best contributions in the fields of prose, poetry, art, and photography, and for the cover design.
Mr David Van Becker of the English department is conducting ;i poetry workshop on Tuesday, February 21, in Rastall Center at 7:30m.
This workshop is designed primarily for potential KINNIKINNIK contributors who want to polish their material before submitting it.
On March 7 a special prose workshop will be conducted by the KINNIKINNIK in order to im-. prove the quality and quantity of work submitted.
All the literary contributions will be reviewed by the 10 member student board of review, and their criticisms and opinions will be recorded and returned to the contributors.
Duncan, Miss Barb Binns, and Miss Pat Swarthwood are the women members.
All contributions can be turned in to Mr Gary Gappert or Mr Jim Scarboro, co-editors, or to Miss Terry Kidner, copy editor.
Donna Hampton-Fred Singleton Married: Sally Nichols-Brian Blakney Births: A boy, Gerald Kelley, to Mr and Mrs.
FINE ARTS CENTER MOVIES The Film Society will present ""A Man Escaped"" at 8:00 on February 17.
Phi Beta Kappa Holds Meeting on Mencken Phi Beta Kappa, honorary scholastic society, will hold its annual Invitational Discussion meeting on Tuesday, February 21, in the WES Room of Rastall Center at 7:30m.
Miss Lorinda Taylor and Miss Elizabeth Tucker, members of Phi Beta Kappa, elected in their junior year, will present papers on different phases of the topic to be followed by a general discussion which will be moderated by Dr.
Invitations have been mailed to students standing in the top ten per cent of their respective classes and to members of Cap and Gown, Blue Key, and faculty members of the Society.
Other students interested in attending the meeting are asked to call Miss Lorena A Berger, X204.
Professor Harry F Booth is president of the Coloi'ado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa and Miss Berger is secretarytreasurer. -rrtrTOWN . . ta Ui^&im, m^fUAe and. mode "" FRESHMEN:At the. next class meeting, the 21st of this month, we will vote for a new sec-treus.
Those candidates who ran at the beginning of the year and have made their grades will lie renominated.
Send Two Students One of the most provocative art exhibitions to be seen in Denvei be opened to the public through February 26th at the Denver Museum $ Art.
One, ""Young French Painters,"" was ganized by the Arts Club of Chicago, the French Embassy and the Mi_^ d'Art Moderne in Paris.
The second portion contains paintings by older anj more established artists whose works are included in many leading musc-ur^ galleries and private collections in the United States, Amoung them such distinguished names as.
Bazaine, Hartung, Manessier and Poliakoft All the paintings in the exhibition are non-figurative and are ch;s terized by originality, subtlety of color and rhythm of composition and ai ( in the best tradition of French painting.
Carnival Time Plans for the Sophomore Winter Carnival are complete and the fe,rj v , air and spirit of an all school holiday is here.
The Carnival accents skiiu; prizes, skats, dancing and a general fun filled weekend.
It seems almost to. much for words to describe hockey games, queen candidates, open hi.-is^ and full-fledged entertainers in detail, but the Winter Carnival will have £. of these and more.
Pearl Honored For Gem Research Professor Richard M Pearl of the geology department at Colorado College has been elected an honorary member of the Canadian Gemmological Association.
Incorporated in 1958, the organization holds its meetings at the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto.
Pearl's writings and research on the subject of gems and precious stones.
In addition to being the second Certified Gemmolog-ist of the Gemmological Institute of America, Professor Pearl is a Fellow with Distinction of the Gemmological Association of Great Britain and honorary vice president of the Gemmological Association of Austi-alia.
He was elected the first American member of the gemmological association of Brazil and is affiliated with the national groups of Norway and the Netherlands.
Pacifism Discussed During Coffee Hour On Thursday, February 9 in the WES Lounge, Mr Carlton Gamer of the music department and Mr Bruce Grace, a senior dealt with two aspects of pacifism.
Mr Grace started off the discussion by commenting on the religious bases for pacifism.
He said pacifism grows out of a way of life based upon love; not a romantice love, but a love which respects the dignity of other human beings.
Love of this nature is a creative power which helps one to overcome fear and to lead a life eschewing not only the evil of war but all evil.
Mr Grace pointed out the inextricable relationship between the New Testament message as found in ""The Sermon on the Mount"" and the idealism of pacifism.
He implied that the pacifist's ideals are no different than those which form an essential core of Christianity.
Mr Gamer spoke about what pacifists are like, and the various reasons which have motivated them to become pacifists.
The religious or moral pacifist adheres to the pacifist ethic of non-violence in all human affairs.
While the pragmatic or nuclear pacifist tolerates violence but does not wish to support a war involving nuclear power. s Following the discussion several of the audience began a question and answer session which continued while coffee and tea were served.
Joseph, Missouri, senior political science ma. jor, and Mr Chris Griffiths, Pueblo, Colorado, junior economic major, have been named CC rep resentatives to the Air Fore; Academy Assembly in March Delegates from 50 other Ameri College and Universities will present at this three day meet The topic of discussion will bs ""Goals for Americans,"" basi the recent report of the President; Commission on this subject Among the major speakers will be Chester Bowles, new Under retarv of State ; George Meanj, President of the AFL-CIO Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Specii Assistant to President Kennedy.
I am sure he has alienated more people than he has otten to rally behind him.
Mr Packard spares neither political party for their contributions to this burgeoning attitude of self first, last, and always.
In an interview on Tuesday he stated that ""We must preserve as much of capitalism as we can,"" that we must ""try to check the slide towards socialism,"" and rid the economy of ""make-believe work"" that has been perpetuated by laborgovernment colusion.
Although he feels that President Kennedy will be more flexible than was President Eisenhower (he also expressed the idea that like President Roosevelt, President Kennedy can not be criticized for his economic politics because they keep changing from press conference to press conference), he still feels that President Kennedy talks too much of economic groth without any consideration for natural resources, or the ability of the economy to absord further increases in production.
He does definitely feel the need for and the desirability of meeting ""unmet challenge for building up the nation's social capital"" and in so doing, absorbing at least ten per cent of the nation's productive energy and strength.
Growth and employment could then be substained without glutting the market place with unneeded goods.
Mr Packard attributes chronic unemployment and poverty stricken areas, which are incongruities in the midst of the waste and gluttony he sees around us, to the partial cause of people refusing to leave depressed areas (like the mining area of West Virginia) and finding work elsewhere if job are more plentiful.
He also feels, as Mr Galbraith does, that there is a general laxity of unemployed people to seek jobs in the face of relatively high unemployment compensation checks.
Mr Packard also portends the ""technological revolution"" and the ""baby booms"" as mixed blessings in lems of the American way of life.
February 19 in the WES room, Bastall Center, Scores from this duplicate bridge play will he submitted upon request to the National Association of College Unions for final tallying from which prizes and awards will be given by this sponsoring organization.
Last year CC had some twenty participants in this program and we ranked comparatively well in the national standings.
There will be a registration fee of one dollar but all the free coffee you can drink.
Here is an opportunity for all you bridge fans to use that finesse you perfected during exam week.
Although the Intercollegiate Tournament is for students only, faculty and staff are urged to come and play with other non-entrants. contrast to the entrenched Republican philosophy that more products prosperity.
He holds that thev really mean is more unneeded and im;es open to governand more unemployeeded by the new cfof production. nds as constructive reading ""The New Capitalist"", a recently published book authors suggest the creation of a federally administrated institution that will underwrite capitalistic ventures of Mr Man-in-the-street.
This would give the average American more involvement and concern in his economic affairs, and would ideally support new enterprises in the field of services and sundry cultural and recreational activities. wanted surplu ment subsidies, ed people iinm ficient mi Mr Packard admits to reading profusely and regards works such as his own as being necessary to awaken latent American sensibility.
He feels that the critics that call his works superficial and misleading because of the out of context references he cites are just reacting to the truth of his subject matter and not his style.
He mentioned a twelve page review in ""Printer's Ink"", an advertising trade journal, that criticized the superficial handling of this subject but failed to include any examples of his work in it.
Mr Packard's next book, to be published in about eighteen months, will deal with executives.
Although its title is ""still a secret"", watch for ""the Pacesetters"", Whatever the title, it seems likely that he will produce another best seller.
Although his approach may not seem ideal to those accustomed to scholarly researching, he does attack pertinent problems and situations that are all too readily ignored by the average American.
TEJON LOCATION — Chuck Henson, Eugene Herman and Doug Hill SHEUJIMIimi'S • CAMERA SHOP* 30 NOBTH TEJON STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store Th» Laiqait S.Jeciioo of Nancy Bowers Chosen As Regimental Sponsor Members of the Nntionul Society of Pershing Rifles held their second yearly Smoker last night for new actives and pledges.
Miss Bowers will become the official hostess for the CC chapter, and will travel with the company to assemblies, competitive events and banquets which will take her all over the country.
Members of the court include Joan Carter, IWA; Nancy Schoi-ling, Delta Gamma; Sheila Watson, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Dorothy Lynch, Alpha Phi and Carol Wright, Gamma Phi Beta.
Added to the evening was a display of more than a dozen weapons and machines which are to become part of the PR training.
Madame Bailie Speaks About Touring France Colorado College students talked last Thursday with Madame Bailie from the Bureau of Student Travel, a branch of the French Government Cultural Services.
Information was given on travel by air and sea to France and on tours or study and how students may live there cheaply.
This ceremony will take place Tuesday, February 21, on the north lawn of Rastall Center.
A mid-spring Music Festival, on the lawn, is being planned for the future, plus other programs to be announced in the near future. . . . and you can bet we haven't been napping.
The banquet was held in the Eastall Dining Hoom at the regular dinner hour.
The banquet honored the scholastic achievement of the pledges, and because Panhellenic means ""all Greek also helped to unify the pledge classes.
This is the first year that a banquet of this type has been held and will now become an annual Junior Panhellenic event.
Besides the pledge classes, others in attendance included Miss Sharon Russell, Jr.
Panhell advisor; all sorority house mothers and pledge trainers; Miss Linda Robsin, senior Panhell advisor; Miss Christine Moon, Dean of Women; and Dr. and Mrs.
Pledges who received a 3. or better for the first semester were awarded roses.
Miss Elizabeth Coleman, Miss Pat Hay, Miss Seece Bovce, Miss Susan Graham, Miss Amanda Hamilton, Miss Nancv Parker, Miss Carolyn Pelly, Miss Penny Walhom, Miss Judy Clark, Miss Linda Foster, Miss Martha Jafiery, Miss Deirdre Jones, Miss Mary Emily Jones, Miss Margaret Kurashita, Miss Nancy Lindsay, Miss Leilani Markisen, Miss Mary Tarr, Miss Jean Tourcum, Miss Jill Vigil, Miss Stephanie Row, Miss Ann Ruth and Miss Melinda Wells.
Additional awards were given to the individual pledge and the pledge class having the highest average, and the individual pledge to the individual pledge and pledge class showing the most improvement from the last grading period.
Miss Carol Wright and her sorority, Gamma Phi Beta, received the first awards, while Miss Marty Jaffery and Alpha Phi and Kappa Kappa Gamma received the award for most improvement.
Fraternities Initiate The weekend of February 11 and 12 terminated the pledgeship of 46 fraternity men.
These men were initiated into campus fraternal organizations after a very stimulating Help Week, Sigma Chi Initiated into the Sigma Chi fraternity were Messrs.
Fred Luft, Peter Law, Bill Ward, Bill Hybl, Les Whittaker, Mike Schmidt.
Ken Reeves, Pete Tmshel, Blake Ozias, Walt Brayman, Walt Hecox and Doug Shaw.
After the ceremony was held at the Hackney House in honor of the new active members.
Phi Comma Delta The Phi Gamma Delta fraternity gained as new brothers Messrs.
Brett Stearns, Dean Behse, Mike Von Helms, Bill Greeley, Spence Cook, Andy Durham, Tom Darden, DeCourcy Graham and Evan Heckel.
Kappa Sigma The Kappa Sigma fraternity was proud to greet as brothers Messrs.
Robert Antton, Richard Cholakian, John Collins, Arthur Daily, Edward DeGeorge, Mike Durfree, George Graham, George Klein, Dave Krell, Edward Mason, Steve Sabol and Clay Sorrieh.
L Marie Barefield, ClerkStenographer for the Reserve Officers Training Corps of Colorado College, was recently awarded the Sustained Superior' Performance Award by Major General Thomas N Griffin, Commanding General, XV T United States Army Corps.
At a ceremony on January 21, 1961, which was attended by her family and members of the ROTC Department, Lt.
Decker, PMS of Colorado College, presented the certificate and monetary award of some $100.00.
Barefield in recognition of her superior performance of duty during the period of September 1959 through I960.
She came to CC in September 1959 and immediately began establishing herself as one of the finest Clerk-Stenographers for any branch in the country.
It'll come m handy for my trip to California,"" Phi Delta Theta Phi Delta Theta activated Sunday afternoon Messrs.
Jan Derrick, Charles Greening, Tom Simenson, Steve Frink, Steve Sabom, John Rowland and Hank Rose.
Rastall Center Opens New Board Application Applications for positions on an expanded Rastall Center Board are open today and will be due at 4:00, Wednes. day.
Application forms can be both picked up anri turned in at Rastall Desk.
The Rastall Center Board is being expanded from it, present membership of five student members and two fac. ulty members to a membership of seven student members anri two faculty members.
Theseus 'says Minotaur is just so much bull . Medusa crowned homecoming queen at Lyceum being taken so that the Center Board can better fulfill its responsibilities in ""providinga social, recreational, and cultural center"" for the members of the college community.
The positions open for student membership involve the positions of chairman of the board, executive secretary, business manager, director of cultural affairs, director of hospitality, director of special activities, and director of recreation, Rastall Center Board members serve a term of one year, beginning and ending in March.
They are selected by the outgoing Board on the basis of their application, a personal interview, and past experience.
Later on in the spring, other students will have the opportunity to apply for the sub-committee positions in the Rastall Center organization, such as music, committee, publications, art exhibits, games committee.
The outgoing board also has plans to conduct a Center Workshop in which they will orient the new board members and their committee members to the problems and responsibilities of Rastall Center and Rastall Center Board.
Miss Sally Reeves, Colorado Co]. lege art student, has an exhibit [ her paintings hanging in Sastall Cei ter this month.
Her works are largely abstracts painted in earth colors "" there is one cubist canvas in the same subtle colors.
Miss Reevi composition is the mist exciting ch; acteristic of her work as seen in t red painting ; a rich red and white variation.
The white painting of angular forms is another examph Miss Reeves' exhibit beautifully ful. fills the potential of aRstall Ccntei in publicizing student activities.
The retrospective exhibit of Philip Evergood at the Fine Arts Centi quite different from previous exhibits Mr Evergood's painting is American and precise with light and delicatt lines and colors that are either li_ . and airy or almost ludicrously dart f ^ and bright.
His women subjects are like the women of Deisler's light but yet somehow imposing.
Mr Evergood lias been classified as a so. cial realist, imaginative realist, surrealist, expressionist, and a sophisticated primitive; in his versitility hi is all of these.
The Fine Arts Center also has a Twenty-Fifth Anniversary faculty exhibit.
Besides the works of Messrs Arnest, Chenowith, and Darriau There are many representing Center resident artists.
Mr Lew Tul ley, who painted the Hub mural, represented, as are Mr Robert Moth erwell and Mr Emerson Woelffer'. well known abstract paintings.
Jim anks, second high scorer in the oeky Mountain Conference, was lid 'Friday night and had only free throws to his credit when fouled out.
They were hurt by fouls in the second half and Hanks, Thompson, and Ackerman all fouled out.
With less than two minutes to play, the Mountaineers took the lead and won the game.
Hanks was back in form and had 16 points, Thompson and Sellitto had 12 each.
Though CC , was beaten twice this weekend, they are still 8-4 in the conference, leaving them in second place.
First place Idaho State is ineligible for the conference championship as they are not playing enough conference games, so there is still a chance for CC to take the championship.
CC plays at the Air Force Academy this Wednesday and is idle this weekend.
Adams State and CSC, the third and fourth place teams, play each other this weekend at Alamosa.
I NTRAMURALJ The Betas hold an undisputed lead in intramural basketball with a 4-0 record.
The Phi Gams and the Kappa Sigs are currently tied for second place with identical 2-1 records.
The season ends on Tuesday, February 28 with a game between the Betas and the Sigma Chis.
Zetas 1-3 The totals in intramurals up to the basketball season find the Betas in front with 15 points followed by the Kappa Sigs with 11 and the Sigma Chis with 5.
Intramural wrestling will be held Feb.-24-25, with weigh-ins at 3:45 on the 22nd and matches to follow immediately.
ME 3-0076 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop Colo.
Springs, Colo. o^W,fti\^ Beauty Salon We Specialize in High Styling Permanent Waving and Hair Tinting [15 N Tejon ME 5-2855 Michigan Wins Over Injured CC An injury laden hockey team made its last Eastern road trip of the season and met with disaster.
Friday's game saw the Tigers lose 5-1, with Duke Dutkowski, CC's leading scorer, getting the only goal late in the third period.
Michigan scored three of their goals in the first period and two in the second.
Norm Laurence made 45 saves for CC while Coyle only had to keep 1 4out of the net's for Michigan.
Saturday night the Tigers were plagued by injuries as they went Unaffiliated people may enter by leaving their names and weights in the athletic office by 12:00 noon Tuesday, the 22nd.
The single high spot of the game for CC was Ed Boychuck's hat trick, getting one goal in each period with the second goal coming on a breakaway.
Injured in this game were Dan McGill, Don Stouffer, Ken Cairns, Archie Prestayko, and Duke Dutkowski.
Monday night the Tigers played Michigan Tech at Houghton, Michigan, and were handed another defeat 10-0.
Again, Norm Laurence made many more saves than his opponent at the other end of the ice, making 43 to the other's 10.
CC now has a record of 4 wins and 13 losses in Western Collegiate Hockey Conference play and is ahead of only Michigan State who has a 3-13 record.
The GOLDEN DRAGON I409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family SfyU Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— II to II Daily W Colo.
Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA ACROSS PROM CAMPUS) ] Febn Colorado College Tiger New Sergeants Added To ROTG Department Sfc.
Lyle Penton have recently been added to the administrative and instructional staff of the ROTC Department.
Petre is in his eighteenth year of service and has just returned from Korea, where he served one year as assistant operations sergeant in the S-3 office.
Here at CC, his efforts will be combined in administration and instruction of the Sophomore and Senior Cadet classes.
Benning, Georgia, where he was the Operations and Intelligence Sergeant for the Special Subjects Department of the Infantry School.
Bragg, North Caroline KRCC Expands With the installation of remote systems in Perkins Hall, Shove Chapel and the Rastall dining room, KRCC is now able to broadcast live discussions and services.
This new system is already in effect now and is a new stepping stone in KRCC's communication.
Now all special events which take place in these buildings can be heard on any FM set.
With the tremendous response to KRCC's new expansion, some thirty students have enrolled in the Radio production class.
To channel the new material for the station, Chief Tyree has appointed Mr Wally Caldwell and with the 82nd Airborne Division.
These new cadre members were assigned to replace former Instructor Russell Johnson _ and M/Sgt.
Tryouts for the spring drama, The Enchanted, by Jean Paul Giraudoux, will be held in Perkins Hall auditorium on Wednesday afternoon, February 22. and Friday afternoon, February 24, from 2:30 to 4:00m.
The cast is a large one, requiring mayors, inspectors, executioners, ghosts, little girls and old maids.
It is hoped that the play can be cast and rehearsals begin by February 27.
The new staff consists of Mr Ed Boychuk and Mr Brian Dutkawski, publicity chairman, Mr Bernard Muehlbauer and Mr Larry Mingus, program and special events directors, Mr Dick Behnke and Mr Crofton Diack as chief announcers.
Members of the radio class are planning a live radio production around the show ""On the Scene,"" scheduled for mid-April.
Students who have not picked up their copy of the fall edition of the KINNIKINNIK may obtain it from Miss Carol Coffman.
The Trotters 15— K K K's 24 The Fighting Five 41— The Spartans 26 The Untouchables 24— Wampies 46 The Crosstown Betas 29— The Mountaineers 17 As this was the first week of play, the four winning teams are tied for first and other other four are deadlocked in a tie for first place honors.
HEALTH INSURANCE AH new full-time and transfer students are reminded that they ure automatically enrolled in the college sponsored Health Insurance plan and are charged $12 for this coverage.
Refund is made only in case the student signs a wavier card at the college infirmary by February 24 showing that he is already covered by other compurable insurance.
Those students who did not subscribe during the first semester and who desire to sign up for the next seven months must do so at the infirmary' by the same date and pay the $12 premium.
Tareyton delivers — and you enjoy— the best taste of the best tohaceos.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL DUAL FILTER iGTCyiOTl ^m** Pure while outer filter Vocal Selections Initiate Series Mr and Mrs.
Harry Booth, ^ prano and baritone, with pianip Henry Margolinski accompanying presented the fourth Winter Co r , cert series Sunday afternoon t full audience in Perkins Hall.
Mr Booth then sang a crusad er's song from 1095, ""Chant D t Croises"" and two French songs \ Gabriel Faure and Henri Daysari His intonation and expressio; made these works most enjoyab Mrs.
Booth's ""Ave Maria,"" very difficult aria from ""Othello; by Verdi, was sung extremeli well.
Especially delightful was tig f^ duet from ""Le Nozze Di Figaro' by Verdi.
The B of understanding and knowledge changed between these two groups highly intelligent people is praeally non-existent.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 24, 1961 Colorado College ;;; ■■ s a result of this lack of ... ication, hostilities and mutual ■(inceptions have developed.
Mr # characterizes each of these cultures"" and breaks down nfair judgements each makes 2 other.
The ramifti Snow forsees as a result of If make dealing with the joblem, and especially understanda problem, important.
The irobk-m takes on its greatest signifi ance when considered in terms of he world distribution of wealth ■evolution of rising expectaThrough the industrial and ecent scientific revolutions, the »rld has, for the first time in his""ioth the desire and the capfor economic development nd improvement far-reaching igh to include everyone.
And who is going to work i-nrd removing this gap depends who really understands that it an be done.
The scientists, Mr J inousays, are really the only ones I vho have any comprehension of iese developmental necessities.
But he other half of the highly educai the West have not an inkling idea of the possibilities of sciand industry.
This lack of unnding, bringing with it the prejidices against even approaching an lerstanding, make effective action world development practically imMssible. ihis essay, now available at the ikstore under the title of The Two It.ires and the Scientific Revolution, has the several advantages of being clear, short, and entertainingly written.
Because of its interest for the educated on both sides of Mr Snow's ""cultural gulf,"" the problem*. in this book will be the bases for a ""Science-Humanism Symposium"" to be held at Coolrado College March 14, 15 and 16.
This symposium will present spokesmen of the scientific and humanistic viewpoints who will, through a series of speeches, debates, and discussions, try to clarify both positions, evaluate the extent of the problem ,and consider the possibilities for reconciliation to be found in a liberal arts education.
The winning team of Mr Jack Cashman and Mr Chris Griffiths was the only undefeated team at the meet.
Other entrants in debate from CC were Mr Jack Walker, Mr, David Bitters, Miss Linda Pierce and Mr Max Taylor.
These teams were moved up into the senior division and showed surprising strength in the Wyoming meet.
Mr Max Power and Mr Taylor were entered in extemporaneous Mr Harry Booth, minister of Shove Chapel, will deliver a series of two sermons, entitled ""The Christian Doctrine of Man,"" this Sunday, February 26, and next Sunday, March 5.
These two sermons are of particular interest because of the approaching symposium on the two cultures, scientific and humanistic.
The first sermon is entitled ""The Life of Reason"" and deals with man's peculiar gifts and the demands made on him as a response to these gifts.
It is an analysis of existence in a world of which man is an integral part and to which he is related by many strands, capable of being understood and used by reason.
The second sermon, ""The Life of Faith,"" deals with man's existence in the presence of other personal beings to whom he is related, not so much by reason as by will, and whose relationships with him are therefore in the nature of encounters rather than ex* ploitations.
This same team was recently undefeated in the Colorado State College Invitational Tournament placing second to Georgetown College.
Team members entered are Mr Furgason, Miss Pierce, Mr Cashman and Mr Griffiths.
Mr James A Johnson is coaching the team and will accompany them to Arizona.
On March 4 Colorado College will host a regional college forensic tournament on this campus, and on March 11 and 12 the team will journey to Alamosa for the ""Top of the Nation"" Speech Meet at Adams State College.
Conference Starts Tomorrow The ASCC sponsored All-College Conference will begin tomorrow noon at Star Ranch.
This weekend symposium of speakers and discussion is for the purpose of airing views and forming opinions on important campus problems.
Although those attending the full function have already registered, any who wish to attend just the speeches and discussion periods may attend for a $1 registration fee payable when they arrive at the ranch.
After a discussion following Reverend Patterson's speech, the Folk Singers, Inc., will provide entertainment.
Busses will be provided for students lacking transportation to the Star Ranch.
They will leave Cutler Hall at 1:00 on Saturday and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
They will return to the campus at 10:00 Saturday night and 4:00 Sunday afternoon.
A descriptive report of the Winter Carnival's activities will help indicate their results.
The inter-fraternity and fraternity-faculty hockey games were exciting for the players and their supporters, and the crowded with happy and short stories which appeared in the fall Kinnikinnik.
His article tells us that we must be renders if we are to be writers; that we most devote ourselves to seriousness and study if we arc to ever become writers of good poetry, Mr Van Becker's institution of the poetry workshop further indicates his own concern for the improvements of student writing.
Anyone, whether they are writing poetry or not. is urged to attend these bi-monthly sessions of poetry CC STUDENTS RODE the *oor chair lift as they turned 'tiers for weekend to participate the Winter Carnival. novices afterward.
Mr Jeff Race and MrDon Oden captured the All Star Student and Faculty Awards, respectively.
Miss Lynn Carmichael's skating solo was indeed a highlight of the evening, illustrating the grace and skill of performance which have been acquired by many years of training.
The profit in monetary terms received bv the sophomore class was between $80 and $100.
Background The success of this past weekend, then, is almost overwhelming in comparison with past attempts of this nature.
The most interesting factors in this achievement are how and why it came about.
Under the apt leadership of the sophomore class commissioners, Miss Julie Bohlke, Mr Hinds and Mr Hank Van Arsdale, almost 75 members of the class participated actively in supporting their project.
These people had decided to make something of their Winter Carnival which they began planning last spring.
They worked with enthusiasm and perseverance in committees and individually, many giving far more time than they could actually spare.
Conclusions The point of this article, however, is not merely to make a wellearned eulogy.
Some useful conclusions can be drawn from the results and reasons behind this successful carnival.
Here we have a group of students with an idea, getting behind it and working out the details carefully.
We have enthusiasm and interest being generated thoroughly among the other students of CC by one class.
Perhaps events can be worthwhile, perhaps all-campus activities sponsored by an interested group are appealing to students on this campus, perhaps there is not as much lethargy within us as we would be led to beleive. criticism.
But perhaps of student writing is not only one of learning technique and form, perhaps it is one of attitude.
The suggestion has been presented that the reason our writers relied dilettantism iu their writing is that they are in fact dilcttants; that our student body is uncxeited, uncoimnftteed mid unconcentrntcd.
It appears la the more Hum casual observer that we might Well he dilating our lives with so many activities thai we have no time For serious loyalty.
To the question of why do our students over-engage their lives, tins writer would hnznrd Clint perhaps we, like our society, prefer tu spread ourselves thinly than lo live in depth.
The art and photography contributions will occupy much more apace in the spring edition of the KINNIKINNIK than ever before, in order to make the KINNIKINNIK a true literary and art magazine, the co-editors, Mr Gary Gappert and Mr Jim Scarhoro, have decided to expand the art and photography section of the magazine to a size commensurate with the quality and quantity of the material submitted.
The editors feel that the creative art and photographic endeavors of the members of the college community deserve as much recognition as their literary endeavors.
They would like to see more students turning in more and better art and photography.
They especially would like submitted photographic studies of student sculpture.
As with the fall edition uf the KINNIKINNIK, $15.00 cash awards will be made for the best contributions in the fields of art and photography.
Art and photography contributions can be left at Rastall Desk or turned in to Mr Dave Dunlap, art editor.
Final Performance of ""Dido"" Tonight #* p**/ OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE 3TUDENT PUBLICATION ,-('hi.-l EDITORIAL STAFF , Ann STAFF— Angslli Absher.
In opposition to the parable of the second paragraph, we wish to take the position of the blind men.
This we feel is the more legitimate approach in so far as the elephant of ""football phenomenon"" is presented here.
So. acknowledging ourselves self-imposed blindness of this wonderful whole, we want to explore some of the more specific parts Mr Carle has outlined.
We cannot conceive how more than $40.000 is spent on ail such extra-curricular activities, but beyond finances if the value of ""as much a part"" is interpreted as student participation, this too we doubt.
If Homecoming is taken as an example, we feel that much more interest is involved in the parade, dance, and alumni functions than is ever shown by the campus community on Washburn Field.
Aside from the fall football season, the returning student and the freshman are confronted with many yearround activities, from social fraternities to student government which all demand early efforts.
We do not see that at any particular time of the year, football becomes an important activity to any but the relatively small number of students involved.
A college campus inevitably has its students whose enthusiasm is so overwhelming it seems to build up morale and to speak for a large portion of the campus.
In a small college like CC, such an attitude would be healthy onlv if it were so wide and so great that questioning it would seem ridiculous.
CC's college morale is not obviously built around intercollegiate sports and CC's enthusiasm is not obviously a by-product of sports, both illustrated again by the small number of participating students.
This is true in that any part of the campus life serves to identify the student, but the degree to which football does this is questionable.
CC student government is a large organization, interest clubs incorporate almost every academic field, the social calendar is full, indicating legions of committee chairmen and functions for students to attend, and the Greek organizations fill other spare moments.
Football is not, in relation to other factors, a large tool for the student's identification and association.
The important point to be made here is not so much that intercolegiate sports has not been fulfilling these four criteria for extra-curricular activities, but that there are other ways which could do a more effective job.
The importance of growing closer to the source of truth or of training leaders is not to be slighted.
The fact must be faced that it is time to try another approach to the problem.
An enlarged intramural program, the new gym, and more opportunity to participate in individual sports may lend themselves beter than the spectator sports have to the demands of a small college in the twentieth century.
Netherlands Opportunity There will be a meeting next Tuesday, February 28, in Rastall for men students interested in doing undergraduate work at the Netherlands Opleidings-Institute voor het Buitenland (N.O.I.B., or the Netherlands College for Representation Abroad), Messrs.
Donald Roll, Robert Selig, and Karel Leeflang will discuss N.O.I.B., answer questions, and pass out application material.
N.O.l.B. is a small mi tial college of business a its which specializes particularly in foreign trade and commerce.
Any interested student who is unable to attend this meeting please call Janet Cosby, \ 396.
The staff of the ""Kinnikinnik"" has been very concerned in the past few weeks over the success of a second issue of the magazine.
We wanted to make the ""K"" a more integral part of school publications and we also had faith in the amount of material that could be produced by the student body.
We wanted two issues partially to induce students to write more consistently, but we need an immediate concern and response on the part of the students to have enough material.
But I was told by an individual that most of the students here are weekend poets, and the primary portion of contributions was a back-log of material from high school on.
We are all weekend poets, but this does not mean a serious effort cannot be made.
We are all infected with the notion that, with an invocation from the Muses and a few words madly scribbled on a page, a masterpiece is created.
You do not have to be serious or philosophical in tone, but the approach involves time carefully spent.
The ""K"" is offering a px-ose workshop, with a tentative date of March 7.
But we need to know, before going ahead with our plans, just how many people are interested in having their work criticized and evaluated.
If you are interested, please contact Mr Racey, Gary Gappert or Jim Scarboro as soon as possible.
Let me repeat that we are trying to set a precedent of more than one issue of the ""Kinnikinnik"" per year.
The following letter is not directed at the Freshman class, but to the president and vice-president.
Personalities excluded, the commissioners did a fine job of wasting another hour on Tuesday morning.
The main point for discussion was the election of a new class officer due to the necessary resignation of Mancel Mitchell.
The five nominees were the same people who were nominated near the start of the school year.
With all respect to these five people, the fact that there were no new nominations allowed, merits some concern.
Early in the meeting ■ I arose and proceeded in nominating a sixth person to the list whom 1 felt was more suited for handling the job.
I was told, however, that I could not nominate my candidate because of the limiated amount of time and a restrictive clause in the ASCC constitution.
It states that no nominations be in order during an election for a vacancy of office.
This is not only undemocratic, in the strict sense of the word, but is highly symbolic of apathy and Much complaining has arisen in the past on the poor attendance at these freshman class meetings.
I have been doing much of the complaining and now feel that an apology is in order to those members of the class whom I mayhave offended.
I can plainly see now that the poor attendance is only partly due to the student.
The larger and inexcusable blame is on the shoulders of the class commissioners.
However, my beliefs regarding the sanctity, if you will, of human life are so basic that if I compromise them I have nothing left.
I deny the state the right to take human life, either through capital punishment or through forcing its citizens into military participation.
I realize that in both these areas my beliefs are not supported by the laws of the United States.
In this letter, many of the problems faced by the conscientious objector are realized.
No one has of yet accurately determined or legislated the grounds upon which one may legally become a conscientious objector for reasons other than religious.
It is morally wrong for one human being's ethic to be replaced by the ethic of an organization formed solely for the purpose of organized war.
This authoritarian ethic is unjust for it superimposes the will of a corps of legislators and armed service officials upon the free will of the individual.
If objection were to be recognized on humanitarian grounds alone, many ""shams"" could claim exemptence from sertime"" for democratic and parliamentary procedure, then I can blame no one for a lack of interest.
They should use their mental faculties and present the desired issues in such a manner conducive to constructive criticism and future planning.
These people are in a leadership role, but so far, have been the classic example of the psychological ""follower pheWhen some curious person asked for a regurgitation of these facts, which the president and vice-president consider so vitally important, a number of the eighty-eight people present, left.
This letter should be accepted as a challenge by the Freshman class commissioners to prove their usefulness.
The ASCC meetings are open to the student body — the class officers are not needed to give a running summary of the aforementioned facts.
Until the time comes that my class officers show some independent thinking, original ideas, genuine concern, and above all, leadership, I can see no reason at all to attend further mettings.
All things possible should be done to make the status that the commissioners hold meaningful to them, and worthwhile to the class.
With the coming of the All College Conference, the whole problem of student government should be allotted as much discussion time as possible.
The goven is required, however, by la grant all those seeking consei, tious objector status, whether religious grounds or not, the vk of appeal.
The colk campus, a common area fo, exchange of ideas, can be passed by no other place beginning for such action.
Oi campus, where over fifty per.cp of the men are being trained i art of warfare, students hav. only an excellent meeting for discussions but also a wo ful point of discussion.
Students should observe analyze and then discuss the pose and usefulness of an ROT department.
Then they should suj. port it if our conscience and idej comply with theirs.
They shot criticize it if our feelings are objection to the doctrine taugf P v there.
H* What relation does the ROlfr 1 * department have with these marks on conscientious object It has this relation — the rules requirements that one must fjy to become legally recognizi a ""CO."" can be altered even until they include humani' and philosophical grounds, only people question and challenge the :lt ^ adequacy.
The role played b; ROTC department is not to presei these controversial points for di cussion but merely to inform dents of the necessity of ar conflict and train them for it.
But if students merely accej the doctrine taught in the MiliUif""^ Science classes, some of which objectionable to us, then they vi probably find themselves taki the next step— that of merely ; cepting the regulations held by I government on the question of e< scientious objection.
We are not suggesting that i eryone should believe or hold tl philosophy of the consciei objector; however, this ver< portant matter can be given time and consideration by the pa pie whom these rulings di affect.
All African territories h long maintained that their n pressing need is the expansion secondary education, and thai greatest obstacle to meeting need is the shortage of quuli teachers.
Persons nominated for this I* gram must be academically first-rj' personally resourceful and imagi* tive in surmounting the unexpr ( -' ,r the difficult, or the routine.
Inn $lnd< I,., .ll Colorado College Tiger February 24, 1961 Since .giale Wofcii'ii hat i hnerio Open Letter to CC Students Experimental Theater future of our intercolathletic program (and more larly football) has come up discussion on our campus, I have asked by many students, facih( and interested friends what my ,ction is to the problem.
Let me |ar t this dissertation by quoting a of a speech given by Rev. wles L O'Donnell, president of \ oW Dame back in 1929.
Many of the critics of football tend dwell only on the aspect of fiances.
There can be no defense for juall college football in this regard. hnost impossible for any small Hegc to finance the cost of its prothrough gate receipts.
There are more tilings in heaven and earth — in the college heaven and earth, for it is a combination of the two — than are dreamed of in the philosophy of foundations for the advancement of college statistics.
Man is not all mind; he is a creature of flesh and blood; he has a heart, aud the heart, too, must be schooled In a curriculum which life itself supplies in those four years crowded with wonder which make up the college career of the student today.
There arc intangible realities, there are imponderable values of which your carefullest statistician never in the nature of things can take account.
Two and two make four, and the college student will learn that lesson through whatever complexities the formula may be extended.
But there is another mathematics, a madder, wilder learning, more di■vine and nearer to the source of truth.
I further believe we share in the responsibility of providing leadership in our world today.
We take a firm stand in our pledge to produce the finest individuals in science, economics, and the arts.
Is it not equally important that we strive to develop or color in football, nor is there a place for snobbery or contempt because of social position — such as our society imposes upon us.
A boy in football grows up knowing he will be evaluated strictly on his ability to perform well for his team.
It was no accident that the top ranked three men in the ROTC Field Summer Camp were football players, and that nine of the first 11 were athletes.
This is evidence that intercollegiate athletics (particularly football) produces leaders.
It is my sincere hope that all of die students, faculty, administrators, and friends of Colorado College will give serious thought to the problem at hand.
I would further hope that deliberate and careful study be given to the benefits of and objections to an intercollegiate athletic program, and whedier it will bring good or harm to our college and our country.
I should hate to see even one small link in the chain of America's ""winning spirit"" be weakened.
One of our greatest resources is the COMPETITIVE HEART, born of amateur sports, without which ""brains"" may be rudderless, Jerry Carle, Director of Athletics Registration for the spring vacation Indian work and study projects, sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee, ends tomorrow, February 25.
Those interested should sign the sheet at Rastall Desk. \u V ollege life as any other ricular activity.
These critics overlook or ignore ■ important, and I think, the most inportant aspect of the whole quesCollegc is not merely a school; a life.
It is a school-life, of and die major emphasis, the leadership qualities in men will help them in giving direcdor impetus to the intellectual wc garner in our many yeai football plays important Kirm, is, as i ludy.
But ever luoll ,)\ UlllT-'st ught to be. if it were not, if ran away with oneNumismatists 6 Philatelists Congregate at the Coin and Stamp Shop 1 16 So.
The characteristics we look for in a leader loyalty, self confidence, self sacrifice, self discipline, a burning desire to succeed, a willing cooperative spirit are die very traits that the rigors of football demand.
If it is fine for us to be able to see apathy; it is fine for us to be able to criticize it; insight and analysis are wonderful dungs.
Apparently the writer of the letter got his point across, for it wasn't long before a flurry of very impressive agitation stirred the campus, with everyone running around asking everyone else why diey didn't help give college life an injection of culture and everyone running around wondering what culture is, and even a flaccid exhortation by a columnist of this paper, suggesting that students make use of die cultural offerings proffered by Colorado Springs.
Notliing. really, came out of nil this until a fusion took place in the mind of a freshman, Mr Jim Fox, whose distaste for the dearth of culture combined with his lovo for the theatre formed an idea.
Special decorations will add to the atmosphere and the Bill Fisher Quintet will set the mood in music with the kind of tempo and color that has made them so popular.
The Playboy rabbit baa been popping up all across the campus to remind the men to get their dates for this semi-formal evening.
Tncidently, there will be no charge for the evening's entertainment; the rabbits picking up the tab.
MOVING SALE Unnijmt £>§ap f°r men is happy to announce a sale of its stock in order to make our move to our new location easier.
The outgoing Board, in the interest of better service and performance, has revised the Board's constitution along lines best suited to handle Rastall Center's new role in campus life.
The new positions include the office of Chairman, Executive Secretary, Music Student Edits Oratorio Miss Jill Tyler, a Colorado College senior, deserves note for her contributions to musicology.
Miss Tyler has recently completed work on the ""Mortali Apprendete"" by Giovani Legrenzi.
Miss Tyler hopes to finish transcribing, translating, and editing the remainder of the oratorio this spring.
Miss Tyler began this arduous work on the Legrenzi oratorio in her junior year in connection with a paper presented at the I960 regional meeting of the American Musicological Society in Fort Collins.
The original manuscript is at the Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana in Rome.
This first piece is a practical appendix with the completion of the work in its entirety.
The music-writer which is similar to a typewriter, was invented by Cecil Effinger, a CC graduate who now is teaching music theory at Boulder.
Albert Seay who has himself edited many of the works previously printed by the Music PressMiss Tyler has contributed in many other ways to the college.
Last year Miss Tyler gave a piano recital and she plans another for this April.
Furthermore, besides her studies in music which she plans to continue in graduate school next year, Miss Tyler is busy with her duties as president of the KKG sorority and as secretary of Honor Council.
CC 'Mesdemoiselles CC will be represented this year on '*Mademoiselle's"" national College Board by Miss Gerri Gene Bartz and Miss Marcia Moses, both sophomores.
As a College Board member, each girl will complete an assignment that will help her explore her interests and abilities in writing, editing, fashion, advertising or art, in competition for the twenty Guest Editorships to be awarded by the magazine at the end of May.
Applications Business Manager, Director of Recreation, Director of Cultural Affairs, Director of Special Activities, and Director of HospitalityThe Chairman hase the responsibility of conducting meetings, Handling policy, and providing over-all leadership and directionThe Executive Secretary will be more than a recording secretary.
He will also be in charge of general publicity, of the general records of the various groups, and be responsible for the care of the display cases in Rastall.
The Director of Recreation will oversee the games area and the various activities in the crafts room, as well as promoting such special outing interests as skiing and cycling.
The Director of Cultural Affairs will handle films, coffee hours, art exhibits, and the various music activities.
The Director of Special Activities will run the annual fashion show, the new Rally for the Keg, dances, and the Playboy Reception.
The newly initiated Greenwich Village Art Festival will also be under his direction.
The Director of Hospitality will handle visitors to Rastall, oversee the publication of the Rastall Center introductory brochure for new students, and the printing of Christmas cards.
Application blanks are available at Rastall Desk and are due no later than March 8, at 4:00m.
Blackburn, Center Director; Mr Gary Gappert, Board Chairman; or from any present .member of the Board.
New Beta Housemother The Betas are proud to announce the appointment of a new housemother, Mrs.
Wolf attended Missouri's Central College and upon graduation entered the teaching profession.
Her daughter now resides in Colorado Springs, and her son is in the employment of the Alcoa Corporation.
Wolf accepted the position of housemother for Beta Theta Pi, she made her home in Butler, Missouri.
Wolf's first attempt at fraternity housemothering and we trust it will prove a most enjoyable experience.
Rastall Center Board has changed its constitution to expand its membership to seven students, and has dropped the provisions pertaining to the alumni member of the board.
It has also changed the specification that the Program Chairman be a member of the ASCC, Social Committee, to specify that ""a"" member of Rastall Center Board will be a member of the ASCC Social Committee.
Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 IIIUIIllllllllIllllllliii, When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
The meeting is open without charge to all interested students, faculty and administration.
He served with the French Army and Resistance Forces during the Second World War and was made an Officer of the Legion of Honor as well as receiving the Croix de Guerre and the Resistance Medal.
At the end of the war he entered the French Foreign Service, and lias been stationed in various posts abroad and at the French Foreign Ministry in Paris.
His foreign duty has included tours of Bagdad, the United Nations General Assembly, Lisbon, and the United States.
His positions in the Foreign Ministry have included duty with the office of German Affairs, the Press and Information Service, the Department of Economics, the External Relations Division of the Permanent Secretarist General of National Denfense.
He brings a very broad background to his present post and to bis discussion of one of the world's most inflamablc trouble spots.
The controversy rages between the House Committee on Un-American Activities and various patriotic organizations, and groups of San Francisco area college students and their various supporters, regarding the proper interpretation of demonstrations staged against the House Committee last year.
Demonstration, disruption, and violence are said to be the result of carefully planned and provoked action by hard-core Communists, operating both for and by themselves and through a large mob.
The objective of such action Sunday Morning Worship Service Shove Chapel — 11m.
John Formby He will discuss the situation in Algeria and alternative solutions to the problem of the relations between France and certain elements in North Africa.
Following his talk there will be opportunity for questions and discussion from the floor. is claimed to be a phase in tht continuing Communist conspiracy to denude the United States ( its internal security apparatus through the abolition of the House Committee.
In rebuttal, the Bay Area Shi. dents and others involved in th f demonstrations claim that their parts were independently organ. ized; decently and lawfully, though noisily, conducted; and prompt^ by legitimate distaste for the Committee's past record.
In an admittedly tangled aft; the two Assembly periods will be devoted to a showing of the film, an analysis of the student rebuttal, and a discussion of some of the basic issues involved.
This disease may ' familiar to many of you, but mechanics and the results of may be vague.
The purpose of this essay is to ■auaint prospective parents with disease and the factors inLed.
This disease consists of an m ja due to breakdown of the f tal blood and consequently reIts in jaundice.
Rh-negative and Rh-positive fac^ in the blood play an imporu,t role in the development of [g disease.
When the foetus, the Id embryo, has inherited Rhfcjtive from the father and the |0 ther is Rh-negative, the chance i a harmful reaction between the |„ther and the foetus is very Sod.
An antibody is a protein with the capacity to neutralize or react with the antigen.
The antibodies produced by the mother pass through the placenta and enter the blood stream of the feotus.
A reaction occurs between the antibodies and the antigens resulting in Erythroblastosis fetalis which, in turn results in anemia and eventually jaundice.
Because of the breakdown of the foetal blood, the red-blood cells are immature and consequently do not ' cany sufficient oxygen to the cells of the body.
This is an heriditary disease because the Rh-negative and Rh-positive foctors are inherited characteristics.
Marriage between two Rhnegative persons yields only Rh-negative children; a combination which would not result in the disease.
However, if marriage occurs between an Rh-positive and an Rh-negative or between two Rh-positives, two types of child Great Decisions Schedule The International Relations Club of Colorado College is sponsoring a series of discussions during the coming eight weeks through the Great Decisions study program.
Faculty and students discuss world affairs and attempt to reach opinions on these problems.
Opinion ballots are filled out, and the results are sent to the Department of State and members of Congress to be tabulated with others from the United States.
The only dangerous combination results when the foetus is Rh-positive and the mother is Rhnegative.
If the foetus is Rh-negative and the mother is Rh-positive, reaction rarely occurs.
The first child of a marriage between an Rh-positive father and an Rh-negative mother is usually not affected because the mother has not had a chance to develop a sufficient number of antibodies to seriously affect the foetus.
However, in successive pregnancies there will have accumulated enough antibodies in her blood stream to affect the foetus.
If the presence of antibodies in the mother's blood stream is detected during pregnancy, the child may be given a complete blood transfusion immediately after birth and may be saved.
Therefore it is imperative that the parents be aware of their blood factors so that they may be forewarned about the possibility of the disease occuring in their chilTuesday, February 14, when the deadlock over Germany was discussed.
The remaining discussions will be held on succeeding Tuesday nights, in the Rastall Center, room 203, at 4:00, except for the second week in March when two discussions will be held.
Persons interested in joining the group may register at the Rastall Information Desk.
The cost is 75 cents for a study kit that includes an introductory booklet, eight fact sheets, eight opinion ballots, and reading lists.
February 28, ""France and Western Unity""; March 7, ""Japan: Future of an Asian Ally""; March 14, ""UN in Explosive Africa""; March 10, ""The Americas in Jeopardy"" ; March 21, ""Arms and Survival""; and March 28, ""Blueprints for the World Economy."" drcn, Also, if the mother is not aware that she is Rh-negative and is given a blood transfusion with Rh-positive blood she will develop the harmful antibodies.
Intercollegiate Bridge Tourney There is still a chance for you to enter the national Intercollegiate Bridge Tournament.
Slow mail made it necessary to cancel the tournament and re-schedule it for this coming Sunday, February 20, at <i:00m. in WES Room.
Duplicate bridge will be played, and the scores of students submitted for national rating.
Needless to say, interest is high and some forty-four people have signed up at the Rastall Center Desk.
Anyone may participate, and those students who want their scores to be sent in for national consideration will be charged a dollar.
This tournament will kick-off u regular Sunday afternoon co-ed bridge program which will be free to all interested players.
Play will commence at 2m. each Sunday in Rastall Center; the room will be posted on the calandar.
Prizes will be given weekly— bring your partner and come each Sunday after this tournament.
Last Tuesday, February 14, the Tigers wound up a disastrous road trip with an u loss to Michigan Tech at Houghton.
Still plagued with injuries, CC dropped its sixth strain game as it just couldn't muster the strength to fight off the strong Husky sextet.
Ed Bo chuck, scoring leader of the Tigers on this road trip, scored CC's only goal as Mike Draj popped in 3 for the Huskies and Mike Angotti who had scored 4 the previous night got This time, Coach Tony Frasca put Pete Doyle in the cage, but he, too, had to fac, rain of pucks, making 35 saves to 16 for Rowe of Michigan Tech.
All through the road t t the CC goalies had to make many more saves than their opponents.
This is due, in part, the lack of defensemen due to injuries and grades.
The defense seemed to pick up some Michigan Tech scored 4 goals in the first period, 6 in the second, and only 1 in the third.
However, the Tigers were hampered by a lack of bench strength in the second half and were forced to play with their starring five throughout most of the game.
The score was tied with 1 min. sec. to play when the Falcons broke loose to pour in seven quick points.
NTRAMURA tS Three teams are now tied for first place in intramural basketball with four wins and one loss.
If none of these teams lose their last game, there will be a play-off during the first week of March to determine the first three places.
Phi Delts 1 4-1 2-3 WANTED Faculty couple or student married couple to run a Summer Camp.
Board play was almost even with the Academy taking off 43 and CC 40, This CC's third loss ndered them rd of 14-7.
Monday night the Adam's State Indians came to town to take on CC in a two game series.
The Tigers were back in stride after suffering three straight loses, and swept the series.
As evidenced by the score both teams were hitting with amazing accuracy in this rapidly paced tilt.
CC quickly got the lead and dominated play throughout most of the contest.
At the beginning of the second half CC was troubled shortly by Adam's State's press, but their fast break proved effective against the defense.
Adams State cut the lead to ten points but CC broke with another sustained scoring attack which carried them victoriously to the final buzzer.
Thompson lead the scoring for the Tiger's with 27 points, 21 of them coming in the first half.
Other high scoring Tigers were Jim Wexels with 26, Art Ackerman with 22, Sellitto with 17, and Captain Jim Hanks with 11.
In Tuesday night's action the torrid Tigers continued their hot streak and downed the Indians from Alamosa in another high scoring game, winning 96 to 88.
Again the game was marked by sparkling offensive play by both zzz. teams.
Five of the Alamosa regulars fouled out in the final period, thus allowing CC to maintain their lead with relative ease.
This trouble would have hurt the Indians more if CC had been hotter on the free throw line.
CC was paced by Jim Wexels who dumped in 27 points, giving him 78 for the last three games.
Thompson and Hanks also scored high with 23 and 19 points respectively.
With these two wins, CC has a 10-4 record in RMC play and needs only one win from CSU in the pending series to clinch the conference title.
The dress is informal, r prizes will be given, and re will be no charge.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, March 3, 1961 Colorado Coll&ge (asketball Team ieceives Bid [t was made public Wednesday at CC had gotten a bid to the juthwest Regional Tournament 'r the college division of the [CAA basketball championship.
Tie tournament will be held March and 11 at Cape Girardeau, Mo. 'he host school is Southeast Misstate College, other schools n the tournament will be Trinity jniversity of Texas and Southern The tourney-bound Tigers out their season this week, n d with games against CSC on ne floor tonight and fomoright.
This series I mark the final home appeare of seniors Art Ackerman, i Hanks, Jim Wexels, Tony Selo, and Paul Mott.
Preceding he varsity game tonight there rill be a game between Betas and he winner of Thursday night's Lappa Sig-Phi Gam game for the ntramural championship.
The campus community was saddened this week by the death of Professor John S Jordan, chairman of the education department and one of the oldest of our campus citizens.
Professor Jordan died Sunday night of a heart attack brought on by asthma.
Since he began teaching here in 1923, Professor Jordan more than performed his duties in the Department of Education, expanding his interests to the college as a whole.
Next week the TIGER plans a biography of this gentleman by one of his contemporaries and admirers.
Uncommitted Student Sunday afternoon the students and faculty at the conference had an opportunity to discuss and air out many of the problems that have appeared on our campus.
In a brief reading from a book by Philip Jacobs, which is concerned with the changes in the college h Foreign Students The Saturday afternoon session of the Allcollege Conference devoted much time to the question of our foreign students and their place on the college campus.
The Foreign Student Committee was organized in 1954 under the direction of Dr.
Thomas Brandt and since that time has been an active, if misunderstood, student organization.
Fred Sonderman and Mr Al Johnson, the committee yearly goes through the procof choosing the foreign students that will be able to give the most and to get the most out of CC life.
The committee is aided by the existing foreign students in choosing, by means of dossiers, the next foreign students.
Since dossiers are strictly impersonal and give the barest minimum of information concerning the person letics.
Patterson, called Father Pat by all who lome in contact with him, severely condemned the double itandard of morality prevalent in society today at the Saturiay evening session of the All College Conference.
His topic in speakwas ""Pre-martial Courtship,'' specially emphasizing its relation:hip to married life.
He also aid a girl who answers nisguided notions of lov> Heavily punctuating God willing . . ' has i talk Father 'at stressed the areas of conflicts n marriage and the need to settle iffeiences and annoyances before ['iage.
In order to insure the 'resence of this ego-booster, series compromises will be made.
The ^security evidenced here is the ;a me that shows the need for reigion.
Personal morality is not a pri>te matter, continued Father at , because there is at least one Mher person involved and two immediate families who suffer with ^ young people in case of rouble.
One student in the audience >ked why a completely erotic experience could not be indulged in. father Pat referred back to his lr >ticism of the double standard an d asked in return how a man 0u ld expect certain standards in wife that he himself could not fulfill.
Reid gave a short history of athletics at CC dating from 1882 when the first Colorado College Athletic Association was formed.
Dean Reid stated that there has been a great change in athletics over this period, Subsidization has been in existence in one form or another since 1905, and the college has had control of athletic expenses since 1935.
Though there were no decisions made or policies formed at this meeting, several good points were raised.
It was felt that everyone was in favor of athletics, and all but 2 or 3 in favor of intercollegiate athletics.
The question of spirit was raised and it was mentioned that an increased intramural program would probably be a poor substitute for intercollegiate athletics.
It was felt that the intramural program as it stands develops rivalries which, while good natured, would become intense if there were no college team to which to rally.
The spirit would then be for the individual teams and perhaps detrimental to the spirit of the college as a whole.
Spirit was certainly in evidence Saturday afternoon and it would seem that those people interested enough in the problem to come to the ACC certainly wanted to maintain what spirit there is.
If we are going to have intercollegiate athletics at CC as the students seem to wish, it seems almost unavoidable that we run a deficit.
As Athletic Director Jerry Carle pointed out, all colleges of our size have this problem in order to compete.
We must then make athletics more meaningful to more students by developing an interest in them so that intercollegiate athletics at CC can become worthwhile and worth the financial loss in terms of value received.
How this can be done remains to be seen, but approaching the problem with this type of a constructive attitude certainly seems to be a step in the right direction.
Debate Team Hosts Colorado College mil host the thirteenth annual Invitational Debate Tournament on this campus tomorrow, March 4.
Twelve schools from Colorado and Kansas are expected to participate in this speech meet which will include fourrounds of debate, extemporaneous speaking, oratory, and radio commentary.
All competition will be judged and awards will be given to winning schools in each event.
Members of the CC debate team will also participate, but will be ineligible for any awai'ds.
Rounds of debate will take place in Palmer Hall at 11:00, 1:00 m., 2:15m., and 3:30m.
Anyone wishing to attend should contact Mr Al Johnson in Palmer 105, prior to the start of any round to find out where the debates will be held.
Approximately 60 teams from 30 colleges and universities were entered in the Arizona tournament. then is the job of the committee.
For next year the committee is considering the possibility of bringing to CC a girl from Poland, if she can leave the country, a boy from Finland, a girl from Sweden, a boy from India, and many more.
The problems of foreign students were discussed and it was concluded that they should be warmly greeted, of course, but not overwhelmed.
The first few weeks of school are hectic even for old hands, to a foreign student they are a complete loss.
Without help from friendly individuals, the feel ings of homesickness and loneliness would be unbearable.
The foreign students present pointed out that they enjoyed individual contact with their fellow students instead of the more formal teas and talks to large groups.
It was suggested that informal meetings, such as fraternity .sorority, dorm and wing meetings, invite a foreign student to talk to them.
It was also suggested that committees on campus, and. especially the language clubs, take advantage, of the the special talents of these students, not only for themselves, but to help the foreign student get more accustomed to campus life.
Next year the administration will carry the two African students for the full four years.
They give much of themselves to our way of life and in return absorb much to take back with them.
The apparent apathy is not restricted to campus life and campus activities but reaches out into the fields of politics and international problems that must be faced.
It is the college's responsibility to supply the student with the means lo develop tools with which he can build his principles which will remain with him throughout his life as an involved responsible member of a community.
Only in college is n person able to be wrong and not suffer the consequences.
If a student comes to college without the courage Oi"" the imagination to be wrong and to grow intellectually, there is nothing that the college can do to help this student.
However, if a student conies to CC with the motivation and the inspiration needed to seek knowledge, this campus has much to offer.
If inspiration is not to be found in the classroom, there are other resources auch % as interest groups, workshops and Coburn Library to further hia education and to keep alive the enthusiasm and the individual's inspiration.
This power of thought should be directed at developing a sense of values.
This development should be continued through all the four years so that at the time of graduation the student will have amalgamated ideas, sifted these ideas and arrived at a new well grounded aet of valueB which will carry over into his life outside of the college community.
If a professor has definite opinions on the subject that he is teaching, these opinions should be voiced in the clasBioom with the understanding that they are one person's opinions and need not, should not, be adopted in their entirety by the student.
It is up to the student to look at what he is being taught and to formulate an opinion one way or another.
It is not his position to tell his students what to believe or how to formulate their ideas.
When surrounded by a group of interested students, it is difficult to realize that there are many students on this campus who are not receptive to new ideas.
There are students who are intellectually lost in a maze of courses and *-%&&» OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION EDITORIAL STAFF Editors-in-chief STAFF— Ansela Absher.
Colorado Springs, Colorado Of the many paradoxes that maintain their health basking in unexamined acceptance on the Colorado College campus, the student himself appeal's the most wanton.
Here all direction seems to be a projection into the future as most of the time and thought is spent on committees planning these wonderous days to come, only part of the time ill a flurry of accomplishing tvhat must be done today and the rest in recuperating Each student is introduced during his four years to enough activities to assure him that he needs not fear spare time.
If he is comnlctelv anti-organizotionist there is an organization of other anti-organizations into which he will easily fit, and there help in their struggle to be properlv acknowledged a ""real campus organization.
In these and more quaint ways, CC students find that wonderful security for which thev come to a small liberal arts college.
Don't take a stand on anything definite; you might be proved wrong, then everybody will laugh.
Don't try to force your opinions; again people might laugh, or, worse yet, ignore you.
Best yet don't say more than 'cool' about anything and ignore everytmng and everybody except when you are in a group and then be sure whether you are supposed to smile or sneer or you might be left out.
In an age when everyone must be a 'specialist' to preserve his identity, the only way for one specialist to give advice to another is by analogy.
Second, any such attempt to try the unusual, or merely different, will be quickly branded 'neurotic' and then one would find himself spending the rest of his life in a real padded cell.
Assemblies Committee's program for the dual assemblies on February 28 and March 7, the rationale for their decision, background material pertinent to the film and the committee's wishes regarding the frame of mind in which those present should view the film.
That the film is extremely moving in its manner of presentation and its after-effect was witnessed by the burst of laughter, clapping of hands, and periods of intense silence experienced by the audience and by the heated discussions it has aroused.
Excerpts chosen by members of the Assemblies Committee from a tape recording of the court proceedings prepared as a rebuttal to the film by some students of the Bay Area were heard afterwards.
Purpose A major goal in this type of introduction and in this dual assemblies program in general is that each interested person can reach his own conclusion about the film and its significance.
It would be ridiculous to attempt to summarize the film for those readers who did not see it, but several undisputed facts are relevant and will perhaps prove helpful to the viewers trying to draw their own conclusions.
The students were interested in attending the hearings because they disapproved of the activities in general and it was thought diat some of their professors might be involved.
Conclusions The article in last week's TIGER described very aptly the two general factions of opinion and the basic argument between them.
So far, however, no clear path to the ""truth"" of the matter seems evident.
Perhaps this will be resolved through the discussions, to be presented and led by well-informed members of the faculty, among whom are Mr David M Van Becker, Mr Carlton Gamer and Mr Fred A Sondemiann, next Tuesday at 11 o'clock.
That is, if there is a real ""truth"" behind this seeming abundance of propaganda mixed with fact.
Obviously, reviewing die provided text of both the movie and the tape, evaluation of your own position and discussion with some of the many other interested faculty members and students on the campus will best prepare you to reach your own decision and to participate in the assembly on March 7.
Student Aid at A 'Snob School' Not so many months ago in a Denver paper Colorado College received the applelation of being in a class of snob schools.
One ramification of this unique position is that CC is often compared with the other schools of its immediate environment.
In this analysis the fact that whether or not CC is providing a better education than local schools is not the question, rather it is enough to say that CC is going about it in a different way, and the most immediately apparent difference is financial.
This year with almost double the number of students, paying a tuition of $950, the total financial aid received by the students is slightly less than $400,000, and is one of the largest programs supported by a small college in the United States.
This large program is administrated by the Committee on Student Aid, composed of administrative officers and faculty members, and is a year-round business.
Ninety-nine students, forty-seven men and fifty-two women have been granted loans totaling $56,000 for the year from funds allocated by the United States Office of Education and made available by the government under the National Defense Student Loan Act.
It is interesting to note that just a little less than half of the names that appeared on the first semester's dean's list are receiving financial aid of some kind.
This year's tuition raise has provoked a large degree of student interest, not only as to where this money is going but whether it is being spent for the right things.
Considering that thjl, s s article was not by-lined, the credit, or the blame, for fg . g article goes to the Tiger as a whole, and, insofar as the Tig| ' represents the student body, to CC as a whole.
In order balance out the picture a little, then, another article, prese ing another point of view needs to be written.
Likewise on the small-war SW ' The main point of last week's article was that the CC student, and most especially the ROTC student, could be an influential force in loosening the requirements of Conscientious Objector status to include those who seek such a status on purely ""humanitarian"" or philosophical grounds, without having any specific religious background to recommend their sincerity.
But the bald and brief statements used as background material to support the idea of student interest in loosening the requirements for ""CO"" status made the article both objectionable and worth replying to.
The particular brand of pacifism represented in this article rested on the assumption that to give support to the American military machine is to give support to war.
Certainly the potential for war of such an ""organization"" is tremendous, and the results of such a war would be disastrous, but to say that the armed services exist solely for the purpose of conducting war is absurd.
The validity, the ""raison d'etre"" of the armed forces today lies not in its military strength per se, but in its potential value.
The armed forces, as potential military power, serve as witness to our willingness to support, with force if necessary, our beliefs.
Without this power, our political maneuvers against Communism would be utterly ineffective.
Our words need the support of the threat of our actions in order to mean anything.
This threat, this constant military potential, is the chief purpose of the armed services.
War will become most likely when the credibility of our threat to war weakens.
On the scale of all-out war, the knowledge of our unwillingness or unpreparedness to retaliate under nuclear attack could encourage enemy attack.
Russia could quite conceivably consider herself to be in a position to effectively destroy a large percentage of the United States' military bases.
If she at the same time considered the U S. to be either unwilling or unable to retaliate, she might find such a means of overtaking her most potent enemy quite the best possible alternative.
Our military defense depends to a large extent on the credibility of our avowal to retaliate an all-out attack.
The chief source of strength our armed forces is individu committment to the suppoi American ideals.
The second assumption made last week's article was that tl ""sanctity of human life 1 highest of all values.
From th point of view, perhaps no better alternative than to avo war at all costs through seeki to have the U S. government g up all armed forces.
A morifc able position, at least from American point of view, howCT would be that human life b< valuable through certain otfa values such as respect for the dividual, tolerance for diffei points of view, and human f dom.
It is on these value assu tions that our military defena set up, and it is on these i; assumptions that we should willing to commit ourselves to li support of our military defe"" system.
Outwits Snow The recent airline strike was sponsible for an appearance Professor Max Lanner, chain of the music department, with Ft.
Collins Symphony Orchesti Nicole Henriot Schweitzer original pianist for the evento was grounded in Boston.
TEJON Colorado College Tiger March 3, 1961 CC Interest Clubs There are 69 organizations on the Colorado College camfts serving approximately 1100 students.
The Tiger is begineries of articles asking whether these clubs fulfill the for which they were originated, if student enthusiasm v,jgh enough to support and benefit from these organiza' on s, and whether these clubs add to or detract from an envhed college experience.
B rtnie peak tguage Prench club, Spanish club, and ■a-man club appeal primarily to idents in these language deents, to other students who ire interested in these mages and to townspeople of , se nationalities. 'oying members number about in French and Spanish clubs Id 80 in German club.
Wahsatch German club holds its activities down to three functions a semester including a Christmas party and two traditional picnics.
Spanish club members hold meetings bi-monthly where they hear lectures or view slides.
Interested persons can eat at the French table at 11:45 Fridays to converse in French.
Language clubs vary greatly in their selection of activities with the exception of always popular Christmas parties.
In all these groups programing originates with the student executive councils.
Later this spring Spanish club plans to have a gala Fiesta and in April three plays will be put on for a two night stand.
So far French club has formed no plans except for an evening of slides of France.
One of the faculty sponsors has been known to say he feels the students of CC are too apathetic to support a language club as it could be run.
In contrast a college administrator was heard to comment at the German Christmas party that this represented an organization as it should function.
Rastall Movie ""From Here to Eternity,"" the sixth free movie shown by Rastall Center, can be viewed this Sunday, March 5, in Perkins Hall at 7:30 Eight academy awards ai e among the impressive list of honors accorded this dramatization of James Jones' novel.
The drama, set in Pearl Harbor in 1941, immediately prior to the Japanese attack, tells the story of two professional soldiers strangely joined in conflict and friendship.
Stars of this production are Bert Lancaster, Frank Sinatra, Montgomery Gift, and Deborah Kei From behind the scenes ""Dido and Aenaes"" was a success.
With great anticipation, rehearsals began two weeks before the performance.
At this time, no one was quite sure what was to come, yet everyone was determined that this opera would be good.
Within a week, things began to take shape and as parts were memorized a ""feeling"" for the opera took hold.
The harbor, countryside, and palace of Carthage was built by a busy stage crew.
Dress rehearsal came and went unarrested and opening night was at hand.
There was not a full house the first night, but to the performers, the most important objective was a good production, not who saw it.
There were low spots in the singing, but we must remember that CC is not a conservatory of music and cannot be expected to be professional.
With an almost full house and with more anticipation and excitment, the second and final night began.
In the excitement they forgot their conductor, N Mr Donald Jenkins, and by the end of the second scene had increased the tempo and gotten a half tone sharp.
But the intermission which followed was just enough for the chorus to collect itself and finish the performance in excellent style.
Aeneas, sung by Mr Harry Booth, who spent most of his time following Dido on and off stage, had but one aria which was done ■with grace and excellence.
Perhaps the greatest achievement in the production of ""Dido and Aenaes"" was the amalgamation of the drama, dance, and music departments.
No one department overbalanced another— the three worked harmoniously to produce an overall feeling of unity.
Many thought, for example, that the chorus detracted from the soloists when they were singing their arias.
Further, it was felt that the lighting of the last scene was perhaps gaudy.
By the fall of 1961 the Kappa Sigma, Phi Gamma Delta and Phi Delta Theta fraternities will move to new residences.
Last week final contracts on the co-operative fraternity-college housing projects were let to Land Contractors, Ltd. of Colorado Springs.
The three new houses will be financed by a loan of $308,000 obtained by the college from the Federal Housing and Home Finance Agency, plus members will be handled in the $45,000 from each fraternity parmanner now used for Slocum Hall. pating in the building project.
The college will naturally hold the titles to the new houses; however, the college presently holds the titles to the houses occupied by the three fraternities involved, so no major changes will be made.
The easternmost location will be occupied by the Phi Delta Theta house, the center by the Phi Gamma Deltas and the Kappa Sigmas will be on the west end of the row.
The new plans call for identical interiors in the houses, but to keep the tradition of varied architecture alive on the college campus, the exteriors will differ in facing materials.
Each house will have a full basement with trunk room, laundry room, recreation room and chapter room.
The living quarters will house 25 men with a variety of singles, doubles and four-man suites.
The bulk of the food eaten in the new houses will be rather similar to that eaten in Rastall Center; the kitchens will serve the food in portable tables from Rastall to the houses.
These new houses will have all of the advantages of college dormitory living.
There will be offered'by the college, linen service, ground service, and anything else needed for the upkeep of the houses.
The collection of room and board fees from the fraternity This system of collection is not as flexible as the system now used by most of the fraternities, but it is much more efficient.
The Beta Theta Pis will be integrated completely into the college fraternity food and finance program upon the completion of the new houses next fall.
The Sigma Chis will remain the only fraternity on the CC campus which will remain independent of the college housing and feeding project.
MEJrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel 1 18 N Cascade Ave.
March 3, 1961 ■ Colorado College Tiger Hamburgori, too, buy 'om by the sect fulll NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME I* EKl°»« Both a prose and a poetry workshop will be held in the following ten days in an effort to improve the quality of the Spring edition of the Kii nkm A prose workshop will be held on Thursday, March 9, at 7:30 in the ASCC Room of Rastall.
The material submitted will be reviewed by Mr, Edgar F Racey of the English Department.
All prose material should be turned in to Rastall Desk by Monday afterThe poetry workshop will be held Tuesday, March 14 at 7:30, also in the ASCC Room.
Caicado I NTRAMURALJ The Betas took first place in wrestling last week as they had four finalists out of a possible six.
The Phi Gams had two champions to the Betas' one but had to settle for second place as the Betas piled up points by pins and seconds place finishes.
The Betas ended up with 27 points followed by the Phi Gams with 16, Zetas with 15, and the Kappa Sigs with 9.
Intramural basketball comes to a close this week with two playoff games.
As a preliminary to the Varsity game Friday night the Betas, who drew a bye, play the winner of the Phi Gam-Kappa Sig game on Thursday.
Thursday's loser will have a chance to play the Betas for second place if they should lose Friday.
Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 1 ....loll Daily W Colo.
Avo. z i THE GOLDEN DRAGON ■ W Broolsido 'Uncommitted Student set curriculum and content to just drift through college according to a pattern set up by the administration or an advisor who takes no interest in you as a person.
Advisors can only be interested. in students who are themselves concerned about their goals and desires.
The fact that some students come to CC without the slightest idea of a major or without the desire for knowledge is a distressing problem.
It is for these people that a set curriculum exists in the under classes.
If the student exerts no effort to follow through on some definite field he will go from year to year taking courses that do not particularly interest him.
The feeling that the freshmen should enter into the real challenges of college life was expressed not only by the freshmen but was acknowledged by the upperclassmen as well.
Seminars for freshmen were discussed as a possibility to develop the potentialities of students immediately upon their arrival at CC rather than waiting until they are upperclassmen.
The freshman is often frustrated because he has ideas but no chance to express these ideas and no chance to act with what he is learning.
The upperclasses also felt that there was not enough of an opportunity to apply what they were learning.
All that was discussed at the conference on the Uncommitted Student cannot be written down.
One of the greatest things to come out of this discussion was an intangible eagerness to move ahead and accomplish something.
There Tigers Drop to Cellar *j Last weekend the Minnesota Gophers under the tutelage of the controversial John Mariucci moved into town and twice took the hapless Tigers to task.
These two defeats left the Tigers in the cellar of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association.
Game one on Friday night found the Tigers suffering their worst loss on home ice this season.
The CC pucksters were soundly drubbed by the Minnesota Gophers 12 to 2.
CC's only two goals came in the last five minutes of play when Danny McGill and Stan Moskal slapped in a pair to save the Tigers from a shutout.
Jerry Norman led the Minnesota squad in scoring by turning in a neat hat trick.
Minnesota had the advantage of a well rounded bench; they employed three seperate units, all of • them working effectively against the Tiger defense.
The second game on Saturday night was sparked by Jerry Norman's second consecutive hat trick as he led the Gophers to a 7-1 victory.
However the Tigers came back gamely after their previous defeat and proved to be no easy match for their opponents from St.
The rather lopsided score was not indicative of the true nature of the game with CC controlling the puck a fair share of the time.
The Gopher goalie, Larson, saved Minnesota from having several more goals scored against them with his brilliant play in the nets.
Larson slapped out 24 shots as compared to Laurance's 42 saves. is a desire in at least a segment of the college to promote a better environment for intellectual growth, but this cannot be accomplished by a few individuals.
The student body as a whole must act, must apply what it is learning, to turn out students who are individuals capable of adding to the world in which we must take an active part.
ITI Friday night the Tiger minder was also busier that opponent, knocking out 28 as pared to 17 saves for Larson. | nesota has now strengthens t second place standing in WCHA with a 12-6 reeonj league play.
With only series remaining, Minnesota^ needs one win to clinch set w place which would alrr them of a tournament bid fronj NCAA selection committee. \\ worthy of note that Mariu. ""refused to schedule any conj g| with the all powerful DTJ j] this season because of his on Canadian recruiting.
Although Mjj, sota's second place positic WCHA may he contested by I it does seem that they ha' tually secured a birth for th. selves in the upcoming NC national hockey tournament.
Apply now for Rastall Center Board Seven Positions Open Deadline — Wednesday, 4::0 Moonlight Bowleu g For those who are interest* bowling, and would enjoy a angle to this sport, Rastall Q presents Moonlight Bowling, sb ing at 8:00, Marc the Rastall Lanes.
For those unfamiliar term, Moonlight Bowling is bot ing in a mimimum of light for if tl maximum of pleasure.
For those adept in the dark, certificat be awarded at the end i period.
Moonlight Bowling has bt tried at other schools, and has p ven very successful.
The idea brought to CC by the Rastall Q ter Board from an intercollej conference.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, March 10, 1961 Colorado College AWS Elections The newly elected officers of AWS are willing and enUsiastic.
The officers about whom she speaks are Miss Betsy Foote, 'ice President; Miss Ann Armstrong, Secretary; Miss Jane Sderson, Treasurer; Miss Sue Heidel, Social Chairman; Miss Kemp, senior representative Advisory Council; Miss Karen ;essen, Junior Representative; arid liss Stephanie Row, Sophomore jpresentative.
Function AWS is divided into two branches, Ivisory Council and Judicial Board. hose elected as executive officers Judicial Board also preside over activities of Advisory Council.
Jdicial Board concerns itself with discussing, revising and enforcing the regulations pertaining to the residence halls.
Their jurisiction extends to cover such matits as the dormitory honor code, punsellor selection, and the late uard.
Advisory Council, on the other nd, is interested in the activities d social functions of the women udents.
In Advisory Council, school pirit, conduct, and various fund-rais>n projects are all dealt with.
Future Plans officers hope to accompsh four major improvements in the situation in order to make )re meaningful to the women tudents; 1) to consolidate Loomis, the administration of this :ore unified; 2) to create ttonger ties among the freshmen arms and between those dorms and oomis; 3) to create more direct Jiimiunication between the individal woman and AWS; and 4) to rouse more interest on the part of ie women students.
It is hoped that the women menoned will keep their enthusiasm nd he able to effect these desirable hanges.
Beguiling next year the women chosen in lie recent elections will assume duties. ,L VISA Volunteers Winter Concerts Resume Sunday On Sunday, March 12, the CC Winter Concert Series will present a concert of chamber music performed by ensembles from the United States Air Force Academy Band.
The concert will be held in Perkins Hall at 4:00m. and will be free to the public.
The program will open with the ""Duo in E Flat Major for Two Violas"" by Karl Stamitz, played by Mr Werner Siepenkothen and Mr Gregory Rodgers.
Stamitz was one of the foremost composers of the Mannheim school of the classical period who took a great interest in the viola.
His viola concerto is one of the most renowned works for this instrument.
Following the Stamitz will be a performance of the ""Sextet for Wind Instruments in G Major, Opus 71"" by Beethoven.
This work was published in 1810, during Beethoven's richest period (that of the fifth and sixth symphonies), but it was composed much earlier.
This explains the direct contrast of its spontaneous and lighthearted mood to the seriousness of Beethoven's works of the 1810 period.
Performers in this composition will be Mr James Hamlin and Mr Gary Scott, clarinets; Mr Deimas Howe and Mr Samuel Mood, bassoons; Mr Richard Van Sice and Mr Presley Wood, horns.
The second half of the program, consisting of two modern works, will contrast greatly with the first half.
The first of these will be a work for a quartet of saxophones, an ensemble rarely, if ever, heard in this country.
This composition was written by Pierre Dubois, one of the numerous and prolific early twentieth century French composers who were encouraged ami influenced by the high standards of writing for wind instruments of all types and combinations set by the Paris Conservatory.
The saxophone is almost completely associated with the jazz idiom in America, but in France the ""legitimate"" use of this instrument is widespread.
Performers in the ""Quatuor pour Saxophones"" by Dubois will be Mr Richard Hubbard, soprano; Mr Wes Adams, alto; Mr Gary Scott, tenor; and Mr Donald Anderson, baritone.
The program will end with a rendition of the ""Octette for Wind Instruments"" by Igor Stravinsky.
This work was completed in 1923, during the composer's change to his so-called ""neo-classical"" style.
This approach is reflected in the form of the work (for example, the theme and variations), and in its contrapuntal style and sparing The schedule of events for the Science-Humanism Symposium arc as follow; TUESDAY, MARCH 14— 11:00-12:00— Perkins Hall 8:00-10:00— Taylor Dining Room ; Professor George McCue moderating; discussions will concern the nature of the science-humanism controversy, the reasons for conflict, the possibilities for agreement.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15— 3:004:00m.— Taylor Dining Room; Frofessur Rucker moderating; discussion of C P Snow's essay and the positions stated by Fiedler and Koch the day before. 8:00-10:00m. — Taylor Dining Room; Professor Rucker moderating; discussion of relation of science-humanism conflict to Liberal Arts college THURSDAY, MARCH 16— 3:004:00m. — Taylor DiScience-Humanism Symposium Dr.
Sigmund Koch Fiedler Room ; Professor Booth moderating; discussion of the relation of the science-humanism controversy to the nature of man.
The all female team from Trinidad was only one of three undefeated teams at the meet, but was awarded first over Otero Junior College and CC on the basis of total points accumulated.
The team of Mr James Spencer and Mr Robert Thrasher from CC was undefeated and took third place in the tournament.
In individual events, Adams State College took two firsts and a second with Mr Keith Michell winning Oratory, Mr Greg Stevens winning Radio Commentary and Miss Shari Montgomery taking second in Impromptu Speaking.
Mr Steve Leonard from Regis College was a one man threat in individual entries, winning first in Impromptu and taking second in the other two events.
CC had the best overall record in debate with the three teams entered winning nine of twelve rounds.
A total of eleven schools from Colorado, Kansas and New Mexico were entered in the tournament.
In addition to Mr Thrasher and Mr Spencer, CC entered Mr Jack Walker, Mr David Fur gason, Mr David Bitters and Mr Max Taylor in debate.
This weekend CC is participating in the ""Top of the Nation"" speech festival at Adams State College in Alamosa.
Mr Jack Cashman, Mr Chris Griffiths, Mr Max Power, Mr Charles Puckett, Miss Nancy Dehlin, Miss Linda Pierce, Mr' James Spencer and Mr Robert Thrasher are entered in debate and Mr Wally Caldwell is entered in oral interpretation.
Next week, on March 14th, 15th, and 16th, Colorado College will be host to its first three-day symposium.
Snow's essay, the symposium will examine the nature of the science-humanism controversy along witli its ramifications and possibilities for solution.
Leslie Fiedler will present the positions of the scientist and the humanist, and will work from there to suggestions for solving the prolem of the science-humanism gulf.
Fiedler, pressently holding professorships in psychology and English L-espectively, are both well-known in their fields, Dr.
Koch takes the postion that although psychology is a science, its subject is the phenomena of the humanities.
Outstanding in fields of literature and literary criticism, he received the Furioso prize for poetry in 1951, a Kenyon Review fellowship in literary criticism in 19567, and the National Institute of Arts and Letters award in 1957.
Fiedler is the author of ""An American Novelist,"" and most recently, ""Love and Death in the American Novel,"" reviewed elsewhere in the TIGER this week.
Fiedler's interest in psychology as well as his background in literature reflects itself in his writing and will undoubtedly enter into the presentation of his position at the symposium.
His fiery personality and love of argument should make the tenor of the symposium 'especially entertaining.
The symposium will begin Tuesday morning, March 14 at 11:00 in Shove Chapel where the two guest participants will present their positions in the science-humanism controversy.
Tuesday evening from 8:00 to 10:00 in Perkins Hall, the discussion will be continued, involving specifically the nature of the science-humanPhi Beta Kappa Nineteen CC Students, 17 seniors and 2 juniors, were elected March 2 to Phi Beta Knppa.
The students to be initiated ;it ceremonies and a dinner in Rnstnll Center Thursday, April 20 are Miss Betty Burgoon, a psycology major; Miss Susan Cannon, u French major; Miss Patricia Crossin, ;i mathematics major; Miss Elsa G a n I) s , a zoology major; Miss Jo Ann Keiser, an English major; Miss Karen Legg, u political science major; Mr David Logan, a chemistry major; Mr Frank Mesich, a chemistry major; Mr Jack Real, a mathematics major; Miss Sara Itivard, an English major; Mrs.
Tucker Secrist, a French major; Miss Ruth Snodgrass, a philosophy major; Mr John Starr, a chemistry major; Miss Shelia Toinlin, a sociology major; Miss Cecelia Travis, a geology major; Miss Ayshlyn Tyler, a music major; Miss Charlotte Van Loo, a mathematics major; and Mrs.
Audrey Ward, an education major, Election to Phi Beta Kappa requires a superior academic standing during the student's college life and is consequently considered the highest academic honor a student can achieve. ontn the for the conflict, and the possibilities for reapprochment.
Rucker, will deal with the possibilities and problems of educating people in the areas of both science and literature.
The final discussion will take place Thursday afternoon from 3 :00 to 4 :00, With Mr Harry Booth moderating, the discussion will involve the implications of the science-humanism controversy for the study of man.
The intent of this symposium is to present the problems involved in the science-humanism conflict, clarify the issues involved, and arouse interest in actively aps proaching a solution.
Because of the importance of this issue to the educated in all fields, the sciencehumanism controversy was selected for the subject of the first CC symposium.
The quality of the speakers and the interest of the subject merit high student and faculty support, <A» ^0* Edltora-In-Chief OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION EDITORIAL STAFF _SUSY SCHELLENBACH, TIM SCHELLENBACH STAFF— Angela Ababer.
Undoubtedly the fact that CC is coed is responsible for why many students come here.
Many people don't seem to think it is anymore, at, at least the boundaries between male and female have certainty grown less acute.
Woman no longer ""stoops to conquer""; she shrieks President into the White Hous* ■ and the childrt ut of school.
But no matter how close the sexes tend there is one i a difference calmly but strongly encouraged from youth explained in the confusion of the bridal night, and then passed on to the succeeding generation.
Obviously, this is the difference based on the malefemale views on sex, not romantic sex, but plain old functional, ""Wha|t any dog can do"" sex.
The only thing that we know of that can he called sacred and dirty in the same breath.
One out of every 10 people in the United States has or has had syphilis, gonorrhea, or both.
The federal courts cannot agree whether laws against promulgation of family planning literature infringes on freedom of speech or not.
In Connecticut it is against the law to use contraceptives, even if pregnancy might mean death for the mother.
Girls of college age don't even know ""where babies come from,"" boys covet misconceptions they gleaned from a grade school recess.
Babies are bom out of wedlock because of a lack of even the knowledge that contraceptives exist (we know of a man 45 years old, a father of three, who thinks one needs a doctor's prescription to buy contraceptives); babies are bom in wedlock to families that cannot afford to support those, they have.
If CC ""seeks to graduate men and women of mature character and discriminating minds,"" or to prepare us ""for an effective role as family member and neighbor,"" is has cut out quite a job for itself.
A job that cannot, we believe, be accomplished by rules that offer just enough liberty to be tempting (what can't be done to Lucie Loomis before 1:30 won't be done at all); by a well-worn dialectic from an entertaining turned-around collar; by a counseling center; an advisor; or a dorm bull session, but by a conscientious effort based on the realization that sex, like eating, is basically an animal act.
If it is to be ""social"" or ""civilized,"" it must be treated with intelligence rather than innuendo.
Venereal Disease By Jane Carolyn Hult The last few years have seen the recurrence of venereal disease in this country.
For years the disease seemed to be on the decline due to the presence of penicillin and other wonder drugs.
Unfortunately, it now appears that the population is developing a resistance to drugs in combatting the infection. cause it works on the internal organs.
If it can be detected in the first stages, the cure is relatively easy but the advanced stages are much more difficult to cure.
Gonorrhea is equally as serious, causing arthritis, heart disease, liver and kidney problems.
Many people become sterile by this disease, many more than by syphilis.
Evidence of this disease appears from one to several days after contact.
It moves internally in women and is difficult to detect until the woman is sterile.
Four-fifths of all women who have the disease are not aware of its existence.
Medical Problems The frightening thing about these diseases is that they are not properly reported and treated.
In many cases the victims' contacts are not known, therefore preventing complete control of the infection.
The only way to prevent wide spread venereal disease is to find CAUSES AND EFFECTS The two most familiar venereal diseases are syphilis and gonorrhea, both of which are caused by bacteria which are transmitted directly from person to person.
Syphilis is not inherited but can be passed to the fetus in pregnant women who have the disease.
Silver nitrate is usually put in a new-born baby's eyes to prevent blindness.
The primary syphilic leisons appear during the incubation period of six to ninety days.
After this time the spirocites, bacteria, migrate into the body and the external infection disappears in about three weeks.
The editorials, among innumerable other things in the TIGER, have been especially good since you have taken over the paper.
They are clear, strong, and welldeveloped, and they make a point, most often a controversial point, without the use of cheap catchphrases and well-worn ideas.
But apparently what seemed to you and I as controversial issues were not so after all.
The response you got, or the lack of it, seems to indicate that the question of whether to have inter-collegiate sports or not does not really exist and that all are in agreement with your position that they ought to be done away with.
Furthermore, it appears that everyone is in agreement with you that Bishop Neill was a far more worthwhile speaker than Vance Packard.
Apparently you decided the latter was the cause, because last week you produced an editorial which excelled only in being flashy and common.
The response is not, however, to the point you made (I'm not quite sure what the point was), but to your approach.
The quality paper you are beginning to produce is worthy of your previous quality editorials.
You have shown that responsible points can be made in an intelligent well-presented manner.
I hope that lack of response has not permanently deviated you from this approach.
Ruth Snodgrass Dear Editors, In regard to a letter in the February 24 issue of the TIGER by Myles Hopper, we feel that some clarification is in order.
His criticism of the manner in which the election of the replacement of the freshman class commissioner was run was directed towards the freshman class commissioners.
We would like to say first that the freshman commissioners were in no way connected or responsible for the election.
All elections concerning ASCC are conducted by the ASCC Election Committee for which the chairman is fully responsible.
Second, he was criticizing the fact that he could not nominate a candidate from the floor because of a restrictive clause in the ASCC constitution which states that no nominations are in order during an election for a vacancy of an office.
We have no idea where he got this information, but there is all of the contacts and to cure them so that they will not be able to continue spreading the disease.
When it appeared as though doctors had VD under control, many of the health measures were discontinued such as the health clinics devoted entirely to the cure of VD and its detection.
It is now centered in the age group of fourteen to twenty-four, most commonly in teenagers seventeen and eighteen years old.
It has been predicted that there are more cases among people under twenty then ever before in history.
As was pointed out by the health department, these are only the reported cases and have no significance because thousands of cases are never reported.
Due to the presence of VD clinics in Colorado, the rate in this state has decreased in the last ten years.
However, there are 21 states that have shut down all VD clinics By Ann Armstrong You have undoubtedly realized by now that this wee] editorial is on a very controversial topic — the sex morality. our present day.
Interviews It was generally acknowledged that there is an increasing break between ""theory and practice"" concerning the moral standards we apply to sex in the United States today.
This break is evidenced by the great no such clause in the ASCC constitution.
If, however, the election committee had asked for new nominations it would have been necessary to have had petitions followed by a period of campaigning and posters.
Also a special class meeting would have been necessary for campaign speeches and elections.
We are not sayir.g that the election was held in the only possible manner.
We are saying, however, that under the circumstances the election committee felt that it was the most practical since next year's elections are to be held in less than two months.
If Mr Hopper was so opposed to the way the election was held, he should have come to the election committee or freshman commissioners before the time of the election.
He as well as the rest of the freshman class, received letters from the class commissioners explaining the procedure that would be followed in the election.
They need the backing of the whole class and welcome constructive criticism and suggestions.
Criticism of the type that was in the TIGER, however, suggests motives other than being constructive or helpful.
Now that we've both stated our thoughts in the TIGER, let's work together.
CC students are more interested in our ability to act than in our ability to write.
Jerry Osborne Chairman of Election Committee Susan Heidel Vice President of Freshman Class Dear Editors, Head Coach Carle's sterling defense of intercollegiate football at CC which appeared in this paper recently was excellent indeed, yet one question nags.
It would seem that individual and group sports such as the intramural program, golf, bowling, tennis, handball, swimming, skating, hiking, riding, skiing, climbing, etc. would not only involve a greater portion of the student community, but, unlike football, they are sports wherein the student can involve {Continued on pane Tour) and consequently given rise to an increase in syphilis and gonorrhea.
Conclusions The health department has become alarmed at this rise and feels that certain things must be done to cut down on the disease.
More treatment stations must be established; young people should be educated to the dangers and more widespread blood testing should be required.
The struggle against VD will be a never ending one because of human weakness.
If all cases were reported and all victims reached by medical assistance, the problem of VD would once again decline and many lives would be saved. of hypocrisy in our socAbD* regarding sex.
The youth find' ' self under the strain of perhaps ing to act freely and knowing -,$ ( ""ame time that society eondt im for even thinking this.
Specific Opinions One person feels that the ^ which the church used to have ( the moral actions of society has ^ almost entirely lost.
Some feel that it ""destm elf-respect"" and even if society cepted such action ""the individu pain and anguish would still 1 present"" in the psychological effect The idea of a resulting ""guilt fe also expressed by others.
In answer to the question of P-' marital relations, one professor plied that ""whatever helps mar later is justifiable"" but aded th ^ he was not trying to allow fo indulgence.
These relations be justifiable only if they ""cement the present relationship o tween the two persons"" and mate later marriage more feasible.
General Consensus All but one person intervievjfelo; agree that the answer to our pre* lliis day confusion can be found only a private set of standards for & ina] individual.
Please sign all matetrlaJ subm tted ao you can will bo returned if ao indicated.
Strange as it may seem to Jems raised on literature decent on a love theme, romantic c did not become the central jrtiis of literature until about the leventh century when the Proeneal love lyrics initiated the seniment of courtly love and the age "" airy.
Lewis is that rare phenomenon of ook which is both scholarly and utifully written.
Mr Lewis, a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxord, and author of many excellent )00 ks, is one of the few dependable authorities on the Middle Vges His analysis of' the develnt of the courtly love tradiand the method of allegory the eleventh-century Languethrough sixteenth-century England is original, clear, and dejptively simple, considering the lifficulty of his subject and the ion which usually abounds rks dealing with medieval :e literature.
Lewis is able to explain the lighly specialized courtly love, main commandments are , courtesy, adultery, and ;ion of love, with a clarity vhich enables us to understand iow such a sudden development mid have taken place and to see as the beginning of the concept ' romantic love which has dominiterl our literature ever since.
His enjoyable and at the condensed that it is lifficult, at least on the first read-. ng, to fully appreciate the trenendous amount of information ind the penetrating insights which resents.
The Allegory of is already a classic in me1 studies and is well worth nany readings.
Love and Death in the Amerii Novel"" by Leslie Fiedler is lically a Freudian interpretation if the distinctive manner in which f e and death are handled in nerican fiction.
Fiedler, American fiction has :onsistently been incapable of dealngwith the normal sexuality and las shown an unusual fascination ith the horrible and terrifying.
American fiction before the twentieth century has escaped from iexual maturity and responsibility fleeing to pre-adoleseent nature horror stories which, though ■n well-written, appeal to the [ensibilities of a child and create llusion of innocence which is jpnipletely incomprehensible to our 'uropean critics.
In the twentieth century Amercan writers have switched from 1 picture of innocence to one of >erversion which though opposite, ■quail y incomprehensible to ' countries.
Mr Fiedler de' e, ops his argument by numerous ^lustrations from American and ■ui'opean literature and detailed Nyses of major American nov^ His style is often complex but st moving and lends itself to 1)1 The San Francisco incident which has been presented to CC students in the past two Tuesday assemblies, more than any other recent assembly, has aroused what seems to be a genuine spark of interest.
Perhaps it is as one of the faculty has remarked, that a very conservative body finds itself intrigued by the opportunity to side with a very non-conservative one.
Another explanation would be of a less emotional and. more idealistic and rational nature.
It may be that CC students feel the HUAC is not securing their rights as Americans but jeopardizing them instead, and their interest is because of their desire to see justice .done.
On the first Tuesday students heard both the movie and the student-produced tape.
Mr David Van Becker discussed the actual event, Mr Carlton Gamer presented a critique for judging it, and Dr.
However, the most predominating student comment about the series was that the assemblies slanted the viewpoint presented to _ the students.
Students, Communists and Committee The issue, as it has been debated post facto, involves three main groups which were present at the time, the students, the Cornwork of comparative literature.
All three are attacked on many grounds, depending on the ideology of the critic, and with varying degrees of objectivity.
The students have been evaluated for their action in many different ways.
Some say the picketing and demonstrating, although perhaps uncouth, is basically a sign that the students of the country are alert and aware of what is going on outside the academic ivory tower.
Some do not even grant the students a legitimate motivation, and feel that they were just out for a good time and to make trouble.
The Communists are charged with organizing and leading the students, bu; the degree of their participation is not easily established.
It may be said with some certainty that Communist agitators were present and mixing with the students, particularly inside the building where the upset was the greatest.
However, it may also be stated that the picket line and much of the orderly student action was instigated by the student leaders of the Civil Liberties Union.
The Committee is questioned, as it often has been, forthe manner, it inquires into the lives of the American citizens.
It is thought to have unjustly persecuted private lives more than it has investigated the extent of Communist infiltration or has proposed remedial legislation.
If all organizers and participants presented a slanted view of an already slanted program, perhaps the true evaluation of the San Francisco incident for the CC campus is yet to appear.
These are the International Relations Club, the Citizenship Club, the Young Democrats, and the Young Republicans.
It holds regular programs which generally feature speakers of some note who can speak authoritatively on one or more of the innumerable aspects of international affairs.
The Y u n g Republicans and Young Democrats are branch organizations of the Citizenship Club, which is endowed by the Rockv Mountain Citizenship Clearing House.
Both the partisan clubs are autonomous in their own activities and arc related to statewide federations of similar clubs.
The International Relations Club programs are consistently informative on vital issues, and, although many of these programs are of assembly caliber, they consistently are attended by a very few per cent of CC students.
The Young Democrats and Young Republican.; have somewhat smaller memberships than the Interational Relations Club They are faced with a great deal of apathy and not a little aloofness.
Students who were actively interested in the I960 campaign have, for the most part, put politics aside for another four years.
Many in the college community, moreover, consider themselves above the cliches and practicalities oi partisan politics.
Obviously, the basis for these four interest clubs extends far beyond departmental lines.
Certainly, they provide information and experience which are valuable to such students, but they have the potentiality to provide these to nil students.
Perhaps it is symptomatic of the American people to he largely ..pathetic and aloof toward their mundane politic al processes and toward the vital issues which confront their society.
TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ""IK BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY I 17'/, Emit C.oh.
COLLEGE CLEANERS ng Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MElrose 3-7883 Report from Poverty Gulch .rliclop st in by CC fncfr m Dr.
Apart from the fact that Cripple Creek provides an inexpensive, quiet, and accessible retreat, the big gold boom here was going on at the same time that the philosophy I am studying was being developed, and that philosophy may be said to be a theoretic refinement of much the same American spirit that Cripple Creek repreinstitution by William Rainey rented in ib* rawest, most immeHarper.
Moreover in the Department of Philosophy, which at first also included psyWilliam James, in the famous essay ""The Dilemma of Philosophy,"" in"" which he draws the distinction between the tough-minded and the tender-minded, uses Cripple Creek as an illustration of tough-mindedness as opposed to the tendermindedness of Boston.
The philosophers I am concerned with were a tough-minded lot, though not perhaps entirely in the sense James meant.
John Dewey, George H Mead, James H Tufts, and Addison W Moore were the chief figures in philosophy; James Rowland Angell in psychology; and Edward Scribner Ames in religion.
In this stimulating' atmosphere, the first thoroughly American philosophy was developed.
Pierce and James had begun it, of course; but Peirce, although the real pathfinder in American philosophy had a lot of Kant left in him; and James simply refused to accept all the implications of his own ideas.
F GT\ gjrjJMrJBTB V4 R ^&£2^£jj E PRECISION Bp^ 1 MOTORS Q G a N SERVICE or d SPORT CARS MEIrose 2-6370 1608 S Nevada NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME 16 E Kiowa lllllllllllllllllll lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Lunch Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA The annual Selective Service College Qualification Test will be offered April 27 on the CC campus Application materials are available at the local hoard office, and must be postmarked no later than April 6.
LOST— A Gamma Phi Beta pin with the name ""Beaulah Hood"" and ""Theta"" engraved on the back.
If found, please return to the house, any member, or call Mimi Jones, Ext.
Dewey was at Chicago ten years, from' 1894 until 1904, and it was there he worked out the basic philosophic position he devoted the rest of his long, productive life to developing.
After Dewey left Chicago, Tufts Mead, Moore, and Ames carried on in the spirit born in that first decade.
Dewey is certainly the best known of the group, writing widely in psychology, logic, ethics, social theory, aesthetics, and the theory of nature.
Tufts wrote largely in ethics and social theory; Mead in ethics, aesthetics, and social psychology; Moore in logic; and Ames in the psychology of religion.
I hope to catch something of that excitement and something of the importance of a community of scholars, a community in the sinse of scholars in communication with each other.
Such a community was more nearly realized at Chicago than at any other time or place in the United States.
While Cripple Creek waits for gold to rise, part, at least, of the intellectual world waits for a renaissance of communicahility.
In this way, we would not only gain wider participation and benefits, but also an extra $40,000 to apply toward faculty salaries, for the caliber of faculty makes or breaks a school like this one.
And so it appears that the case against football is indeed imposing, and perhaps the time has come for Colorado College to reach a decision as so many other comparable colleges and universities hava done in the past.
Salinger's ""Catcher in the Rye"" appeared, a novel about sixteen-year old Holden Caulfield's search for something genuine, something free of phoniness, in the world and in himself.
The boy's search is an illuminating one, and this is a sermon about that search and about a man whom the writers of the New Testament, maintaining he is indeed free of phoniness, call the Good Shepherd.
The purpose and the necessity of the armed services is to defend our ideals from Commu. nist forces.
The primary strength of our military program lies in the commitment of the individual to defend these ideals.
Thus, pacifism is intolerable — individual pacifism even more so for it weakens our defenses and makes uv more susceptible to war.
These assumptions are highly patriotic, but unfortunately, very narrow-minded.
One must not assume that a person who opposes organized war is unwilling to defend the ideals of our country.
The belief of pacifism and failure to defend American ideals do not go hand in hand.
We do not feel that the armed services loss of the amount of legal conscientious objectors, living now, will seriously affect our military potential.
In fact, many of these same CO's served during the past wars in a non-violent capacity.
They defended them by fulfilling necessary jobs, but, understandably, they would not beat arms.
Patriotism and the defense of American ideals is not only acceptable, but rewarding.
Nevertheless, for one patriot to say that a non-violent way of patriotism is ""intolerable"" is in itself more intolerable.
Pacifist Speaks A young man, described in a recent anthology as having a long socialist-pacifist background and one of the few knowing bridges between tough politics and beat mutiny, will visit the campus next Friday, March 10.
He graduated from U.C.L.A. in 1953 with a B.A. in political science and has been active in. the pacifist movement since 1949.
He will meet with interested students and faculty at 2:15m. in the WES room.
The meeting will be informal, with Mr McReynolds leading off on topics of disarmament, individual conscience and social change through non-violence.
There will be ample opportunity for questions and discussion among the participants. :i lid. tiitioi H< interbj i' 1 here The lul pi Students receiving loans from Federal funds and wishing to apply for another loan next year are to see Dean Mathias before March 15 to insure the availability of such loans.
B range from economics and business adirounti The school is located on a beautiful place along one of the oldest of Holland.
The main buildId castle but very useful for 'ooms, all with modern equip,ent.
Iff TK> ministration to psychology, political science or foreign languages.
In coordination with this program, outside lectures, excursions to business firms and special courses in banking, journalism, publicity and transport are offered.
The Dutch language gives a lot of trouble in the beginning, but a special course in Dutch of five hours every week will give these students enough knowledge after two or three months to understand the Dutch people.
On March 3 and 5 audiences of about fifty viewers each witnessed the theatrical efforts of Mr James Fox and his student cast of fifteen in the production of ""A Sunny Morning"" by Serafin and Quintero and ""The House of Bernarda Alba"" by Frederico Garcia Lorca.
These actors were quite successful in creating an emotional experience of real value for their audiences — even for some of the reputedly critical members of our campus community.
However, the failure to remember some important lines and the absence of a prompter at these times were rather disconcerting.
Whether or not this effort was ""experimental"" with its ordinary use of stage properties, recorded sounds, artificial lighting and appropriate costumes depends on one's definition of the word.
Perhaps the lengthy program explainingbiographical factors, the aisles through the audience used by the players, the use of blackouts to indicate the curtains, the live music and the symbolic representation of the characters on burlap pieces are experimental.
Certainly the purposes expressed CC Summer School An exciting eight weeks are in store for students who attend the CC Summer Session from June 19 through August 11, 1961.
The departments include anthropology, art, botany, business administration, dance, drama, economics, education, English, French, general studies, geology, German, history, library science, music (applied and theorby the director, Mr Fox, in the TIGER of February 24 were accomplished.
If we are to have more of this ""culture, theater and personal integration of students with many facets of theater work"" at CC, and more support in terms of active interest from both students and faculty, perhaps a building in which to work and materials to work with, will be helpful.
DUAL FILTER 1 QTCytOTl »-, ACTIVATED CHARCOAL inner filler J£J» etical ) , philosophy, photography, physics, political science, psychology, sociology, Spanish, speech and communication, and zoology.
The music department will ask three outstanding string teachers for private and chamber music instruction, and for a series of public concerts.
The Fine Arts School will offev courses and workshops in design, painting, graphic arts, and sculpture, as well as other courses of interest to students.
A new ""program in the Creative Arts"" is projected, which will attempt to tie together the courses olfered in art, dance, drama, literature and music.
Albert Seay, and includes a general studies course on ""The Creative Arts in America"" and weekly colloquia at which practitioners of various ait forms will discuss their particular areas of interest.
For the first time next summer the new programs of Master of Arts in Teaching English and History/Government will attract students who wish to go on for advanced work in teaching, with emphasis on subject matter.
A ""Program in Continuing Education"" will feature three one week long Seminars (meeting during the afternoons), conducted by CC faculty members.
The first of these seminars will deal with the topic ""Interpretations of Contemporary American Society"" and will be led by Dr.
The second will have as its topic, ""Values in a World of Business and Science,"" under the direction of Dr.
Darnell Rucker of the philosophy department; and the third will deal witli ""The Evolution of Physics"" under the leadership of Dr.
Any student who wishes to enroll in the 1961 Summer Session is invited to consult Dr.
Fred A Sondermann, Director of the Summer School, room 201, Peabody House.
The Tigers received a standing ovation as they scored in the three-figure column for the third time this year.
Hanks and Wexels led the CC attack with 22 points apiece, followed closely by a flashy Art Ackerman with 20.
Early in the second half, Art hit for eight straight points to push the CC margin to G4-47.
Farrell Thompson dumped in 18 and Sellitto hit for 13 while playing his usual good defensive game.
Again Cossitt was packed to the rafters as CC, playing the role of conference champions for the first time since 1945, put on a good show for the fans in their last home contest before the NCAA tournament.
Hanks led the scoring with 27 points, followed by Thompson with 17, Wexels with 14 and Ackerman with 13.
Today the red-hot Tigers begin play in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, by playing the host school of this Southwest Regional Tournament of the NCAA small college division championship.
The other schools in the tournament are Trinity of Texas, and Southern Illinois of Carbondale, currently ranked fifth in the nation among small colleges.
While Hockey Team Hides Its Head Friday night's hockey action at Denver saw the Tigers going down in defeat at the hands of the DU Pioneers.
Denver got off to a quick lead as Jon Art scored in the first' thirteen seconds of the opening period.
DU dominated the play throughout with Yankovieh getting CC's lone goal in the middle of the second period, as Denver took the contest 8 to 1.
Hot pink, raspberry, red, mauve, violet, purple, yellow, orange, greens, blues, beiges, all the browns.
Heading the list of candidates is Gordon Aamoth, who has played the number one position on the team for the past two years.
Aamoth has made an excellent record in intercollegiate golf and last year qualified for the United States Amateur Tournament, which was held in St.
Mike Cudaliy, Ed Boychuck, Jim Wexels, Jeff Race, Chuck Beemer, and John Reid.
New men who will he candidates for the squad for the first time are; Bill Hyhl.
The golf season is highlighted by the Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament, which is held annually the second week in May at the Broadmoor Golf Club.
The Betas outscored the Kappa Sigs from the held but hit for fewer free throws.
The Kappa Sigs led all the way but had to suppress a Beta rally in the last few minutes to preserve the victory.
Fouls played an important role in the final moments as the Betas lost two men on fouls and the Kappa pigs made nine out of their last ten charity tosses.
High man for the Kappa Sigs was Terry Wright with 17 followed by Kent Vick with 15.
The Betas were paced by Ned Lawrence, Jerry Osborne, and Tom Rivers with 20, 14, and 10 points respectively.
Tuesday night the Betas played the Phi Gams for second place. gers after having been on the bench much of the season and turned in 32 saves as compared to Kirkwood's 20.
Saturday night in the Tigers final appearance of the year at the Broadmoor World Arena, CC lost their eleventh straight game, falling again to the hands of DU 13 to 3.
The game was marked by a pair of hat tricks by two DU icers, Munro and Walker.
Sch eally speaking, he will acquis good knowledge of the Dutch k uage and, although it is not i most used language, it can heir studying other languages, suc r German.
Also one can learn al* economic problems of a sun country and about the EuroBJ trade unions.
But this is only the schols, side, and in my opinion not i most important side of stndjj abroad for a year.
It is the \i of meeting other people that is£ [f|C portant, to see their way of "" how they behave and what (t think.
To see other countries, ttj el over Western Europe and s the atmosphere of all these is invaluable.
But remember the one can't get accustomed will hi hard time and that he will h; have an open mind to get c this exchange program that avva jbni him.
A Marine Corps Officer selection Team will be stationed in Rastall Center March 23 and 24 from 9:00 until 3:00 m. to interview students for the Marine Corps Platoon Leaders Class.
Linda Dunn-Jack Jones (U If. \ versity of Florida) B» llei Alice Parsons-Tim Tuckee (U versity of Washington) Births: A boy, Stanley Larry H Jr., to Mr and Mrs.
Phi Gamma Delta Hostesses: lama Department will present Enchanted by Jean Grandoux. be admitted with , general adn ■l*n. u dents win W activity ( is $1-25.
The Enchanted was adopted by Valency and first proiced on Broadway on January 8, was an immediate flop. came to the conclusion the play had too much sexual siveness, it needed more btle humor.
Using this as a guide the CC ama Department hopes to make ess of The Enchanted which sidered one of Grandoux's orks.
The play expresses the ,vetnent of a girl into womanmoeence breaking through :o reality with the aid of human Mr Valency says of the play; [ is iot a forceful play.
Rather, is gentle and lyrical and it conys as close to music as one can me with words.
The cast iucludes Mr John ReyIds, the mayor; Mr Nick Nicholl, tor; Miss Jean Nelson, Isa1; Miss Holly Menkel, Miss Jo allei, Miss Ann Armstrong, Miss Lee Turtle, Miss Terry Kidlittle girls; Mr William *, the inspector; Mr Leonard alsemer, the supervisor; Miss Warden, Armande Mangeiss Carol Elfring, Leonide angebois; Mr Miles Hopper, the lost, Sebastian, first executioner id papa Tellier; Mr Ray Chatcond executioner and M irian.
THE SIX QUEEN CANDIDATES for the Honorary Cadet Colonel are, from left to right, Miss Sandra Laizari, Miss Becky Dunbar, Miss Ann Bender, Miss Ann Frey, Miss Ann Willumsen, and Miss Nancy Bowers.
ROTC Military Ball Tomorrow night will be the date of the 9th Annual Military Ball, sponsored by the Colorado College Reserve Officers Training Corps.
The time is 9m. and the place, appropriately enough, is the General Palmer Ballroom in the Antlers Hotel.
The Military Ball is for members of the ROTC Department and special guests.
This is the biggest formal seen during the year at CC, and has been marked by an overwhelming success in previous years.
The formal attire for men is the ROTC uniform with a white shirt and black bow tie.
The ladies in the picture above are in full floor length gowns, but if the gowns are not availiummer Crossroads or GG Students Summer Crossroads is a prodesigned to bring a selected roup of foreign students, about to include their studies in the Uniti States, to an American comlunity for discussions of their n experiences and their jews of the United States, and one of America's most dutiful spots.
Any foreign student, graduate undergraduate, who has studd in the United States for a year ' more and will return to his puntry within the current year, eligible to join this program. | committee of local citizens, with ssistance of the Institute of Irternational Education; and CC, r 'll sponsor this program.
Air Force fcademy, a trip to the Cripple ^eek Melodrama, an Intemation>' Pot-luck Supper, an afternoon ^spection of a community at (pile— all this in addition to home T°spitality and brainstorming disjussions will be offered both the Bnerican and foreign students.
Summer Crossroads wants and [Ms American students to participate in this program.
Persons are ie eded to act as recorders for the 'arious discussions and act as 'ides.
The program promises to rewarding for all concerned. squa able the regular short formals ai Betas Provide Social Aid Last weekend the Colorado College Gamma Delta chapter of Beta Theta Pi distributed a thousand cannisters for the Easter Seal Society in their annual campaign for crippled children.
After Easter the Betas will pick up the cannisters and return them to the Rehabilitation Center.
The Betas received well-earned publicity for their work both in the Free Press and over KRDO television.
In order to raise money for their Mother's Club, the Betas are collecting old clothes and belongings for a chapter rummage sale to be held in the Izaak Walton League Building on March 24.
Mr Ervin Hinds, a sophomore from Denver who is president of his class; Mr Joseph Moore, a sophomore from Grants Pass, Oregon; Mr Gerald Dorsey, a freshman from Hunters, Penna.
As soon as the ground is completely thawed the Betas will begin construction on a 30 by 40 foot basketball volleyball court.
The court will be equipped with a removable plastic cover so that the court can be flooded and frozen for skating.
Since the time schedule for seating cadets is very close, the Academy would appreciate it if those who attend would plan to be seated five minutes prior to the starting time. equally appropri ate.
Cadets and dates will dance to the music of the 179th Army Corps Orchestra.
This orchestra is composed of fifteen' professional players who have played all over the country.
The highlight of the evening will be the presentation of the six queen candidates for Honorary Cadet Colonel.
This year's candidates are Misses Sandra Lazzari, Gamma Phi Beta; Becky Dunbar, Delta Gamma; Ann Bender, Alpha Phi; Ann Frey, Independent Women; Ann Willumsen, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Nancy Bowers, Kappa Alpha Theta These young ladies will make an appearance on television and radio on behalf of the CC ROTC Corps, and will represent the Battalion this coming year.
The Cadet Corps will vote for the Honorary Cadet Colonel this following week.
Lieutenant Colonel Decker permitted all Cadecs to attend drill in civilian clothes last Thursday, enabling uniforms to be cleaned and in perfect order for the Ball.
The Military Ball is paid for by the Cadet Corps, and this year promises to be greater than ever.
Chess Club Plays Sunday, March 12, the Colorado College Chess Team was defeated 5% to 2% by the Air Force Academy in a match held at Rastall Center.
CC's points were made by Mr Paul Szilagyi, who won his game at first board, Mr Jim Costin, winning by forfeit, and Mr Holm Kieser, whose game ended in a draw.
Members of the CC team losing to AFA strength were Mr Joe Wilcox, Mr Arthur Dana, Mr Bob Williams, Mr Wann Rawles, and Mr Bill Lange.
Utilizing the new remote control svstems of KRCC-FM, Perkins Hali will take mi the qualities of an actual radio st nil in-auditorium.
Station breaks, spots, time signals as well as top talent will be integrated into a 90 minute production.
Miss Laurie Perry, Mr Ed Boychuck and other KRCC announcers will appear as guest announcers and will take part in the management of the show.
This is a radio class production and is the first in a series of live broadcasts presented from the CC campus.
All interested people are encouraged to audition, keeping in mind that no dancing or skits may be used.
The talent will be carefully screened Cor a good variety and cross sections of CC's finest entertainers.
The program will be broadcast to Colorado Springs and the surrounding area.
A number of noted professional radio personnel and students of college radio departments will be visiting CC that weekend for the producCampus Opinions On Symposium tourna Hotel. nt at the Broadn In the past week the CC campus entertained what is hopefully only the first with more to follow of Colorado College Symposiums.
The topic chosen for this first symposium was the Science-Humanism Controversy.
The TIGER has wondered just how much of a controversy this topic is on the CC campus, and whether the Symposium has awakened additional curiosity and interest in the students and faculty.
Both faculty members and students were interviewed and many opinions given.
One girl pointed to the origin of the gap between science and the humanities as being in high schools.
There the sciences are predominant with little or no study of ethics and only a practical side of English.
She continued about the nature of the conflict saying a balance is necessary; an adjustment of the inner life with an ethical standing is not being made to the technological advances of science.
A science major said that the emphasis should be equal, with special importance given to the foreign languages for communication.
In college this equal emphasis is maintained with the choice of specialization left to the student.
The trend may be towards specialization, but only a broad knowledge of many things makes this complete.
The emphasis should be upon science with a correlation of the humanities.
In the modem world, a universal, Da Vinci-like man is no longer possible, making the communication of these two opposing disciplines more necessary.
Now theorists, technologists and social scientists share the field of scientific inquiry.
In high schools the sciences are more teachable because of their objectivity and the younger students' awakened need of certitude with an unquestionable fnundation.
However, in later schooling, philosophy and English and art are necessary to an education.
Another professor even questioned the necessity of possibility of communication.
Perhaps the two cultures are of men of two alien temperaments between which there is little possibility of contact.
Judging by these interviews and then the enthusiastic turnouts for the programs, the problem of two cultures on the CC campus is for the main part an important one.
Opinions have varied from the ones stated here of the necessity for some kind of a balance between them and they doubt the controversy is important in the United States or even as another said, exists at all.
In spite of this, those who have thought about it or did attend the speeches and discussions feel that the symposium was both stimulating and worthwhile.
EDITORIAL STAFF etSf n-Chiof OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION — AngelB Absbe.-, Tom Abshcr, Ann Armstrong, Alice Brooks, Wally CaJdwell, Doug Cowles, James Dyson, Myles Hopper, Jane Hult, Sandy Litchfield, Fred Luft, Vicky Morcy.
Kothy Pavlia, Steve Porter, Max Power, Ruth SnodgrasB, John Trotter, Jack Walker, Ted Worcester.
Last week on this page the TIGER presented a format of three articles on sex.
This was done with somequalms on the part of the editors, not because we felt that there might be retribution, but rather a fear that there might not be any response whatsoever.
We did get response; granted most of it was vocal but a few did realize that a paper exists not on words spoken but on words printed.
In going through the various letters, the following points seemed to predominate, so it is to these points we shall answer.
The first and most important item was that our TIGER has not been representing the students, that is, providing full news coverage.
Second, that last week's paper showed up this lack in the most blatant manner in our devoting most of page two to three articles on sex, to the privation of other newsworthy items.
We would like to answer these three points by taking the last one first.
We feel that the TIGER has the potential to be the one campus institution which could provide full communication.
By ""full communication"" we don't mean just reporting and pictures; we mean much more.
For example, we feel that any student should be able to find himself and the issues in which he is interested within the TIGER each week.
Not just in ""Greek News,"" ""Three Little Words,"" or ""Slocum Intra murals,"" not in anything specific but rather the TIGER should be a mirror of the whole individual.
We firmly believe that each of these articles was legitimate, otherwise we would not have printed them at all.
Rather it was the fact that there were three articles, all in one week, all on one page.
Second, that last week's TIGER would seem to be overwhelmingly devoted to this specific subject.
If the TIGER is to fulfill this potential of ""full communication"" and thus represent the student body, this must be done from the bottom up, that is from the students to the paper; as we said above, the TIGER must not be a fabricator.
With a very few notable exceptions the burden of the TIGER is carried by a staff of a dozen dependables; if this is not a faction in anyone's sense of the word, we don't know what is.
As we outlined above, we do not think of the TIGER as a run-of-the-mill, entertaining calendar, as we do not think tliis is in any way representative of the Colorado College Student.
If the TIGER has been unbalanced, the responsibility is ours; but the cure is up to you.
The next all-star] meeting is today from about five o'clock till supper; the TIGEB challenges CC students to put their pens where their mouths are.
Plei U-rrial iibmi be contacted for further ir orma All ma erial will be eration with the abo ve will cation in each issue.
One of the objects of a liberal education, it is said, is to prepare the student for a more mature and reasoned later life.
It would seem that constant warning to college students is hardly a compliment to their intelligence, to say nothing of the quality of the average student at Colorado College.
This attitude is at between boy and girl seems to be i east realistic and the Cornell adchildish or immature.
However, let us examine the opportunity afforded the average student on the campus to express any form of love during his or her stay at college.
If no car is owned by one of the couple in question, there are a variety of romantic places.
The park behind the Fine Arts Center offers all the advantages of outdoor loving; of course it is rather cold in the winter, and the raosquitos and dog walkers in the spring create some hazards.
If one's tastes run to more domestic accomodations, the observatory or Shove Chapel afford cozy nooks if one is willing to wait in line for the facilities.
Any comfortable place is immediately turned into an obstacle course when its whereabouts become known.
In an effort to find the general attitude of the students, the TIGER took a random sampling; some of the results follow.
If these three quotes are representative at all of the majority of students at CC it would seem mandatory that some changes be investigated.
Although student life shouldn't be cloistered we shouldn't have to escape to the back seat of a car to leave a blaring TV set or just to be alone with another.
Our honor system is based upon intellectual responsibility demanded by its occasion; perhaps the same might be sought socially. jeHersjojftej^ Investigation on Morality Hear Editors, I have been withholding judgement on the unique, to say the least, style of your newspaper since your appointment to see what would happen.
Articles such as Venereal Disease and Report from Poverty Gulch have no place in a college newspaper to my way of thinking, or at least not as much of a place as you gave them.
A second disagreement is with the allotment of space to different articles.
I feel that it is a sad day when ""Dido & Aeneas"" completely overshadows such an event as the Winter Carnival.
It would be hypocritical to say that ""Dido & Aeneas"" should be left out, but the Winter Carnival was an occurrence much closer to the students, and the TIGER is a student newspaper.
The victory of the Trinidad debate team is another article given an undue amount of space, as the Winter Conceit article, I believe.
It appears that you are sacrificing the space for articles of a more general interest in order to leave space for subjects that you are interested in.
Remember, there are many different people with many different interests among your readers.
We are paying a very capable photographer to supply you with pictures, and I am sure that is not his fault that they do not appear.
I find myself in serious disagreement with you again on the subject of sports coverage.
The city newspapers give our athletic teams a hard enough time as it is, and I see no reason for the mouthpiece of our student body to carry on the practice.
If your readers really wanted to work a puzzle that badly I'm sure they would go and buy one.
It becomes a chore to have to have to search for the second, third, and fourth sections of every article.
Mr Cashman and I never got along greatly when it came to the TIGER, but now I must congratulate him on his past job and entreat him to give you two some lessons in newspaper publication.
You may wonder where I can muster the gall to write such a letter as this.
These ideas are not only my own, but those of many people who have discussed this subject with me.
Every student is paying for this paper and they are not getting their money's worth right now.
I found this last issue to be enlightening reading from cover to cover.
I like the higher standards of style and subject that yon have been attaining.
Especially appreciated was the frank presentation of anamolies that exist within the American social milieu, the informative article about venereal disease, and the interesting views on morality presented on page two 1 look forward to the same candor, vigor, and responsibility in your treatment of other important Steve Kushnir Dear Editors, First, what I regard as a word of well deserved praise.
Under your direction the TIGER is fast becoming a serious and carefully developed organ of campus expression.
Personally, I have been pleased with the trend being set and sincerely hope you will keep up the good work.
But there may be a need for a word of caution in view of the editorial page in your March 10 issue.
It seems to me that as editors of a campus paper, you have a peculiar responsibility to make the paper reflect topics of immediate concern to the campus community— both in the news and editorials.
Of course, tlu's concern can, and should, be broadly construed and may well be controversial in nature.
Logically, sex is a topic of interest among young adults of college age and one that quite properly ought to be discussed rationally and intelligently by the students.
For this reason the subject of your editorial last Friday was a legitimate one, and the same holds true for the article on campus morality.
One wonders, however, if the third article on VD is quite so pertinent to the audience to whom it was addressed.
I have the very uneasy feeling that the impact of all three on the same page was a bit overdone— that it might well fail in the purpose of arousing interest in an important subject' on a rational level but could rather appear too dramatic an attempt to induce discussion.
While there is nothing seriously objectionable in any of the three articles taken separately, I would question the necessity of taking up so much space on one page of one issue.
Perhaps you are going just a bit too fast in your laudable efforts to make the TIGER a prompter of campus discussion on live issues.
A pinch of caution mixed with a dash of refllection might possibly lead to some second thoughts on the means of gaining your ends.
I wonder if there are not some students who have sufficient interest in the TIGER and the kind of paper they want to express some opinions in the columns of that paper.
It certainly seems to me that several of the recent editorials have covered topics of some hot interest not too many weeks ago.
I feel sure many ""Letters to the Editor"" would be welcome to those responsible for the TIGER and others interested in things that concern Colorado College.
I feel that it is time that the students express themselves concerning the TIGER, and I know that I am speaking for a great deal of the student body.
I believe that this phrase is no longer valid, for recent issues of the TIGER no longer represent the CC students.
In fact, while reading the TIGER, one can't help but get the feeling that he is being talked down to, that his own newspaper is making fun of him.
The TIGER is a newspaper (with a heavy accent on news); we already have an excellent literary and cultural publication for expounding one's talent in such fields.
The weekly standard columns, although admittedly often run-of-the-mill, at least were read and enjoyed by students.
For example, what was the object of last week's editorial page, which in my opinion was ridiculous The report, which under ""The Wolfenden Report, divided into four major sectio introductory, homosexual offei prostitution and recommendation Also in Cnbiim is the book ""Live and Let Live"" which provides an enlight, ening comment on the above men. tinned report.
The investigation was carried o^ judging from the report, in a spfrjt of open-minded willingness to see [| le facts as they are and to treat them as such.
An important recommends tion of the Committee concerninj homosexuals, that ""homosexual l lr .. havior between consenting adults \ n private be no longer a criminal nf fence,"" illustrates this spirit.
The Wolfenden Report has beer introduced into Parliament twice sine, its publication and been twice re. jetted, however, with a smaller innjority the second time.
It is this lasl fact which has specific relevance io those of us concerned with the moral situation in general in the United States.
Patterns of American sexual be. havior pretty much have been to go along publicly and to follow own standards privately.
It would be far more re sponsible to try to bring about I change in the laws.
If so, wha appears to me to be near-sensation alism is a poor way to attain thi And true sex is of utmost interest t every CC student and there is n reason it cannot be maturely discussed, but it is not the purpose ol the TIGER to provide education along these lines.
The purpose of the TIGER is to print news and to be an expression of all the students I hope that the many parents who read that editorial page didn't think it was an expression of CC students Colorado College has been called an apathetic campus all too often.
The hands into which the control of the TIGER falls have a great influence on the campus.
The TIGER is now in capable hands and there is no reason that if everyone's interests are served, the current TIGER cannot be the best ever put out, But remember, this paper *< ours, the students of Colorado College.
Petitions for ASCC president, vice-president, secretary a „d (reasurer are due March ■jg by 4:00m.
Leigh Rainey-Brett Stearns Engaged Judy Gibson-Dave Cavlstrom ,AFA) Married: "" Linda Rork-Bill Berry Births: girl, Laura Ann, to Donna Bll d Steve Bellstrom.
Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 Cap & Gown By Betty Burgoon Two important purposes of college or of a liberal arts education are clarity of thinking and articulate expression.
Since these are obvious and are simply means, instruments in attaining higher goals, they are often obscured.
I am often stricken with how effectiveness and impact of communication are not always a function of the quality of ideas, but very often a function of the speaker's fluency.
It becomes somewhat frightening to realize that even if one has a great wealth of knowledge he can still be ineffectual without the ability to articulate his ideas.
This is extreme, of course; no one is so poor of expression that he is completely incapable of communicating himself to others, but many people are unable to express their ideas clearly and precisely.
Here it could be said that this can often be attributed to foggy thinking, and it is foggy thinking which brings up the second point, that of logical and orderly thinking.
Logical and orderly thinking is a^ skill whicli necessarily develops with practice.
There are many academic practices which aid in developing the aforementioned skills, but I would like to confine myself to two specifically, writing papers and participating in discussions.
Dinner Try Our Presh PIZZA ACROSS FROM CAMPUS Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I IB N Cascade Ave.
On Tuesday, March 21, at 11:00m„ the film ""Communism on the Map,"" a documentary on the progress of world communism in the past fifty years, will be shown in Shove Chapel.
Anyone interested in the film ""Operation Abolition"" will find much of similar controversial interest in this new film.
Time permitting, discussion will follow. ideas and to communicate themselves to others.
Students generally have to read somewhat hurriedly through many assignments and hence formulate vaguely the essence of the material and their evaluation of such.
When a more critical analysis becomes necessary, as in paper writing, the student organizes the material in a systematic and orderly fashion and hence begins to sharpen his critical abilities.
For this reason, I feel papers are an excellent exercise, perhaps much more so than tests because of the time element involved.
Tests can precipitate muddled expression when in an attempt to get all his ideas down and all of the questions answered, the student scribbles the answers with little opportunity to consider the various possibilities of presentation and expression.
Oral expression can be improved not only through classroom discussion but through such things as extracurricular discussion groups many of which have been organized on campus recently.
In these discussion groups various disciplines are usually represented and topics of discussion require integration and synthesis of ideas from several areas of study, thus the problem of communication becomes more acute when one has to express himself to people outside his discipline, and the need for clear and logical thinking becomes more evident when complex and abstract questions are being considered.
The student can develop clarity of thinking and articulate expression through many means, but I have offered these two for particular consideration.
Too often the value of writing papers is overlooked, and too often the value of discussions underestimated.
If college students are to be influential members of society, they must be concerned with the development of these skills and consider the various means of doing such.
Chow Yin Ling Loomis Girls Foster Child The girls on the third floor of Loomis Hall deserve recognition for a project which they undertook last November.
Through the efforts of the floor president, the girls decided to financially adopt a ten year old Chinese girl in Hong Kong.
The Foster Parents' Plan, founded in 1937, has helped more than (500,000 young people.
This organization is non-profit, non-propaganda, non sectarian, providing financial aid for orphaned or distressed children.
She receives $8 in cash and the rest goes into food, clothing packages, translations of letters, medical services and education.
Her family is one of the hundreds of thousands of refugee families living in extreme poverty in tiny huts in one of the areas surrounding Hong Kong.
The family's monthly income is $31.50, Because Pershing Rifle Maneuvers Sunday, March 12, Pershing Rifles held a field problem at Fort Carson.
After leaving at 7:00m. the group split into two groups, aggressors and defenders.
The plan of the day was for the defenders to re-take ground lost to the aggressors through four obsticles to the final objective, Machine-Gun Hill.
These practices are for members and interested MS-III cadets to help them when they go to summer camp for basic training.
Own.i of the insufficient funds, Chow Yin Ling cannot pay the sixty cents a month for her education.
She is a bright student and deserves the help she is now receiving from the CC students.
Her ""foster parents"" send her gifts and letters to make her feel that there is someone who is taking an active interest in her future.
Next year the whole hall will take over the support of Yin Ling, because it is a financial burden for a small group of girls.
The hall will continue to send money to Yin Ling only for another year.
Loomis Hall hopes to have this project continued even after the initial instigatnr.s have all graduated.
The GOLDEN DRAGON I4OT S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful S.rvlng Family Styl.
Wahsatch March 17, 1961 Colorado College Tige Letter to the Editor items of current interest.
The TIGER is neither ,i textbook nor a Salvation Army bandstand— it is a college newspaper.
If I wish to read about decaying morals and decaying flesh I can go to any city newspaper or any medical magazine in die country.
But when the activities of this college are first encountered in die FREE PRESS or the GAZETTE -TELEGRAPH, then the TIGER is not functioning well, perhaps not functioning at all.
Charles E Puckett Dear Editors, At the discussion concerning athletics at Star Ranch, we felt that the dissenting opinion was not adequately expressed.
In this letter we would like to suggest some ideas and solutions to the athletic problem.
It was pointed out at the conference that spirit and winning teams are directly related.
What was not pointed out was the fact that winning teams take a great deal of money.
We question the validity of losing $50,000 alone, much less the cost of the entire athletic program.
We condemn the solutions to this problem which we offered at the All College Conference.
The only value we can see in this suggestion is the decrease in attendance taking.
To us, there are no signs that the S50.000 deficit will go down in the future if all NOIB Applications Written applications are to be turned in to Mr Al Johnson's office, room 102, Palmer Hall.
Deadline for application is March 17, after which all applicants will be interviewed by the Foreign Student Committee and a mid-April decision made. the intercollegiate athletics are to he continued.
It was almost pointed out at the conference that spirit was more important than academics.
It is important to realize that spirit is the sum total of many things of which football is just one.
Spirit may also be achieved through plays, concerts, intramurals, and other such activities which cost far less than the intercollegiate program.
We feel that §50,000 could be used in a more beneficial way by a broadening of the intramural program and by creating a physical education program which would benefit the entire campus instead of a select few.
It is our contention that if this happens it will only be due to a failure on the part of the stu.lent body to adjust to a new environment and to create new ideas and interests.
The choir will leave on the morning of March 29th, return the afternoon of April 10th, and will sing eleven concerts during that time.
The program (which will be heard on our campus later this spring) includes a fifteen-minute portion of the Bach motet, ""Jesu, Priceless Treasure,"" some early church music of the Renaissance, some Easter carols and spirituals, two rarely performed German works of Hugo Wolf, and ""Jesus and the Traders,"" by Zoltan Kodaly, the contemporary Hungarian composer.
South Gnrfield AveMonterey Park, California. \pril 4 — College Avenue Congregational Church, ColleRe Avenue at Orangeburg, Modesto, California. program of reading of poetry is being sponsored by the Departments of English and Foreign Languages.
These readings will be held on Wednesdays at 4:00m. in the WES room f Rastall Center.
The emphasis is to be on the readings themselves, with little or no commentary Ur translation.
March 22— EE Cummings, Mr Van Becker April 12 — Spanish Poetry, Miss Perry April 19— Middle English Poetry, Mr Ross ay 3 — German Poetry, Brandt Mr May 10 — Gerard Manly Hopkine, Mr Racey May 17— French Poetry, Mr Boyce May 24— Old English Poetry, Mr McCue March 'J'J — Community Congregational Church.
March 30 (""omniumi} M ih.«iist Church, shemukeVs • CAMERA SHOP • 30 NORTH TEION STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store rtio Latftl Selection of Photographic Equlpa*mt I Rocky 'Mountain Atoa Jm Doall orce nOJBcers Jame o TvmgsV Decidedly not.
And it is foreseeable that in your working lifetime, there will be piloted spacecraft— piloted and navigated by Air Force officers.
But right now, there is also a big future for collegetrained Air Force officers on the ground.
Important administrative positions must be filled as World War II officers move into retirement.
Then for college graduates, men and women in certain fields, there is Officer Training School.
The graduate of its three-month course wins a commission as a second lieutenant.
Other ways are the Navigator Training program, and the Air Force Academy.
Starting salary plus allowances compare with the average in equivalent civilian jobs.
Then there's free medical and dental care, thirty-day vacation, the chance to win graduate degrees at Air Force expense, and liberal retirement provisions.
United States Air Force There's a place for professional achievement on the Aerospace Team Colorado College Tiger • March 17, 1961 Today is the Last Day to Turn In Kinnikinnik Contributions Pacifist Stirs Listeners Local Art Shows Review Slocum Intra murals Friday David McReynolds before a small crowd in the fcc room, largely in reply to *Jions from the floor.
These Ufons came fast and furious contingent of ColoF Springs folks who had scatty themselves throughout the iience. » so cialist-pacifist, McReynolds ,viuusly extremely devoted to his beliefs.
One very interestD it of biographical information [that McReynolds' father is an er in the United States Army and his dfather an officer in the Air e He implied that despite his lilitavy"" background, his family ,1 of him for showing inriduality and non-conformity.
Lher or not they are proud of jt was clear that he stands Uy, and w e might add admirlv on his convictions. t necessary to summarize s he made, but it is untie 1 1"" portant to give recognition to the manner in which he handled himself.
The speaker, tired from a day of travel, spoke clearly and logically and in a meaningful context.
Whether anyone there agreed with his doctrine of socialism or that of pacifism, he was admired both for his devotion and his penetrating comments.
McReynolds displayed true pacifism when confronted by a group of shallow, provincial, and disgustingly patriotic citizens of this city.
The people of Colorado Springs were so afraid that members of our faculty and administration received approximately fifteen calls to stop McReynolds from speaking here.
They said that it wasn't fair to subject young students to the trash of a socialist-pacifist.
Their concern was doubly unwarranted, for there were only thirteen students present anyway.
However, M Buck's other paintings are too contrived, both in color and subject matter.
This is unfortunate because with such control, more inventiveness and greater awareness would make his work very good.
The Fine Arts Center is now displaying ""Drums, Rattles, and Flutes,"" the musical instruments of the Pueblos, Apaches, and Navajos of the Southwest.
One rattle is a large square of leather with pieces of hoof and tin bells placed along the bottom.
The drums are made of clay and wood; one is an enromous clay pot and another a tree trunk.
Conch shells were imported from the west coast and trumpets were made of them, with clay mouthpieces.
The musical bow was the first string instrument; next were wooden fiddles with deer sinew for strings.
Also at the Fine Arts Center currently is the Contemporary Artists Show, with a few unusual paintings.
Springs' Homo of Whooli SCHWIHH and RALEIGH BICYCLES COMPLETE SERVICE ALL MAKES 4I0 W Colorado Ave.
Some twenty-four men participated and the competition got difficult as the semi-finals and finals approached.
This competition should bring together the best from the Intramural League and others on campus that have shown good ability with the paddle and ball.
Baseball Team Has First Practice The Tiger baseball season got under way Tuesday afternoon with the first workout of the spring.
Again this year pitching seems to be the real trouble spot on the team.
About sixteen showed up for the initial workouts with several lettermen returning.
A couple of positions on the infield and outfield have been vacated since last year but pitching warrants the most improvement.
The Tigers will be handicapped somewhat with their pending schedule from a rather late start with training.
Spring vacation will interrupt the practice schedule and the first game is with Mines on April 12th, just two days after the spring break.
Also there is a series with State, the conference power, on April 14th and 15th.
It was a combination of too much height and poor hitting from the floor that beat the Tigers.
SEMO had a big team and CC only hit for 34 per cent of their shots as achievement to win the conference against a hot 45 per cent for the seachampionship and get the Tournason.
Riller of SEM had 22 points and Gray and Cressing, both 6' 7"", had 19 and 18. ended one of their most successful consolai nt, CC > Saturday night in the round of the tourna Trinity of Texas and again were against a big team.
Thompson had 17 points again to lead the Tigers in scoring, Hanks had 12 and Sellitto 10.
CC didn't fare too well in thi nt, ial much to be proud of in addition to the tourney and the championship.
There is no shame in taking fourth tournament such as this one The intramural track meet will be held this weekend with preliminaries this afternoon and final events tomorrow.
Alumni Play Hockey For Charitable Fund Saturday night the Tigers lost to DU 10-5 in a hockei game at the Broadmoor World Arena.
The familiar faces Gee, Dutkowski, Boychuck and Moskal weren't there how ever.
Instead there were the faces of alumni, some recent and some not so recent, playing in a charity game which nett&i the Heart Fund $507.78.
Some of the great hockey names of the area were in th( lineup, such as Ikola in the goal, and lines featuring nani^ like Frasca, Love, Whitworth, Yalich, and the famous ""warv of the flashing blades, Jerry Carle.
Jack Smith and Jim S\v were the big guns for the Pioneers as they each pumped a hat trick in a game that was as entertaining as anything we've seen at the Broadmoor for a long time.
Since 1899 ME 2-6635 NEW BOOKS ■ ■ • USED LAHOlfT SUCTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOMI ULKIewa Ben Lustyk Tuxedo Rental Complete Accessories 3 1 8 East Pikes Peak ME 2-7215 When It's Murfc If.
MEIroie 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre T pram his S] C ig<H 1 We 4) C iGEf iait kef"" Statement of Policy 'A Shop Dedicated to the Genteel Traditions of Good Grooming"" rrihe London Shop's single purpose is to gratify your taste for traditional elegance.
Our policy is to impeccably groom every customer to his own total satisfaction.
Our interest is in your final appearance and not in the size of the order you wish to place with us.
In selecting the merchandise we feel we can recommend, our Buyers are instructed to place quality uppermost, and to obtain from the finest sources, anywhere in the world, the styles and fashions of good taste and excellence which will assist in creating the air of distinction all properly groomed gentlemen desire.
The London Shop, to serve you, must insist on your own interest in your own appearance.
Our best advertisement is the man we serve whose appearance tells the story.
Open 9 to 6, Friday 9 to 8:30 Dial MElrose Five, Two, One, Two, Six r Colorado College Tiger • March 17, 1961 ASCC Executive Elections By Jane Hult The following qualifications submitted by the Election , mmittee are concerned with the ASCC elections to be held lus spring.
THE PRESIDENT OF ASCC, [sides presiding at the meeting r the Executive Council, has the ■ower to appoint, with the advice md consent of the Executive Weil the members and chair,f the standing committees.
The resident also serves on the Honor jouhcil and is an ex-officio memier of the Student Conduct Comnittee.
He must be willing to derote time to his duties and act in iuch a way as to create enthusimong members of the comnittees and among the student iody as a whole.
It is his extra [uty to unite the campus continuity and give spirit to its memlers.
The vice-president is responsible [or all campus communications binding the student body, the ;ive Council, the administraid the faculty.
He traditionally heads the enthusiasm commite which is responsible for freshan orientation week.
Any new •ganizations on campus come to m for help so he must be enTiger Club Hostess o Deaf Students Sunday afternoon from 3:00 to r :00, the Tiger Club entertained Sixty students from the Colorado School for the deaf and blind.
Miss Carol Swartz, as chairman of the afternoon was assisted by members of the Tiger Club, and Black and Gold.
The party given Sunday was preceded by a party in November also given for the students of the deaf and blind school.
The games area was [open for free bowling, pool, and pingpong, so that every student had a chance to do ""Something which was of interest to him.
To show their appreciation to the Tiger Club, the students invited them to a roller skating partv in April.
The Tiger Club deserves recognition for the efforts they have shown to give these students a chance to leave their school campus and meet new people.
Before Tiger Club undertook to provide this entertainment, the deaf and blind students had never been entertained off their campus.
Other service projects that the Tiger Club has performed this year are leading campus tours, participating in freshman orientation, assisting at registration, helping with National Defense Week, and ushering for the Variety Show.
On Wednesday, April 12, right after vacation, the Tiger Club will be tapping new members.
The new members will be chosen from Tigerettes on the basis of interest, enthusiasm, and cooperation.
New members will be' required to wear 1'ellow ribbons for one week. thusiastically concerned about helping form new groups on campus.
He is also an ex-otficio member of all ASCC committees to help them in all fields.
The vice-president of ASCC must be an enthusiastic person devoted to the college because he spends on an average the most hours per week furthering the successful college atmosphere.
The secretary of ASCC maintains the office, writes all thankyou notes and invitations for the council.
The secretary spends on the average of 3 hours a week taking care of these duties.
The treasurer is chairman of the Finance Committee of the Executive Council and submits a proposed budget to the Executive Council concerning the allocation of ASCC funds.
At the first of the year he holds hearings with the campus organizations concerning their financial needs.
PETITIONS ARE DUE FOR president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer at Rastall Center desk by 4:00 on March 28.
The candidates for president will give their speeches at an all-school assembly on April 11.
ASCC Executive Council has invited all interested students to a coffee hour in the WES lounge which will be held in April.
Also any student who wishes to know more about ASCC Executive Council is urged to attend the meetings on Monday afternoons.
Students interested in serving on the Assemblies Committee during the school year 196162 are requested to complete the standard extra-curricular activities application form.
The form is available at Rastall Desk and must be turned in no later than April 24.
GG Students Speak For Red Gross Drive Two Colorado College men are serving as volunteers on the Speakers Bureau of the Red Cross during the present Red Cross fund drive.
Mr Max Powers, sophomore, has already been called upon to make several speeches in behalf of the Red Cross.
Mr Power is from Denver, a resident of Slocum Hall, president of the student's Young Republican Club and an honor student.
Mr Chris Griffith of Pueblo is the other member of the Speakers Bureau.
Mr Griffith is a junior, a member of the debate team and affiliated with Beta Theta Pi fraternity.
The Rer Cross Speakers Bureau is composed of several community leaders, radio personalities and long-time Red Cross volunteers in addition to the students.
The Bureau is headed by the Reverend William Tatum of the First Presbyterian Church.
Parent's Weekend Set for April The fourth annual Parents' Weekend of Colorado College will be held this year on April 28, 29 and 30.
Miss Betsy Foote and Miss Joan Jilka, student directors, have done a great deal in coordinating the activities and seeing that everything runs smoothly.
The committee chairmen for this year's Weekend consist of Miss Patricia Adams, parent-faculty dinner, Miss Ann Armstrong and Mr Glen Clark, chuckwagon breakfast, Miss Eleanor Jones, registration, Mr Dave Furgason, publicity, Miss Nadine Chang, open houses, Miss Sylvia Stenovec, Saturday evening entertainment, Mr Jerry Northern, Song Fest, Miss Karen Bessesen, Shove Chapel Program, and Mr James Dyson and Miss Gretchen Feroe, assembly.
Mr William Barton, instructor in economics and business, is this year's faculty advisor and has given much valuable aid.
All parents of CC students were sent invitations and RSVP cards to be returned by March 25.
It is hoped that students will encourage their parents to come, and if the decision to come is made after March 25, the committee co-chairmen ask the students to let them know of the change in plans.
This year's Parents' Weekend promises to be the best thus far for both parents and students.
The book was written by Mr Paul Szilagyi, a senior chemistry major here at Colorado College, and Dr.
Mr Szilagyi spent a year and a half doing research and writing the book.
He is planning to spend next summer at Reed College, Portland, Oregon, with a research grant.
Kolonits, prior to 1966, was the head of the Hungarian Pharmaceutical Institute.
Miss Barbara Wadell, Miss Ann Ruth, Miss Jo Ann Wallis, Miss Ruby Haslam, Miss Bobbie Tolley and Miss Margie Taylor all have a chance to become ""Miss Lady Luck"" at the IMA Las Vegas Night, to be held tomorrow night at Rastall Center.
Vegas Comes to CC Tomorrow The annual ""Las Vegas Night"" sponsored by the lndependent Men's Association for the whole student body will begin tomorrow night, March 25, at 8:30m. in Rastall Center's dining room.
The admission price will be $1.50, for which you will receive gambling money, a chance on the door prize and the opportunity to vote for your Miss Lady Luck candidate.
In the past this evening has been most successful in terms of fun for the many participants.
Winners at the end of the evening will have a chance to bid for prizes at an auction with the money they have accumulated during the evening.
The side attractions of refreshments, the green 1952 Pontiac which is the door prize, and Miss Lady Luck should make this return to the old West an enjoyable affair for everyone.
The candidates for Miss Lady Luck are Miss Jo Ann Wallis Alpha Phi; Miss Bobbie Tolley, Delta Gamma; Miss Barbara Wadell, Gamma Phi Beta; Miss Ruby Haslam Ind* pendent Women; Miss Margie Taylor, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Miss Ann Ruth, Kappa Kappa Gamma.
The play, complete with ghost and executioner is considered elusive but forceful.
Rabbi to Speak The Colorado College Religious Affairs and Assemblies Committees are jointly sponsoring the three day visit of Dr.
Sunday, March 20 at 11:00m., the Rabbi will speak at the Shove Chapel Sunday morning service on the theme ""Robots Don't Pray.
Rabbi Silverman, of Congregation B'nai Jehudah, Kansas City, Missouri, lectures on college campuses under the auspices of the Jewish Chautauqua Society, an organization which creates better understanding of Jews and Judaism through education.
After spending the symposium week sandwiching classes in between 'gladitorial combats,' it is apparent that the symposium, per se, is a good thing.
It started students and faculty thinking and talking about an important issue.
It drew large crowds of people, with a balanced student-faculty ratio, who came to the programs to listen and perhaps even participate.
Most important, it proved that this sort of thing can be done at CC and be well supported.
Any criticism of this event must be taken in view of the fact that the program was somewhat of the nature of an experiment.
Many of the symposium's deficiencies were apparent through the audience.
First, the audience, save a few who knew the symposium was coming and a few who caught on quickly, was not orientated to the problem.
Also, during the five different sessions, most but not quite all of the audience seemed to ignore the subjects selected by the symposium committee and ask those it pleased.
This resulted in harrying the speakers and making the whole schedule of the symposium seem disjointed.
Finally, there was no opportunity to follow up any of the ideas raised during the week because of the scheduling of exams ana"" vacation.
The program itself has been under more local fire than any one part of the symposium.
Fiedler were the best choices, and if the committee had to sacrifice ideas on personnel because of time being short.
Perhaps the best way to get speakers who would work out is to start selecting, interviewing if possible, and deciding early.
Also, it would seem more fruitful to find some way of informing the campus so as to create the issue chosen for the symposium before the outside speakers arrive.
This should help the audience to cooperate with the committee as it plans the themes of each session.
A follow-up program, perhaps based on a synopsis of what was said at the sessions, could be arranged for beforehand.
The whole program should be put at a time of year when there is time for students to participate in this follow-up.
The symposium is potentially a good thing, contributing more to the campus than any 'Vance Packard' of the past few years.
The only way to accomplish even more for next year would be to start organizing now.
Girls Dorm Positions Open By Jane Hult There is a group of students on campus who receive very little recognition for the difficult job that they have.
At this time of year, when new dorm presidents and counselors must be chosen, it seems necessary to inform the campus of the requirements and responsibilities of these positions.
This GPA must be maintained throughout the term of office, one year, or the girl is replaced.
If her grades fall below this mark at the semester she is given until midsemester to bring them back up.
Usually the sophomores are counselors because they are not as busy as the upperclassmen and therefore have more time to devote to their office.
The dorm presidents also have a 2. and are usually taken from the incoming junior class.
THE GIRLS WHO ARE CHOSen to be counselors and dorm presidents have a very important job.
It is their duty to help the freshmen women get settled and feel at home here on this campus.
Many of the freshman women have never lived in a dormitory and it is a new and often bewildering experience.
In an address by Miss Russell at the conference for new counselors and dorm presidents, the qualifications and requirements for these positions were stated.
If the counselor has good study habits and conscientiously does her work she will encourage her counselees to do likewise.
A good example does much more toward gaining order out of a chaotic situation than many lectures given at wing meetings.
By not placing an emphasis on expensive clothing or dating the counselor can relieve pressure in these areas.
The honor system, an important aspect in dorm life, must be upheld by the counselor and emphasized in a subtle way in her everyday life.
The counselor must be able to convey a feeling of individual concern to each member of her wing so that each girl will feel that she has someone to go to when she has a problem.
A counselor must be able to give good advice; advice stemming from her own persona] experience.
If her experience does not cover the situation she should direct the girl to someone who can help her.
A GIRL MAY BE NOMINATed by her resident, her wing, or the dorm council for the position of counselor.
Also a girl may apply independently of these means by securing an application blank from one of the dorm presidents.
For beat reiiQlls please submit all material in written form to the boiea in Rastall or CDtler.
Please sign all material submitted bo ybe contacted for further information if need be.
Your cooperation with the above will assure you of | Letters to (he Editor Dear Editors, The Science-Humanism controversy pointed up the problem which lies at the basis of a philosophy of liberal education, namely the reconciliation of an enormous mass of facts and a limited amount of time to understand them.
A liberal eduittidy of a as well as tzation. ;s this problem by the dde variety of subjects major field of specialIn connection with the problem of the difficulty of communication between groups of scientific speciallists, a leading physicist proposed that an individual should study two subjects, far removed, gaining a deep knowledge in each of these two, as well as an acquaintance with other fields.
Perhaps a similar program would he advantageous to some students at CC, humanists as well as scientists.
One prevalent danger of a somewhat superficial knowledge in fields outside the major subject is the tendency to disbelieve the validity of the study o fthe other fields.
Some chemists dismiss sociologists as being too broad in their subject matter, while dramatists regard the mathematician as being too trifling, and so on, ad absurdum.
This disbelief is certainly a closing of a young person's mind to the problei of the world, ""a mortal sin, in all the horrible connotations of the word,"" to quote Dr.
The above mentioned program might reduce this disbelief and pessimism more than the traditional type of liberal education, since a deep knowledge of widely diversified fields would help to form a bridge for the communication of ideas between fields, for it is only through higher level courses that one finally begins to understand what a subject is really about, and learns to be proficient in its language and concepts.
The Student Curriculum Committee Dear Editor, This letter is written in regard to the policies of the Nugget staff for this year.
A fee was imposed on the fraternities for the amount of S75 for their pictures that are to appear in the Nugget.
This fee may or .may not be reasonable — no one seems to know for sure.
The amount was not so objectionable to the fraternities as was the way of handling the bUling of the costs.
In previous years we have not had to pay for our pictures or at least were not billed for them.
Most people were under the impression that the cost of the yearbook was taken from the amount of tuition charged each student.
This is apparently not so for this year all fraternities and sororities had to pay the aforementioned fee.
This year is over and done with but not without a lot of ill feeling on the part of die fraternities toward the Nugget staff.
This staff's failure to notify these organizations concerning this fee caused a lot of heated argument on both sides.
It is hoped, by writing this letter, that the Nugget staff for next year will try to have a better sense of direction as far as their communicatioris are concerned.
If they were to give a full account of their costs and what they have to receive in order to presidents and executive board consisting of old and new members.
Any girl who would like to be a counselor should secure an application form nov; because the deadline is March 29.
The duties of a counselor are many but it is a rewarding experience and an opportunity to get to know the freshman girls.
Snow's exposition of fl problem, students and faculty attended the symposium, )\ l} . ing f or ' ■-■ fight, a resolution, a definition, a further exposition — or something.
But Tuesday morning at the first scheduled meeting none of these expectations were fulfilled.
No fight, no resolution, no definition, no further exposition, because Dr.
Koch was alone (his antagonistto-be was stuck in Salt Lake City at the time,) and ""frightfully,"" as he put it, ""long-winded,"" and relatively incomprehensible.
Tuesday night the audience came armed with the same expectations plus one more.
They hoped not only to clarify the problems involved in the science-humanism controversy, but Dr.
I feel that the English department on this campus is in part to be blamed for this failing.
Speaking as a freshman, I have been bothered by the lack of enthusiasm in creative work.
I have heard complaints from other students who enjoy writing; some of whom were thinking seriously of majoring in English.
These students have been discouraged to the point of changing their major because of the lack of inspiration which exists in classrooms where English is professed to be taught.
When restricted to writing analytical papers on the Greek poets, the creative student cannot, is not, allowed to develop his creative talents.
Many freshmen come from schools where they were asked to write original themes every week.
They developed their minds, quickened their wits and turned out very good writing.
These people expected to come to college and continue in this manner to improve with the superior guidance that is supposed to be found in the English departments of colleges.
A friend of mine at Pomona could not get her writing graded because it was said to be too radical or too original.
Progress in writing as well as in any other field, comes when someone dares to turn away from the ""accepted"" methods and venture on their own.
Freshmen as well as the upper class students must continue to develop their talents immediately upon entering college and not be forced to regress two, three or even four years.
Therefore, I say that it is not only the students fault that you are having trouble finding printable material, but it is also the fault of the English department.
Fiedh Those dissatisfied did not, hV ever, give up but continued to aj tend symposium meetings, perW to heckle, perhaps to back the h* men off their stated positions, perhaps to enjoy the sensation getting their feathers ruffled ov something.
Many came to get look at that ""wild man"" Koci who, for all his so-called mean Eur fount f^eii prehensibility, was fascinating and to compare Koch with tb deft and witty Feidler.
Here was a man, some beg; realize, who was refusing to adaj himself to the familiar clich< the science-humanism dispute, refused, for simplicity's sak> for the scientists' sake, or evR for clarity's sake to make inaccw ate generalizations on whal considered to be a very comply subject.
The subtleties involved breaking down the continuum knowledge and knowledge-seek require a sensitivity and a pre sion to which no generalizaii< can adequately contribute.
Feidler was more generally accepted as a representative of the humanities that Koch of the ences.
Feidler more or less up to the expectations of those attending the symposium, articulate, relatively telegraphic, witty, and gracious.
But while his contributions were entertaining, he left little concrete by waf of creative suggestions toward defining and solving the problems whatever they may be, in the science-humanism dispute.
As they Sound that a trip to Europe is a mating and instructive expen, for the student of history, j, music and geography, Dr. a,t ; ch er plans to escort a 56-day nittman Grand Circle Tour to Sope, leaving Ne» York City August 15 and returning about October 9, 1961.
The tour will begin in London n A visit nineteen countries, with Sels as far north as Bergen, Norway, east to Vienna, and south to' Naples and Barcelona.
The mode of travel will vary from olane to Ireland, by ship to Norway, via train from Copenhagen to' Cologne and some forty clays bv a luxurious touring bus on the j Continent. pjltman escorted tours include Jiree services which mean much to f] ]e traveler; hotel reservations are 3 weeks in advance, porters f your two bags and tips for normal services are included in the price. can be noted that students after 36 days may fly home from Rome in time to meet their classes at Colorado College.
Symposium Reinterpretations On March 16th the Colorado College ""Science-Humanism Symposium"" came to a close.
The following day, Wednesday the 15th of March, two more sessions, in which faculty and students as well as our guests participated, took place.
The topics at this time were C P. ment of chairs to the topic of discussion, spoke of an unusual Snow's essay concerning the conflict and, in the evening Society of Friends Sponsors Discussions By Ruth Snodgrass Of the many speakers that come to Colorado College each vear, perhaps the most unique was a Dr.
Rachel DuBois who, sponsored bv the Society of Friends, presented a program last Sunday in the WES Room.
DuBois, through leading a discussion based on the time sense, on the relation of past, present and future to the life of the individual, showed that viable conversation could be generated in a group of apparently disparate people.
Although the answers in themselves were interesting, the ferment of ideas that this one question raised, ideas of where you were and what you were feeling when you were twelve was what gave life to the discussion.
DuBois led the conversation into memories of friendships, friendship in general, the problems to friendship that the present offers, the problems in general that the present offers, and approaches to the future.
The contributions of the participants were usually simple, often entertaining, sometimes profound, but always of interest.
The discussion ended with a period of silence, traditional in Quaker meetings.
DuBois is on a speaking tour, sponsored by the Advanced Committee of the Friends' General Conference. meeting, the relation of the conflict to a liberal arts college.
Formal meetings ended on the 16th with a discussion of the relation of the science-humanism conflict to the nature of man, but informal discussions have not yet ended.
These informal discussions are of greater value now than before the symposium because the students are well informed and have firm grounds on which to base their arguments and opinions.
WAGER, Owa Watch and Jewelry Repairing DON THOMPSON COLLEGE TIME SHOP Col.
Science By Ray Chatfield Suddenly there is overpopulation; there is the 'A' bomb; there is the threat of mutation by radiation.
Perhaps the ""serve humanity"" angle seems too high flown and idealistic.
Let us say simply he had a natural curiosity which he sought to satisfy, and, without regard to ""humanity,"" went his own way to discover one of nature's secrets.
If he does not care about ""humanity"" and wants to keep his discovery to hansel., he will gi.e it to keep society from p rse. tiling him and skinning him alive.
He has no choice, and yet when his ideas are spread by society and the harm from them finally comes, the world cries out, ""It was you.
Out of the good, but selfish desire to live, the members of society took the scientist's ideas from him.
They wished the medical discoveries to prolong life; they have cauBed overpopulation.
They wished the secret of the 'A' bomb to keep other people from endangering their way of life, but they have endangered all peoples with sudden death, radiation, and perhaps extinction.
If it is agreed that We the society are in part responsible for this dilemma, we should employ once again the knowledge of the scientist and with his help take it on ourselves to realistically solve this problem. fe provoke further Humanism By Joan Manly While .scientists and humanists share a similar aim, the enrichment of the .body nf knowledge, the humanists' concerns are primarily with ideas, ideals and interests, not always publicly and empirically verifiable, which he believes to be distinctively human.
A humanist, then, strives to understand the human situation; to this end he may employ a variety of methods.
In the movement toward this goal, the humanist employs the vigorous use of rationality, a faculty in which he has much faith although he recognizes its limitations in finite man.
The humanist is much concerned with interpretations relative to the many problems with which Inworks; he attempts to make distinctions and sensitive, intelligent choices between good and evil, plcasureable and painful, beautiful and ugly.
As a result of this, and, moreover, as a result of the multiplicity of humanistic problems and methods, the humanist cannot restrict himself to experimentation within the confines of a laboratory.
Moreover, the humanist attempts to ""report"" on man as he sees him; thus the humanist is likely to he a mcliorist, rather than an optimist or a pessimist.
I suspect that most humanists believe that the goal of man is the attainment of "", . . continuous, supreme, and unending happiness;"" that the realization of this goal muy well be beyond the reach of men is a tragedy humanists acknowl 'ilge.
However, humanists Ijelicve Unit this goal is approachable through the seeking of diversified knowledge, and through the understanding that knowledge yields pertaining to the somewhat malleable relationship between oneself and one's world.
Perhaps most humanists are of the opinion that were the humanistic traditions to become impotent, the wind might soon whistle through the ruins of civilization.
Brooks, of the political science department, has recommended a series of three pamphlets on the problem of war in the nuclear age.
Not only are the pamphlets on a topic of current interest and controversy, but they are also briefer and more concise than the books on the subject.
The first of the series, ""Community of Fear"" by Harrison Brown and James Real makes a prediction.
The continuation of the war system with its ""explosive technology"" and ""encrusted political and moral concepts"" will result in thermonuclear .catastrophe or fearful retreat at the expense of democratic values.
The second, ""A World Without War"" by Walter Millis states that, if the war system were abolished, we could find a pi-acticable international forder for the continued existence of a civilized world.
The final pamphlet, ""Permanent Peace"" by Walter Millis attempts to examine the questions of power in order to formulate a better theory of national and international power.
Such a theory might help us make the transition from the world of today to the desired warless world of the future.
In this third pamphlet he suggests two solutions to the problem of transition.
First, the relations of the American states might be used as an example of how international power could be organized in the absence of an organized war system.
These states operate among themselves without war and without a ""world"" government.
Second is the realization by the states of the world that the power struggle can be carried on bymeans other than military force.
For example, there are economic pressures, ideological appeals, and subversion.
According to this, Millis is correct in saying that the Soviet Union really does want disarmament and may be sincere in its proposals.
It is just as interested as the United States in preventing the thermonuclear devastation of the world and in redirecting the economic resources committed to the military structure to more productive uses.
The Soviet Union is also better prepared than the United States for the various forms of indirect aggression.
He is also correct in saying that the vague concept of Russian ""control"" of the world or of any area needs clarification.
Does ""control"" mean military occupation, economic domination, or the triSpring Vacation Indian Work The Religious Affairs Committee is sponsoring a work-camp over Spring Vacation in Gallup, New Mexico for Colorado College students and faculty.
The group plans to leave on Saturday, April 1st and spend the week at the Gallup Indian Community Center.
Like most student work-camps, the participants will work with the Indians in a community project.
In this case, the students will find themselves helping the Indians at the community center build a patio and recreation area, as well as possibly helping with a project on the Navajo reservation.
There will also be time to visit one or two of the other reservations in the area, as well as partake in the social activities of the center during the evenings.
The first aspect is to allow the students to gain a better understanding and a first hand knowledge of the problems and livelihood of the Navajos.
It is felt that by sharing physical work there can be more communication.
The second thing is that such a project allows a person to actively express his social concerns in a simple yet rewarding way.
Those going are Miss Margaret Neuman, Miss Susan Holmes, Miss Hadley Taylor, Mr Paul Szilagyi, Mr John Stickney, Mr James Fox, Mr Henry English, Miss Kari Dunn, Mr Bruce Grace, Professor and Mrs.
All of this is fine as long as the existence and devastating power of thermonuclear weapons neutralizes military power.
Here it would appear that Millis does not have the answers or does not feel that he can attack the problem.
The "" Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions has published, besides the above three pamphlets, other studies on the problems of religion in our society, of the rise of corporations, and of the rule of law in world affairs.
Then too, the National Planning Association has published some excellent pamphlets on the problems of security through arms control.
All publications mentioned in this article are available in Cobuin Library.
Pharmacy] PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 13-1 15 E Bijou St.
The morning panel will consist of three discussions, led respectively by Dr.
Fred W Neal of the Claremont Graduate School, whose topic is ""The Theory of 'Core Interests' and U.S.Soviet Cold War Rivalry""; and Dr.
Raoul NaroII, Anthropologist at San Fernando State College, on ""A Cross-Cultural Survey of Deterrence Policies""; a discussion by Dr.
Hervert S Dinerstein of the RAND Corporation of Santa Monica, California, who will speak on ""Soviet Use of Military Strength in NonWar Situations""; and will conclude with a discussion by Dr.
The first in a scries of poetry readings sponsored by the Departments of English, Romance Languages and German was held on Wednesday, March 22, at 4 in the WES room of Rnstall Center.
Five CC Students Apply to Africa Five Colorado College students may have the opportunity to go to Africa in order to teach next year.
These are Miss Jean Manly and Miss Joanne Wiegel, both of whom applied on their own, and Miss Carla Sperling, Miss Niki Ganns, and Mr Gary Gappert, all of whom were officially recommended by the Colorado Cnllegi; 1 selection committee.
If chosen, these students will become working employees of the overseas systems in which they are placed.
Any and all CC students who wish to attend this Symposium are cordially invited to do so.
Old Letter With New Idea -This letter was fouy in a back issue of the TIGER ; H thought to be of current interest.
Remembering our discussions [ your football men who are having troubles in English, I have decided to ask you, in turn, for help.
We feel that Paul Spindles, one f our promising scholars, has a chancv for a Rhodes Scholarship, which would be a great thing for him and for our college.
Paul has had tlv> academic record for this award, h U | we find that the aspirant is also required to have other excellences, and ideally should have a good record i n athletics.
Bui he does try hard, We propose that you give some special consideration to Paul as s varsity player, putting him, if pas. sible, in the backfield of the football team.
In this way, we can show a better college record to the cr>ni. mitr.ee deciding on the Rhodes Scholarships.
We realize that Paul will be a problem on the field, but — as you have often said — cooperation between our department and yoursis highly desirable, and we do expect Paul to try hard, of course.
His work in English Club and on the debate team will force him to miss many practices, but we intend to see that he carries an old football to bounce (or whatever one does witli a football) during intervals in his work.
We expect Paul to show good will in his work for you, and though be will not be able to begin football practice till late in the season, be will finish the season with good :i(tendancc. — Benjamin Plotinus, Chairman.
WALNUT following locations 1404 SO, TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ""IN BY 9.-00 DIRTY — OUT CLEAN BY 4.-30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY Il7l/j East Cock.
L Poudn COLLEGE CLEANERS Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEIrose 3-7883 Colorado College Tiger March 24, 1961 r Club Sponsors Speaker Next feek on Overseas Administration n,i Monday, March 27th, nl in Rastall Center WES hinge, the International RelaClub, in cooperation with the Rlorado College ' Public Lectures 11 present Professor John Gange.
Secretary of State; and in 1948-49, he served as the Executive Secretary in the Economic Cooperation Administration.
Department of Defense and the Psychological StratThe Rastall Center Board announces that subcommittee positions are open for the special activities committee, including dances, rallies, and fashion shows, the recreation committee, including games area, outings and crafts, the hospitality committee, including decorations and publications, and the cultural affairs committee, including films, coffee hours and display cases.
Applications may be obtained at Rastall Desk and are due by March 27. egy Board.
Presenting Culture One of the greatest deterrents to the fulfillment of an embroyo talent is for the professor of that talent to be lauded for an inept performance.
Whether sculptor, vocalist, instrumentalist, actor or dancer, thoughtless praise for poor workmanship is prone falsely to feed the ego and kill the germ of artistic progress.
Another deterrent to talent fulfillment is for the talent to receive inept training.
Much can be said for ""learning by doing,"" but LEARNING by doing presupposes couth, cogent and trained guidance.
Many are the voices never heard in the concert hall as a result of ill-advised training ruining the instrument that nature provided.
When a Stradivari or Cremona produces agonizing squeaks and wails, it is not the fault of the instrument, but of the untutored fingers that abuse it.
You know what you Invest in advanced ROTC ... two years of classroom time and outside study.
First and foremost, there's the proud moment in Graduation Week when the gold bars of a Second Lieutenant are pinned on your Army uniform ... and deep inside the warm sense of accomplishment at having made it.
There'slmmediatehelpinmeetingexpenses a subsistence allowance of $535 for the two-year advanced ROTC course.
Uniforms and military textbooks paid for. $117 for your six-week summer camp training, plus travel allowance.
You discharge your military obligation with the traditional rank, pay, privileges and responsibilities of an officer In the United States Army.
And later, when you're starting your climb up the civilian ladder, advanced ROTC will still be paying off.
Success in the executive areas of business and industry comes earlier and more substantially to the man who can lead.
Ask particularly about the ROTC course in Leadership, with its practical axperience in command responsibilities.
In this light, that which is experimental or that which is pretentiously amateur would seem at best to have dubious claim or culture or the presentation thereof.
If, indeed, the course of our current ""experimental theater"" represents the flaming pudding of culture, there must be a singular revival of faith in the Phoenix.
Some years ago a sprightly coed registered for a Philosophy of Literature course with an English professor of considerable fame.
The professor spoke, early in the course, of the part played by sheer un-functional intellectual curiosity in plumbing the breadth and depth of literature.
Ca Pu i [be s eral ; BATIK takes a walk Bali Bali and other isles id the south seas give us the beauty of batik.
The skipper of this shop suggests you steal a march on this new fashion by an immediate stroll in hU batik walk shorts.
NTRAMURAL Rastall Center Women's Bowline PRECISION 1 MOTORS SERVICE and SPORT CARS MElrose 2-6370 1608 S Nevada 22 Results of Saturday's Play KKK's 36 Spartans 27 Trotters 2£ Crosstown Betas 24 Fighting Five 16 Untouchables Mountaineers Wainpies Standings KKK's Fighting Five Spartans Untouchables Crosstown Betas Mountaineers Wampies Trotters Then been J NEW USED BOOKS LARGEST SELECTION IN TOWN MOHL'S BOOK HOME 1 6 E Kiowa lllllllllllilEllllllllllllllllllllllIIIIINI iDDniiiniiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiJiJik When II s Music It's Millers Millei Music Co.
Details gladly supplied. activity in the Rastall Cent« Games Area lately.
The unusual team names been added to the color of the league, which is made up of re sentatives from our food sei department, secretaries, etc., very much a part of the college family.
Such team names includi The Odd-Balls, APC's (infirmary nurses are included), Sellei , Ras Rookies, Bemis Dreamers (head residents and secretaries), an Fireballs.
MEIros« 2-9996 Colorado College Tiger • March 24, 1961 V>\ Candidates for SCC Reveal Purposes So Students May Vote Next Monday and Tuesday, April 17 and 18, when CC students vote ASCC president, they will also vote for new members to serve on [{"" student Conduct Committee.
The current Student Conduct Committ,ie has nominated twelve sophomores whom it feels qualified for the ■t The students at large will now elect four of these nominees, two ^° ,'<g and two girls, who will serve their junior and senior years.
The Student Conduct Committee is ane of about three disciplinary ■ ea on the campus which is controlled by the students rather than 'administration.
It handles non-academic honor violations and gen1 student misconduct occurring both on and off the campus.
Students S ' n g before the committee are having the opportunity of being reu by their own peers for their misconduct.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, April 14, 1 96l Colorado College ASCC Presidential Nominees has two reasons for existence addition to the most obvious JJ,e that of giving students an ffibortunity to appeal to other goents.
Sarah Gruen 'Consistent with the idea of a liberal education is the privilege that a student has to be judged by his peers in matters of honor and conduct.
Perceptive, impartial, responsible people are the strength of our judicial groups.
Ervin Hinds 'The Student Conduct Committee should have a powerful influence on the disciplinary policy of Colorado College. feel it important for the accused to face students who have sensed similar ings; students who are understanding but who can make deciwhich are a credit to a high standard of conduct.
It is extremely important for the committee to work with discretion for the protection of the accused.
David Hite ""Serving judgment upon your peers isn't an easy task—it requires a sense of responsibility and ubjectiveness.
I would see my responsibility as being held accountable to all for rational decisions.
Equally important however is a recognition of justice and impartiality.
Rachel Jensen ""I consider it an honor and a privilege to be nominated for the Student Conduct Committee, for this group plays an important role in maintaining a high standard of conduct for CC students.
Ben Lewis ""I consider it an honor to be nominated for a position on the Student Conduct Committee.
I belj eve this committee to be one of the most important on campus and am very much interested in its w ork.
If elected I would do my best to judge with an open mind and without prejudice."" person accused of illegal behavior can have as judges a group of his peers or equals.
The Student Conduct Committee gives any student accused of improper conduct this important privilege.
Henry Rase ""The Student Conduct Committee is an important constituent to Colorado College student government.
A committee such as this increases, indeed, the prestige of students on campus, showing their ability of self-government.
I have great respect for the work of the committee and responsibility it holds.and feel my experience as counselor in Slocum Hall would give me some insight to the probThe Presidential elections will be held April 17 and 18, next Monday and Tuesday.
Palmer Hall -9-11 Rastall Center11-2 Rastall Center 5-8 Activity cards will not be needed to vote.
If run-off elections are necessary for the presidential election they will be held April 20 and 21 during the same hours.
Tim Moe Don Lavers Chris Griffiths All-College Confab Continues Saturday The discussion groups that were cancelled due to snow at the AllCollege Conference will be held during the next two weeks.
Social policy — Alpha Phi House — 2:30, April 16, discussion led by Mr Tim Moe.
Governing Organizations — Kappa Kappa Gamma House —2:30, April 1(5, discussion led by Mr Chris Griffiths.
Judicial Organizations— Kappa Alpha Theta House— 2:30, April 23, discussion led by Mr Stew Richie No registration is necessary.
All candidates for ASCC offices are urged to attend the discussion on Governing Organizations, as well as present and past officers of any school organization.
All social chairmen of the Greek organizations are requested to be at the discussion on the Social Policy, as well as anyone who is interested in the formation of a CC social policy.
All students, faculty, and administration members of Judicial Organizations are urged to attend the discussion on Judicial Organizations.
ATTENTION SENIORS Seniors may now pick up their announcements at the bookstore.
I am assuming that before you will make a decision on whom you will be voting for, you will want to know what each candidate thinks ASCC's position is on this campus.
Therefore in this article I will explain what I feel is the purpose, function and obligation of ASCC and what the president must do in order that these things are carried out.
I feel that ASCC is the strongest student body organization on this campus.
In the past year I have seen the foundations of the committees handling these items laid down.
However there is much building to be done on each one of the foundations.
In the academic field I would like to see the possibility of having a three term system, percentage grades, and a foreign language requirement looked into.
I'm not saying that all these things are suited for this college but let's at least look and see.
April 1 7-May 3 Pre-registration will take place Monday, April 17, through Saturday, May 6.
During this time all students are to make appointments with their faculty advisors to obtain semester grades and plan the first semester of the 1961-62 academic year.
The schedule of courses and pre-registration forms may be obtained by faculty from the"" Registrar's Office on Friday, April 14.
Students who pre-register from May 4 until noon, May 6, must pay $3.00.
Those who pre-register after this date will be required to pay a fee of $10.00.
I have no unique answer, for this question, but can only say that I am interested in the job and that I am confident that I can do a good job.
I have had two years experience on the Executive Council, once as Sophomore Commissioner and once as Vice-President.
With these two years experience as my guide and with a desire to see the students' wishes carried out as an incentive, I build that confidence.
I would like to be able to set down point by point exactly what I would do as President of your student government.
This, unfortunately, is an impossibility, Sineit is impos sible, I can only tell you what I will try to do and what I would like to see happen.
First — I believe that any student government should 'represent' the students.
At present, I do not believe that the ASCC represents you to the extent that it should.
I would like to see a program set up that insured your desires are fulfilled— a program of true representation.
I feel that this apathy is not an inherent quality in students but that it rather reflects a lack of anything to be interested in and that it is in this area that the ASCC has failed.
The reason for this failure of the ASCC is the organization's complete neglect of one of the basic responsibilities of a student government.
A student government has two major responsibilities, first, to supply student services, and second, to represent the student body in the making of school policy.
In the first of these areas, the supplying of student services, the ASCC is, for the most part, efficient and effective.
It supplies the TIGER, the Nugget, weekly assemblies, and many other services.
Unfortunately, the ASCC has in the past concerned itself exclusively with the operation of the bureaucracy and has completely neglected its equally important function of expressing a student position in the making of campus policy.
Student opinion is absolutely CC Hosts United States College Unions Colorado College will host the 1961 Conference of the Association of College Unions to be held at the Broadmoor Hotel April 10 through April 19.
Mr Richard Blackburn, Director of Rastall Center, is the conference director and Mr Donald Oden will -;ssist him in directing the Mtm ties of the conference which will include tours of Colorado Springs and the Air Force Academy, several banquets and program sessions.
The final banquet, April 19, will be entertained by the CC Dance Theater and the Colorado Springs Opera Association.
Louis T Benezet speaking on ""What Can You Do With a Applications for editor and business man ager of the Kinnikinnik are due Monday, April 17 at 4 m Application blanks may be picked up at the Rastall Desk.
Griffiths In the ""democracy"" we Americans bold dear there is a weird but healthy paradox.
Since The Articles of Confederation we have recognized the real need of at least a minimal central power, minimal in the sense that it must not be so strong that it jeopardizes individual rights.
It seems to us that while unmistakably this form of government has aided the United States in offering the possibility of adaptation to growth and change, it has not been our representative form of government solely which has ""made"" the United States what it is today; but rather in one sense it might now be construed as hindering.
It seems that until recently what was responsible for the direction and growth of our country was almost more natural than social.
The individual American had available a ""frontier"" from which he could gain a real sense of individuality, mentally and physically, where individual ""rights"" could really flourish, not at statues but in the more rewarding manner of striving for and then protecting these rights with his life.
Since the diminishing of this frontier, wars, social crises, and economic lapses have offered clarion call for the individual to step forward and provide direction to his fellow-men.
Recently here is an arbitrary term, meaning that many tendencies have grown to a proportion to show us a trend.
Possibly because of the natural fear of our citizens to entrust complete power to an individual there has grown up a well-oiled bureaucracy, a central power not one of individual but rather a horde of relatively ineffectual, uninterested nine-to-fivers.
This ""government"" has, despite its cumbersome nature, rather well supplied the populace with its needed governmental services.
In our first editorial we said that we felt the student body of Colorado College lacked a definite direction corresponding to that of its administration and faculty.
It seems ASCC is the organ through which such direction might come, IF ASCC itself has leadership.
We think that from our experiences in attending the present ASCC executive meetings, from the speeches given in Perkins on Tuesday and the letter on page one, Mr Chris Griffiths has the qualities that will provide this leadership.
For this reason the TIGER endorses Mr Griffiths for the position of student body president.
We are perfectly cognizant of the fact that this endorsement might well be no favor to Mr Griffiths.
It seems we have managed to gain quite a group of opponents in one-half a semester.
All we ask is for you to consider carefully what we have said above and try to judge objectively.
TIGER DEADLINES needing public in Raetall or Cutler, ntacted for fnrt indicated.
We, the undersigned members of ASCC Executive Council, are placing our vote in the ASCC Presidential election for Chris Griffiths.
These ideas are definite and concise, but Chris is not the type of person who will ignore the opinion of others.
These organizations include AWS, the Choir, the Enthusiasm Committee, the Foreign Student Committee, International Relations Club, the Publications, the Religious Affairs and Assembly Committees, the Women's Athletic Association, KRCC and the Debate Team.
Chris would like to see the interest of these organizations ex4) Chris wants to use the power which the Executive Council has been given.
He plans to do this by presenting campus issues and problems to the Council for discussion such that the Council can take and present a stand to the members of the student body.
In other words, he wants the Council to become an active pressure group on campus.
Chris is a man of action, and a person who not only can understand the problems that exist, but who wants to and will do something about them.
After having observed ASCC meetings for three and a half years in one capacity or another, I feel compelled to make a few comments pertinent to the pending ASCC elections.
Its excellent constitution, written five years ago by one Carl Pitts, has been polished and revised in the interim by such people as Keith Argow, Sally Jameson, and now Jack Real.
It now has become a quite efficient and quite well-ordered organization, performing many behind-the-scenes services for the students.
ASCC in the future must create and initiate new activities to serve the student interests.
Its constitution, both implicitly and explicitly, gives ASCC the potential to be the most powerful group on campus, second only to the Board of Trustees.
ASCC exists potentially as an effective student tool with which the student body could manipulate and influence Administration policy.
ASCC though has never availed itself of the opportunity it possesses to present the Administration with student opinions and desires and to make sure that such opinions that the students have are taken into account by the Administration.
Witness the deferred rush mess and the girls dormitory situation as two examples.
In these and other issues, ASCC has never asked for and never ventured to volunteer student opinion and ideas.
Unless ASCC becomes an effective policy making and pressure group and exercises its potential 'student morale,' it will continue its decline into oblivion, and its activities and services will be supplemented by a series of other, lesser organizations.
The students' opportunity to have a ""union' working for them will be lost.
If the students are interested in having their interests protected and furthered, ASCC must now assert the responsibility and power that it has been endowed with, and which it has never tried to use.
The effectiveness of ASCC as a student pressure group rests with the office of the president.
Only he can use to full advantage the forces that ASCC has at its disposal.
If the students with the ASCC wish to protect their interests and to voice their opinions, they must elect an ASCC president that can and WILL use the full power of his office in such a role.
All three candidates have served on ASCC this past year and have had a chance to display their ability.
His ability has been ably displayed and he also seems to have the personal qualities necessary for the job.
He will be able to take the long range view and the all school perspective necessary for service as president and spokesman for all the students.
All three candidates could serve ably as ASCC president as the job exists now, but Griffiths is especially qualified to make ASCC and the office of the president more than just a rubber stamp, and to give the students a really effective voice in Cutler Hall.
To an editor of any paper this should appear as a high form of flattery.
However I recommend that you bend ear a bit more and listen to the utterances against your four page answer to a small town scandal sheet.
You have, for the past few issues stressed the topic of morality, its ayes and nays on the college campus.
Were it not for your appraisal of campus morals and the bringing to light those things that happen after hours I fear every young virgin at CC would have been rid of purity at one of our Bacchanalian orgies in the past few weeks.
Every facility in the men's room of Loomis hall thanks you night after night at closing hours.
I'm sure not, as that's where you have chosen to obtain your astounding facts along with a few astounding articles written in the periodicals for the lay-mind.
Maybe from findings he'll re-invent penicillin as have you rewritten a few widely known facts.
Between your literary efforts, high school hygiene classes and the fire and brimstone of such men as Elmer Gantry we might all be saved.
Thank you, TIGER, you pillar of the medical world, you second hand Kinsey report, thank you.
As a former full-time, present half-time, and future full-time member of the Department of English at Colorado College, I should like to respond to Miss Jane Hult's letter in last week's issue.
Miss Hult is, I am afraid, making a confusion, which I thought had died out among young people.
The study of literature should not be mixed up with high-school ""creative writing"" courses in which, each week, the student turns in a ""theme"" on my pet dog or on what I did last vacation.
A college student is supposed to have left this kind of juvenile exercise behind him, and most of our students surely have.
A college English department provides an opportunity to study literature; to write about it and to talk it over with teachers and fellow-students; and to use it as a basis for thinking — and writing.
To suppose that the average teen-age freshman, fresh from Miss Schmaltz's Finishing School, has much to say that is original, is hoping for too much.
I'm afraid that most beginning students in colleges have a great deal to say that is rather stale, and in order to realize that it is stale, they must read and write about < works of the past.
Tt would ghastly to wish — as Mis s j> seems to— that each generatim; students should have to re-^ Milton and Keats, making same assumptions and the 5, mistakes.
All of us in the English partment are willing and E eager to have students turn creative work to us.
Heaven kr> we receive plenty of it, and are happy to let students ]rj. what we think, for whatever ii kind of opinion is worth.
Let student writer also turn in his t terial to the Kinnikinnik; and him send it to Poetry Maga/int if he prefers, to Playboy. \ successful writers have papersroom or two with their reject} slips.
Any time we squeeze in between the skiing bridge in attempting to rec that heritage — and the heiita of Latin literature, of the Midi Ages, the Renaissance, and modern period — is, I think, proper function of a departm which is supposed to deal works of literature.
I've had some blueboo in what appeared to be a stre of-consciousness style, but were never very successful.
In the last y students have asked .me to fa at plays, poetry, short stori parodies, and vignettes.
Being one of those students w occasionally makes an attempt' wade through that campus life ary spokesman, the TIGER, I h« come to the conclusion that it cos obviously be improved.
Bill Bentley ""The Student Conduct CommitB is a vital part of the college community.
The role of this committee can greatly affect the lives f every one of us.
It therefore see ms self evident that this committee be composed of well-informed, unbiased people.
I feel the committee could be improved by increased communication with the student body.
With increased reports from the committee I feel the student body would gain more confidence in this organization and thereby strengthen its function.
Therefore, I feel that the policies of the committee should be known and understood by all students.
NEW RASTALL CENTER BOARD members standing from left to right; Mr Clay Sorrick, Mr David Sher, Mr Ben Lewis, Mr Skip Meece.
Sitting from left to right; Miss Julianne Rolfe, Mr Ervin Hinds, Miss Leilani Markinsen.
Newly Organized Rastall Board Provides New Center Services The new Rastall Center Board positions were recently approved and projects are already being planned by the new board.
The usiness manager, Mr David Sher, will be responsible For the budget, ticket sales, special promotion and house development.
Mr Clay Sorrick, the new executive secretary, is in charge of correspondence, display cases, the records and files.
Equipment is bePerkins Hall, coffee hours, music and exhibits will be under the management of Miss Julia Rolfe.
Visitor service, decorations and publications will be handled by Miss Leilani Markinsen.
A fashion show to be held in Taylor dining hall on April 21 is being organized by the new special activities chairman, Mr Charles Meece who ""will also manage nd rallies. ing purchased for stone cutting and polishing.
All students are urged to make use of the crafts because it is offered as a stimulant for personal creativity.
The newly organized outings program hopes to coordinate the activities of the skiers, cyclers, photographers, mountain climbers, pistolers, sports Oskacita, the girls riding club.
Many advantages of each of the organizations will grow out of this program such as an outing calendar and brochures put out by each group in the fall to inform the campus of their activities.
Programs of special interest to the sportsman will be offered by the outin-gs program including movies and lectures.
The cyclers are active this spring in organizing a rally to the Garden of the Gods.
Completing the board are Mr Blackburn and Mr Don Oden, nonvoting members and Mr Ormes and Mr Tyree, voting faculty members.
KRCC Presents ""On the Scene"" Live Tonight Radio station KRCC-FM Colorado College will present a live production of the radio show ""On the Scene,"" tonight, April 14, from R:30 to 10:00m.
Staged live from the Perkins Hall auditorium, the production will he carried over KRCC's remote system and channeled throughout Colorado Springs on FM dial 01.3.
To be seen and heard are Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradley, classical pianist, playing two short preludes, one by Debussy and the other by Scrinbine.
Polk singer Pete Cheney along with the Kappa Sigma Barber Shop Quartet will help carry the audience through a distinct variety of music.
Miss Joan Rernenu will sing and play the piano tn an original composition making its debut on the show.
The Folk Singers Inc. and Mr Henry English and Mr Dick Brigham will give n new dimension to folk songs and drum suites.
Mr Wally Caldwell, the director of the show, will serve as Master of Ceremonies and entertain with contemporary poetry.
This variety of talent will be integrated with spot announcements, station breaks and musical hacking by the Scene combo.
Perkins Hall will be the scene of a remote broadcasting system complete with four channel microphone systems, spot announcers for campus activities, public service, station breaks and time signals.
The entire audience will be a distinct part of the show for tho response to acts will lie heard over the air.
The admission charge is 50c which will go towards the purchase of a new tape recorder for the studio in Rastall.
All students are urged to see this production not only for flue student talent, but to understand the production of a live radio show.
KRCC guest announcers will include Mr Harry Diaek, Miss Lawrie Perry and Mr John Bluck.
Station breaks and spot announcements will be controlled by Mr Evan Evans and Mr Eddie Boychuck.
Mr Mike Cook, chief engineer has set up all the broadcasting equipment and recorders.
Chief Woodson Tyree is the faculty director of KRCC-FM and the station is managed by students.
Petition lor class commissionarc due April 17 at 4:00 0., at Hastall Desk.
Campus problems should not be discussed once a year at an All School Conference, they should be the constant concern of the ASCC and should be constantly discussed.
For this reason I propose that emphasis be placed on the ASCC's responsibility to represent the student body in the making of school policy.
I feel that this new emphasis can be accomplished in a three step process.
First, to investigate problem areas such as curriculum, intra-mural athletics, and the moral code of the college.
Third, to make definite statements to the administration of what we feel to be problems and of what we feel to be the best solutions for these problems and in so doing represent the student body in the forming of school policy.
As I have already stated, the reason that CC has an apathetic student body is that the ASCC has failed to give that student body anything to be interested in.
The reason the ASCC has not given the student body anything to be interested in is that it has concerned itself exclusively with the totally uninteresting administrative details of supplying student services and has neglected the more interesting and important function of representing the student body in the forming of school policy.
I have proposed not a deemphasis of the services function but rather the added emphasis on the policy function. feel that this emphasis is necessary before CC can ever have an effective student government.
I have found that the Executive Council does less and less as the year progresses.
The members of that organization are elected for all year, not just part of it, so I believe that they should act for the whole year, not just part of it.
By taking an active part in all campus issues all year long, the Council will have to act all year.
In addition to these three broad objectives I can only say that the Council must keep in mind that all its actions should be in the best interests of the student body as a whole.
In summary, let me repeat, I would like to see better representation, better communication and continual action.
With your help and backing, I truly believe that all these objectives can be effectively reached.
Last, I entreat you to vote on Monday and Tuesday, and in the elections to follow and most important, back those you elect.
I was quite disappointed to learn that it has been suggested that the athletic committee be dropped. feel that there are a great many things such a committee could do.
It could strengthen the intramural program and help develop more student interest in intercollegiate athletics.
These are just a few of the things that ASCC could and should look into.
I think that the president has three main roles that he should be responsible for.
First he must run all of his meetings in such a manner that they become effective sessions.
He must be alert for ideas to be dealt with in committees so that they do not waste the council's time.
Secondly he must instill the idea in each ASCC member that his or her job is one which takes tune out of each day and that they must be constantly thinking of ways of Choir Schedules Spring Concert The Colorado College Choir under the direction of Mr Donald Jenkins, will present its annual spring concert on Sunday, April 16.
The program will feature sacred music of the Easter season and will be given at 4m. in Shove Chapel.
The 59 voice choir has just returned from a 4,000 mile tour of California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah and Colorado, singing eleven concerts in that many days.
Their performance was enthusiastically received everywhere and most places invited the choir to return next year.
Sunday's spring program will open with works by Allessandro Scarlatti and Palestrina.
Three Easter carols and two Negro spirituals will conclude the concert.
This performance will represent the April event of the college's monthly concert series and will be open to the public free. improving their committees.
Thirdly one of the president's powers is that he is an ex-officio member of many committees and he must keep in constant connection with them to leam the pros and cons of issues so that he can formulate an opinion.
In closing I would like to remind you that your student government is only as good as the people you elect.
It is for this reason I hope you give a great deal of consideration to your vote.
Remember it is not words and wishes which will put him in office but votes.
Garden of the Gods Scence for Cycle Race The ""TOURNAMENT OF CYCLES"" a 4 kilometer or a two and a half mile bicycle race is to be run in the Garden of the Gods on Saturday, April 22nd at 2m. and should hold all the same thrills and excitement that centered around the fall event, Rally For The Keg.
Both men and women may enter this event which will make a single loop through the beautiful Gardens area, allowing the spectators to catch glimpses of the riders.
A map of the race course a general information is available the Rastall Center Desk.
This means it meets rigid standards of excellence in cut, carat weight, color and clarity.
Artcarved's written guarantee explains how the exclusive Permanent Value Plan lets you apply the full current retail price toward the purchase of a larger Artcarved anytime, at any Artcarved jeweler throughout the country.
You will be proud, too, of Artcarved's award-winning styling, like the Evening Star shown here.
Look for the name inside the ring, and ask for your written Artcarved guarantee.
L pel pulpit will be occupied by ^ /oungr men embarking on caBrs as college .ministers.
After Leiving a Masters Degree this [unG he is hoping to return to a allege campus as a full-time Uister to students.
The following Sunday Mr Kener h W Burton, minister of the Manor Community Church, Chicago Illinois, will be in the pulpit.
He, too, is donning to enter next fall into ull-time student religious work.
We ore happy to have both of he gentlemen visit for two to hree days each and to preach at he Sunday morning service.
Seniors to Paint Weather Permitting The ""Senior Playday"" will begin at 2m. on Sunday, April 16, when the senior class will paint the home bleachers at Washburn Field.
This project was originally scheduled in the fall, but had to be canceled because of weather conditions.
All members of the Faculty and friends of the college are urged to lend their paint brushes for the afternoon.
They may be turned in to Mr Richard Kendrick's office or the Athletic Department.
The painting of the bleachers will be canceled if the weather is not sunnv for the rest of this week.
Tickets may be purchased for $2.25 at 519"" N Tejon, ME 4-6820, or through Mrs.
Josephine Estill, who sang Dido in the CC Opera Workshop production of ""Dido and Aneas,"" will sing Turridu.
Last night the Regimental officers from Colorado Unniversity inspected P/R Co.
D-9; this included a close personal inspection of all the members, of all the company's records, and a review of the company marching.
They will leave the College on Saturday noon and return about Sunday noon.
Saturday afternoon, and Sunday morning the MS I Cndets will conduct the operations of Squad Tactics, but Saturday night the MS II Cadets will conduct at least one night patrol against the encamped defensive unit, the way they learned in regular ROTC class.
D-9 will conduct the annual Regimental Assembly for all the P/R Companies in the 9th Regiment at Fort Carson.
On Saturday night the Regiment will have a dinner and dance at the Officer's Club, and the BEST COMPANY AWARD will be presented to the Company that has done the moat worth-while things, had the beat Inspection Ratings, and done the best all-job.
TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY • Letters to the Editors one could rend many issues of the TIGER before finding one article that could qualify either way.
The TIGER'S treatment of athletics constitutes the hare minimum necessary to relate the activities which take place.
No effort is made to arouse any interest in forthcoming events and very little ink is wasted in praising or applauding any victorious athletic organizations.
I am indeed sorry that this is the sort of a campus where little or no interest exists in athletics outside of those individuals directly concerned.
This subject has been rehashed dozens of times and no true conclusions have .been reached.
Upon reviewing the results of your creative efforts of late I am forced to admit that I have found the literary equivalent of Galileo's Physical Laws of Motion— in particular that portion dealing with vacuums.
I have found this weekly publication utterly devoid of anything appealing to the average student.
Deing well versed on morals and having listened to several VD discussions 1 find your articles on the aforementioned a bit of a drag.
Your ridiculous references to athletics in last weeks edition particularly upset me.
To have all these pages devoted to track and baseball instead of tu Rachmaninoff and Tennyson is without n doubt squandering valuable newspaper space which could have been better afforded to articles of a much higher vein.
In my opinion such columns as ""Three Little Words"" — ""Intramurals""— athletics schedules and write-ups could better be included on posters in the fO'U Dei Micks.
Shirbot MEIrwo 5-2740 PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER I 13-1 15 E Bijou St.
Since 1899 ME; Q UICK UALITY ERVICE ""IN BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" ON BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/, Ea.t Cocho La Poudrt COLLEGE CLEANERS |Acro« from Slocum) Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEIrose 3-7883 April 14, 1961 Colorado College Tiger Track Team Speeds To Early Wins With new blood the tracksters of Colorado College opened the 1961 season by breaking two CC records and coming within ii"" of a third.
Ed Loosli came within Y"" of the high jump record with a leap of Bruce Boyd launches Sputnik VIII The GOLDEN DRAGON 140° S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Sarvlng Family StyU Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 1 «. to 1 1 Dalhy W Colo.
Cholakian or ""Little Slovak"" is from Valley College in California and Loosli is a freshman from South Pasadena, Calif.
Rice is a freshman from Grand Forks, North Dakota, and was state champion in this event last year.
Jeff Clark, another freshman, is running the mile for the Tigers and and should be pushing a respectable 4:40 by season's end.
Returning distance man and letterman, Don Kintz is also looking for his all time best in the two mile with something under 10:00.
The sprints are run by Broyles, a returning lettermari LeRoyal King, a sophomore \ r from Bakersfield Junior Colk California.
We also find Ed Loosli <„ hurdles running a 15. in the and 26:5 in the lows.
The heij these hurdles is 3"" above those dies he ran in high school and this is adjusted should mean \ lege record in Ed's pocket.
Barker, a freshman from B.irrii 111., will be pushing Ed all tl lt this season.
Farrel Hot in d Farrel Thompson and Ed Loosli high pumping for the Tig. doing quite well.
Letterman Jim I returns this year after placing ond in the conference last year, vaulted 12' in the meet F ; Thompson, transfer from a college in Idaho, will also be ing this year.
Thompson, guard the basketball team this year, 11' 6"" the first meet of the The meet was a triangular between CC and the Inch Adams State and the Mounl from Western State.
The final had the Tigers on top with 79 the Indians with 49 and We<* trailed with 15.
The Rocky Mountain Rel; follow on the 22nd of April at Colorado School of Mines oval.
The 29th the Colorado College will meet CC and May squad will travel to Mines foi [ meet.
Adams State College of Ah will host this year's edition o Rocky Mountain Conference C pionships on May 12 and 13.
These jven Mr Ervin Hinds, Mr Steve Lamb, Miss Jean Daniels nd Miss Leigh Rainey.
Mr Ervin 3inds, 3(19; Mr Steve Lamb, 277; Ben Lewis, 275; Mr Bill Bent174; Mr Hank Rase, 156; Mr )ave Hite, 129.
Miss Jean Daniels, 291; kiss Leigh Rainey, 280; Miss Mar[ia Moses, 237; Miss Raehael Jenen, 219; Miss Lynne Vincent, 160; , n d Miss Sarah Gruen, 148.
The »e\v members of the SCC rill not be active members of the fomnuttee until next year.
After a week of speeches, posters, coffee hours, hurridly printed flyers, and general campaigning, better than two thirds of the Colorado College student body turned out to try to see their candidate for the Presidency of ASCC into office.
In what was thought to be a close race between all three candidates, Mr Chris Griffiths was elected to office without a run-off election.
A run-off election would have been necessary and would have been held on Thursday and Friday of this week if one candidate had not received a majority if the ballots of the students who voted.
This election is unique in that there was such a great deal of participation by the students, by both interest shown in the campaign and, what is more apparent, the large number of students who came to the polls.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, April 21, 1961 Colorado College Executive Council Candidates Torn left to right are secretary candidates Julie Bohlke and Kathie g Norberg and Hank Rase, and standing are treasurer candidates Bruce, vice-president candidates Jim Dunlop and Bill Stafford.
Julie Bohlke The office of Secretary of ASCC olves the responsibilities basically Ntlogous to those of the secretary of ;impus organization.
It is the jeretary's job to keep an accurate ord of the minutes of ASCC and take care of a major part of the despondence of the Executive ouncil.
To me the job in 1961-62 would, of course, begin with an effective freshman orientation program.
This program should be a co-ordinated effort of the s t u d e n t s of CC, their organizations, and the administration.
As orientation proceeds the vice president's most important job, although not so obvious, should be Hank Rase ""It seems to me, if singled out, the most important function of the Vice-President is in the field of communications.
For student government to be effective there must be informative communication between the student body, the committee members of ASCC, the administration, and the faculty.
If this is done properly, a smoothness of operation can be obtained that will Two-Thirds of Student Body Vote President Griffiths voted.
This is only half as many as this year's high total of twothirds of the students and probably good three-fourths of the a c t i v e, full-time students on campus.
One factor in this extra large turn-out was undoubtedly that activity cards did not have to be presented in order to vote, but the voters only had to give their names, which were then marked off on a master list.
This new proDebate Club Captures Cups The Colorado College Debate Club made their finest showing of the year by taking all of the honors at the Colorado Women's College Annual Forensic Tournament held in Denver, April 8.
The CC team won the Sweepstakes Trophy for the best overall showing by an entering school as well as first place in debate and first place in oral interpretation of poetry.
Colorado College's second entry of Mr Max Power and Mr Dave Furgason were undefeated at the meet but were edged out in total points.
Jim Uunlop ""I have been asked to state a few brief reasons as to why 1 submitted my name as a candidate for ASCC treasurer.
My main reason for running is that I have a sincere interest in the ASCC as the representative and functioning organ of the student body.
Many CC students are quick to criticize the Executive Council of ASCC and the various committees and organizations on campus.
Everyone will agree Bill Stafford ""The treasurer of ASCC does not take on the general aspects of a common club treasurer.
This position is not just an exercise in accounting, for the school handles the ASCC accounts.
I feel it is one of the most important positions on the Executive Board.
He is responsible for directing the ASCC funds to organizations in such a way that this money will be of benefit to the greatest number of students.
Sweepstakes Trophy is awarded to the school accumulating the greatest number of points in the combined events.
The CC Debate Team Will close out the season with a public formal debate against the Air Force Academy here and the National Forensic Tournaments in Louisville, Kentuckv.
During the season Mr Chris Griffiths and Mr Jack Cashman met the AFA twice and were defeated once.
The formal debate will consist of one round with the team meeting a team from the Academy.
The debate will be held April 25, in Perkins Hall, and the public is encouraged to attend.
The last event of this year will enter three teams consisting of Mr Griffiths and Mr Cashman, Miss Nancy Dehlin and Mr Dave Furgason, and Max Power and Mr Charles Puckett.
Johnson, the team's coach, will accompany the six participants on the trip.
Spring Style Show A style show featuring bridal, trouseau, and the newest spring fashions from the Gray Rose dress shop of Colorado Springs will be presented by the Special Events Committee of Rastall Center today, April 21, at 3:30m. in the Itemis Lounge.
Eight CC girls, Misses Nancy Heitz, Heather Kirk, Nancy Schorling, Mary Lou Spry, Shelia Watsou and Margie Taylor will act as models for the show and will be escorted by four boys who will act as ushers.
The door prize, a two piece dress with matching accessories, is now being displayed in the first of Rastall Center's showcases.
There is no charge for the show and refreshments will be served This show is one of the first events of the Special Events Committee and is being supervised by Miss Giimy Hampton and Mr Skip Meier.
Bechtol Heads AOLU Chapter Mr Paul Bechtol, professor of Business Administration, is chairman of the recently organized Colorado Springs Chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Other members of the local board include Mr Donald King, head of C.U.'s local extension center, vice-chairman, and Mr Charles Emery, secretary-treasurer.
The ACLU was organized forty years ago as an agency for the defense of the central constitutional safeguards of citizen's rights.
The Union works in courts, legislative bodies, executive agencies, and the wide field of public opinion in its fight to maintain freedom of inquiry and communication, due process, equal protection of the laws, and the ""retained"" and ""reserved"" rights of the people.
It is a private organization of people who wish to join actively in the continual struggle for each man's right to be free, within the democratic framework of government.
PlOBM sik"" n"" material aubni be contacted (or (urlher informalion if need be.
Your cooperation with the above will ossur noon on Monro to the TIGER will be returned juu of publica' The End of the Beginning Mr Chris Griffiths has won what we feel to be an unusual election at Colorado College.
In an unpresidented turnout of about three-quarters of the electorate who might have a vital interest in CC's politics.
First, our new president has a real majority of students behind him and his avowed platform.
Second, most of these students have made a thoughtful choice and will want to be duly represented in the innovations upon which Mr Griffiths built his platform.
We expect results It would seem that the new president will have to exert some powerful change to gain his ends, and just as important the student body will have to also make sure its opinions and 'ideas are heard.
We think the only way both of these factors will be accomplished is if the spirit of last week s elections is maintained, both for the rest of this year (let s not relax for the remaining elections), and what is more impora "" Our congratulations to both Mr Griffiths and the student body of Colorado College; they both made a fine showing.
AWS Shows New Directions By Ann Armstrong In the TIGER article informing the students of the newly elected AWS executive officers and representatives, mention was made of the functions and the division of this campus organization.
The end of this article suggested that the new members of AWS wanted to make some changes and hoped that they would be able to do so.
Until this year, all cases of dorm residents staying 'out over night were handled quietly and consistently by the administration.
The standard policy has been that such a dorm infraction means dismissal from school for a period of time.
If there have been any cases where this policy has not been followed, the administration, not the Judicial Board, has been called upon to use its discretion.
The result was a minimum of discussion about the cases, a minimum of confusion about policy.
This year, for some reason, the burden of the decision was thrown to a group of 20 students on Judicial Board.
Judicial Board has a definite function and efficacy which has never been really seriously questioned.
It has been quite effective in handling minor dorm infractions, milking decision on dorm policy and setting hours.
I'm sure no one on Judicial Board felt slighted because its responsibility did not extend into the areas of extreme dormitory infra tions.
Most areas of student life should, even at the expense of efficiency and consistency, be handled by the students.
Questions which concern, as in this case, extreme dorm violations traditionally punished by dismissal from school, should, for the sake of the girls involved and for the sake of effective administrative policy, be handled by the administration.
Ruth Snodgrass Dear Editors, As a present full-time student of English at Colorado College, with a rather uncertain future, 1 should like to reply to the recent letter from Dr.
Dr, Ross seems to imply that high school ""creative writing"" classes have little or no merit and that the study of literature in college offers a panacea for creative writers.
A study of literature is essential for creative writing but so is the actual attempt at being creative with the ideas aroused by this study.
This attempt is far better made in high school than on a first college term paper.
Themes on my pet dog or past vacations may not be original, or they may be juvenile fiction material.
Whatever, these classes provide a chance for tiie student so inclined to express himself, a chance usually lost in the pressures of the college cosmos.
I too would be horrified at students forever rewriting Milton and Keats, although I've no doubt they could improve them, but I'm equally horrified at students having to write critical term papers on Eliot or Faulkner with no other background than a college literature class.
No one will argue that ""creative writers do not spring from the brow of Jove"" but neither do they spring from freshmen college classes in Greek Literature or even Twentieth Century Literature.
Boss paradoxically deplores in students and praises in Eliot, do not belong in a critical paper, which is probably why most critical papers are pendantically insufferable.
RUTH SNODGRASS TOM ABSHER Absher, Alice Brooks, James Dyson, Sandy Litchfield.
It has been decided that beginning this week the minutes of the Advisory Council will be posted in Rastall for all of those interested in finding out what transpires there.
The immediate concerns of the council are three of its annua) projects and a newly initiated one.
The Senior Honors dinner is given each year for all senior women who are graduating in June.
This year on May 11 in Bemis dining room some of the senior women will receive certificates of recognition for outstanding contributions to Colorado College, which are among many other honors to iced at this time.
The Welcomer-Welcomee Program is also provided by AWS and entails assigning those girls who volunteer the names of several incoming freshmen with whom to correspond this summer, answering any questions that may arise about CC and extending a friendly greeting of welcome to the college.
The third annual project of AWS in the planning stage is the Tradein which holds a sale of articles for the dorm rooms like lamps and bedspreads in the fall.
These articles are collected in the spring from any girl who wishes to sell them after she marks the price at which she wishes to sell the article.
The new project is a handbook which will contain information of interest to women students only and will therefore be sent only to the entering freshmen women.
Suggestions under consideration include campus fashion, ideas of decorating rooms and a detailed report on laundry facilities, to mention only a few.
There are two major items of interest in this area right at the moment.
The beginning of the counselor and dorm president selections for next year are being made.
The Counselor's Workshop will be held on May 13 and one day in the fall b -fore the freshmen women arrive.
There have been several innovations in these policies under the new AWS officers.
Instead of having an over-all president of Loomis and then a president and counselors for each floor, there will be one over-all hall council consisting of one president and seven counselors.
The other item is an investigation of the dorm honor system and the rules it should be upholding.
This is in preparation for a statement of policy and of rules which have been unclear at times in the past.
Miss Betsy Foote, who is heading this committee, would appreciate any constructive suggestions, because these are two areas which concern men students as well as the women.
Any group of new officers has ideas and plans for improvement, and enthusiasm is quite high at the beginning.
However, they will also need the support and contributions of both men and women students if they are to begin to accomplish as much as they can.
Lines of Authority and Social Policy Discussed Sunday, April 16, two extra sessions of the All-Coll^ Conference were held in two of the campus sorority houses.
They were the sessions on social policy and lines of authority, The last of the All-College Conference discussions will be heid at the Kappa Alpha Theta Lodge, Sunday, April 23, at 2:3|j The topic, judicial organizations and lines of authority] will be led by Mr Stew Ritchie.
Everyone interested or con nected with judicial organizations of any kind is invited to attend.
In the discussion held on social policy, led by Mr Tim Moe, it was decided that a definite but flexible social policy should be adapted.
The social chairman for ASCC will take charge of organizing and trying to pass a new social policy before the end of this semester.
Working under him will be S3ven committees dealing with major social problems on the campus.
Sunday afternoon from 2:30 until 4:45 Mr Chris Girffiths led a group of about twenty students in an enthusiastic discussion on the lines of authority as regard college life.
The object of the meeting was to arouse the student's interest in college regulation and to define, more or less, the limits between student government and college administration.
It was agreed that tbe amount of discipline necessary and good for maturing college students is hard to establish because of the variation in maturity of students, the expectations of different parents, the standards of Colorado Springs in relation to other areas from which students come, and the desires and interests of individuals.
Policies must be explicit, yet they must be flexible; and they must be understood by all.
Government by administrators would practically eliminate social life, and would probably create a very dissatisfied student body.
However, it would be equally undemocratic to have government by students alone.
Besides being undemocratic, it would be impractical since students lack the experience necessary for such a job and would most iikely concentrate on the present and immediate future, forgeting to or not bothering to take into consideration the after-effects of their acts.
A combination of the two, student and administrative power, offers mutual aid consideration, and creates a sense of responsibility in each for the interests of the other and for the interests of the college community as a whole.
Because the college assumes responsibility for its student body, its administration should make the policies, but the students should be recognized as having the right to a final word on the acceptability of these policies.
It was decided that the students' opportunity to initiate lies in the social aspect of college life — such as assemblies, newspaper and student services.
Two books of poetry have ban published recently by Coloradt College faculty members; hotfc. unique in that they represent nior, than single efforts of the respective publishers.
Charles Mierow, head ol CC's Classics Department, ha published for his brother, the late Dr.
Herbert Mierow, past head of CC's Classics Department, a lection of poetry.
The volum. dedicated to the Princeton Class of 1914 and warmly conveys sense of genuine ""school spirit"" the several poems dipicting Dt, Mierow's undergraduate and graduate life at that institution.
The subject matter of the poetry range; from the dogwoods of Princeton's campus to the Aspens of C< "" do's mountains.
The poetic insight of a man well travelled both phy sically and mentally is well por traye'd, many of the poems depicting' the direct value of a classical education to a poet.
The second book, again one of poetry, is unique in that it represents the combined talents of Dr.
The Brandt's book, beautifully printed in Denmark, contains some fifty poem; T about a third of which are in English, the rest in German Neither the English nor the German are translations but were written in these languages originally.
Many of the poems are illustrated by cuts executed by Mj> Brandt, well known in this artf for her artistic abilities.
The cuts printed from linoleum blocks ii black and white, add immensely to the format of the book.
The poel^ at least those in English, sbow a real poetic sympathy between tte writer and ""this everyday worlj that the rest of us so often mis The book ""Gedichte-Poems"" '* available at the bookstore roi $1.60.
Although the students' infl* ence on the academic side of cO; lege life was not discussed, attend ants of the end of the Collejp Conference series came away W' the feeling that something h* been accomplished in the way (1 establishing the students' role x the regulation of the daily 0"" social routine of the college CO* munity.
Colorado College Tiger ■ April 21, 1961 fl La ^ssffl is often noted that here has i a definate need for an up-tofL publication on the history of usic one which could be easily ad and understood by the wellJucated person.
For the most *V books dealing with this field 1 either too theoretical, too genCap & Gown By Jill Tyle ■ too detailed.
Instead of being a detailed lC count of composers and their .orks, it looks at music in relato its social, aesthetic, reli,i 0U s, and historical backgrounds.
Each uthot depicts the story of music [ continuous history, not as a ip of distinct periods.
As a re.. one of the strongest and most ntei-esting aspects of this volume the explanation of the relationhips and influences of different i and countries on one anither.
The book also furnishes inforiation about instruments and leir development, the changing tatus of the musician, the dance, lusical practice and notation.
Perhaps the most interesting hapter is the one dealing with i-western music.
The author, „t e r Crossley-Howard, begins ith the culture of Mesopotamia md takes the reader through the is developments of Eastern up to the present.
In this ss he is careful to point out YAHNS AND ACCESSORIES FOR EVERY NEED Help Aavailable During Your Knitting Projects.
Honor System — Points to Ponder Tradition has it here at Colorado College that the individual should be given the greatest possible liberty in developing his capacity for self-mastery and self-direction.
In accordance with this tradition has evolved the Honor System under which each student is expected to do all his academic work independently.
It is in this type of approach that a person gains confidence in himself, in his ability to reach intelligent conclusions and develop sound ideas without leaning on someone else.
That the rules of the Honor System have come from the members of the student community makes it a mature system and one which assumes an adult attitude.
Each of us when admitted to Colorado College signed a pledge stating that he understood the Honor System and pledging himself to uphold it.
A working Honor System can best make possible the fulfillment of the potential of a liberal education because it is based on the idea that honor is conduct's guide in all matters that pertain KRCCs 'On The Scene' Radio Production Success Last Friday night, in Perkins Hall KECC held a live radio show, ""On the Scene,"" which provided excellent entertainment for a moderately large audience.
Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradley, well known from previous performances, once again exhibited her exceptional talent at the piano.
Miss Joan Bemeau, accompanied by Mr Henry English and Mr Dick Brigham, returned several times throughout the evening. trend in radio broadcasting, ""col^r Mis; als. gave indito de nt hu Blue Key Hop Coming The Annual Blue Key Dance will be held April 29 at the Chanticleer from 0:00 'til 12:00 This is an all-school affair.
Music will be furnished by the Bob Bishop Orchestra, with tickets priced at $2.00 per couple.
Highlights of the evening will be the tapping of new members into Blue Key and the coronation of this year's Blue Key Queen.
Tickets may be purchased from any Blue Key member or throughout next week at the Rastall Desk. the influences of Eastern and Western music on each other; the result is a fascinating and illuminating survey.
The Folksingers were in excellent form and as usual the audience wanted more.
The evening contained a special feature, as Mr Woodson Tyree, faculty adviser for KRCC, was presented with a commemorative certificate from the staff, which included Mr Caldwell.
MC; Mr Harry Diack, Mr John Bluck and Miss Lawrie Perrv, guest announcers; and Mr Eddie Boychuk and Mr Even Evans, technical assistants.
Effects The staging was elaborate, with colored lights flashing and loudspeakers blaring.
The ent rtainment, which deserves most of the credit, was counter-balanced by KRCCs presentation.
A light flashing ""On the Air"" blinkwl throughout the performance and perhaps could have better read ""On the Scene,"" as Mr Caldwell did not neglect to tell us each time he appeared.
The listener began to wonder just how far it was from Rastall Center to Perkins Hall.
Comments This seems quite unfortunate when KRCC has been .expanding by leaps and bounds, becoming far more effective than ever before.
The announcers themselves recommended KRDO and KVOR as stations in Colorado Springs which offer a variety of music and frequent interviews.
KRCC, which plays largely classical music, presented the show as KYSN might have done.
The performers were hardly representative of rock and roll or characteristic of the method of presentation.
Even more strange is the fact that in its daily presentation KRCC is not ;it all commercial.
Interviews and comparatively straight-forward announcing have been their policy.
On the contrary, in view of their policies in the past and the nature of their performers, it seems that a less-flashy presentation would have been more effective.
If anyone really wants the cool cats of commerciality, we already have KYSN, with enough watts to reach every teenager in Teatro Espanol Gives Three Spanish Plays The Teatro Espanol of Colorado College will present three plays in the original Spanish Friday and Saturday nights, April 21 and 22 at Perkins Hall, curtain time S:20.
The first play, ""El Paso de Las Aceitunas"" by Lope de Rueda, concerns the confusion that can arise over a useless dispute, and the simplicity with which such confusion can be resolved.
In this play Cervantes presents the problem of the confusion of appearance and reality.
The last of this series of short plays is ""La Presumida Burladora"" by Ramon de la Cruz.
Miss Ruth Snodgrass, Miss Lorua Bates, Miss Renata Appel, Mr Carlos Morales, Mr Drane Wilkinson, Mr Luis Arrieta, Miss Martha Lockhart, Mr John Gaubntz, Mr Jerry Northern, and Miss Nancy Duncan.
James Prohens, Mr Herving Madruga, Mr Tom Biery of Wassou High School, and Miss Laurie M Perry, who is in charge of the production.
She is assisted by Mr Carlos Morales and Mr William MeMilleti who is technical director.
Because of the color of (Incostumes and actions, the music and the madrigal singing, the directors do not believe thai ;i ki.owl:dge of Spanish is necessary foi the enjoyment of these plays.
T believe that next years prestige of the council by taking on secretary will be able to increase the range of her job and add to the some added responsibility in the field of communication on campus.
For example, by distributing copies of ASCC minutes more students would be informed about the current issues discussed in weekly meetings.
Tins communication could be extended to include correspondence with other colleges on subjects such as the quarter system, which has been discussed this year in the Executive Council, dorm hours, social policy, freshman orientation and many other subjects which directly concern the student body.
ASCC can get new ideas, find out how dioy have worked for other schools, and possibly employ them here I think this year's presidential campaign has shown that CC students can be interested in their student government, but only if the student government communicates with the students.
Further, the -secretary should be responsible for seeing that those comments are presented at Monday afternoon meetings.
Enthusiasm for CC must certainly mean athletic enthusiasm, and an over all pride for our CC and what it stands for as a liberal arts institution.
The most important aspect of creating this enthusiasm is an informed student body; informed as to athletics, student government, and academic activities.
Such is the job of our service organizations, the ASCC, the social organizations, and Rastall Center.
Through organizations, co-ordination, and communication, I would feel it my responsibility as vice president to execute this program.
This ""field"" is the item that has disturbed me most about the workings of ASCC and is primarily the reason I chose to run for this office.
Not only are the students not informed as to the many things that concern them, but some do not even realize the aspects of ASCC that make it so important.
In turn, I would stand by the president in motivating interest among the members to present effective, worthwhile programs to be decided upon.
You, the voters, can ask for no more than devotion and ability which I think I can provide.
Dunlop that constructive criticism is the best means for any improvement.
But let's face it; most CC students aren't enough interested in campus activities to criticize intelligently.
I am running for treasurer because I think I could do my best for the school at this job.
Stafford hax the consent of the ASCC before spending any funds, but he does determine the financial needs of the organizations reqviesting money and recommends the amounts to be allocated.
MElrose 2-3946 ~~ Counselor openings available for single J men as Hiking Counselor, Western Riding Instructor, Arts and Crafts Instructor, .22 Rifle Instructor, Archery Instructor, MainSummer tenance and Driver, and Dishwasher in our | summer camps for boys.
Also have opening for single woman as Arts and Crafts Help Instructor in our camp for girls.
Spring vacation proved to be a period of hard work and hard thought for 11 CC students and a professor and his wife.
Staying at Gallup, New Mexico at the Indian Community Center, this group spent an intense week discovering much of the Navajo's way of life and problems.
The work, as well as being an end in itself, afforded an introduction into the Navajo culture and personality.
When the group first arrived at the rural elementary school it was quite evident that the Indian children, like their parents, were extremely shy.
But, while laying a patio for their convenience in wet weather, and playing games with members of the executive board will be free to channel their attention in other areas of concern.
I cannot advocate any financial policies at this time, because new leaders and new conditions will create new financial problems.
Through this contact and attendance, I have discussed financial difficulties with many of these in relation to the paying of my bills.
My knowledge is thus general and not confined to just one or two organizations.
Also in this regard I have met, and know, most of the administration and students on this campus."" discovered that the children had a huge capacity for fun and laughter.
This basic conflict of values was soon discovered by the students to be an amazingly complex problem.
In a session with one well educated and articulate Navajo (that lasted about three hours) the students learned of a desire on the part of some of die Navajos to establish the reservation as a judicial entity in which many of the traditional values could be preserved.
Yet another, a member of the tribal council, told the group that the Navajo wants to become a part of the EuropeanGuest Minister Visits Shove The guest minister featured a t the Shove Chapel Sunday Morning Service, 11:00m., ""April 23, is Mr Kenneth W Burton; A native of England, he has spent all but the past three years in that country.
He has been preparing himself at Chicago for the position of minister to students and would like to combine such a position with teaching on a college campus this September.
American tradition and seeks higher education in science and technology The whole problem of assimilation becomes quite difficult especially when one has seen the beauty not only of the Navajo arts and crafts, but also of Navajo' personality, feeling, arid philosophy.
Tejon MElrose 2-0164 SEE EUROPE THIS SUMMER Dittman Tour Escorted by Paul E Boucher 55 days in Europe ... 19 countries.
Arts and Peoples of the South ,; n c"" is a collection of about objects from museums throughit the country.
Zealand are represented, prom Samoa and the Fiji Isnds are two examples of large Kava bowls — one in the a turtle.
Kava is a bever"",e from the root of the pepper ; ail The clothing of some of the islanders is made from the ^ f the mulberry tree and lied tapa; it is dyed in designs ,d cut.
Especially interesting is a prehead from New Zealand. lie riends are preserved from love 1( ] hate.
The Japanese exhibit is a selecof Japanese design in textiles, d ceramics, metal, china and isware.
It is extensive and quite ilorful. ly Song Fest Due End of April The final arrangements for the 1961 Song Fest are being made •by Mr Jerry Northern, Song Fest chairman and the Song Fest Committee, composed of all the song leaders of the entering organizations.
The song selections for this year's performance have been selected b ythe groups from an open category.
A new touch has been added to the annual Song Fest performance, with the addition of a smatl group competition, designed for groups of eight or less singers.
This classification was set up in order to take pressure off the larger groups having to force the majority of their members to learn and sing two songs.
With this year's program the large groups will sing only one song, and the smaller group will sing the other song.
Along with the older traveling trophies for the winners of the large group mens and wornens choruses, trophies will be awarded to the winning mens and womens small group.
Please note that this year all orders for records will have to be placed in advance or on the evening of Song Fest, and no orders will be taken afterwards.
This is to facilitate the handling of the records and to get the earliest possible delivery to the students.
Boyd, organist and choirmaster for the Air Force Academy; Mr Peter Tyree, son of Mr Woodson Tyree and Qualified Judge of National Barbershop Singers; and Mr Donald Jenkins, CC choir director.
Along with the singing there will be a drawing for two stereo record players with AM-FM radio.
This raffle is being sponsored by the Junior Class, and tickets will be available next week in Rastall and from various members of the class.
Following the Song Fest performance refreshments will be served in the Slocum Hall lounge.
Projects Completed By Beta Theta Pis On Saturday, April 15, the Beta Theta Pis and the Kappa Kappa Gammas gave a picnic in Boulder Park for the orphans of the Christian Home for Children.
Last week the Betas picked up the cannisters for the Easter Seal campaign and returned them to the Rehabilitation Center with S4.00 collected.
Sunday morning, another tape in this series entitled ""Man's Greatest Challenge"" will be presented at 9:00m.
The talk is a tape of a speech originally given to the City Club Forum of Cleveland, Ohio, Sunday evening, at 8:00m.
The format consists largely of attractive, lively and entertaining taped interviews with outstanding authorities and representative spokesmen.
The programs are narrated by Bob Considine, Mountain Club Invades LA for Climbs and Fun On the afternoon of March 29, eight members of the Colorado College 'Mountain Club left Rnstiill Center parking lot lor Mexico.
Here the climbers had n great deal of fun, meeting several interesting people and exchanging club insignia.
It had been very dry and the snow had receded to an altitude of about 16,000 feet, baring some nasty slopes of volcanic ash and dust.
Two of the party attained the summit of ""Popo,"" Professor J Ball and Mr, Gary Zeigler, the others reaching various altitudes before turning back.
Upon returning to Aniceameea they found that it was Easter Sunday and succeeded in ""aceing out"" about one hundred of the locals, some whom became rather irate.
Amid some confusion and a few curses they left Amecamcca and returned to Mexico City.
Monday, April 2, five drove toward El Pico de Orizaba, the highest mountain in Mexio.
They had intended to take ;i combination of dirt roads, jeeps, and pack burros to the north face of the mountain, which promised some interesting ice work, but they could not find the town due to conflicting reports from the naPAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 13-1 15 E Bijou St.
TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY Mountain Club atop Shove lives, Nonetheless they finally got to ciudtid Sordini, which gives access to the south tin' of the peak and, ns tin,, town is quite a resort, some real fllll.
Silicosis, from the dust of tho proceeding day. hampered them somewhat, hut again two made till' top, I'mfcsxor Hull mid Mr Ceorge English.
They arrived back in the camp about noon and started back for Cuidad Sordnn.
This workshop, designed to facilitate and improve the inner workings of Rastall Center Board and its various sub-committees, is being conducted for all the new members of the Rastall Center Board and their committee members.
Freshmen especially are urged to attend, particularly if they think they might be interested in some future service in Rastall Center activities.
The workshop will begin at 2:00 m. with a general welcome from Mr Erv Hinds, new student chairman.
He will be followed by Mr Gary Gappert, outgoing chairman, who* will discuss the Center's relation to the rest of the campus.
Mr Richard Blackburn, Center director, will then discuss the relation of the Center to his position and to the rest of the administration.
The next portion of the afternoon will be spent in workshop Golf Team Sets Ambitious Nine Match Season The Colorado College golf team was to have opened the 1961 season with a match against Colorado School of Mines in Denver on Friday, April 14, but the match was postponed by bad weather.
The Tigers have a nine-match season scheduled, plus the Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament in May.
Their opening match was a triangular affair played this Wednesday against the Air Force Academy and Colorado sessions that will deal with particular areas of Rastall's activities, e. cultural affairs, recreation, etc.
The afternoon will be concluded with a general tour of the building and its facilities.
Workshop information and preparatory material will be available at Rastall desk, Monday, April 17.
The workshop planning is under the direction of Mr Clay Sorrick, new executive secretary, and Mr Gappert, Garden of the Gods Scene for Cycle Race The ""TOURNAMENT OF CYCLES"" a 4 kilometer or a two and a half mile bicycle race is to be run in the Garden of the Gods on Saturday, April 22nd at 2m. and should hold all the same thrills and excitement that centered around the fall event, Rally For The Keg.
Air Force Academy at Broadmoor Golf Club, May 12 and 13, Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament at Broadmoor Golf Club Bengal B-ball Offense Outruns Team Defense The Tigers started the '61 baseball season last week \yjj three conference games.
Mines only outhit the Tigers 15 to 12, but CC pitchy fT< yielded 26 walks, seven wild pitches, and four balks as the team committed eight errors on the field.
Olsen was the winning pitcher for Mines and also had a perfect day at the plate.
Norm Laurence's three run homer in the 4th was the high spot in the Tiger offensive.
CSC, the perennial conference power, had whipped Mines 39-1 over Spring Vacation.
He allowed 12 hits ""a i^ 01 19 walks while going the distant as his teammates committed fli errors.
Jerry Maglie, the stinting pitcher, was quite tive and had a no-hitter going a til Ron Strasburger slapped double in the seventh.
John Trr, ter went in to run for him scooted home on two infield < Julie Yearling can be singled a of the hitting barrage as the o standing Bear batsman, as picked up four hits including three run homer and a grand -I; mer to account for nine runs \ ted in.
In the nightcap, Don Jorgenss handled all the pitching chors the Tigers.
The Tiger's scoring thre came in the second inning three successive singles by Du kowski, Carraway, and Moi kowski and Carraway picked i two more hits in the seventh is, m their teammates couldn't pu them across.
Mr [(och, a native of Texas and a top member of the John Birch Society, will speak in a general way on foreign aid and domestic Communism.
Mr Koch graduated from the Massachusetts Institute f Technology in 1922 as a chemical engineer.
His work in oil refineries carried him to England, France, Germany, Rumania, Russia, Italy, Portugal, the Middle East, Burma, South Africa, an d Canada.
Paul, the South Saskatchewan Pipe Line Company of Regina, Saskatchewan, and The Great Northern Oil Purchasing Company of Regina, Saskatchewan.
This speaker's presence on the Colorado College campus is timely in the light of current national controversies and certainly merits high student interest.
Parents Arrive Today For Weekend Activities This week-end of Friday through Sunday is Colorado College's annual Parents' Week-end.
The student directors of this event, Miss Betsy Foote and Miss Joan Jilka, have .pent much time in planning their activities, in getting good teople to head their committees and in generating enthusiasm among the faculty and students, They feel that plans are ■unning smoothly and that those participating will find many /able ways of spending ;ime provided.
The $5.00 registration fee paid by lateHank Rase Monday and Tuesday of this week CC students selected three more leaders to aid Mr Chris Griffiths, ASCC president-elect, in guiding next year's Executive Council.
These were Mr Hank Rase, vice president, Miss Julie Bohlke, secretary, and Mr Bill Stafford, treasurer.
Although campaign posters were used in this election, general campus excitement was not as evident as is was in the President's election, and it is surprising that as many voters turned out.
Perhaps, again, this is due to the organization of the Bill Stafford election committee placing the polls ;ii convenient times and places.
Uso on Friday afternoon there ill be campus tours conducted by he Tiger Club, leaving on the hour Tom Cutler Hall beginning at 2:00 All sorority and fraternity iouses and the dormitories, under ;he direction of Miss Nadine jhang, are having open houses 3:00 to 5:30, during Inch refreshments will be served.
At 7:15m. the annual Song 'est will be held in Shove Chapel, tfter which President Benezet will lave open house in Slocum lounge.
An innovation for SongJest this year is a raffle held by :he Junior Class during the time ■hat the judges are deliberating, 'wo stereo AM-FM radio and reci'd players will be raffled off, and ickets may be purchased for $.25 apiece or 5 for $1.00.
After visiting classes and faculty offices, which will be open on Saturday morning, the parents are invited to an assembly in Perkins Hall.
This will be a Campus Planning Committee conducted by Miss Gretehen Feroe and Mr Jim Dychairmen of the assembly son, co Vol.
An engineer by profession, Mr Albu was educated at the Imperial College of Science and Technology, and worked for many years as a Works Manager.
In 1946 and 1947 he held a senior position in the Control Commission for Germany, and in 1948, prior to his clot.'); inn to Parliament, he was Deputy Director of the British Institute of Management.
He has been o mem l)c-r of the Select Committee on Nationalized Industries since its formation, and is Deputy Chairman of the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee.
He has been a tfelegatc to the Assemblies of the Council of Europe and the WestMi European Union, and has paid ieveral visits to Central and East Vfrlca. in addition to these positions, Ir.
Albu has written extensively mi economic, industrial, and scientific as well as political problems, and has lectured in the United itates in 1953, 1957 and 1959.
ANNOUNCEMENT Applications ai e now out for those wishing to be welcomcrs for next year's fi eshmen.
Any girls who have not received forms may pick them up at Rastall desk.
Left to right [ D °n Wolfgang, Miss Betsy Gaskill, and Mr Skip Meice. ndidates for the office of Junior Class Mr Brad Chase, Miss Kay Mathews, Mr THE SIX CANDIDATES for Senior Class Commis' to right Mr Dave Furgason, Miss Sue Hoyt, M Mr Bob Kendall, Miss Jane Grothaus, and Mrs Rod Peck was not available for the photograph. sner are, from left , Don Strasburger, Oscar Soule.
Mr ANNOUNCEMENT Tickets may still be purchased for the raffle to be held at Song Fest tonight by the junior class for two AM-FM radio and record player sets.
JANE HULT, RUTH SNODQRASS TOM ABSHER usher, Alice Brooka, James Dyson, Sandy Litchfield, Vicky Morey.
JOHN FORMBY Printed Fridays by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Springs, Colorado Let's All Vote, Cha, Cha, Cha Another election and another proportionately high student turnout.
We wonder if this is a trend or if the energy inspired by the presidential election is just slowly dissipating back to lethargy.
We wonder because last Monday at the weekly ASCC meeting the fact came out that this year's sopomores and juniors have ""decided"" not to have public speeches outlining their platforms.
It seems that almost nobody turned out for the speeches given this last week by the candidates for ASCC vice-president.
Miss Cogswell pointed out a fact we would have thought gratuitous, but was, nonetheless, accepted by most of those at the meeting as important.
It seems that one very important ramification of having the speeches is that each candidate must spend a good amount of time thinking, thinking about why he is running and what he wants to accomplish by gaining the office.
As we say, most seemed to agree that this would be a good thing, but after all, three days would not be enough time to prepare and publicize the speeches this year, would they; better wait til next year.
Leaving the freshmen out of this since they still plan to have their speeches, this leaves us with an even dozen upperclassmen who don't seem to realize that an honest decision to vote for a candidate rests on the fact of the voter's having some idea of why he is voting for a certain candidate.
We admit there can be an election where one votes for a certain candidate because he knows that candidate's personally or belongs to the same fraternity, sorority, or clique.
We think there are better ways to show this kind of friendship, and these ways have nothing to do with politics.
As far as there not being ""enough time,"" we feel that most of the interest in the presidential election was generated in the last couple of days.
We thought that it was a trite rale of politics that if the candidate wanted the votes, he reached out toward the voter and did not wait for the voter to come to him.
So, admire the clever posters, learn from a ""brother"" or ""sister"" which candidate is ""our kind of people"" and next week let's all vote, cha, cha, cha.
Mr Griffiths has promised a dynamic leadership for ASCC during his term.
In view of what we said we wonder if Mr Griffiths is not being too optimistic in so far as what he thinks of the group he is to lead next year.
It seems that much of the trouble with past and present councils is that they are largely comprised of jaded deadwood, students who ran for and gained office with an attitude based on ego rather than thought.
If Mr Griffiths hopes to put his policies into effect, and because of present circumstances, it would seem to us that it would be wise if the incoming president will review the several candidates for the different class positions; decide who might best BOTH aid him in his task and also best represent his class; and publicly endorse his choices.
For best results please submit all material in written form to the TIGER ..,-.-. in Raatull or Culler.
Please sign all matetriai submitted bo yoa can contacted for further information if need be.
Your cooperation with the above will assure you of publicu.iuii in each issue.
Austin, Texas, is ready for further integration of public facilities and business establishments.
Many restaurants are open to Negroes, as are predominantly white churches and civic organizations.
For more than two years Mr Goldenson has refused the persistent requests of hundreds of Austin residents.
Since last November as many as 'i(>00 students and citizens in a single day have stood in protest lines in front of the theaters three times a week.
Inform Mr Goldenson of ABC Paramount at the above address of your decision to patronize only theaters which belong to intergrated chains.
Send your contributions to Students for Direct Action, 2844 Shoal Crest, Austin, Texas.
T want to take this opportunity to write you and let you know that the students in the choir are a credit to your school.
They acted like ladies and gentlemen on the whole tour and it was a pleasure to be their driver.
They were alto goodwill embassadors for our state, Everywhere we went, the local people had nothing but praise for their behavior.
In this letter, I want to thank your school, Mr Jenkins, and the students for a very pleasant trip.
Dear Editors, Junior year in Paris, visions of the Lido and Maxim's surrounded by rich and charming French admirers, strolling down the Champs Elysses in a Dior dress with a pink poodle on the end of a jeweled leash, sipping champaign cocktails in the Ritz Hotel or spending hours in a cafe on ""Boul Mich"" in stimulating conversation with a German philosophy student Not quite.
Great was my disillusion when I realized pink poodles aren't practical, Dior dresses are for Jacqueline Kennedy and German philosophy students don't come to Paris.
We had expected crowds of French people flocking around us, asking questions about America, our government policies, college life, etc.
Now all of a sudden we were just one of the 30,000 other American whom the Parisians have learned to accept as a necessary evil.
The student's Paris is a Paris of smelly crowded metros, of rainy days and rushing people, of long waits in the lunchline at the Restaurant Universitaire, of hours spent between classes in cafes discussing everything form the Algerian situation to which pastry shop offers the most for your money or sitting in the sun in the Jardin du Luxumbourg sketching nude statues.
Spare time is spent at the Louvre, in the library or at the park, depending on the weather.
The schedule of courses and pre-registration forms may be obtained from the Registrar's Office or from the student's faculty advisor.
Late registration between May 4 afternoon and Mav 6 will be penalized by a $3.00 fine.
After May 6 the fine will be $10.00. trips to outlying areas, or visit exhibitions, or just explore one of the many curious districts which are so numerous.
Out of fifty students which compose our group, some study constantly, others play constantly, but everyone has time to cultivate his own interests and taste to the fullest.
There are two teenage twins in my family, so life is lively and American rock and roll records are the order of the day.
The bigger the collection the higher status so its not too easy to get homesick, not in the realm of rock and roll anyway.
We eat dinner at 8:30 or 9:00 at night and usually spend over an hour at the table.
This drove us nearly crazy at first (having been used to the ""ten minute system"" prevalent in college dining rooms), but now we are quite used to it and this gives us a chance to discuss interesting topics like ""Bobbup"" and ""Bennur"" with the twins.
Rather than going on a date from nine til twelve, you go from one til eight, usually dancing, as this is the favorite pastime of all Europeans and they are shocked to find Americans don't go in for it much.
Sunday is family day and the Paris population migrates to the grand boulevards and strolls from three to five, finishing the day with a movie.
This is standard procedure and if the Parisians are in a rut they don't know it.
They are doing what they want to do and you can't condemn them for that.
Tf Maxim's and the Lido are way out of the student's class they have replaced them well with ""Chat Qui Peche,"" ""Caveau des Oublittes"" and other numerous ""boites"" in the Latin Quarter which offers jazz and folksingers of every sort.
Montmartre overflows with artists and prostitutes in true Toulouse Lautrec style, and Les Halles are the mornwith people its gothic fascinating at three ing, already swarmin] buying their grocei week.
From Notre Dame beauty to UNESCO super achievement of modern architecture, Paris satisfys every taste.
I think the biggest advantage a year in Europe offers is to get to know yourself, to develop your tastes, to look at things more objectively, to become more aware of the problems posed by modern day society and especially to take a better look at America, at college life, and at the future.
Penny Davidson ability at the graduate lev, Graduating seniors are requj^ to take the Area Test and i Advanced Test in their major fi e . except for those majoring in Q t man, Art, and Business there is not an Advanced % presently available.
The Area Tf counts 10% in determining hono but is not otherwise pertinent graduation.
The Advanced T^ however, is used as part of Comprehensive Examination; essary for graduation.
Stude^ may take the Aptitude Test whj is required by many grad schools, but it is not required t the college.
These tests ar fered at various times during [\. year for the benefit of those sfc dents who must take them in the year to meet gradual school deadlines.
The questions on the GRE's aj very carefully selected and constantly being examined and ii>. proved by the Educational Testis Service.
The results of the are reported both as a numeric; score and as a percentile ratira Seniors can obtain their score from the department chairman i their major field.
Dean Worner explainn that this plan was intended to a courage knowledge of a wide nut ber of disciplines in accoidain with the goals of a liberal art college, to furnish the administn 'ion and faculty with an index I the scope of knowledge of Colt rado College students, and to M cate where improvement is needeCareful records have been k^ut i the last several years of testuq Results indicate that very few sti dents would have been denie graduation as a result of the GEE scores and that these .-cor. generally correlate with grade ai e rages.
Dean Worner would like to hai students' opinion of the tests an would give their opinions conside . ation in evaluating the testing pit gram.
The United States had coned defeat long before the Russia announced on April 12 that th had won the race to put a man space.
Quite a number of Awe can scientists have long felt tr the goal in no way justifies tlie 1 forts anyhow.
The Russiless adept at H-bomb miniatur (Continued on '.■■•■ ' p-ad* ut'iid$2( ilM' Colorado College Tiger • April 28, 1961 ub Board Seeks Workshop Chairman, landhook and Photographic Editors Monday, May 1, at 4:00m., is the deadline set for subssion of applications for three positions on Publications Board.
Editor of the Student Handbook, Writers' yorkshop Chairman, and Photographic Editor.
To qualify „ r each of these positions, a student must have had a 2. ra de average last semester.
The Editr of the Student Handbook is responsible for Wishing the Handbook sent to mus t be done before the end of the tudents during the summer.
A full report has been written to clarify these and other responsibilities.
This year was the first time the Writers' Workshop was set up, and it turned out to be very successful.
The position of Photographic Editor is a more time-consuming job which requires some knowledge of photography.
He is expected to keep his own books — all transactions are made through the CC business office.
This year, all film processing has been done professionally by Stewart's.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of the Photographic Editor to take pictures as well as to deliver and pick up the film downtown.
The school presently owns a Crown Graphic camera with a strobe unit, and Publications Board is now in the process of buying a second camera, perhaps a Rolliflex.
It is up to the Photographic Editor to select a staff to work with him.
A student applying for this job must be able to work well with both faculty and students, and must also have extra time to dedicate to his work.
Applications for each of these three positions may be picked up and returned to the Rastall Reception desk no later than 4:00 m., Monday, May 1.
Conducted by Mr Robert Brossman, the various heads of planning committees gave details on individual projects; the library, the science building, fraternity houses and the Sports Center, as the largest projects for the immediate future.
Blue Key Hostesses: Gamma Phi Beta Worship Leader: Miss Burgoon IVttv and SPORT CARS school than the students.
It seems that more students would have been interested, as the plans are as varied as the interests and needs of the student body.
The assembly was quite impressive and indicates a far-reaching interest by some in CC advantages.
Mr Bernard Arnest, head of the Aesthetics sub-committee, began the discussion with a statement of artistic purpose.
The nature of the building program, he hoped, would preserve and forward individual character through diversity.
Each building will be distinctive, capturing, it is hoped, a functional and spiritual invitation to use.
Ellsworth Mason then spoke on the plans for the new library, built on four levels, including such innovations as seminar rooms, listening rooms with tape recorders and phonographs, typing rooms, individual studying booths, smoking lounges for studying and relaxation, and an outdoor studying area.
Dean Juan Reid, head of the sub-committee for the new fraternity buildings, spoke of the immediate plans for three new houses north of Palmer.
They will be nearly identical in construction, achieving a certain amount of individuality through different color schemes.
One third of the necessai-y funds has been raised by the fraternities, the other two thirds will be gotten from government loans.
Wilbur Wright gave some details about the new science building, the ground-breaking of which is to come around May 16.
The building will occupy 67,000 square feet, with four levels, two thirds of the space usable, the other third involved in overhead.
The basement will have dark rooms, supply rooms and special laboratory facilities.
The first floor belongs to the physicists, with classrooms at one end of the floor and laboratories at the other.
The chemists will occupy the second floor, the biological sciences, the third floor.
The work by the local chapter consisted of general maintance and clean up work in three different locations, one at the Hope House for mentally retarded children, one at the rehabilitation center for handicraft training of the handicapped, and the other at the center for therapy for the physically handicapped. quiring a greenhouse.
A glass-enclosed balcony stands out from the west face of the building, connected to the building proper by a glassed walkway.
This section, which will compliment, the design of the library, will be used for administration, seminars, displays and one large lecture room.
The Sports Center will include a gymnasium, pool, handball courts, rifle range and locker rooms.
Cossitt's first floor, financed by the Women's Educational Society, will be modernized and used for women's physical education and dance.
On completion of all this Colorado College will certainly be an impressive architectural sight.
Mr Brossman, however, emphasized the fact that CC is a small, liberal arts college and plans to eventually maintain a constant enrollment of about 1500 students.
Sunday Sermon At Shove Tilled 'Fathers and Sons' This Sunday's Shove Chapel service will be bold in conjunction with Parent's Week-end.
Mr Booth will deliver a sermon dealing with ""Fathers and Sons"" which he hopes will illuminate the relationships between the students and their college and the students and their families, and the merging together of their sometimes conflicting relationships.
The customary coffee hour will be held as an outdoor reception on the lawn.
They're tho pants with Velcro-adjustable waist; fly-front and side-pocket.
Although the idea of such a performance had been brewing for four years, the plays got their real start in November through the combined enthusiasms of Professor Laurie Perry of the Spanish department and Mr Carlos Morales, the foreign student from Mexico.
Having selected three plays on the basis of their actability and positions of importance in representing various conventions of the Spanish theater, Mr Morales and Miss Perry immediately began once or twice a week rehearsals.
The Spanish Theater found its actors among CC language students, some with only one or two years of study in Spanish, foreign students, townspeople, and members of the CC faculty.
This group, despite its disparate origins, showed remarkable interest in working together toward the production of good plays.
The costume making, with the aim of the low-cost creation of 16th century dress, was an amazing feature in the production of the plays.
With contributions from the Salvation Army, the GoodWill Industry, Church rummage sale material and friends, plus imaginative use of old bed-spreads and curtains, Mrs.
Felisa Llorente outfitted the whole troup with costumes appropriate to each part.
The group used only the bare minimum of decoration for the stage, including only those things essential to the sense of the plays.
The plays, then, were produced with a minimum of expense and a high degree of enthusiasm.
All these preparations, enjoyable in -themselves, resulted in two highly entertaining evenings last Friday and Saturday.
With the help of the very well-written program notes and the general action on stage, even those who understood not a word of Spanish enjoyed the plays.
Each night's audience was also sprinkled with a goodly number of Spanish-speaking people who were further able to appreciate the plays.
The time-lapse between each play was filled by the Madrigal Chorus singing Spanish Madrigals of the 15th and Kith centuries, sort of activity is encouraging.
Senior "" vJM-M Commissioner g\ fv\ f //I IjIj GANO DOWNS HEN'S CLOTHUiQ — FT7RN1SHDMGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL MfimiitYs • CAMERA SHOP* 30 HOBTH TEJOH STREET The COMPLETE Camera Store 7b« Laryoj; ScJocIlon of Photographic Btjatpwnt I Rocky Mountain Am EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3171/j N Te|on {BHIND HATVAIK HOTBL) Alpha Lambda Initiates New Members and Officers Alpha Lambda Delta is the freshman women's scholastic honorary fraternity on our campus.
A girl must make a 3. her first semester or an overall average of 3. for her entire freshman year to become a member of this group.
Under the leadership of Miss Jean Daniels, as president of Alpha Lambda Delta, the organization lias become more meaningful to the campus this year.
Sor WAA Holds Annual Initiation Banquet The Women's Athletic Association held its annual initiation banquet Thursday night, April 13, in Rastall Center.
The celebration included an hilarious entry of the outgoing, officers, followed with individual skits relating to the office concerned.
Miss Pixie Cambell proudly bestowed upon Miss Jean Albrecht the remains of the president's manual; vice-president Miss Mimi Meek left Miss Portia Van Meter in charge of the ""Emergency Squad""; Miss Gwen Salisbury presented secretary Miss Jean Torcomb, with the bundle of previous minutes; the finances, treasurer Miss Leigh Rainey left to the capable hands of Miss Nadine Chang.to be straightened out; while Miss Sarah Gruen, social chairman, let Dante's Inferno explain her job to Carol Wright.
At the first meeting of the new board, the basketball honor teams were chosen.
The first team includes Misses Pixie Cambell, Jean Torcom, Mimi Meek, Nancy Delhin, Sue Evans, and Portia Van Meter.
On the second team are Misses Jean Albrecht., Phyllis Setter, Carol Wright, Donna Story, and Jan Sartor.
Father Bartolome, a Spanish priest from Denver, was delighted with the performances and has invited the group to come to Denver some week-end in May, all expenses paid, to present them again.
These plays are a most felicitous example of what good results an interested group can achieve.
Especially in a year marked with criticisms of cultural apathy, this of the activities which this members have continued from the past have been the tea in the fall for freshmen women, the letter of information about their group to freshmen women in the summer before their arrival at CC and the individual encouragement in their academic work by notes and conversations with freshmen women.
Alpha Lambda Delta has also introduced new activities, recommending a monthly list of cultural activities on campus and in the Colorado Springs area, and posting it on various bulletin boards as a possible place of reference for students looking for something to do.
A tutoring system was set up earlier this year which the new members of Alpha Lambda Delta are hoping to continue in a more organized manner next year.
A list of subjects offered and the times -hey would be available to freshmen women was posted in each of the girls' dormitories, and this year's system did prove helpful to some students.
If you look at the natui'e of each of the major projects of this organization, you will see that they all serve the school in a serious and important way.
The present out-going active class, the sophomores, has tried to keep in mind the service goals of Alpha Lambda Delta in choosing their activities as a group.
Miss Susan Areritz is president; Miss Stephanie Kow is vice president; Miss Mary Bardone is treasurer; Miss Sue Hile is secretary; Miss Linda Harrison is historian; Miss Maria Bullock is in charge of special projects.
Other members of this class are Miss Judy Clark, Miss Jeanette Moore, Miss Carol Wright and Miss Jo Anne Gray.
Daniels, Mr Orin Flint, \ Charles Gibson, Miss Judy & Mr Michal Oren, Miss K a Simms, and Miss Karen Will^ The concert will be free arnj open to the public.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGC BICYCLES T*JO EAST PIKES 4 «JtF PEAK AVENUE will 'ork I'nUUl tills ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave.
Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEIro' 3-781 Colorado College Tiger • April 28, 1961 [ 4 | I 5 ' jlauilost of the Peace Corps voluneel s will probably be young cole ze graduates, but there will not ^ a ny limit as to age or set.
There |rill undoubtedly be some skilled 'vorkevs without college degrees who will be in working roles of jbout a two to three years duralion.
Most of the newly developing countries are in great need of skilled manpower.
If this shortnot filled from the outside, j°any development programs would nd to a halt, much to the disss of the inhabitants.
The basic philosophy behind the Peace Corps is the placid of Americans in workingand instructive roles in static underdeveloped and newly developing countries of the world.
The Peace Corps members will teach, build, and work in the to which they are sent. ing in other health projects; working in agricultural projects and rural programs; working on largescale construction and industrial projects; and working in governmental administration.
Its major role will be to reinforce private and public means of assistance and, where possible, to initiate new methods requiring PC volunteers.
The Peace Corps, therefore, would become the ""basic component"" of our entire foreign aid program.
April 28, 1961 "" Colorado Colle ge Tiger Honor System Procedure Since there have been some questions concerning the procedures for reportinga suspected honor system violation and for conducting the subsequent hearing, the following summary lias been prepared to facilitate an awareness and understanding of such procedures.
Ross Renders Middle English Poetry Last Wednesday in the WES room of Rastall Center Dr.
Ross read segments of Middle English poetry including Chaucer, Dunbar and Tangland.
He translated in part the more difficult terms which did not correspond with present day English.
With the reading lie explained the language, theme and structure of the selection.
The latter, for instance, was about two large women complaining about the length of Lent which made thei Teachers Wanted $5,000 and up.
If this first step, that of warning the student, is taken, the individual may find, in some cases, that his suspicions have been allayed by. information acquired in the process, and that it is no longer feasible to report the case to the honor council.
If the student does wish to report the case, he must contact a member of the council within two school weeks after the observation.
This honor council member is responsible for submitting a written report to the entire council concerning the details of the case.
The student accused is notified of the accusation by a registered letter, and if he thinks the accusation is not valid, he must notify the chairman or the secretary of the council within forty-eight hours of the notification, 'if the accusation is not contested, it ia automatically recorded as a formal warning.
When the accusation is contested, a formal hearing of the council is held to determine whether or not it believes the accusation to be valid.
The accused and accuser appear individually before the council to present their testimonies.
They, as well as the honor council, may call as many witnesses as they desire.
The proceedings of this hearing are kept secret, and the names of those involved in a case of discipline and the evidence in connection with it are never divulged by the members of the honor council except by the proper authority.
At least nine members of the council of thirteen members must be present for the hearing, and a majority vote of those present is necessary in order to issue a warning.
The procedure for reporting a suspected second violation and the subsequent hearing are the same as that required for a first violation, with the exception that a 9/13 vote of the council members is necessary to issue a second warning.
In the event that a verdict of guilty is returned against the accused, the honor council recommends dismissal to the president of the college.
The council also recommends that if a person so dismissed requests a transcript of his college record to be forwarded to another institution that the administrative office take into consideration the L-ecommendations of the honor council as to the presence or absence of any extenuating factors.
Upon the conviction of a second violation any student who believes that the honor council has acted unjustly or has erred in considering liis case has an unqualified right of appeal, An appeal hearing is then conducted in which there is a disinterested presiding officer, a counsel for the accused and for the prosecution, and a jury of students chosen by lot.
A description of the proceedings of such a hearing may he found in the constitution of the honor system.
Tire jury's penalty is final, but any recommendation the jury chooses to make as to the penalty affixed tn ;< verdict of guilty is advisory in nature only and is forwarded to tincouncil for duo consideration.
Since 1899 ME 2-6635 Good Grief VOTE EOR KAY MATHEWS Junior Commissioner • Peace Corps ""Technician Helpers"", 4) programs of UN and other international agencies, 5) through directly administered Peace Corps programs with host countries.
Once the PC is a moving concern the training program should be integrated with the regular college curriculum.
Standards for PC would be intensive study of languages, history, economics, and especially the culture of particular areas.
If a student desires to go into the Peace Corps, he should take available education courses in instructional methods.
From this training period through his term of office, the volunteer would be subject to immediate dismissal and a return trip home.
Those who do not adjust to new challenges must be relieved of their duties promptly.
The Peace Corps will not be an exemption from the draft, but will in most cases be grounds for deferment.
The volunteers will not be paid comparable salaries to the ones they might receive at home for doing the same job.
Nor will they be paid what their counterparts ji-oad are now being paid.
The volunteers would receive enough pay to maintain a decent standard of living.
At the end of one's term a separation allowance will be given, depending on the length of one's term.
The critics of the PC have a fairly strong opposition rolling; it runs the line from GOP in Congress who desire a ""go slow"" attitude all the way to the abolition of the plan entirely.
To the last group belongs Mr LeFevre, editor of the Colorado Springs GazetteTelegraph.
In an editorial of his dated March 28, 1961, ""Kennedy's Kiddie Kar Krew,"" he implied that boys should not be sent to do a man's job.
The Peace Corps, besides spending tax money, would again lower American prestige.
However, to the critics of the Peace Corps on Mr LeFevre's grounds, this reply seems fitting.
It seems a better idea to have this harbinger of world peace carried on by the youth than leave it in the hands of mature elders who appear once every so often on our campus.
Racial prejudices, rigid attack against Socialist-Pacifist speakers and a general mistrust of any form of intolerance for ideas which are called ""un-American"" are qualities which would immediately eliminate these people from the Peace Corps.
If maturity is to be a deciding factor for membership on any Peace Corps-type program, it will be achieved by the training of eager and for the large part ""openminded"" youths, not dogmatic elders.
SKIP MEIS Junior Class Commissioner Tiger Swatters Split With Regis 33-7, 6-3 The Tigers gave CC baseball fans something to shout about this weekend as they turned in their best performance of the year in splitting a doubleheader with Regis.
Graboski, Hanks, and Frolick also got 4 hits as Syl Carrawy collected 5 and big Duke Dutkowski rapped a grand slam home run.
Strasburger allowed only 10 hits while walking 1 and striking out 5 in the winning effort.
Regis tied it up in the top of the 6th, but CC went ahead in the bottom of the inning 3-2.
Regis . added 4 in the seventh to put the :&. . game on ice as CC failed to score in the remainder of that frame.
Jorgy's homer was the first of his career as he turned a fine per||& formance.
Pharmacy) SEE EUROPE THIS SUMMER Dittman Tour Escorted by Paul E Boucher 55 days in Europe ... 19 countries.
Of course, being engaged is wonderful, but sealing the engagement with an Artcarved ring makes it more wonderful than ever -fo refer/ Ar_tc a rye.
Also name of nearest (or homei town) Artcarved Jeweler. am enclosing ] 10* to cover handling and postage.
Address In Colorado Springs See CECIL HOWELL Jeweler for your Artcarved Diamonds 1 26 North Tejon St.
I96I I 1 COLORADO COLLEGE PED-POWERED cylists Invaded the Garden 1 (he Gods last weekend for the Rastall Tourney.
Shown here, two entjnts make the corner, still upright, to speed on to the finish.
Under the leadership of the event airman, Mr Paul Kilbreath, the officials took their places ■ound the rugged course and necessary measures were taken ialt all traffic in the area.
Visitors and sightseers joined Colorado College students and faculty that were on hand to watch the competition.
A cai'avan of cars carried the riders over the course to acquaint them with specific hazards and a briefing of the race rules followed.
All bicycles were checked for proper brakes and steering while the racers had their numbers pinned on their backs.
The race referee, Mr Dick Oldakowski, a local bicycle enthusiast, called the racers to their starting position.
The bicycles were both The GOLDEN DRAGON 1409 S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Sarrlng Family Stylo Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN—I I to 1 1 Dally Colo.
Ave. z > 1 THE GOLDEN DRAGON ■ W Brookiida Don't Let This Happen to Vs ■ 1 SUPPORT SOULE SENIOR COMMISSIONER KRCC Presents Power ""'»« in KRCC-FM 91.
The talk is a tape of a speech originally given to the City Club Forum of Cleveland, Ohio.
As the gun sounded they all leaped forward and off they went down the hill and around the sharp curves.
A pre-running car kept a safe distance ahead of the cyclists to insure a clear course and a first aid car driven by Mr Dan Bernthree women were included in the stein followed at a proper distance keeping a close' eye out for spills and collisions.
As the riders disappeared around the first curve the spectators scrambled up the rocks to secure a position of observation for the backstretch.
Sitting there on high ledges, it was easy to spot the racers as they darted around the winding road, flashing behind the huge red rocks and Republican Ranks Max Power, two term chairman of the Colorado College Young Republican's Club and rising young political figure, Saturday was elected Chairman of the College Young Republican League of Colorado.
Mr Power had attended the two-day convention of that organization at Boulder as a candidate for vice-chairman, but was drafted by the six schools represented to fill the higher post.
Mr Power, who was instrumental in bringing Walter Judd (RMinn.) to CC last fall, has been active in Colorado Republican affairs for many years.
He is a graduate of South High of Denver, where he worked closely with the Republican officials.
Mr Power is well known on campus as a 4.00 student and a member of the CC debate team.
The wind was from the southeast and made riding very difficult but the course road, on spreading out, conveyed the difference in conditioning of the riders.
Mr Mark Stetson pushed over the finish line to become the first winner and record holder for the Tournament.
His time was 7:24.3; riding a hard second was Mr Cassius Defiori, who finished with a time of 7:30, and third place went to Mr John Stickney with 8:13.
Mr Evan Heckel, Miss Kathy Murphy, Miss Carol Howard and Miss Stephanie Ames.
The Junkie Classic started immediately after this race and included in the line-up such spectacular sights as a tandem bicycle, fluorescent bicycle and rider's shirt combination, bent bicycle wheels, amusing hats and bicycles with such necessary racing equipment as mud flaps, horns, rear view mirrors and raccoon tails.
Mr Gary Ziegler, 9:10.0; Mr Steve Srpague, 9:30.2; Mr TonyFischer, 9:57.8; Mr Augie Meyer; Mr Jerry Macon; Mr Emerson Ellett; Mr Dick Runddl, Mr Bob Graham; Mr Mai Randle; Mr Charlie Campbell ; Miss Ginger Gallalee; Mr Dick Moss, Mr Stu Hovey and Mr John Rinderknecht , and Miss Judy Coleman.
A discussion by Mr Brossman, president of the Campus Planning Committee at CC, and Dr.
Wilbur Wright of the physics department will take up most of this program.
Wright will discuss the philosophy of the science buildings; and Mr Chris Griffiths will conclude by giving the implications for the future of the new buildings and what this will menu for the incoming students.
Saturday evening the Parent-Faculty dinner in Rastall Center has be^n arranged for under the direction of Miss Trish Adams.
The parents will be seated with their son's or daughter's Faculty Advisor and short addresses will be given by President Benezet and Mr Griffiths.
For the expected S00 parents at the dinner, Miss Sylvia Stenovec has arranged entertainment consisting of the best acts from the 1900 variety show, which will he presented in Perkins Hall after the dinner.
The parents are then invited to attend the Blue Key dance from 9:00 until 12:00m., at which new members of the National Blue Key fraternity will be selected.
The semi-formal dance will be held at the Chanticleer and costs $2.00 per couple.
Faculty and students will be the cooks and entertainment, including n rock climbing demonstration, will be provided.
Miss Karen Bessesen has provided for a non-denominational church .service in Shove Chapel at 11m.
Mr Harry Booth, Dean of Shove Chapel, will speak on ""Fathers and Sons"" and a reception will be held outside the chapel following the Bervice, Mr William Bnrton has been the faculty advisor to the Parents' Weekend Committee and Mr Dave Furgason has been the committee's publicity manager.
The efforts of all those people are to be acknowledged by (lie faculty and students of CC because it is from Hit' parents of its students that an institution gets both financial and vocal support for its activities.
And certainly, parents who visit Colorado College in such a pleasant way, seeing its aspects of fun and study in such a friendly atmosphere such as .this week-end provides, will be well .satisfied with their investments.
Tajon MEIrose 2-0164 '] April 28, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger THESE SIX BEAUTIES would create enthusiasm in anything, but, as next year's cheer leaders, have been chosen by the ASCC enthusiasm committee to instill It in the student body.
From left to right Misses Sue Kellog, Isabelle Williams, Sharon Demong, Lynn Miller, ""Buffie"" Buff urn, and Bobby Tolley. on for five innings and the girls will be given a slight, but necessary, handicap.
Under the point system, the class accumulating the most points will be the lucky recipient of a keg of beer.
A large hose will be strategically placed on the lawn, and School Picnic Due May 16 An event long associated with the coming of Spring, the AllSchool Picnic, will be held on Saturday, the 6th of May.
Festivities will start with food served at 11 o'clock on the West side of Shove Chapel.
In this same area, the sophomore girls will play the senior boys in a softball game.
Starting at 11:15, the game will go Tiger Club Taps Twenty Each spring the Tiger Club of Colorado College selects new members from among girls who have shown interest and enthusiasm in school activities in general and especially in school sports.
The Tiger Club is a woman's honorary organization and a service organization.
Its prime activities are involved in awakening interest in the students toward their college.
This activity is most conspicuous in the fall during freshman orientation and the football season.
Tiger Club members are most easily distinguishable by their yellow jackets which they wear at football games and on the day before football games.
Misses Mary Bardone, Susan Bigelow, Sylvia f Buffie) Buffum, Peggy Coe, Janice Collins, Louise Dodge, Patricia Hay, Susan Heidel, Susan Hile, Kathy Innis, Mimi Jones, Susan Kellogg, Margaret Kurashita, Helen Moe, Eleanor Patterson, Jann Rowley, Anne Trueblood, Kay (Kitty) Tytler, Dorothy Albrecht, and Jane Alderson. those escaping the loosers' prize will be able to> attend in dry clothes the varsity baseball game which will begin at 1m. on the baseball field.
This became an overwhelming advantage when the race to put man in space began.
Many -scientists think that the race to put man in space is of dubious value.
Vannevar Bush, a venerated figure in the scientific community, has said that a man can do no more than an instrument, in fact he can do less.
Sophisticated instrument payloads have given the U S. singular success in solving scientific riddles beyond the earth's atmosphere with small, unmanned rockets.
It works together with a pure white outer filter— to halanee the flavor elements in the smoke.
Even with their far ' powerful boosters, the IW have made no efforts as far know to use satellites for things as communications rgi] in space.
They have made tnejjj scientific contributions, the * important being the photogrf of the far side of the moon.
Dr, Harlow Shapely, form er rector of the Harvard Obsen-afe and one of the world's leadi stronomers remarked, ing such a tremendously beautj| job of exploring space that up there would be a hindr; ■ are \ Many thoughtful citizens convinced that the really excit discoveries in space can be lized better by instruments thai man.
K •< m A second reason for quests ing the justification of such space race is its danger of runni out of economic bounds.
Nevertheless no price seems t high to the enthusiasts who wa to put a man into space as so as possible.
Unfortunately, .such a comjir son had not been made effectivi to the public both here and abrw in the past — and at this ]}""■ would only sound like sour g(W Again the Russians have drawn into a competition on their o' terms.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 5, 1961 Colorado College AH School Picnic Saturday Includes Games, Food, Beer This Saturday starting at 11:00m. behind Perkins Hall the entire school, students and faculty alike, is invited to attend the All-School picnic.
The main events are a picnic lunch of fried chicken and lemonade and various games.
The regular lunch will not be served in Rastall Center Dining Room, so everyone will be able to attend the picnic.
Starting as promptly as possible, about 11:15, the sophogirls will play the senior boys in a game of softball.
Then the classes will compete in a sack and mob race, and the class which accumulates the most points in the races will be awarded with a uf beer.
Also, the freshmen meet the faculty in another softball match. e culminating event will be a tug-of-war in which the sophos and the seniors will try to pull the freshmen and the juniors through the water from a strategically placed campus hose.
The picnic will end about 1:00 in time for the students to attend the intramural track meet or the ty baseball game.
IMPORTANT CORRECTION The annual General Assembly to elect new members to the Honor Council will be held in the Taylor Dining Room at 4:45m., Tuesday, May 9.
It is here that student representatives from each academic class meet to nominate and to help select neii members of the Colorado College Honor Council.
It will be shown Friday, May 5, at 8:00m. in the Music Room of the Fine Arts Center.
In the early 1950's, the Marshall family of Cambridge, Mass., who run the Polaroid Lens Co., went on safari to the Kalahari Desert of South Africa to study the Bushmen who still live extremely primitive lives there.
Their daughter, Elizabeth, wrote a book called The Harmless People, available at Colburn, about their experiences.
The son, John, was at the time an undergraduate major in anthropology at Harvard and chose to find out about the Bush life.
Fortunately he had good endurance, for at one time he accompanied the Bush hunters on a giraffe hunt taking 4 or 5 days.
They had little to eat during the hunt, and nothing to drink except water which they sucked out of roots.
Young Marshall shared their privations and had, in addition to everything, his equipment.
Entering in the two-man division will be Mr Jack Cashman and Mr Chris Griffiths.
Mr Charles Pucker, Mr Ma\ Power, Mr Dave Fnrgason and Miss Nancy Dehlin are entered in the four-man division.
The CC team will be competing against GO to 70 of the top colleges and universities in the country, Mr Al Johnson, who will accompany the learn as coach, said that he felt the CC team was as good as any entered in the tournament but would have to get lucky in order to come out on top in the rugged three clay meet.
A special feature of the meet will be tlie initiation of three members of of the CC group into Tau Kappa Alpha, which is a national honorary forensic fraternity.
The three students being initiated at Louisville are Miss Nancy Dehlin, Mr Dave Furgason and Mr Chris Griffiths.
Mr Charles Puckett, Mr Jack Cashman and Mr Max Power were initiated into the fraternity last year at the national tournament at Salt Lake City. colo vith John Marshall rath IFC Picks Rivers, Peck as New Leaders Mr Tom Rivers, junior from Muneie, Ind., of Beta Theta pi was elected Inter-Fraternity Council president and Mr Rud Peck, junior from Denver, of Kappa Sigma was elected iIFC secretary-treasurer by IFC last Tuesday night.
The Council consists of two members of each of the five fraternities, Pat is, the president and an elected representative from each F'Use, making 10 members in all.
It was the presidents and PPtesentatives that were elected in respective houses just this spring *° put Mr Rivers anil Mr Peek ll <> the posts.
Mr Rivers is well aware of the pontial of a group such as IFC and u °Pes to make it an active organ of he CC campus next year.
As for next year's Greek Week, ^icli is traditionally sponsored by fC, M r R, vers assures the students ™t it will be planned for and take as scheduled.
Sn Senior Ball Faculty Breakfast Class Gift for first and second sem seniors.
A greater percentage of the freshmen voted than any other class, electing Mr Steve Sabom vice-president, and Mr Bill Greeley , secretary-treasurer.
The junior class elected for their commissioners next year Miss Betsy Gaskill , president; Mr Brad Chase vicepresident , and Mr Skip Meis secretary-treasurer.
Mr Bob Kendall will head his class next year on ASCC, voted in with a majority of 20 votes.
Pick CV Pan Awards Given Members and Special Guests Honored at Annual Picnic The Pick and Pan awards given each year for outstanding work in speech, radio, debate and drama have a long and interesting history at Colorado College.
Benham Edit Kinnikinnik Miss Pegi Benham and Miss Terry Kidner have been chosen by Publications Board to be the editors of next year's Kinnikinnik.
Mr Arthur Daily, a freshman at CC, has been elected to serve as business manager.
Both Miss Benham and Miss Kidner are qualifying juniors; Miss Kidner plans to major in English, Miss Benham in philosophy.
Both have served on the Kinnikinnik and are acquainted with the duties necessary to handle the editoriship.
They hope to put out two issues and continue the board of review and the presentation of awards.
The first issue will concentrate on prose and poetry, the second on art.
In addition, Miss Benham and Miss Kidner have decided to incorporate the art and layout editors and perhaps illustrate the winning piece of prose or poetry.
They are both aware that the success of the magazine will largely depend on response from the students.
As a result, they plant to cooperate and work with the Writers' Workshop, the present poetry workshop and a prose workshop, if it can lie established next year.
Mr Daily, although lacking in specific qualifications for business manager, impressed the board with bis comments and attitudes.
His reason for application is largely an interest in publications, which he may be fulfilling in more than one capacity next Many recipients of the award hav these fields.
Mr Harry Dlaclc, Mr John Black, Mr Jim Frolick, Evan Mr Jay Viclcci Mr Ed Boychuck, and Mr Evans.
The awards for debate are to go to Mr Chris Griffiths, Mr Ma\ Power, and Mr Charles Puckett.
Four Students arc receiving the award for drama, they arc Mi Leonard Dnlsemer, Miss Barbara Blair, Miss Georgia McClay, and Miss Carol Herndon.
These award winners will be the honored guests of ""Chief"" Woodson Tyree at his home this Sunday morning lor breakfast.
The distinct by Mr Tyree ; The goldpan and miner' burro, as in the cut ah designed r Buchan. pick and ■e, is the old ch, dr. are needed to profit, Sunday afternoon there will be a picnic at the Tyree's where the award winners will he the honored guests while special recognition will go to the membership of the Talent and Speakers Bureau.
Members of the bureau who will receive certificates of recognition at the awards assembly later this year will be Miss Ann Willcox, Miss Mary Elizabeth Bradly, Mr Wallace Caldwell.
Bowl team, Miss Ann Willcox, Mr Charles Greening, Mr Jim Flocrehinger, and Miss Terry Kidner.
Many new additions and ini provements, baaed on the editor's exteneivi pa | . cperlence, will be incorporated into tho L062 Nugget.
Catchy advertisements will he used as often as possible in place of the usual trite ones.
Basically, Miss Larson hopes to put the Nugget, on a sophisticated college level.
Mr Peek intends to place an efficient and orderly bookkeeping system into practice and keep all accounts straight.
With the new staff's experience and ideas tile \'M\2 yearbook ought to be well worth the work it will take to make it live up to expectations.
AT THE ANNUAL BLUE KEY DANCE held last Saturday night, II new members were tapped.
Doug Norberg, Jim Hanks, Bob Kendall, Erv Hinds, Pete Pleasant, Tom Rivers, Chris Griffiths, Archie Prestayko, Al Church, Don Lavers, and absent from the picture because he is in Holland as an exchange student, Bob Williams.
During the past week each class went through the process of electing a representative to the forthcoming assembly which will select members to fill vacancies on the Student Honor Council.
The answer lies buried beneath a river of pious words which, in far too many cases, serves merely to cover either cynicism or misunderstanding.
We come to Colorado College aware that it operates under an Honor Code.
But that signature does not always indicate that we understand either the workings of the system or more basically, the privileges of living and working in the context of being trusted.
Many of us never have been forced to work in a school where the guiding principle was that studen s are not honest.
The consequences of this P^hy^ a ""protective system"" in which the students are guilty ratal proven innocent, in which the atmosphere of an armed and hostile camp is prevalent, with teachers serving as wa.dens and spies.
Those who have been unfortunate enough to exist in this environment can certainly appreciate the breath of resh air that an honor code introduces.
An atmosphere of trust is essential for the best relationship between students and between students and faculty.
In this way the honor code permits the kind of enyn onment that a liberal arts college seeks to achieve But it does more for the individual, in giving him the full restart ion that he is not engaged in a game of trying to outwit elthei his fellow students or the faculty.
This system makes each puson aware that he is responsible to himself for his ; own actum * It seems that his is far better than the other alternative-ot living constantly under the shadow of suspicion.
In order to maintain this atmosphere of trust, we must want the system to work.
In order for the system to work, those who fail to live up to their trust must be made aware that they harm others as well.
Perhaps our greatest immediate responsibility is to insure that those who sit on the Honor Council will be the best possible representatives.
New members will be chosen on Tuesday by those we select from our classes.
Those class delegates should be reminded that they have a serious job to do.
Finally, those chosen to act on the governing body of the system have an even greater obligation.
They set the standard and have the power to enforce it in case of violations.
Recognition of that power and the responsibility it carries must serve to encourage them to give their energies to what may often be a thankless task.
Only by the proper exercise of this authority will the students be well represented and the system itself survive.
Colorado College, ASCC to Host Wyoming Academy of Science On May 5 and 6, 1961, the 32nd annual meetingof the Colorado -Wyoming Academy of Science will be held.
They wil] meet jointlv with the Colorado-Wyoming Section of the American Association of Physics Teachers and the ColoradoWyoming Junior Academy of Science.
Anyone interested in science may become a member of the Academy upon payment of the required fee.
The yearly membership fee is $3.50 for regular members and $1.00 for students.
The meetings of the Colorado-Wyoming Academy of Science are held at least once a year, as determined by the executive council.
CC Faculty and Students Of the many section meetings being held, three will be chaired by faculty members of Colorado pology; Dr.
On the second day of the meeting CC's ASCC is sponsoring a dance for the Junior Academy of Science in Bemis with records.
Rinnikinuik 1 Spring Coir ,||M< of the 1%0-1%1 ""Kirmikinnik"" will be distributed to the dormitories on Monday.
No longer can we safely look to our high government officials, educators, churches, military leaders, or even to anti-communists for true data in order to keep informed.
It seems wi are left in a state of paralysis as to whom to believe and what to do after we decide what to believe.
As far as quoting the John Birch Society out of context, we wonder about some of the quotes made in the speech today.
Probably most of us feel a certain amount of infiltration occurs at all levels of our society and hearing this put into words does give us a greater prod toward awareMarcia Moses Eleanor Jones Water Study Done By CS Personnel Dr.
The most interesting achievement at the present moment is the development of a Water Study Kit designed to provide high school and junior high school teachers with a s^lf-contained unit to study water.
This is the only unit of its kind in the country, and the patent has recently been applied for.
This kit has an important special feature in its design — it provides the teacher's students with research apparatus so that they can design their own investigations with water.
There is a book of sample exercises designed to stimulate student interest in creating their own experiments and in outside reading.
These two factors, if taken advantage of, will help the students understand how scientists work.
The Failure of Our ""Business"" Courses By Jane Hult The leading business people of today have become alarma] with the recent trend which young men are following in col. leges.
Their concern stems from their inability to find qualj. fled men to fill important business positions all over thi country.
These courses teach a man con,, pai'atively nothing, but waste four Parents Pointed Out As Root of Student's Baldness Problems years of his college life.
The student does not have a chance to develop his thinking power, which is the primary asset in being a successful businessman.
It is felt, by leading businessmen, that courses taught under the heading of business administration teach the student things which3 could much better acquire on the job.
The businessmen propose a better plan for turning out potential business leaders.
The liberal arts educator, in their estimation, provides the student with a more valuable background.
A liberal arts course, including English, mathematics, the natural sciences, history, psychology, economics and the humanities, is much tougher than a business administration course, but it developes mental discipline and reasoning powers which carry over into any field of business.
With the constant progress being made in business techniques a businessman has to have an agile mind and intrinsic ability to cope with situations which could never be found in a textbook.
When a student majors in business administration these courses take up the greater part of his tim?, leaving him no time to take liberal arts courses.
It is not possible for a student to cram into four years everything which would make him a well-educated person.
With this ability there is nothing that a good man could not accomplish.
A baldness gene is derived fron one parent and one from the otl parent will result in baldness the male and partial baldness the femals.
If one parent has baldness gene and the other p ent a nonbaldness gene, the bald ness gene will express itself in to sons, but the daughters will bo nt bald.
A nonbald gene derived fr fcoth parents will always result nonbald offspring in what ever i they come together.
It is interesting to note tb there are two examples of patti balding on our campus.
If) you don't wish to be a l'i Bryner, I suppose toupees can 1 purchased some place in Color* Springs.
However, the strK winds"" in this area of the rtl probably would make it diff» to wear one successfully.
DAVE FURGAffl JOHN HA* 1 I Friday* by PEERLESS PRINTING 1IGER DEADLINES Pur best rebuilt, pleane submit i in Ruslull or Culler.
Your cooperation •on on Tuesday l>rtform to the TIGEK Colorado College Tiger May 5, 1961 Miss the other |rit< Pla iript beside Th< aften Week eerein as ti Fred shove follov Ye me Jnpar from just < Sloeu Students to Guide Campus Visitors Under the Hospitality Commitee of Rastall Center Board a new tudent Guide Service is being organizedAbout twenty students of junior and sophomore rank will be chosen by application to be official student hosts of the college.
They will S' lVe Prospective student tours around the campus and Rastall ■'enter and also .be at the disposal \ the President, Director of Adnl i^i""ii and Alumni offices.
Applications will be open from May 6 to May 15 and can be picked at the Rastall desk.
More information may be obtained from fl^gs Lani Markisen, chairman of (i ie Hospitality Committee, or other Rastall Board members.
Tree planted at Slocum ""Dedicated to the growing 1 and branching brotherhood of these young men from throughout the "" -id — 1961""— so reads the inscription on a plaque to be placed beside Slocum Hall.
The tree was planted last Friday afternoon during the Parents Weekend Openhouse.
A simple ceremony surrounded the occasion the dormitory president, Mr Fred Fingleton, placed the first shovelfull of dirt in the planting followed by Mr Aziz Aghbari from Yemen, Mr Hiroaki limo from Japan and Mr Bernard Spinoza from France.
The tree itself sits just outside the west entrance of im and a white picket fence >rs the planting site.
This prowas one in a series this year te Slocum Hall Council. , Politics of Cuba Aired During WES Coffee Hour The WES Coffee Hour Wednesday, April 26 attracted probably the largest crowd it has ever had for the discussion by professors William Hochman and Herving Madruga on the situation in Cuba.
Hochman, a professor of history at Colorado College, began the discussion with a twenty-five minute statement of certain aspects of the problem in Cuba, especially with relation to the overall United States foreign policy pursuits and aims.
He began by putting the problem into the context of United States foi-eign policy problems in general.
The US's two main centers of concern, he said, are the desire to contain international Communism and the desire to identify with the interests of the underdeveloped countries of the world in their effort to improve their standards of living.
Kennedy, he said, inherited and continued the policy of the Eisenhower administration of training and giving military and monetary aid to anti-Castro refugees in this country ' and in Guatemala.
CIA presented an intelligence estimate to Kennedy stating that the time was ripe in Cuba for an anti-Castro revolution.
The idea was that given the impetus of an armed rebel invasion, the predominantly anti-Castro population of Cuba would join in with the revolt with the result in the overthrow of Castro.
Dinner Try Our Fresh PIZZA munist intervention into Latin America, hoth ideologically and militarily, an opportunity to indicate to the world that we do not aprove of dictatorship, and a demonstration that underdeveloped nations cannot best achieve their aims through identification with Communism.
The disadvantages would be that we, in opposing the Castro regime, may be identified with opposing the social revolution as well, which would not help us anywhere in the world in our attempts to identify with the underdeveloped countries of the world; it might heighten the old Latin American fear of ""Yankee Imperalism"" which is in fact stronger in Latin America than the fear of Communism; and if the invasion did not succeed, it would only serve to strengthen Castro's control over his own country and would show the world that social reform can successfully be brought about by dictatorship.
Tejon MElrose 2-0164 MISS RUTH SNODGRASS led the Kappa Alpha Thetas, winning first place in both the large and small group competition for her sorority in the annual Song Fest, held on Parents' Weekend.
Also taking top honors was Beta Theta Pi, led by Mr Doug Letts, who received the first place for men's large and small groups.
P ppa about this as arc it few, Another noticed a lack in the number of men stud. ids imvtlcimitinjr in social fund ma like dances as compared wit i the number of girls who wouli like to join in the fun.
All par thanks foi the opportunity to visit the school see their children, talk with other parents' and faculty members uid for being mo well Gntevtained at every turn.
Some Parental Opinions Of Last Weekend's Event Last weekend parents of CC students were entertained in many ways.
The open houses and the campus tours proved benafiisid ir-. gettingthem acquainted with ths pliyBl2tl ispect of the school and the SongFest was a delightful success in presenting one social aspect of campus life.
The President's reception was well-attended and the dinner with the students' faculty advisors the next evening quite instructive as well as fun for the parents.
Most comments about the eventful weekend, however, concerned the chuck wagon breakfast held in the Garden of the Gods.
The parents were especially pleased with the friendly atmosphere and the various kinds of entertainment provided as well as the general aura of the ""Old West"" such an occasion always has.
Parent Opinion A TiGER reporter asked several parents how they would feel about sending their daughters to a school which did not have dormitory hours, both because the question is provocative and the topic pertinent.
Two of them said, ""Yes, T'd let my daughter come"" and the other two said, ""No"" because they feet the rules are good training, and they like to know that their daughters are keeping certain hours.
The first two parents also indicated that hours were good to have because there are many girls, they feel, who need such limitations.
The other question asked of these parents was quite general and resulted in the fact that on the whole they are pleased with what their children are getting out of this school.
The two areas which were criticized were the academic honor system and the social life of the school.
One parent felt that the academic honor system puts too much duty on the students in having to turn others in, since many students are not as conscientious Mountain Club member demonstrates some necessary mountain climbing skills, needed in order to tackle Colorado mountains, for the CC parents who gathered at the Garden of the Gods for a chuckwagon breakfast on Sunday morning of Parents' Weekend.
Special Attention to Applications Knutson-Bowers photographs -c all ME 4-6276 '] May 5, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger Outstanding Hockey Players Receive Coveted Awards CC HOCKEY COACH TONY FRASCA, right, presents the Tigers' leading team members of last season with the annual trophies they won for outstanding play.
From left, Brian (Duke] Dutkowski holds the Hopper Memorial Trophy, as CC's high scorer; Larry Gilbertson holds the trophy as the most improved player; and Stan Moskal receives the Cheddy Thompson Award as the Tigers' most valuable player.
Mosfcal was also elected by his teammates as team captain for next season.
ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS ; BY 9:00 DIRTY -OUT CLEAN BY 4:30"" N BOTH LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/] Eait Cache La Poudrd 'Oedipus Rex' Shown in Perkins ""Oedipus Rex"" will be the final film shown during the current school year sponsored by Rastall Center.
Written by Sophocles more than 2000 years ago it is the tragedy of the king who unwittingly slew his father, married his mother and finally came to ruin.
This Greek tragedy has modern impact which is not merely confined to the drama, but which gave Freud a psychological concept which he called the Oedipus complex.
The seminar will meet one hour a week for one credit hour on Thursday at 12:00.
The seminar will consider the elements of binary logic and its applications to the programming of a digital computer.
Ormes to Conduct Rock School in Climbing Skills Mr Robert M Ormes will conduct the annual Rock School for the Pikes Peak branch of the Colorado Mountain Club in two sessions.
The first will be at 7:30 this evening, Friday, May 5, in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center.
There will be a chalk talk on methods, practice in rope handling, and H showing of a film on safety techniques in climbing.
The second session will be held in the military rock climbing area in North Cheyenne Canon, assembling at the staircase there at 1:30 on Saturday, May 6.
The third session will start behind the West stand at Washburn Field at 1:30 on Saturday, May 13.
The school is for beginners, who may apply the fee of $2.00 toward membership in the Colorado Mountain Club.
See Mr Ormes if you need transportation for field sessions or further information about the school.
House Committee on Un-American Activities and the DAR, the Join Birch Society.
Due to bad leather tennis was never corniced and the points have not yet feen awarded to anyone.
Softball has already begun with the Kappa ■L s and the Sigma Chis defeating JJ Betas and the Phi Delts respectively.
Intramural volleyball s completed last week as the KaPP a ^'^ s 1,ername ^ undefeated ' win.
The Sigma Chis finished second, followed by the Phi Delts in third place.
A varsity tennis player was allowed to play in the intramural tennis tournament.
These unusual incidents were allowed to occur because there is no one to enforce the rules of intramurals.
Perhaps this could be corrected by having a board composed of impartial members to decide on protests and decisions.
Also name of nearest (or hometown) Artcarved Jeweler, i am enclosing 10* to cover handling and postage.
Address nty County c In Colorado Springs s <» CECIL HOWELL Jeweler for your Artcarved Diamonds 1 26 North Tejon St.
Boxes for the clothing will soon be placed in the Eve women's residence halls, Slocum and the fraternity houses.
This year, as in the past, some of the clothes collected from Colorado College students will be given to local charitable organizations.
In early June most of the clothing will be shipped to the World Clothing Fund's headquarters, handicapped employees will sort the clothes in preparation for distribution to people on Indian reservations, in disaster ana-, in the United States and overseas.
Last year over .500 pounds of good used clothing was collected from the freshmen dorms, Slocum and the fraternities.
Then, on Thursday, March 27, the new presidents and the other members of the Judicial Board reviewed the applications for dormitory hall counselors and were again able to make excellent choices.
Soldiering Equipment Displayed in Rastall Teachers Wanted $5,000 and up.
Miss Joan Jilka will be the president of Loomis Hall next year and Miss Carolyn Troxell will be the vice-president.
The counselors will be Misses Linda Pierce, ground floor; Sue Ballou, first floor east; Kay Mathews, first floor west and north; Jan Fry, second floor east and south; Betty Rouse, second floor west and north; Nan Bourroughs, third floor east and south, and Alice Brooks, third floor west and north.
Miss Rachel Jensen will be president of Montgomery Hall with Miss Mimi Jones and Miss Carolyn Morris as her counselors.
Miss Sarah Gruen will be president of Ticknor Hall with Miss Ortclien Feroe, Miss Peggy Coe and Miss Diane KoUschel as counselors.
Miss Maroia Moses is the new president of McGregor Hall and will have as her counselors Misses Sue Lauthau, Jean Torcum.
Miss Ann Armstrong will be president of Bemis Hall and Misses Fifi Maroney, Betsy Dunham, Tish Amberg.
There will be a counselors' workshop on Saturday, May 13, beginning at 11:00m. at Star Ranch for the new presidents and counselors at which interesting talks pertaining to the college and counseling will be given.
This year's workshop has been designed under Miss Ann Armstrong's leadership to present the more philosophical aspects of counseling.
The workshop will b> completed in the fall by a session dealing with the more practical aspects.
The workshop committee, the hew presidents and counselors are hoping to help the dormitory system become more meaningful and more fun for all of the girls living in the residence halls next year.
The Soldier was a mock-up of what the soldier is expected to look like.
There are several features that are yet to be produced and distributed for the Army and all that hasn't been tested will lie in the near future.
Among this equipment is a propulsion unit on the back of the Soldier's belt.
This will enable him to jump oyer small obstacles, across small ravines and also to run very fast across open fields.
The idea behind the belt is to neutralize' most of the soldier's weight.
It is made of alternating layers of tightly woven cloth and fine mesh, The vest will stop shrapnel and nil but a direct hit by small fire arms.
The soldier's hoots, not shown on the dummy, will be able to withstand ""small nuisance mines"" such as the present anti-personel mines.
If he stepped on one of the mines it would give him a jolt hut it wouldn't kill him.
TinSoldier's uniform protects him from fall-out and extreme cold; there are small heating cells in the cloth to keep his body at constant temperature.
Caicado TYWW1 j SUWtY PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 13 1 1 5 E Bijou St.
The Tigers picked up their lone run in the second inning on a solo home run by Duke Dutkowski.
Jim Hanks hurled the first game for the Tigers in his mound debut of the season.
He allowed 13 hits and 10 runs but limited the Indians to three bases on balls.
Hanks received rather meager backing from his teammates who were my able to collect five hits and who committed three errors in the field.
The Tigers scored twice in the second on a walk to Wisgerhof and back to back doubles by Graboski and Moe.
Jim Workman led the Adams State offensive, going three for four at the plate with one home run and three RBIs.
Jorgensen pitched the second game; he allowed nine hits and ten runs but passed only three.
The Tigers held a slim lead till the (3th, then went behind and fell just short of victory, as a 9th inning brought them within one run of the miners.
Ron Strasburger handled the mound duties and was hindered by the inept fielding of his teammates, with CC committing G errors.
These scores were set up by a Frolic triple, doubles by Hanks and Graboski, and singles by Yankovich and Dutkowski.
The result of the failure of the invasion was that we gained none of the proposed advantages and all of the disadvantages.
Not only did our actions condemn us as aggressors, but aggressors not powerful enough to defeat Cuban forces.
Furthermore the Communist position was strengthened with respect not only to Cuba hut to other Latin American nations as well; Castro strengthened his own position in Cuba and Latin America; and we were identified as opposing the social revolution.
The threat we posed to world peace destroyed much of the work which Adlai Stevenson had been doing in the UN in our behalf.
Hochman had called the US's over-all foreign policy, Professor Madruga gave United States actions in Cuba a completely economic interpretation.
We are kidding ourselves with the help of news agencies when we back up our actions with excuses of moral intention of fear of Communism.
There are certain companies in Cuba, like the United Fruit Company and the American-Cuban Sugar Company which hove been notorious for their exploitation of the people.
These private American concert, have considerable political p 0Vfj J in this country.
When Castro all justification expropriated tti companies, they used their i n j ence to embargo Cuba, denyi, her many things necessary to'jjj success in the social revolm;^ In anger Castro expropriated Qtjjj more legitimate private Artiei concerns and, out of neces_._ looked to Russia and China for t^ provision of the goods we 1^ denied Cuba.
These action serva] to throw American opinion a{ the Cuban revolution, the desired by these corporation agers.
As far as Castro's being tator is concerned, Professoi druga explained that dicta torshij in Cuba at this point is mevita The establishment of a democr depends on a country's having s tradition of individual civic respoj, sibility and a relatively stable «t nomic structure.
Tareyton""Dual Filter gives you a unique inner filter of ACTIVATED CHARCOAL, definitely proved to make the taste of a cigarette mild and smooth.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 12, 1961 Colorado College i e ace Corps Rep „ Review Corps lay 18-WES Room The International Relations Club ' oYS a talk by Dr.
Peace Corps has already igiteil more public enthusiasm than iy other program sponsored by ie new admisistration.
The voluniers will fill the gap between the lent technical advisors and lo_,. experts on the one hand and jlatively unskilled local labor on b other.
Peace Corps ulunteers will also work in apved programs undertaken by —...■ate agencies, the ICA, and Inited Nations bodies.
Application blanks ...descriptive literature already tarted going out from the central ffice.
There iple time for questions Last Concert of Winter Series Presented Sunday The last concert of the Colorado College Winter Series will be presented next Sunday, May 14th at 4:00i n Perkins Hail.
Featured artists at this occasion will be Mr Henry Margolinski, pianist, and Mrs.
Margolinski will then perform a group of songs by Handel, Martini, Haydn and Schumann.
She will be accompanied by her husband, who will close the joint recital with Nine Preludes ,by Shostakovich and the famous Third Ballade in A-flat Major by Chopin.
For many years they have been outstanding teachers and performers in this community.
Their appearance in Perkins Hall has become a yearly event counted among the highlights of the local musical season.
Greenwich Week Begins Sunday The Rastall Center Board is sponsoring a Greenwich Village Week from May 14 thru 20.
The week center's around six cultural events that are to take place on the campus next week.
Sunday, May 14 CC Winter Concert Series Irene Margol insk i— Voice Henry Margolinski — piano 4:00m.
Perkins Hall Tuesday, May 16 CC Band ""Pops"" Concert Tuesday afternoon Wednesday, May 17 Woodwind Quintet Thursday, May 18 Coffee Hour— ""Art vs.
Tyler to Perform Recital in Perkins Miss Jill Tyler The Colorado College music department will present Miss Jill Tyler in her senior piano recital on Wednesday, May 17th.:15m. in Perkins Hall.
Miss Tyler, who came to Colorado College from Denver, is ail outstanding performer and student.
During her undergraduate years at the college, she has been heard repeatedly in excellent performances.
She won regional piano contests, among them first place in the Colorado Music Teachers Association competition.
She has been president of her sorority, Kappa Kappa Gamma, and secretary of the Honor Council during her senior year.
In this, Mr Max Lanner will provide the orchestral part on a second piano.
Hochman to Be Put 'On the Block' Have you ever had a crazy urge to have Dr.
Well, these and many other rare privileges will be available for a price at the Campus Chest Auction, Tuesday, May 16, at 7:15 in Perkins Hall, where the famous ""Doc"" Stabler will, as in the past, demonstrate his rare talent as an auctioneer.
The highest bidder will he the proud possessor of the job of Dean of Men or Dean of Women, or even President of the College for a day.
Whoever ""buys"" Mr Tyree will have breakfast cooked by Chef Tyree himself for two couples in his home.
Some sorority with a yearning for some real home cooking will get Mr Chris Griffiths as a housemother for the day The services of the Folk Singers, Inc. for one-half hour will go to the highest bidder; as will the fraternity hashing talents of past queens, Misses Nancy Bowers, Isabell Williams and Meridith Richards; or Lynn Ballard, Carol Herndon, Kay Mathews, and Nelle Bonfoy.
Students, fraternities, sororities, or other groups may also purchase the hashing services of Miss Moon, Miss Russell and Mr Torrens.
Students with dirty cars may bid ,on the group of faculty car washers, or if they have other odd jobs, they may' ""buy"" slaves, Messers Gary Gappert, Jack Cashman, and Bobby Johnson.
All the funds from the auction will go to various local and national charities, including Cerebral Palsy, American Red Cross, Community Chest, Hope House, Penrose Hospital, March of Dimes, Muscular Dystrophy, El Paso Tuberculosis Association, and Crippled Children.
Any student is eligible to fill out an application if he wishes to apply.
Dance Theatre Readys Unusual Work for Concert The ege Dam Final Poster Wkshop To Be Held the 18th The last Rastall Center poster workshop of this year is scheduled for Thursday, May 18th at 7:00 m. in the Crafts Shop.
Dave Dunlap will exhibit their technique in brief demonstrations and then all present will have an opportunity to put their own ideas to use on assigned projects.
There will he no charge for this workshop and no need to bring materials of any kind; they will all be provided.
Everyone is invited to observe and participate in this learning experience; the results can mean a greater understanding among those present in the areas of new poster ideas, best materials, how to cut costs and how to save time.
Final Examination Schedule Theatre is once again in full scale rehearsal for its annual dance concert.
The program will lie presented May IS through May 21 at the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center.
The Dance Theater will follow its usual format of presenting works in all the important dance media.
Of unusual interest this year is a modem jazz interpretation of ""The Insomniacs,"" a new work by Igon Puchalski.
This young composer is presently u member of the Air Force Academy Band, and the Air Force Band under the direction of Gregory S Rodgers has performed and recorded the music for the CC presentation of the work, A repeat of the gay popular ""Cakewalk"" is the ballet offering for this year's program.
It was premiered in December on the Christmas Festival program which Colorado College Dance Theatre presented in conjunction with the Colorado College Springs Symphony Association.
The ballet, .based on the form and spirit of the old minstrel shows, is a humorous evocation of a vanished period, Music is by Louis Gottschalk.
The eloquent and forceful ""Meditations on Ecclesiastcs"" will be performed as the modern dance selection.
This work is based upon Jose Limon's ""There is a Time,"" and a total of 20 dancers have been assembled to assist in the performance.
The music for this ballet won a Pulitzer Prize for the composer Norman Dello Joio.
A rollicking polka, a Spanish Jota, a fast and furious peasant dance, and a lively rendition of Lecuona's ""Andulucia"" will conclude the program fare.
Lighting is by Jean Favre of the Arena Players and Calvin Lamb is sound technician.
All seats are reserved and tickets for the program go on sale May 10 at the Rastall Center on the CC campus.
Telephone reservations may be made by calling ME 4-7744, extension 334.
Colorado College and faculty and students must have their activity cards punched in exchange for a reserved ticket.
Examinations of classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit convenience of students and instructors.
Busmess «""«« — gj""^j TOEGASON Ml> M„».£r — JOHN HANEY STTAFF-Jaj "" PrioUd Friday, by PEKBLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Sprints.
One smiles down on lovers dreaming, And lights the usual trick or treating.
Now night skies mean real fear, No need for ghouls or ogres here, It soars so high yet seems so near, For more will come and cost us dear.
Gone hammer and sickle, gone eagle and spear, Nothing is left But the circling sphere.
For best results please submit all material in ""•■-"" fame, in RaltaU or Cutler.
One rather hopeful estimate has been the loss of 20,000,000 American lives not to mention the consequent destruction of industry, communication and technology.
And not to mention the possible loss of the very values we seek to maintain.
Not only do we continue, but the Soviet Union does, along with England and France.
Under these conditions what is to stop China, Sweden, Israel, etc., as soon as they develop the technology to do so.
All attempt for a world ruled by law will degenerate into a world ruled by terror.
Last of all we feel that any disarmament must be followed by close inspection.
But in considering the alternatives to disarmament — a world ruled by the terror of the bomb — we have no choice but to place our hope in a policy that will reverse the direction which our present policy is now taking us.
To do this we must at least take initiatives towards unilateral disarmament.
This could mean disposing of our nuclear capacity in the face of the Soviet's bombs.
Essentially we must show the world that our policy is directed by morality.
The worst that could eventually happen would be Russian occupation of this country.
In this position the force of morality would be in a struggle with the force of evil.
If one has any faith in the superior strength of the former, they would have to agree that in time it would win out.
But this is the worst that could happen, and it is doubtful that it would.
The Soviet Union may very well follow our lead, and if not, it would be quite preoccupied with the adverse opinion directed against it by much of the world.
Peace is based on trust of one's neighbor and trust of other countries.
If it is peace that we are after, we must incorporate an element of trust in our policy concerning nuclear weapons.
It is not until we have begun with trust that we can begin working for peace.
These are a few of the premises upon Which the arguments for unilateral disarmament rest.
It states that survival is better than mass suicide, that civilization is better than barbarism, and that compassion is better than vengeance.
Not a society dedicated to survival through cooperation and morality The advocates of unilateral disarmament are willing to accept the worst.
Uses of Suffering Speaker: Mr Booth Worship Leader: Jeanne Daniels Hostesses: Kappa Alpha Theta Ushers: Phi Delta Theta Special Feature: Baptism of Mr and Mr Jenkin's baby, Grant.
It is a sermon on the inevitability of human suffering-, some unsatisfactory explanations, and some more satisfactory ways of dealing with it.
It includes some thoughts provoked by the death of some of America's finest skaters, the witness of the. life of Adolph Kallmann, and the agonies of Ivan Karamozov.
The continuing reliance on armaments to insure peace is becoming extremely dangerous.
POETRY WORKSHOP The last meeting of the P 0I Workshop will be held on Tuesdai May 16 at 7:30m. in the Asc{ room.
Poems for di sion should be submitted to Rastaji Desk by Friday, May 12.
This is a thought provoki scientific film about the circulj tory and blood system of the body with a Christian interpretation, national arrangements is feasible, and if so, how means of violence can be limited through arms control.
The initial step of the committee was to undertake an extensive evaluation 01 our national armaments.
The result of this study is ""1970 Without Arms Control,"" which is based entirely on reliable non-classified information available to the American public.
The problems of arms control are extremely difficult but not impossible.
Arms control requires the serious and well-informed attention of the American people and can only be studied when the facts concerning nuclear warfare are known and the public realizes the necessity for an immediate and serious evaluation of some form of disarmament.
The"" fantastic technological development of warfare in the last 16 years is amazing.
The atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6 and 9 of 1945 were one thousand times more powerful than any other weapons ever used before.
And today, a modern strategic bomber can carry a single hydrogen bomb having the destructive force of 20 million tons of TNT— one thousand times as powerful as the Nagasaki bomb and one million times as powerful as any weapon ever used before the Hiroshima attack.
And with these nuclear explosions come temperatures of millions of degrees instead of thousands and a fantastic amount of deadly radiation.
The blast of the 10 megaton bomb would collapse a reinforced concrete building with 10 inch walls.
Then from within 4 to 7 miles of the blast all buildings would receive heavy damage and a mortality rate of 30 per cent.
Outside of this area to 10 miles the damage of suburban homes might result from sweeping fires.
Third degree burns suffered at Hiroshima involved all exposed individuals within a mile and one half of the blast.
Radioactive fallout is due to fission bombs which enables radiation to occur.
Basically, the article would have had merit had it been written in the right context, but as it exist ed, it was of little value and possibly harmful.
This article correctly condemned those Colleges of Business Administration within various universities, which offer literally hundreds of hour of minutely detailed and specialized courses, dealing with business and finance.
These schools usually require such heavy dosage of business course in order to obtain a degree that business administration majors have little, if any, timi ■to devote to basic, broadening, humanistic and scientific studies.
This problem does not now apply to the Business Depart ment of Colorado College and the Head of the Department ' continuously altering the course structures and offerings that it wili not apply in the future.
These required hours include basic principles of accounting, statistics and commercial law all of which are beneficial t< the student preparing for life even if he has no more contac 1 with business than waiting an occasional check.
The TIGER article has made irresponsible generalise about business courses as a group, and naturally directs in plication towards CC's Business Department without qualification.
Further, the TIGER article says, ""The Businessmen P» pose a better plan for turning out potential business leaders.
The plan indicated is a liberal arts course with the compl* absence of any business courses.
Aside from their Vial function,these organizations all have some sort of chartable project or organization to which they contribute either TO i-k or money.
The fraternities serve the further function of ,-oviding housing for many of their members.
Beta Theta Pi: President, Mr Thomas McDowell; Vice President, J ]r William Bentley; secretary, Mr' Benjamin Eastman; treasurer, j [n Robert Poster.
President, Mr Ljney Peck; Vice President, Mr feaglas Norberg; Secretary, Mr William Johnson; Treasurer, Mr Bruce Houghton. phi Delta Theta: President, Mr Donald Lavers; Vice President, Victor Kuehnert; Secretary, John Haney; Treasurer, Mr Tim Moe.
President, Mr Theodore Worcester; Vice President, Mr William Hybl; Secretary, Mr William Grobowski; Treasurer, j(r.
MEIrose 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre PAINT SUPPLY COMPANY PAINT — GLASS — WALLPAPER 1 1 3-1 15 E Bijou St.
Since 1899 ME 2-6635 The GOLDEN DRAGON l*» S EIGHTH STREET CHINESE-AMERICAN RESTAURANT Colorado Springs' most beautiful Serving Family Stylo Lunches and Dinners VERY REASONABLE PRICES OPEN— 1 1 o to II Dally Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
Handbook, Workshop Heads Start to Work Mr Jerry Osborne, Misses Maria Bullock and Ann Gourlay have been selected by Publications Board to be the co-chairmen of the Student Handbook for next fall.
Mr Osborne is a junior; Miss Bullock and Miss Gourlay are both freshmen.
All three are from Denver and will be able to work closely with one another on the Handbook's publication.
Publications was quite impressed with their forethought given to the position and their ideas and plans for next year's hook.
First of all, they hope to make the handbook smaller, perhaps pocket size, as it was two years ago.
They will include illustrations and cartoons to give the book the' reader appeal it has lacked in the past.
The editors are presently at work with faculty and administration, gathering the information necessary to complete the book early this summer.
Most important the new editors would like to have a complete statement from all organizations as to what they want included in the handbook.
There has been much criticism on this point in the past; it has been partially the fault of the organizations, as they have not taken an active enough interest in what was to be said about them.
These groups are encouraged to make a complete resume of all they wish included in the handbook and return the forms immediately to Rastall Center desk.
M Jim Scarboro has been chosen as next year's chairman of the Writers' Workshop.
Mr Scarboro hopes that the workshop will not he exclusively a fall project but can be continued in some form throughout the year, perhaps with panels, discussions and speakers.
The continual operation of the Poetry Workshop this year indicates at least partial, long-range success of the workshop in generUnplanned Water Fight Fails To Dampen Picnic Spirit Last Saturday at 11 :00m. the hungry student body and some professors with their families met on the damp grass West of Shove Chapel for the All School Picnic.
Mr Torrens and his kitchen crew served a picnic luncheon quite efficiently, with second helpings for anyone interested.
Following this were many well-planned and interesting activities of the picnic which continued into the afternoon.
The sophomore girls, after ninny antics in trying to catch baseballs imd landing inevitably on their beInnds, lost the baseball game to the confident, left-handed senior German Club Picks Officers at Picnic The Colorado College German Club held its annual meeting on May 7 at Autin Bluffs, although inclement weather kept all but the most devoted members from attending.
After a soccer game, a meeting was held to approve the slate of next years officers.
Chosen were Mr Daryl Anderson for president; Mr Vernon Olivier, vicepresident; Miss Ann Schneeberger, secretary; Captain Arnold Anderson, treasurer; Miss Cecilia Luschak, social chairman, and Mr Michael Orem, publicity chairman.
Thomas Brandt, club advisor, for an evening of games and German songs. al, ami perhaps next year a Prose Workshop could be permanently established. boy Afte ■ boys from each tli.juniors who were moba, tbe mob ■g of beer.
The tug of war between the freshmen and juniors on one side and the sophomores and seniors on the other ended successfully for anyone who cared to grab a hose and shoot water at. someone else, although tinsophomores and seniors did pull their opponents across the line first before the water light.
Chris Batley in the pop stand wbn directed the activities and his jokes at thi> same time, creating a synthesL or a mess, depending on one's opinion.
Speaking of opinion, four fifths of tln> people this reporter tallied to enjoyed the picnic immensely, and many of these students hail planned to eat and run but stayed on to witness or participate in the games.
One person Celt that the water fight Should have been prevented erything about the picnic, especially the unplanned water light.
Wlien asking about having this kind of all school activity more often, it was felt that a picnic -■very warm Saturday would lose the interest and enthusiasm of tbe students.
At the same time, there was a great deal of opinion that such an all school picnic would be good to have once in the Kail and once in the Spring.
Nevada May 12, 1961 Colorado College Tiger 1970 Without a Sssion explosion occurred and equalled one megabomb, the radioactivity one hour later would equal that of 300,000 tons of radium.
Uusuallv one-fifth of a gram of radium is used to destroy malign tissue in cancer therapy.
The radiation from small bombs (less than one megeton) would rise into the troposphere where frequent rains occur and would carry the radioactivity back to the ground.
A large bomb forces the radioactive elements into the quiet stratosphere where tie radioactivity may remain for years.
The tropospheric radiation reaches the irround in a few weeks and covers an extensive area.
The stratospheric radiation settles at a rate of 10 per cent a year and covers the entire world.
The Federal Civil defense Administration has predicted the mortality rate of a nuclear attack on the industrial complex and the oirbases of the U S. under typical weather conditions.
Only will a peaceful world come when the people of the world realize and strive for peace through a realistic and sane way.
Th.s means it meets rigid standards of excellence in cut, carat weight, color and clarity.
Another form of denial is to assume that if a third World War broke out that nuclear weapons wouldn't be used.
This is absurd— our whole military policy is centered around the use of such weapons.
We have no other alternative.for we no longer posses enough conventional weapons.
A final form of subtle denial is to use reassuring words to describe our predicament even though these words are rapidly losing their meaning.
Thought Barrier Breakthrough Today, as always, man is faced with a rapidly changing environment.
There is no real defense against the fury of nuclear war In the days of conventional weapons an adequate defense was suitable, however, because of the new-found powers of nuclear bombs; this is no longer true.
Now a defense should be at least 90% effective — this, though, is virtually impossible with offensive technology advancing so rapidly.
Some defenders of nuclear arms claim that a country can survive n nuclear war and still keep its social structure intact.
However, nuclear explosions will make the environment extremely hostile to man.
All humanity will be the loser— the way of life for which the few survivors fought will be lost to the struggle for .mere survival.
As a psychiatrist, Mr Frank is especially interested in the command power which so many individuals hold in their hands.
As nuclear weapons increase in numbers, the power over these weapons filters further down the chain of command.
Every population contains psychotic and neurotic and profoundly malicious people, and so it is only a matter of time before one of them assumes power over such weapons and fires one to destroy a city in another country.
Americans have nominal command of the weapons on our bases in foreign countries, but our soldiers are greatly outnumbered and' could not prevent a seizure of the weapons by the homelanders.
The individual responses to modern weapons include all of those ever found when one thinks of mass danger.
Also a habituation to the danger occurs and we seem to be able to sustain our fear.
We lose our moral refutation towards that e ,'il which persists for too long.
The inability of most humanists to contemplate their own deaths is a healthy form of denial since constant awareness of one's inevitable demise would lead to a continual state of depression.
If one men,. ber of a hostile group decides to merely speak wtih a member f the opposition, he is immediately subject to accusations of disloy. alty.
We expect people to .beh a v e in a certain way and thus we behave in a certain way toward them as to invoke the fulfillment of our expectations.
As a result all their proposals and commitments f ot peace are seen as mere coverup s for violence.
But even this year of nuclear violence need not exist — if men's minds could be freed from the fi x . ation of ultimate superior violent as the only solution; this would enable the intellectuals, the politicians, and the moralists to construct alternatives for war. if this can be accomplished the world could be nearer to developing its full potentials.
MBrose 3-6069 Colorado College Tiger • May 12, 1961 W Varsity Slips By Tiring Alums 14-8 The deciding factor of last Saturday's annual varsityLjumni football game was conditioning.
The varsity pulled out a 14-8 victory when the alumni ran out of gas near the end pf the third quarter.
They were unable to stop the varsity from tallying in the latter part of the fourth period.
The alumni were first to score when, midway in the third period, Dave Parker went on a 72-yard touchdown jaunt. p ar ker did a fine job of runnningMidway in the fourth quarter, ar d rutting on his trip to the goal the varsity got their first tally well as all through the game.
The varsity was held to 3 first downs while the alums picked up 11 in the scoreless half.
Passes counted for 59 of the 61 yards and Wayne Deutscher put the ball over in 2 single yard gains.
The varsity picked up the 2 point conversion on a fumble recovered in the end zone.
There will need to be considerable work on the ball exchanging, timing, and general smoothness of operation.
This will probably be worked out this fall when the team reports Sept. for fall practice.
The team lacks a fast, shifty back but the slack should be taken CC to Host Golf Tournament Colorado College will be host to the Fourteenth Annual Colorado Invitation Golf Tournament this Friday and Saturdav at the Broadmoor ' Golf Club.
Fifteen teams from Colorado and adjoining states have filled six man entries for the event.
A new champion will be crowned; since Houston Uninversity, current NCAA champions, will not be on hand to defend their CC Invitation crown which they won in 1959 and 1960.
The tournament is a 54 hole medal play test, with 36 holes on Friday and 18 holes on Saturday.
Each team is nllowed to enter six men, but only the low four men count in the team competition.
A new individual champion will also be named, since Mr Larry Beck of Houston graduated last Spring.
Gordon Aamoth, Jeff Race, Ed Boychuk, Chuck Beemer, Art Berglund and Paul Christensen, who will be defending their Rocky Mountain title won last year.
The low RMC team in the tournament is recognized as the conference champion, A buffet luncheon for all contestants is scheduled at the Broadmoor Golf Club following the final round on Saturday, at which the trophies will be presented.
Six lovely CC coeds, Misses Julie Bohlke, Kathie Berthong, Carol Fisher, Nancy Bowers, Lynn Ballard, and Heather Kirk, will act as hostesses at the luncheon.
Dinner Ve're Going on SUMMER HOURS First Tiger Road Trip Falls to Adams State The Tigers proved unsuccessful on their first road trip of the season, dropping both ends of a doubleheader to Adams State last Tuesday.
The inimitable Don Jorgensen started the first game for the Tiger nine and went the route, giving up 11 hits along the way, as the Indians won it 8-3.
Ron Strasburger sparked a third inning rally with a 2 run but CC was shortly put down.
In the second game, the tireless Jorgensen again went to the mound for the Tigers, but had to call for help from Jim Hanks in the third inning.
Jim Colbert, a Colorado Springs lad, led the Indian hitting with 3 hits in three trips to the plate and 3 RBIs.
One of Colbert's hits was a home run, and Big Syl Carraway slapped a four bagger for the Tigers.
Wittshire led the Mountaineer hitting witli up with the prospect of a good, tough line.
Some promising freshmen, who will be sophomores next year, are Ed DeGeorge, Rick Carroll, Steve Frink, Al Loosli, and Steve Sabol.
Chris Batley demonstrated fine punting Saturday night with an average of over '40 yards per kick.
All things considered, the CC football team should be watched closely for they have the potential of having a fine season next year.
CC failed to get the clutch hits they needed and left many men stranded.
The Tigers' big gun was Alex Yankovieh who rapped Tevis for a home run with one aboard in the sixth.
It works together with a pure while outer filter-to balance the flavor elements in the smoke.
DUAL FILTER n pj re white """" outer filter I ACTIVATED I"" 1 CHARCOAL &■-* inner filter fff Produtt p/ l/£ j/mAiil-tiit ,_/< Aia-c-tcyiilny Col.
Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finger lickin' good"" Take-Home Department Sf> Open *p\ I Im. to RC 12m.
RT or call ME 44)881 Yet, ws tiavo 16c Hamburgers, too, buy 'em by the sack fulll ""till.
Charles L Horn, president of the Olin Foundation, addressed the student body.
It was one s:« ngs, Colo., May 19, 1961 Colorado College Abbott Memorial Lecturer Nevins Advocates Faith in Time of Crisis I The fourth annual Abbott Memorial Lecture was given Wednesday, May 9, in Shove Chapel.
After a few introductory remarks by President Benezet, Mr Allen Nevins was introduced by Dr.
Louis Geiger, head of the history department, [ v jio gave Mr Nevins full praise for his many achievements j n the fields of history and literature.
Mr Nevins is a small man, with a quiet speaking voice, and gentle sense of humor.
Perhaps this is the reason his talk went over the heads of many students.
Essentially, what Mr Nevins did was to give the student body a faith to live by, a faith in democracy.
He stated that democracy is not a static faith, but one that grows stronger as it is exercised, and then went on to prove how this was so in the Civil War and is true now.
By showing how Lincoln faced this crisis, and why he faced it the way he did, Mr Nevins demonstrated how we can deal with crisis today.
He continually referred to Lincoln's belief in ""the common sense of the common people"" as the basis of our democracy.
He said that Lincoln never lost faith in democracy because he had faith in the people.
During times of crisis it is useless to analyze and theorize on democracy, but it is vital to practice it.
Mr Nevins also stated that this democracy needed a strong leader, Democratic or Republican.
This leader may make errors and stumble, but as he does, his faith in the democracy he represents will grow, and we will survive.
There he Stabler Auctions Iffices, Services or UG Fund Last Tuesday, May 16, Colorado jfege held its annual fund-raising stion in Perkins Hall.
The pur( se of this auction was to raise a nip sum of money at Colorado jUege which will be donated to e Colorado Springs United Giver's intl drive.
The United Giver's md collects money from all over e community and apportions it to e various individual charities aejding to their needs.
The object lo avoid the annoyance of conmt soliciting for funds of separate unties all year long.
Tlte one ive takes care of all the charities At Colorado College, rather than nply asking for individual student ntributions, an auction is held, the weeds of which go to the United iver's Fund.
Under the powerful luctioneering of ""Doc"" Stabler, bids taken for the buying of many Hministrative offices, for the buyng of special services by some of professors, and for the buying ertain student services.
Stabler's inimitable feeling for picturesque revealed itself from beginning when he passed nd two bed-pans in which to ollect any ready cash which memrs of the audience may have had indy.
The bed-pans produced $34 ash with many pledges for more iey to be donated later. laving emptied the audience of petty cash, Dr.
Stabler began the ual auctionning, with all the tee-cracking and gag-playing that motioning by ""Doe"" Stabler implies.
Winy the administrative offices sold Dean of Men to Miss Sue or $45; Dean of Women to '•well Bossart for $66; and [resident of the College to Phi dta Theta for $85.
These offices |11 be filled today, May 19, and ill be held for one day.
Benezet pointed out Hie Blue Key Honors Assembly, * not intended to be merely nomw, hut instructive, giving the stuFits holding them a chance to see s involved in carrying out a administrative position. sold were the services of proe «ors and administrators in areas pide their normal range of duties. fan Moon, Miss Russell and Mr 'Wens, for instance, were sold to _ ,ll « Meredith Richards for $20 to ^h one meal.
Yes, but done with the rare mind of a man who is able to see the past as it applies to the future.
This ability to see the past as it was, to pick out the important details from such a wealth of information, and then apply them to today's crisis make Mr Nevins is the ""dean of American historians"" indeed.
All graduating seniors who havenot yet tilled out Senior Questionnaires must do so immediately and turn them in at Rastall Center Desk.
All seniors are to meet in the Slocum parking lot at 10:00 the day of the Sneak.
Contact Jeff Race, x 375, Bob Selig, x375, or Annie Hereford, x396, soon if you need further information.
Misses Isabel WilMusic Students Present Recital Thurs., May 25 Six outstanding music students will be presented in a student recital on Thursday, May 25, at 8:15 m. in Perkins Hall.
Miss Berneau came to Colorado College this fall as a Boettcher Scholar.
She is not only a fine pianist, but also a very talented young composer.
A good example of her creative ability will be offered at the children's modem dance concert of Mrs.
Miss Berneau has composed the entire music for this event which is scheduled for Saturday, May 27, 3:00m. in Perkins Hall.
The student recital will be continued by Miss Barbara Morgan, sophomore from Ft.
Collins, who will perform the violincello sonata by the English Baroque composer, Henry Eccles.
Miss Morgan plays regularly in the 'cello section of the Colorado Springs Symphony.
The voice department will be represented by Miss Polly Franklin, who will sing an aria from Mozart's ""Don Giovanni"" and songs by Liszt and Gretchamnoif.
Miss Franklin, a sophomore from Wichita Falls, Texas, was heard earlier this year in the stage production of Purcell's ""Dido and Aeneas"" as the sorceress.
She is vice president of Kappa Alpha Theta and was elected to the Alpha Lambda Delta, national scholastic honorary sorority for freshman women.
She will be accompanied by the well■ known pianist and organist, Ben Gehart.
Mr Sherman is another Colorado College student who is a regular member of the symphony.
He will perform the violin concerto in a minor key by Antonio Vivaldi, accompanied by Barbara Couey.
The program will come to a close with the first movement of Mozart's piano concerto in C minor, with freshman Miss Barbara Couey as soloist.
This young lady, who comes to us from Trinidad, Colorado, is already one of the best piano performers of the department.
Her accomplishments in the next three years will deserve special attention.
This year he returned with Mr Whin, vice-president of the Foundation, to break ground for the building which is to be known as the Olin Hall of Science, Tn his short address Dr.
Horn expressed his belief that an education should develop the student's capabilities for independent thinking, and not rote learning.
He further stated that government paid education would suffocate development of independent thought.
He finished by saying that he was extremly pleased to be visiting with us once again.
Horn's address, Mr Whin addressed the college and stated, to the surprise of all present, that the Olin Foundation was making a further contribution to our college and paying for the ""moveable equipment"" which is needed in the science building.
The ceremonies continued with the changing of the ASCC president's office into the hands of Mr Chris Griffiths and the presentation of departmental, athletic, allcollege and Blue Key awards.
The Chemistry Department awarded the American Chemical Society Award to Mr Harold D Rider, the Chemical Rubber Co.
Award to the outstanding freshman in chemistry to Mr Michael Orein, and the Merck Index Award to Mr Frank G Mesich.
The Economics and Business Administration Departments awarded the Kaye Prize in Business Administration-to Mr Richard Street and the Kaye Prize in Economics to Miss Joan Erickson.
The English Department awarded the Evelyn May Bridges Prizes in Poetry to Mr John Ebey, first prize, and Miss Roseann Brown, second prize.
The Geology Department awarded Mr Fred Peel the Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Award as the outstanding senior in geology.
The German Department gave awards for excellence in German, given by the German government through the Consulate of the Federal Republic of Germany, to Misses Elizabeth Bungenei', Ann Schneeberger, Cecilia Luschak, Judy Gray, Elizabeth Kendall and Lorinda Taylor, and Messrs.
The Mathematics Department awarded prizes to Mr Bobby Johnson and Mr Paul Jensen for excellence in mathematics.
The Romance Languages Department gave the award for excellence in Spanish to Miss Martha Lockhart and the award for xl that tho Olin Foundation Dr.
Charles L Horn excellence in French, given by the cultural section of the French government, to Misses Linda Harrison, Judy Bensel, Stephanie Row.
The Sociology and Anthropology Department awarded the Southern Colorado Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers Award to Mr Eugene Higgina and the Swart-Abbott Prize to Miss Shiela Tomlin.
The Speech, Radio, Drama and Debate Departments awarded Miss Sigrld Hepp, Miss Ann Willcox, Mr Wallace E Caldwell.
Athletic awards for the most valuable player in football Went to Mr Jack Real and the most valuable player in basketball and baseball to Mr James Hunks.
Awards went to Mr Jeff Race in golf, Mr Jim Sperry in tennis and Mr Don Kintz in track.
ASCC announced that tho monetary awards for school activities went to Mr Robert Selig, Miss Janet Fry and Mr Charles Ritchie.
President Louis T Benezet preBlack and Gold Elect New Officers For Next Year A Black and Gold meeting held May 11 produced both new officers and new members.
Chris Batley, Kick Carroll, Rich Cholakian, Mike Clark, Wayne Deutsche!', Mike Durfee, Bill Greeley, Bill Hybl, Stan Kaiser, George Klein MrAlpine, Sieve Sabom, ural John Simus.
Already great plans are being made for next year's projects which will include freshmen agitation and orientation.
Colorado Spri Bright-Eyed anrfBushy-Tailed Looking back we wonder where the semester went.
It seems that it was only a couple of weeks ago that we got back from semester break, but now the specter of exams blows that dream to bits.
The new building intrudes daily as we all try to find the shortest path to the next class.
These have been, we feel, a real spark of student interest in both the college community and in national affairs.
The new presidentt of ASCC, voted into office by a record student turn-out, has made some real hopeful promises, and, if the conduct of the two ASCC meetings he lias presided over are any indication, he means to carry them out.
All these things are barely started and in less than a month most will leave and CC will be turned over to the summer students and tourists.
One can't help but wonder if the welcomed hiatus of summer vacation won't prove too much for all the projects that have been started, and they will dry up with the summer heat.
Seems a college campus needs two springs; one at the regular time and another rebirth in the fall.
Perhaps the incoming freshmen will provide the stimulus (and we don't mean just to upperclass men) to renew our energy to help finish all that has been started.
So to the graduating seniors we say goodby — come back in a year of two and see all the paper' projects become realities; and to the rest of you, see you next fall, bright-eyed and bushy-tailed.
Last Monday a group of individuals from CC demonstrated for a couple of hours downtown.
As an article elsewhere in the TIGER explains, these citizens were asking the people of this town to give some careful thought to alternatives to the nuclear arms race as a means for determining national security.
As one of the demonstrators we received several unsolicited comments on the proceedings.
This paradoxical condemnation left us with two alternatives ; either this pair must get along grandly together at home or neither really knows what they were talking about since they really didn't know what the group was trying to do.
This reminded us of similiar comments about our TIGER, one of which was by an individual who said he couldn't stand the TIGER anymore, six pages of sex was too much to read (this week eight glorious sinful pages) so he threw it away as soon as he picked it up.
He is now on his way to England from where he will return to CC next fall.
Thought about something yesterday — knew it was important day, but remembered Lincoln was shot , and forgot about you, since you had forgotton us at birthday, Christmas, Valentine's day, Thanksgiving, etc., etc.
Have name of five or six peers, but will have time for your friends, too.
Moscow titanic place — comparatively few buildings built since Revolution — and those in older style.
Everything massive, rather dilapidated, except in center of town, and on outskirts where enormous housing developments (big blocks of flats as we say) going up.
People seem in hurry, few speak English, but almost everyone, including me, was stopped by a couple of teenagers or people in twenties who wanted to know about Outside World, and who mildly complained.
Hermitage great collection, part of it in winter palace; saw room in which Kerensky govt, was arrested, after Kerensky left.
People sometimes, not always, poorly dressed; seemed more accessible, outgoing in Leningrad, away from eyes of Nikita, window on West, etc.
Guides either naive or restrained; much less strident nationalism there than we expected.
Everywhere there seems to be, from what we could guess, great pride in achievement to date.
Until that time we are kept on go . . . we take a few local trips, trying to make the most of our ""kotiapulaincn"" before we return to the Occident.
Yours, Lev Bronstein The following letter was received by Mr Hairy Booth from last year's exchange student Bruno Attolmi.
The TIGER is printing it because its message is pertinent to all CC students, and, in fact, all students anywhere in America.
Only now I can look back and see this past year as a whole, as a past experience.
My experience has been partial and incomplete, limited in time and in space (only Leningrad and Moscow), but I like to think to have made the most of these days.
At this time the analogy was drawn b, tween the ASCC and a car with a perfect engine and no dri Vfc shaft; they both run beautifully but don't go anywhere.
Th reason, it was said, that they don't go anywhere is that ther has, in the past, been no attempt by the ASCC to express dent opinion.
The people that you elected to represen] hi""; you are, for the most part, enthusiastic and able, but it shotilj be pointed out that these people do not represent all interest, on the campus.
My point being that if all interests are to fe represented by the ASCC, a good many of them will have | ( represent themselves to the ASCC The means of representation are available to all students.
AH ASCC meetings are open and all students are invited auj urged to attend these meetings.
The purpose of these letters will be comment on the progress which we hope to make in the con, ing year.
The effectiveness of the ASCC will be largely <fc pendent on how well informed and interested the student bod; is.
I am looking forward to a fine year in which the ASCt will become an organization respected by both the student, and the administration.
One of the more distinguished current-day muckrakers, skilled in the art of expose' and revelation, recently visit ' cool colorful Colorado Springs and conducted a news conference for the local press.
Anyone who has ever read many of Mr Drew Pearson's syndicated columns would have expected to meet a rabble-rousing firebrand with more than fire in his eye.
This reporter was rather surprised to find that the hard-hitting journalistic hand of Mr Pearson belonged to a quite engaging gentleman with nothing but a twinkle in his eye.
Defends Press Mr Pearson was able to offer a defense for the sometimes sensational news coverage offered by himself and other members of the daily press, and emphasized that it often was not sensational enough.
Knocks Ike Mr Pearson then turned his muckraking skills upon the past and current political situation.
He also encouraged boycott of Cuba and expressed chagrin that Castro was receivin] so much aid from Canada.
Mi Pearson forecasts that Bolivia i be the next ""explosion spot"" South America.
He recalled meetm ing the Peace Corps Director, SerF geant Shriver, the day before ar^i W called him ""an efficient operator/^™ Mr Pearson praised th' of America for doing a good j< in spite of being starved for funk and has much confidence in Mr Edward Murrow's capabilities (j further its work.
The International Cooperation Administration neetfe in his estimation.to be revitaliwBL and cleaned out of ""joyr so that it will once again do ^ good job it did when it administered the Marshall Plan.
President Kennedy's )'"" ""Hundred Days,"" Mr Pearson sessed as being generally good ag predicts that President KenrtJ will pass most of hi3 dome* legislation.
All Organizations All organizations which have ' ceived blanks from the editors of student handbook are requested fill them out and return tlieai Rastall Center Desk.
This is neo sary in order tbat each orgua* u'on may get the representation would like in the Handbook.
Kastall Center has just finished its second year as part i the Colorado College community.
In its two years of existnc e, Kastall Center has firmly established itself as the ""Hub"" 'f the college's extra-curricular life.
Three points of the philosophy behind our college union should «rv definitely be made if we wish consider the direction that Ras']j should be taking.
First of all, Rastall must pro -;,im itself to be just a piece of he college's activities pie.
Since iggtaif has become the geographeal and traffic hub of the campus, t might be expected to also bethe social and activity hub to be sure, f or the campus.
Now, however, both Rastall and :he ASCC are beseiged by requests ■o do this or that for this or that [articular group.
It would be loped that Rastall could limit itself to helping these groups to themselves, instead of spoon ceding them a massive bureauratic program.
Even at a small :hool like ours, ""obnoxious overersMrganization"" can run away with Itself. nificant part of Rastall's id Activities role can be the coordinition of the cooperation of several [roups in sponsoring such extend1(1, special affairs as the Writers' willVorkshop' Week and Greenwich tillage Week.
The second point to be made ■ning Rastall's philosophy is ;hat it must keep pace with CC's icademic advancement and not be ntervailing drag on CC's luest for excellence.
Every organzation on campus has an obligaion to add to the student's entire ducational development and effort, bringing to the student an appreiation of what he and others are loing in the classroom is an esiential role of all extracurricular ionizations.
Bridging the gap beween the various academic displines and cultures is the special sponsibility of CC's extracurricar activities.
Rastall can aid in lis by sponsoring programs that fill give the students, in sugar :oated form, a glimpse at what he artist and scientist are both ,ICi jf* Thirdly, it must be emphasized hat Rastall's initial and primary Sponsibility is to the individual tudent, and not to the group of w Mch he is a part.
However, his field of interest is the USSR and its foreign policy, about which he spoke clearly and with much knowledge.
The thesis of the talk was that it is evident there is a new look in the way that the Soviets, or more particularly Khrushchev, wish to deal with what they call the western camp.
The change is most apparent by comparing the contemporary attitude with the policy which Stalin formulated.
Stalin outlined the 'old look' in foreign policy such that the world is divided into two camps, that of socialism and that of capitalism, and the future would be determined by which camp defeated the other.
Russia's job was to strengthen socialism (a synonym for communism) in Russia and then use it as a base to spread it by revolution to other countries.
Russia would strengthen herself by increasing economically by emphasizing henvy industry rather than consumer goods and militarily and would defeat the imperialistic world by playing upon its three inherent contradictions, its labor against its capitalists, the imperialist countries against their colonies.
Khrushchev recognizes the conflict of these two camps and has ambitious ideas about socialism, already claiming that the socialistic world is ahead of the capitalistic.
This comparison is not made on grounds of production but he claims supremacy in this field too in a much shorter time than seems at all likely.
However, he appears to .be placing much more importance on the strengthening of Russia and socialism than the weakening of capitalism.
Economically he has introduced light industry in Russia itself, and since the Commnuistic conquest of Red China, seems more aware of Communnist possibilities in Asia, Africa and even South America.
In this area The liberal arts school is truly the last fortress against the anonymous conformity of bigness.
It should be Rastall's role to show that satisfaction and happiness can still be found according to the individual's own designs and that one big happy family often breeds nothing more than contented, unproductive cows.
In the final analysis Rastall's most significant contribution to the liberal arts concept can be in breeding discontent and helping the student in resolving such discontent in individual ways, rather than in smothering with a barrage of group therapy activities his aspirations.
Sines 1899 ME; COMMITTMENT Group Demonstrates For Peace ""LIFE,"" ""PEACE,"" ""THERE ARE ALTERNATIVES""— These were three of the sixteen signs displayed by the group COMMITTMENT during a demonstration last Monday in downtown Colorado Springs.
The demonstration began in front of the county court house; from there the sign carriers marched to Pikes Peak and Tejon, where they split into four groups and stood on each corner.
Literature was passed out to interested passersby, stating the purpose of the demonstration.
The literature and the spokesman for the group stated that the real purpose of the demonstration was to ask the citizens of this community to become more informed as to the threat and danger of nuclear arms and then to consider the alternatives to a nuclear arms race.
When questioned whether or not the group was advocating pacifism, a sound and firm negative was the response.
A ""follow-up"" meeting was held on Wednesday evening at 7:30 in Carpenters Had.
At the meeting the dangers and the alternatives to a nuclear holocaust were discussed by some well-informed citizens.
Dunloti and Carlson Take Art Show Prizes Two Colorado College students were given top honors in the sixth Annual Inter-Collegiate Art Exhibit.
This joint effort on the part of the two schools is designed as a double opportunity for students to gain individual attention as well as to bring attention to fine arts in Colorado.
Having been here for four years, the graduating seniors should be closer to reaching these goals, if they are valid, than the rest of us.
The college has achieved its goal of ""helping its students acquire self-reliance without losing humility"", although one person felt that lie had perhaps lost some humility.
The college has in no way ""guided them in the development of self-control and the habit of considerate conduct toward others"", because this was learned in the home or not learned at all.
The men interviewed felt that the atmosphere on campus promotes more aggression and self-assertion among the men students than it does consideration.
The college has indeed ""prepared them for active and intelligent participation as citizens"", and that this rightfully belongs among a college's goals.
That in .most cases the college has not ""sought with them n knowledge of Cod and provided the occasion for worship"", and that it should not necessarily try to do this.
Although these seniors [eel that the college's goals are stated incorrectly in the catalog, they feel that the two which belong in :i college atmosphere can lie sought after and reached very fully at Colorado College.
Finest quality leather, master-crafted in genuine moccasin construction, cradles your foot in comfort from heel to toe.
MYRU MYRpeace to the world, and looking convinced and convincing; I heard that heroic, great people speak of their scientific achievements, of their po* tentialities, of their Land, of Mother Russia, of the Plans, of the Future, ... of their beautiful sinning, happy Future.
I have just come back to this old, dear Europe, and I still have before me the shining, sterilized image of comfortable America.
You are a great, really great, Country, blessed by Nature in every possible way.
At the end of the war, the word America meant to us all that is good, and loyal, and democratic, and ethical; the invincible force that STOOD UP and came to rescue Europe and the world from tyranny, despotism, violence.
My Russian experience scared me; because to us, and to the world, and to hersell, America is no longer a flag, a symbol.
Oh, she has kept the ""religious clubs"", the crosses, the altars; but she has lost her faith.
A French writer said once that a young man who is not enthusiastic about socialism has no heart.
After tin dent had completed his speech, tfei Battalion passed in review unfe the command of Battalion Adju tant Gibbon.
COMPACT CARS Service Center • Specialists on All Makes • Two European Trained Mechanics Factory Experience 310, PRECISION MOTORS SERVICE and SPORT CARS MElrose 2-6370 1608 S Nevada President Benezet and Miss Ann Williamson tie the Best Compj, ribbon to the guidon of Co.
A ROTO Cadets Get Honors from Benezet On Thursday, May 11, tile ROTO speech.
Battalion of Colorado College gave special tribute to the president of the college, Louis T Benezet.
The president presented many medals to the cadets, then gave a short Entertainment Not Business for Fr.
Club At Last Meeting The last meeting of the French Club will be held Thursday, May 25 at 7:45 in the Hayes House library.
The meeting will feature entertainment by the professors and a few students of the French department.
Since no business will be handled at the meeting, the evening may be of interest to anyone and is not restricted to French students only. it's great to look away from the miseries, the tragedies around us, and be able to say let's build a better world!-; and when one is young (in heart, tha t is sincere, generous, warm, enthusiastic) I think it is much more difficult not to say no.
The socialist faith is constantly, systematically replacing the ""American symbol' 'in the eyes of a new section of the world.
Denny, Crofton Diack, Victor K hnert, Don Lavers, Robert Lurif Tilman Moe, Robert Selig, Theissen ; General Excell Mr Dale Dalby; Scholastic lence — Mr Donal Bitters; Outstanding Non-ct sioned Officer — Mr Willia well; General Excellence MS j — Mr David H-jldori — Mr Richard Woods Drill Competition (MS III, Is place) Mr Roger Mayo, (2w place) Mr Dana Ketchem, (MSI 1st place) Mr Coleman stead, Mr Winston; Rifle Team (1st team] Messrs.
Mark Stetson, James Df son, Jerry Macon, Stephen Cross Bruce Lew, Messrs William Wisgerholf, Erie H jord, Gary Ziegler, Ja> Jay Freer.
Mr Gary Gappert has ' Lived a one year fellowship in edition at Makcre College, Kampala, ,[ ml la, and a two year teaching apSWntrnent in one of the British East ifricnn colonies.
Miss Betty Bungener has been chosen as an alternate foi an award of the Government it the Federal Republic of Germany.
Graduate schools from Connecticut (o California have awarded Colorado College seniors fellowships or assistSntships for advanced study.
Miss Betty Burgoon has rezed a tentative assistantship in etiology at Radcliffe College; Robert Johnson, assistantship in siin.
HrNNIKINNIK NOTICES Off-campus students and fratemity men can pick up their Kinkinniks at the Rastall Center desk.
This list is complete up to the present time but will undoubtedly be increased as more students are notified of decisions on their applications.
Any foreign aid given is picked especially for propiigandistie purposes.
This difference in the Communist line is further illustrated by the conflict of the Mao Tse-Tung, Red Chinese Communist leader, and Khrushchev.
At a meeting last year held in Moscow a document was issued, which because of the many contradictions involved is thought to be meant as a sign of desire for unity rather than reconciliation of views.
The fact remains that Mao feels Khrushchev is being too cautious with his dealings of promoting socialism and discrediting and weakening the West.
Mao still recognizes Russia, however, as the leader of the socialist camp.
The new look, then, is that Khrushchev has every intention of furthering socialism and fully expects it to succeed.
At the same time, on his visit to the US, he agreed with President Eisenhower that there would be no war, no internal interference and no threats as far as the opposition of the two camps is concerned.
Khrushchev is not willing to push his relations with the West to nuclear war, but does want an economic and ideological struggle, which he is convinced he will win.
Egbert J Miles, visiting professor of mathematics, are retiring from the faculty of the Colorado College this year.
Miss Raechel Jensen, a sophomore; Miss Lynn Carmiehael, a junior; Mr Govdy Aamoth, a junior; Mr Ben Lewis, a sophomore; and Mr Steve Sabom, a freshman.
Re-elected president of the Honor Council is Mr Stew Richie, with Miss Karen Williamson being next year's secretary.
Its main goals will add an increased intra-campus awareness of the freshman and transfer students.
He began teaching here in H)21, having been a professor at Rice for a year.
Poetry of Hopkins Glearified by Readings Last Wednesday, May 10, Mr Edgar Racy read selections of the poetry of Gerard Manly Hopkins in the WES room.
Before the reading, Mr Racy gave a few important biographical notes on Hopkins, noting especially the religions and the expermental nature of Hopkins and the tension which resulted.
In the reading the rush and tension of the words, their contrast and tension within Hopkins, was , well brought out.
Senior Women Honored At Annual AWS Dinner The end of four years of hard work and hard play is close at hand for many CC co-eds.
In order to recognize the graduating senior women, a senior honors dinner was held by the AWS in the Bemis Hall dining room on May 11 at 6:00m.
After the seniors, special guests, and hostesses had eaten -Trrrr^zzz^zzz^T, a delicious meal, Miss Sue Dave, incoming president of AWS, began the presentation of awards and gifts.
Intramural competition awards went to the Delta Gammas, first place; Kappa Alpha Thetas, second; and Gamma Phi Betas, third place.
Ordinarily there has been only one winner of the WAA individual trophy, but this year the award was earned by two senior girls, Miss Jean Wilfong and Miss Sue Evans.
Wakuta, an athletic club basing membership on interest and par■ ticipation in sports events, tapped eleven new members at the banquet.
They were Misses Sue Ballou, Karen Clausen, Nadine Chang, Nancy Dehlan, Marian McClaughry, Leigh Rainey, Ann Seely, Jo Waller and Home B Wilson.
Miss Sara Rivard, president of Loomis Hall, relinquished the Loomis Pendant to Miss Joan Jilka, president for 1961-62.
Alpha Lambda Delta, an organization comprized of those women who have maintained a 3.5-orabove average during the first semester of their freshman year, gave awards to senior women with the highest academic standing.
They were Misses Betty Burgoon, Pat Crossin, Karen Legg, Sara Rivard, Ruth Snodgrass, Lorinda Taylor (who had the highest grade average) and Libby Tucker.
Next on the program was a special recognition given to the various women's dormitory presidents.
Phibbs, from Denver, to make an award to the outstanding senior girl from Denver.
They were Misses Lynn Carmichael, Mariana Cogswell, Susan Dare, Betsy Foote, Judy Gibson, Joan Jilka, Kathy Lyons, Gay Petzold, Ruth Snodgrass and Karen Williamson.
The Ann Rice award, a memorial to a young CC co-ed who passed away her first year in college, is presented each year to a junior girl who best exemplifies the characteristics of brotherhood, unselfishness, kindness and high This picturesque young man wants to go places in life . . . but not for an hour or so.
Right now he's relaxing — really relaxing — in the appropriate shoes for Cloud 9.
They're Goofers by Tex Tan . . . soft as the Autumn mist of the Keats poem.
Amazing how you sit and muse ... in those easy Goofer shoes. $7 9"" oferss Mountain and Cycling Clubs End Season The nature-lovers of CC have been making the best of the recent spring weather.
Sunday afternoon, members of the Cycling Club took a ride up Cheyenne Canyon where they feasted on the usual— hot-dogs.
It was a windy day, but a good one for riding, and the group of ten decided to plan more such outings in the fall, in addition to their regular program, Mark Stetson and Cassius DeFlon, both winners in the Tournament of Cycles held recently in the Garden of the Gods, led the group.
The event included couples dancing to polka music supplied by a record player powered by a portable generator.
An event yet to come is the Mountaineers' Weekend at Salt Lake City, Utah.
This annual event provides an opportunity for climbing with members of other college mountain clubs in new areas of challenge.
President, John Kuglin; Vice-president, Arthur Dana; Secretary, Annie Stratford; Treasurer, Art Merrel; and Publicity Manager, Jay Vickerman.
RASTALL Bowling Florsheim shoe shop ME 3-7472 Pikes Peak and Tejon personal ideals.
Gilbert will go to England to study tb, the British Welfare the only man in Colorado to ^ ceive a Guggenheim last year.
Three CC professors have ^ tired from the college they serve; so long and well.
Miss Christine Moon, Dean of Women, brought the presentations to a close by recognizing the ten best all-around senior women.
Those selected were Misses Pat Beaver, Betty Burgoon, Marti Gravitis, Sigrid Hepp, Anne Hereford, Karen Legg, Sara Rivard, Ruth Snodgrass, Jill Tyler and Karen Williamson.
After a farewell address from the outgoing president of AWS, Miss Marti Gravitis, the speaker of the evening, Mrs.
Malone has had experience with reference to this situation, for she is both a homemaker and a practicing eye specialist.
Giving several amusing examples of the way women have struggled to take their place in society, Mrs.
Malone stressed the fact that the field is wide open and that a woman can do almost whatever she desires in the way of a career these days, whereas in times past, she had very little opportunity for interests outside the home and family.
YARNS AND ACCESSORIES FOR EVERY NEED Help Aavailable During Your Knitting Projects.
She will also study the Basque language, which, legend hath, so discouraged Satan that he fell off a country bridge and broke his neck.
Mr Harry Booth, Dean of Shove Chapel and professor of religion, has received a grant from the Congregational Church and a Doctoral Fellowship in Religion from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund for Theological Education.
He too will work at the British Museum, leaving in June and returning in February.
Glen Gray, professor of philosophy, has been awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for next year.
Gray does not yet know where he will work, but he plans to do research for a book tentatively titled To Make Men Seekers, A Theory of American Education.
Gray is the only Colorado professor to receive a Guggenheim Fellowship this year.
He first became interested in educational theory ten years ago when the ""Freedom and Authority"" classes began.
Ruch will work toward her Ph.D. degree while her husband and child accompany her.
Albert Seay, professor of music, received his Guggenheim last year and will leave this year for Italy to study the life of a little-known fifteenth century composer.
In addition to his Guggenheim Fellowship, he has been awarded an American Philosophical Grant.
Seay has had the honor of being asked to speak at the Colloques de Weiemant at Leige, a conference on medieval music.
He has also received a fellow. ship from the Lincoln Foundatiw to Claremont Men's College for; tax seminar.
Werner will u^ these grants during this summer and will be back to teach at CC September.
Howard Olson, also of t physics department, will take sabbatical leave during the si ond semester of next year.
She has a full tuition antship, plus a salary and assistant to the activities di Fortunately, along with all tho; leaving, three CC professors 1 be returning to the fold.
Neale Reinitz will year's teaching and stud; ing in Helsinki, Finland and Di Darnell Rucker will return fn a year's studying and relaxing near-by Cripple Creek.
All good wishes are extended those leaving and an equally wa welcome is extended to th< returning.
TEJON GOOD SUNDAY MORNING ONLY Colorado College Tiger 19, 1961 Honors Assembly nted * he all-college awards.
The , oT j\ Award for service to Colo3 ' College publications went to l(r Gary Gappert.
Blue Key awarded Mr William gabom as the outstanding freshen' and gave Mr Harry Booth a necial award for his participation \ campus activities.
U> Campus Auction Richards, Nelle and Lynn Ballard were sold Beauty Salon We Specialize m High Styling Permanent Waving and Hair Tinting U5 N Tejon ME 5-2855 Col.
Ken Wis.fhof and Eddie Kintz for $19, and jotber $32, bought Mr Chris iiiiths as housemother for a day. lessrs.
Gary Gappert, Bob Johnson id Jack Cashman went as slaves for hour to Delta Gamma for $15, 3 Messrs.
Ron Strasburger, Tim oe, Tom Rivers, and Art Ackerman ■ bought as slaves by Miss Jan for $38.
More hashers — Misses arol Herndon, Kay Matthews and ancy Bowers —were sold for $15 Beta Theta Pi fraternity.
The Folk ngers, Inc., were sold for $30 to ag to Miss Joan Jilka for one half The results of the auction were enjoyable evening, the attainment some interesting new (but tempary) activities for some, and the allection of an estimated $500 for le United Giver's Fund.
Tigers Take Doubleheader Sweep Mines 5-2, 9-3 Wednesday, May 10, the CC Tigers ended their ten game losing streak in RMC play by sweeping both ends of a doubleheader from Mines at Golden, 55-2 and 9-3.
The Tigers picked up all their runs in the first few innings in game one, and Hanks held the Orediggers to only three hits.
The Tigers produced 2 runs in the first on a pair of Miner errors and a sacrifice fly by Hanks.
Yankovich Friday, CC fared less successami Summers singled in the secj ul i y in theil . tilt with Conference ond and scored on a triple off the champs CSC in Greeley, as they booming bat of Big Syl Carraway. dropped a rather lopsided game, The Tigers picked up their last 2 6-l.
John Andradi pitched 6 hit run in the third when Brian Dutba]1 j or tne R eal . s an d allowed only kowski tripled and danced across one mn Three of the CC hits were the plate on an infield out, accounted for by Jim Frolick, durIn the second game, the incomable Tiger catcher.
Jorgensen was parable Don Jorgensen turned in called on rather unexpectedly to a peerless performance allowing handle the starting chores when only seven well spaced hits.
Jorgy Ji m Hanks suffered an elbow inalso showed more than journeyman jury in pre-game warm-ups, and skill at the plate as he went three gave up 21 hits before the game for three including a 2 run homer wa s called on account of rain in in the 6th.
His squad picked up the stn Saturday's game was 14 hits in his support in one of . , .,, . , r; . c , + . snowed out and will not be retbeir niori' -ucrc.^titl outings. scheduled this season.
Unii four ersity' man golf team successfully battled high winds and intermittent snows to capture the 14th annual Colorado College Invitational Golf Tournament held at the Broadmoor Goli Course last Friday and Saturday.
The low RMC team in the tournament each year is recognized as the conference champion.
Colorado College finished eleventh in the fourteen team field and was fourteen strokes behind Adams State.
Gordon Aamoth, CC's number one man, was sixth among the seventy-five individual entries.
Following the final round Colo_^ rado College was host to the visitHging' teams at a buffet luncheon held at the Broadmoor Golf Club.
Slocum Sponsors New Activities This last year there have been a threat many new activities at Slocum Hall, intended to make the dorm more than a place for the residents to sleep and study.
It is hoped that these innovations, plus some new ones, will be continued next year.
A program was launched to recognize the wing with the highest over-all scholastic record each semester.
The intramural program covered football, wrestling, basketball, table tennis, golf, swimming and bowling.
Traveling trophies will be on display in the display ease, along with team pictures.
The Slocum Hall Council deserves a great deal of credit for a year of fine service and progress.
DUAL FILTER iQYCytOYl Pure white ""outer filter ■Jdi ^'/aitumn A <£e*i' (,—ywnr. f] May Colorado College Tiger Important Dates May 19— Friday Departmental Comprehensive Exams.
They are Mubian Twilight, Waters Over Nubia; Thinking Machines, Youth Has Its Say, and Ride with the Sun.
These tapes may be obtained from KRCC-FM for private and classroom use.
Hue., suit mtJxfiie dold Phars You're needed .. .just as your father and grandfather were.
It's an obligation that a lot of qualified college men have to meet. ..that of serving your country, when and where you are needed.
This is caused by the rapidly expanding technology that goes with hypersonic air and space flight.
You have the potential to profit from advanced training... then put it to work.
Here the Air Force commissions certain college graduates, both men and women, after three months' training.
The navigator training program enables you to win a flying rating and a commission.
An Air Force officer's starting salary averages out to about what you could expect as a civilian.
Then add on such things as tax-free rations and quarters allowances, free medical and dental care, retirement provision, perhaps flight pay, and 30 days' vacation per year.
As an officer, you will become eligible for the Air Force Institute of Technology.
While on active duty many officers will win graduate degrees at Air Force expense.
Keep up with events about the town this summer and all through the year — subscribe now to the Colorado Springs literary fine arts magazine.
Monthly features on books, movies, art, records, hi-fi, food, night life, TV and FM, and a special series on summer theatre keep you smiling and informed.
In announcing die exLjnation the Department is seeking 'i Interest young men and women o have majored in such fields as economics, public and business ^ministration, language and area jtudies, history and political science.
Candidates must be at least 21 and under 31 years of age as of October 23, 1961.
Persons 20 years of iay apply if they are college Graduates or seniors in college.
A newly appointed Foreign Service Officer may serve his first tour of duty either in the Department's headquarters in Washington.
The starting sal„, for newly appointed Officers of Class 8 range from §5,625 to $6,345 per year, depending upon the qualifications, experience, marital status id age at the time of appointment.
Any students interested in further information about die Foreign Service ilt Dr.
For the riext eight years he held various pastorates in England and in addition taught part-time at the niversity of Durham.
In 1958 he migrated to the United States ith his wife and three children . ip and Mrs.
Mr Burton will teach only one Ufse in the Department of Ketfon and so will have the time, 1 none of his predecessors have 'd, to be pastor to the whole col-6e community, particularly to Ments.
He and his family will Fein the Stewart house (on Wood Avenue just north of President szet's house), and he is lookH forward to getting to know s Many of the campus personnel 8 Possible, being willing to coners e on any subject from the ecicities and glories of the to lacrosse.
Seven New Faculty Swell Staff to Ail-Time High Seven new faculty members began their duties last Monday for the first time at Colorado College.
The school bus and other transportation will leave the Rastall Center parking lot at 2:30m. for nearby North Cheyenne Canon.
Neal Reinitz will explain the rock climbing demonstration to be held on the granite pinnacles surrounding the outdoor amphitheater.
Tbe Significance of Christ; Anger and Disappointment Speaker: Kenneth Burton, Minister of Shove Chapel Worship Leader: Dr.
Shove Chapel The sermon concerns the fact that too often we attempt to deny the real humanity of Jesus by refusing to acknowledge that He could be angry.
Mr Burton wishes to draw attention to the incident where Jesus curses a big bee.
Richard C Bradley, 311, of Chicago, associate professor, and George J Basbas, 23, of Manchester, N H., instructor.
Donald W Sheam, 30, of Oakland, Calif., has been appointed assistant professor of psychology.
The first issue of the Kinnikinnik is scheduled for publication in December.
The exact deadline for contributions to the magazine and for the above-mentioned positions will he announced later.
The Colorado College began its 88th year of classes last Monday with a freshman class boasting the highest scholastic achievement in the college's history and the largest new building program ever under way at one time on the campus.
The overall scholastic ability of students at CC is higher this year than ever before in the college's history as a result of the exceptionally high averages posted by the freshmen class on college entrance examinations.
This year there are some 3S0 freshmen and transfer students, plus a few special foreign students, coming from 40 states and 15 foreign countries.
They will be among the approximately 1200 students enrolled in the college.
More than 30 per cent of the new students are from the state of Colorado.
The total number of applications for admission for the 1961-62 academic year was the largest ever recorded by the college.
Officials said applications made this year surpassed last year's by more than 300.
Under construction at the present time are three fraternity houses, a new library and a new science building.
All are scheduled to be completed during the next The §450,000 fraternity house cluster will be completed and occupied this fall.
The three buildings will house the Kappa Sigma, Phi Gamma Delta and Phi Delta Theta fraternities.
Each of the twostory and basement houses will provide quarters for more than 36 fraternity members during the school year.
CC GOP'S Check Up on ANNOUNCEMENT The Rastall Center Board has opened the position of Business Manager to application.
The application forms are available at the Rastall Center desk and will close September 22 so that all applicants can he notified hy September 20.
Meetings On Tuesday evening, September 26, the Sigma Chapter of Alpha Kappa Psi, The First Business Fraternity, will present Mr Joseph Schmidt, the Assistant Director of Research for tbe Denver and Rio Grande Railroad.
Mr Schmidt will give an informal talk on the importance of the railroads in today's economy.
He will also discuss the problems railroads will face in the future, such as the use of rockets for carrying mail.
Special guests at this meeting will be Mr Roy Walholm Jr., past president of Sigma Chapter and Bill Graefe, president of Gamma Sigma Chapter at Regis College in Denver.
This will be the first of a series of programs sponsercd by Sigma Chapter of Alpha Kappa Psi, and will be open to all male students interested in the fields of Business or Economics.
ANNOUNCEMENT There will be an organizational meeting of the Colorado College Debate Team next Tuesday, Sept., at 7:30 in Rastall Center.
All students who are interested in the Debate Team are urged to attend.
Five CC students were among the approximately 4,000 Republicans who gathered in Denver last Wednesday to hear former Vice President Richard M Nixon, Miss Jean Toreom, CC's Young GOP chairman, Mr Mux Power, chairman of the College YR League of Colorado, Mr Ed Parker, Mr Bill Hunter and Mr Russ Sperry heard Mr Nixon commend Uiu GOP in Colorado for its organizational work which, he noted, paid off handsomely in last year's election.
Nixon, while expressing disappointment with die first eight months of the Kennedy administration, made clear liis whole-hearted support of the President iu the Berlin crisis.
Mr Nixon spoke of tiie challenge presented by world Communism and cautioned that in dealing with die Communists, strong words must be backed by strong action.
The recent Republican presidential nominee noted dial Premier Khrushchev had a grout deal to lose by a full-scale war, and urged that our efforts in other ureas of competition with the Communists bo strengthened.
Thy CC delegation, at the request of die Republican State Central Committee, took u great many pictures during the program and afterward us Mr Nixon personally greeted die many in attendance.
Henninu Gertrude Kilgore bus given Coburn Library a copy of her new book.
Rough Houd in the Rockies, in one chapter of which she writes of ""floating"" up to receive her coveted diploma from Colorado College in June, 1952, magna cum luude, twenty-three years after she hud entered CC as a freshman, Mrs.
Kilgore's book was published in July by Alan Swallow's Big Mountain Press in Denver, and is on sale at tile CC bookstore.
Rough Houd in the Rockies opens when the writer became a log-cabin wife in the mountains near Denver a quarter of a century ago, and ends, contrastingly, with the author in her present position as Dean of Girls at Roy J Wasson High School in Colorado Springs.
The author and her husband and later dieir children run die gamut from experiences in mountain cabin, to fox farming, to living in a trailer, to return to formal education, Through the entire book appear a lively wit and a warm philosophy.
Kilgore has published articles in Christian Science Monitor, Empire Magazine, Parents' Magazine, juvenile magazines, and educational and guidance journals.
Please alft-n all malclrlal be contacted for further Information if need be.
Your cooperation with the above will Ion. en form to the TIGER submitted so you can iterinl will be returned assure you of publicoYour TIGER Needs A New Editor for the rest of the fall semester Applicants must have at least a 2. for previous semester's work, lots of willing friends, willingness to work.
Rnl OFFICIAL COLORADO COLLEGE STUDENT PUBLICATION BUSINESS STAFF JOHN HANET Printed Fridays by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Springs, Colorado 7tom the Chair By Chris Griffiths In this, the first of the bimonthly column From the Chair, I wish to express my enthusiasm for the coming year.
We cannot help but have great expectations when we consider the able leaders who are found in almost every organization on campus.
This year's abundance of leadership and great enthusiam will mean that much of the responsibility for the organization of campus activities can be assumed by the various organizations other than the ASCC, thus allowing the ASCC time to concentrate on its primary duties as a coordinating and policy-making body.
In the field of policy-making it is my expressed hope that the ASCC can effectively convey student opinion to the administration and faculty and in so doing contribute to the policies of the school.
For this reason I invite all students to attend the Monday afternoon meeting of the ASCC in Rastall Center and offer their ideas to the Council.
Only active participation by the entire student body can insure the success for which so many of us have hopes.
I would appreciate \i if you would run a brief notice in the TIGER to the effect that four students had to be dropped from courses with the grade of F for failure to observe the regulation of class attendance immediately preceding and immediately following spring vacation.
We have veryfew strict rules, but the ones that we do have are of course enforced.
Each of the four students was given every opportunity to present a legitimate excuse and none of the five even bothered to present one after being notified.
This is a somewhat larger list than we have had in recent years at the spring vacation period and perhaps you can have a brief notice of this in the TIGER indicating that the number is somewhat larger than normal and stating that I hope very much that we will not have as large a list at this time next year.
Peoples of the world had better spend less time fighting one another .and pay more attention to fighting forces of nature, such as insects, water shortages, and diminishing resources, things that have the final say about how we William R Sullivan 1116 S Flower Los Angeles 15, Calif.
The following letter was delivered to a member of the campus this summer and is from Gary Gappert who, after graduating from CC last spring, is in Africa studving to teach there.
I live and eat at Livingston Hall which is one of the five halls on campus each with about one thousand students.
Three other Americans live here also although we are pretty well separated which is good.
The' Africans are pleasant and have a wonderful sense of humor; they have given us a very warm welcome.
All told they compare us favorably to the English, for whom they don't seem to care very much.
The English tend to be stand-offish in contrast to the Americans who have done a pretty good job of mixing.
The food here is rather monotonous with a lot of rice and potatoes and bread.
We all have single rooms which are plain but The weather has been extremely nice and rather cool with quite a bit of rain, much like Colorado Springs in the springtime.
The first sixty Americans with teaching experience have just been assigned to their teaching posts and begin next week.
Forty of us stay here until January when we do our practice teaching, then move on to our regular teaching posts in April.
The foi-ty of us here are enrolled in the Institute of Education and will receive diplomas in April.
The courses are not too taxing but most of us are doing a lot of extra reading on African Affairs.
It reminds me of some of the Mississippi river towns like Galena and Hannibal.
The most attractive part of Kampala are the open-air verandas and sidewalk cafes that offer good meals and drink for about $1-2.
They are about two and one-half miles from the campus which makes a healthy walk.
The things we miss most are good black coffee, easy transportation, and news from home.
The newspaper and magazines here seem to print no news from the USA unless it deals with race riots.
The in ion lere, called the canteen, is a far cry from Rastall but has a ve ry homey, warm air.
It is 'better' perhaps in that it serves beer and other such things but of cours e that does not help the students a ny.
Their chemistry section for instance offers iuu( h moi e than Coburn does.
Construction on the new sen building started last May, j modern four-story classroom j laboratory building was fij»j by a grant of nearly $1,5^ from the Olin Foundation of) York City.
It was designed be nationally known architect firm of Caudill, Rowlett and S of Houston, Texas.
Scheduled for completion August or September of 1%2 science building will house the] any, chemistry, physics and 1 ogy departments.
M am Call Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou SL R, W Becker Colo.
Each year CC's publications are faced with the problem of finding interested personnel to help out.
Campus Newspaper — TIGER Yearbook — Nugget Literary Magazine — Kinnikinnik Photography Writers Workshops — Prose and Poetry Campus Address Phone Extension THANKS After Game Dance Well Attended One of the high-lights of the past freshman week was the all-school dance held in Rastall Center after the football game on Saturday night.
Such all-school activities are hoped to be held more often in the future, utilizing the new Rastall Center, and with continued good attendance, these activities are much more likely to be held.
For the first time Slocum has added a director of intramurals and also the individual wings will have their own managers.
Watching the Tigers were 3,500 fans, led in enthusiam by CC cheerleaders and the freshman class, which turned out hi beanies and sweatshirts to cheer and perform a half-time demonstration.
The game opened with a spectacular 84 yard scoring play in the first two minutes, giving CC an down with only 1:05 remaining early lead of 7 points.
The second half, opening PORTS however, with eleven grinding plays, finally pushing them across the goalline.
Slugging Junius {Pretty Boy) Cassius takes off the brass knucks to enjoy his favorite smoke.
Says Pretty Boy, ""Ecce Tareyton, one filter cigarette that really delivers de gustibus.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAt INNER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton Ptodud of JS&t-WWKJWW"" Jk$tcce-€c-maa-rw — JwaUP U Our middle I tlie Tigers' favor, 14-7, saw the lead slip away from them.
In the third quarter, the Ichabods trapped CC's Holleran behind the line, scoring a safety.
A lucky punt by Washburn which they recovored on CC's 13 yard line spelled the ond of the scoring game.
A final Tiger effort, a long drive from their 45, was interrupted by a 10 yard holding penalty, which lost them a first down.
It's easy . just clip the coupon below or get an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions oflhe icn game scores.
Enter as many times as you want Simply send an empty Viceroy package or reasonable rendition of the Viceroy name with each entry.
Viceroy weaves those tiny strands into the special Deep-Weave Filter . . . and that's the filter you can trust to give %.. % y° n the good taste of Viceroy's rich tobacco blend.
Unfortunately, in past years some tudents became aware of the committee's authority only af|r being brought before it for misconduct unbecoming a [olorado College student.
The Student Conduct Committee is a joint faculty-studittee consisting of eight Vol.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, September 29, 1961 Peace Corps Exam Given October 7th tuiletita, two faculty and two adijnistrative members.
Four studmembers of the committee are leeted each spring from the sophnore class and they serve during nior and senior years.
The comittep at present consists of studt members Jean Daniels, Leigh liney, Erv Hinds, Steve Lamb, [nriana Cogswell, Susy SchellenK h, Tom Rivers, and Gordon AaThe faculty and administraembors are Dr.
Authority is delegated by the esident of Colorado College and e Executive Council of ASCC hich gives the Student Conduct lommittee the power to sit in dgment on cases.
These involve tudent misconduct, except for ordinarily handled by the Council, the residence hall Is or other bodies.
Cases lay be referred to the committee /one in the college communstudents, faculty, adminisration or supervisory personnel.
Until recently the committee's ction on individual eases has not publicized.
This year, howiver, all decisions will be published n the TIGER in order that the tudent body will be aware of the ommittee's function.
Last year the committee acted in nine cases which involved 11 students.
Drunk and disorderly and use if vulgar and profane language n Loomis Hall.
Damaging of private propery in downtown Colorado Springs vhile under influence of alcohol.
Unauthorized presence in the omen's residence hall area after -.. (specifically, on a fire es'ape) while under the influence of ilcohol.
Decisions in two of these cases ^suited in dismissal of two studEnt s from Colorado College.
Lesser Penalties included probation, fines ai, d in some cases personal coun* elin £ was directed.
C£ Debaters Meet Plan '61-62 Season The Colorado College Debate Club began preparations for the comingseason at their first meeting with fourteen new members and nine members returning from last year's squad in attendance.
Students interested in debate should contact Professors Johnson or Rudoff or Max Power, President of the Debate Club.
New members of the team are; Sue Caudill, Jim Cotton, Jim Heckman, Sue Heidel, Jo Heller, Dan Jaffe, Diane Johnston, Crissy Moon, Carol Nelson, Suzy Patterson, Mare Streuli, Pete Trushell, Mike Von Helms and Bob Williams.
Members of last year's squad returning include ; Dave Bitters, Nancy Dehlin, Dave Furgason, Chris Griffiths, Linda Pierce, Max Power, Charles Puckett, Max Taylor and Bob Thrasher.
The meeting was attended by college YR's from Adams State College and Western State College, and CC's club acted as host.
Any the nts to ce Corps will have another opportunity to qualify by taking examinations on October 7.
The third round of Peace Corps examinations will begin at 8 :30 m. at the Main Post Office of Colorado Springs and will last for six hours, with an additional hour out for lunch.
Each person will be given his choice between two types of examinations.
One examination is designed for men and women who would like to be considered for positions as secondary-school or college teachers.
To take one of these tests, you need a bachelor's degree but you do not need to be an accredited teacher.
The other examination is for everyone else who wants to serve in the Peace Corps.
Results are considered along with such other elements as background, special skills, and character references.
For the October tests, the Peace Corps hopes to attract a large number of Americans in the agricultural and industrial fields.
Many of those who will take examinations will be men and women who have sent in a Peace Corps questionnaire since the last testing in July.
Addition Received by Cobum The German Research Association (Deutsche Forschungs-Gemeinschaft) has presented Colorado College with a collection of German-language history, literature, and art books valued at $400.
In addition to the 39 bound volumes, the gift includes a number of scholarly periodicals dealing with German literature, culture, politics, and history.
Thomas Brandt, professor and chairman of the department of German, said the collection would be extremely valuable to students taking advanced courses in German.
Library officials said a selected number of the German books will be placed on exhibit in Coburn library starting October 1.
The collection will be housed there until the Charles Learning Tutt Library, now under construction, is ready for occupancy next May.
Brandt has been in close association with the German Research Association since it first expressed interest in making a gift to the college library.
Bruno Werner, former cultural attache at the German Embassy, Washington, D.C. was instrumental in obtaining the gift for the college.
Benezet Stwaks As Convocation Officially Opens '61 Academic Year Last Tuesday in Shove Chapel Colorado College formally made witness to a new academic year at its traditional convocation ceremony.
The ceremony continued with a Invocation by Professor Kenneth Burton, the singing; of the Colorado College Hymn, a scripSuch an attitude must bo fostered hire reading by Dean Lloyd Worner, l, v a faith in the validity of man an anthem by the choir, the presenand his ability to he effective in tation of the President's Prize for the world.
This faith, Rxn^i ,.,,„Scholastic Improvement, and a Welcome and Introduction by Christopher Griffiths.
After making initial comments on the progress of the physical plant at the college — the new fraternity buildings, the science building and library now under construction, and the swimming pool — Dr.
This central problem is the relation between us as students dedicated th ■ of I eluded, allows us to look forward to the solution of tlie seemingly Insoluble problems facing the world today.
Brooks Opens Lecture Series hers of a world which seems to be controlled not by reason but by fear, stupidity, and irrationality.
Benezet first pointed nut that overwhelming crisis is not new in 1961, and that it has existed almost continuously for at least the past 14 years.
Furthermore, he illustrated by e\amples from history that reason has never played a dominant role in the activities of men.
Tins all has tended to make the commitment to reason and intellect less tenable.
Benezet went on to examine various reactions to the dilema of man as a seemingly non-rational creature.
Some, he said, react by becoming dogmatic and authoritarian; others become ""super-rationalists,"" holding out for the possibility of the ultimate pessimism in the ability of man to do anything of any importance.
Benezet's own reconciliation of man as rational and as irrational involves none of these extremes.
Certainly, man is not all rational, but neither is he irrational — that is senseless and completely without contol.
Rather he is partly rational and yet moved to a great extent by non-rational elements.
But these nonrational elements can be highly productive in terms of artistic creativity, motivation, t h e development of friendships, and the like.
This is the basic question with which Dr, Glenn Brooks, Assistant Professor of Political Science, will deal in the first of three fall faculty lectures on October 3, at 8:15m. in Perkins Hall.
Brooks will point out the stresses and strains which this swift acceleration has brought to bear on our political institutions, indicate how progress has been made in meeting the problems of compressed time, and project ways in which we must change or strengthen those institutions if they are to survive.
Decision making, not only in regard to nuclear war but also in broad social and economic questions, is one of the many aspects of the overall problem of time compression to which Mr Brooks will devote his attention.
William Fischer, Professor of Geology, will speak on ""The Dimensions of Geologic Time,"" on October 17.
He is the author of When Governors Convene, a detailed study of the National Governors' Conference.
The TIGER is the main line of communication between the various organizations on campus and the student body as a whole.
This does not have to be its only function, but as a newspaper this should be its primary objective.
The Kinnikinik, as the campus literary publication, presents the students with a collection of prose, poetrv, music, art, and drama.
A reminder of ones college experiences is provided by the Nugget, an opportunity for creative writing, literary discussions and lectures is available through the Writers Workshop.
It is obvious to all of us that campus publications do exist, but they cannot fulfill their functions without the support of the student bodv.
In my three years at CC I have heard numerous complaints about various publications, but few people try to strengthen their complaints with action.
I think that much of this hesitancy to act is because of a feeling that work in publications requires much experience.
True, the position of editor requires some experience, but there is no better way of achieving this experience than by working as a staff member.
This year we have many capable freshmen with new ideas that can and should be put to use, and many upperclass students who have spent from one to three years either complimenting or criticizing the campus publications.
Now is as good a time as any to offer more than verbal support, not only if you have had experience, but also if you have only an idea or a willingness to learn.
If you want campus publications that meet your demands, then you must provide the thought, time, and energy necessary to achieve the quality desired.
Please aim nil maletrlal si be contacted for further information If need be.
The members of the Executive Council of ASCC feel that it is essential for each student of Colorado College to take an active interest and participation in school affairs.
We believe that every student has something unique to offer for the betterment of the college community.
For this reason we present to you a list of committees and committee chairmen on ASCC so that you may have the opportunity to find answers to your specific questions on the different phases of student government.
Assemblies — Betsy Gaskill Athletic — Oscar Soule Communications — Hank Rase Constitution — Bill Greeley Curriculum — Nan Burroughs Judicial — Bob Kendall Dear Editors: The Independent Men's Association takes this opportunity to thank the administration for giving us the privilege of having a house.
The house, located at 15 E Cache La Poudre, will be used as a private residence for the members and a meeting place for the organization.
It has been completely redecorated by the members of the organization and consists of a livingroom, lounge, kitchen, den, four bedrooms and a study room.
Those presently living in the house are John Bluck, Jim Orban, Lynne Hare, Aziz Aghbari, Steve Peacock, and Elton Hay.
We will be holding an open house Sunday afternoon, September 24, from 3 to 5m. for all those who are interested and everyone is cordially invited.
Jim Orban Secretary Applications for chairman or co-chairmen of the AH College Conference to be held in late February, are now open.
Applications may he obtained at the Rastall Desk and must be returned there by October 16.
Since many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding their entrance, candidates for admission to next year's classes are advised ordinarily to take either the November or the February test, if possible.
The Law School Admission Test, prepared and administered by Educational Testing Service, features objective questions measuring verbal aptitudes and reasoning ability rather than acquired information.
The Bulletin (in which an application for the test is inserted) should be obtained four to six weeks in advance of the desired testing date from Law School Admission Test, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey.
Completed applications must be .^received at least two weeks before the desired testing date in order to allow ETS time to complete the necessary testing arrangements for each candidate.
Information and Bulletins will be available from Professor J Douglas Mertz, Peabody 301.
Students who will be sophomores or juniors, and who surpass the minimum qualifications required by each program, may apply.
Students in each center may choose from a wide range of liberal arts courses.
Intensive language instructon and other special courses are also available.
Mr Burton Ushers: Blue Key Hostesses: Cap and Gown Loneliness is very much a mix], problem: witness the title of b-J man's The Lonely Crowd arid iC plays of Tennessee Williams, n'~ loneliness is not only a modem r> r ,i lem; Jesus of Nazareth, as the even] of His last evening show, was alJ ' lonely man.
Yet in the course op it. last evening He celebrated u r j Communion with His followers | j this act points to the only CDmrmMkl which exists which does not Fail man and which therefore can con, with the problem of loneliness. the h while in Gt ""li'llK.. ., FreilJ Paris centers or in the host country classes are taught open only to juniors.
Nine European countriesEnglju, France, Germany, Belgium, \\a Luxembourg, Austria, Spain an Switzerland— will be visited by s ti dents in the Vienna program. \st burg students will visit German; Austria, Switzerland and Italy on hi-, field-study trips.
Paris students wjij visit England, France, Belgium, ]t a | v and Spain.
Crisply tailored, with raised seams and flapped pockets — Available in Herrings, Solids, and rich patterns.
PHOTOGRAPHERS Anyone interested in the position of photographer for publications contact Bill Stafford at ext. .175.
On Monday morning, Oct., at S formal traffic tickets will be issued with resulting fines enforced.
Hank Rase and courageous Black and Gold members braved flying dinks, shaving cream and clenched fists in an nt tempt to keep order among the rowdy freshmen.
They were aided by two hoses which were intermittently utilized by wary upperclnssmen as n defense against the class of '65.
Included among the myriad of violations committed by the frosh were the failure to wear dinks and nametags, and the inability to answer questions posed by upperclassmen.
The verdict reached by judges Trisb Adams, president of Tiger Club, Nadine Chang, vice-president of Tiger Club, Ben Eastman, president of Black and Gold, and Sam Coleman was, of course, guilty.
However, several freshmen extroverts agreed to lead their class in the Fight Song and the Alma Mater to bring to a close another chaotic Kangaroo Kourt.
FRESHMEN EAGERLY AWAIT Kangaroo Kourr. the beginnings of this year' Center Activities Friday and Saturday nights the Hub will be open until 11:15 p, in.
Games Area Two new improvements over the summer in the games area resulted in a completely renovated crafts shop.
Now available are all kinds of MEIr ZECHA& ADAMS 1 CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave.
Slugging Junius Cassius takes off the brass knucks to enjoy his favorite smoke.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton Product of <Jfa \j/mtu'£an J<j$a£ee>~(^Ty t3] September 29, 1961 ■ Colorado College Tic wood working, leather craft, and precious stone polishing equipment.
Also available lo all students is a tandem bicycle which can be checked out at the games area desk.
The Rnstnll Center Board again plans lo attend the Association of College Unions yearly conference, this year to bo hold in Luramie, VVyo.. on October 5, 6, and 7.
Julie Rolfe, I ini M.irk gen, skip Mcis, Cluy Son ■ k owis, and Student Aetlvi ies 1 lire tor Don Odcn.
The group \ rill 1 e led by Mr Richard Mi okbu n, Hi stall's Union Director.
ASCC Requests Student Opinions In an effort to arrive at proper judgments of policy, ASCC is interested in pooling opinions with the student body.
This has become a pursuit of Chris Griffiths and will be carried out by the various committees under him.
The evaluation of the lines of authority of the judicial organizations in the effort of one committee, and, as stated above, the opinions and criticisms of the student body on the subject are appreciated.
ConJunior High Science Institute Underway versations with members of the committees and editorials in the TIGER would aid these people greatly.
This group will be composed of the leader or a member of the judicial organizations and interested students who are willing to participate.
The reasonfor this is that these people participating in the present organization can present opinions as to strong and weak points in the organization's authority from a position of practical experience.
Equally important, however, are the opinions of those who disagree with the present system, but do participate in one of these organizations.
They represent ideas which are sometimes neglected because they do not get voiced.
This group will try to define the jurisdiction of the judicial organizations and arrive at a clearer understandingof the position of the administration, the judicial organization, and the student on matters of violations and general student activity.
Speakers will be announced on posters placed on all major bulletin boards.
About 20 junior high school science teachers from the Colorado Sprincs-Pueblo area attended the opening session of a year-long in-service institute Saturday morning.
The day-long sessions will be held on campus each Saturday for 32 weeks during the regular academic year.
Open to general science teachers, the tuition-free course carries eight semester hours of graduate credit for the year term.
Richard Beidleman, director of the institute and associate professor of zoology, said each of the sessions will be tailored to introduce junior high school teachers to the broad spectrum of the natural sciences, with an emphasis on basic principles.
These will he followed by two sessions of meteorology, seven of chemistry, two in astronomy, seven in physics, and seven in biology.
Pam Bays, Nancy Bills, Sarah Fish, Janette French, Catherine Grant, Sue Halton, Anne Holmes, Sue Iglesrud, Donna Jones, Sue Kania, Sandy Marvin, Anne Miller, Susan Patterson, Sharon Polkinghorn, Judy Reid, Susan Sehnert, Nancy Smith, Mary Tom Spring, and Jean Whyte.
Jan Afton, Cheryl Betts, Joanne Birchill, Sue Caudill, Ann Doremus, Roms Favrot, Jan Forsgren, Natalie Gee, Sarah Grogan, Jo Heller, Julia Huenick, Marilee Knox, Caroline Mitchell, Diane Mitchell, Faith O'Reilly, Cindy Pate, and Joan Sehmitz.
Karen Benson, Linda Burtschi, Sally Connolly, Meg Courtney, Sue Danovic, Liz Hickman, Marcia Irving, Caroline Jacobson, Judy Jaccard, Kay Knudson, Kathv Mcintosh, and Karen Tucker.
Leslie Beebe, Barbara Bohn, Caroline Cool, Barbara Deeds, Linnea Erikson, Gloria Farha, Maxine Gaddis, Susan Gehle, Sue Henrikson, Jane Humphrey, Molly Macnamara, Jan Mastin, Myrle Miller, Susan Moore, Jan Nyquist, Caroline Paige, Sue Thompson, and Polly Thompson.
Lucia Bates, Barb Couey, Lucy Cristy, Linda Dunkin, Sue Bea Fertig, Sara Harrell, Marcia Holden, Peggy Hoover, Mary Ann Hubbell, Ann Lea, Pam Meredith, Madelyn Millimet, Crissy Moon, Lynn O'Malley, Leslie Pearce, Mart a Phipps, Sharon Shackleford, Nancy Shoup, Susan Smith, Judv Stampfli, and Jill Thomas.
Daniel Armstrong, Tom Ballantyne, Peter Booth, Frank Boydn, John Clarke, Richard Dhanes, Frederick Davis, Peter Goodbody, Steve Livingston, Tom Malone, Daniel Martin, Rich Nichols, Goeff Rivers, Coleman Robinson, Mark Streuli, Carle Wallingford, and Greg Wingate.
Ait Basham, Nolan Coogan, Hunt Cudahy, Rory Donaldson, Bob Edmiston, George Henzel, Jim Hutchins, Bill Kutza, Chip Lyith, Tony McGinnis, Mike Mestik, Rory Weed, and Lincoln Westcott.
Gil Burns, Tom Cooper, John Dickson, Glen Foust, Steve Fredrikson, Gus Hart, Dave Helms, Dave Holdort, Curt Kennett, Ed Lorson, George Mansfield.
Goulort, Bruce Hansen, WilijJ Kranich, Ed McCarroll, Mick RaJ sey, David Smith, Hallett Smii James Smith, Brian Somers, a rJ Robert Ward.
Middle R< — Coach Flood, Coach Carle, Frink, Gotto, Hayes, Strausburger, Dianovslty, Geary, Blair, Carroll, Cybulislc, imerllng, Sparkman, Carroway, Dakes, Eastlack, and Trainer Loosli, DeGeorge, Ma Melton, Sabol, Rouse, Chapman, Zens, Broyles, Mueller, Bundy.
Mary's Cavaliers The CC Tigers, plagued by 13 penalties, a blocked punt and two faulty center snaps on punt situations, rose to the occasion at Dodge City last Saturday and eeked out a 9-6 victory over a determined St.
Mary of the Plains on a cold and wind-swept field The Cavaliers had suffered two previous early season losses and were geared to upset the highly favored CC forces.
The pile-driving ■ picked up 30 yards in six s and tore off three crucial down to keep the drive going.
G CC ground game sputtered, ver, inside the 10, and on a i goal situation from the Cavseven the Tigers called on field 1 specialist Jim Blair.
Blair ■d by splitting the uprights the 18, on what was to he the winning margin. ither team scored again the reiex of the first half.
Mary's then stopped three line shots ^ finally thwarted the Tiger scorbid when they halted a fourth ii and fake field goal attempt, as ""* hrst half drew to a close.
The Tigers scored again midway WUgh the third quarter when ^ lnt z plunged into the end zone ^PP>ng a CC drive that started on 32 yard line.
Key play in the r^es was a third down pass recep| from Kintz to slotback Dan 'fe'ht who squirmed his way back d zone making the score 9-0.
Both threats were the result of center snaps that sailed over the head of punter Fred Emmerling.
In the fourth quarter an onrushing Cavalier Lineman blocked an Emmerling punt attempt and recovered on the Tiger 45.
Led by quarterback Jim Holmes and tricky running halfback Bob Lisa, the Cavaliers moved into the CC end zone with Lisa scoring from the three.
But again the Tiger defense rose to the occasion and piled up each bid short of paydirt.
He has three chipped vertebrae and will miss tomorrow's game against Ft.
Announcement BUDGET REQUESTS Applications for ASCC funds can be obtained at the Rastall desk and must be returned by Oetober 9.
KRCC Music News Interviews Special Programs Weather Touch Football Begins Intramural Season Slocum Hall began its intramural sports program with five hard fought touch-football games being played between the different wings.
First South beat Second South 8-0 and Third West routed Second West 20-0.
First West held Fourth West to onlv one touchdown as they went on to win 16-6.
The sixth scheduled game between Third South and the Faculty was post-poned.
Flu Shots Available At Campus Infirmary As a result of warnings bp public health authorities that the influenza epidemic in Europe last year is likely to be prevalent in this country during the coining winter, immunizing shots have been made available at the infirmary.
The series consists of two injections about a month apart, and the football squad lias already received its first.
Those known to be allergic to eggs are advised to avoid this i minimization.
Seeks Golf, Tennis Entries The Colorado College intramural golf and tennis tournaments ore slated for early October.
The golf tournament will be held Saturday, October 7 and tennis matches will be arranged the following week.
Hays Bengals, of the Central Intercollegiate Conference, invade Colorado Springs with one win and one loss in two previous contests this number two for the Tigers.
The man instrumental in the able Tiger .starters tomorrow night victory was one whose name may will he Mike Minelli and Jim Wusound a familiar note in the minds will be Mike Minelli and Jim Wujcof some CC students.
He is Dave Parker, the former CC scatbaek who thrilled many a crowd with his spectacular running as a Tiger halfback in 1958 and 1959.
In 1958, Parker sparked CC to the RMC championship and was voted outstandingfreshman in the conference.
He returned in 1959 and that year was selected most promising player in the league.
Tiger coach Jerry Carle has geared his team's defense to contain Parker, who does most of his damage on the quarterback rollout.
The Bengals also occasionally set Parker as a halfback where he is a constant threat to the outside.
Carle will again go with his alternating units in an attempt to halt Ft, Hays and rack up win at the ends, Ron Diunovsky Furdock ami Al Loosli at guards, Mike Romero at center, co-captain Ed Kintz at quarterback, Terry Holleran at halfback, Wayne Deutscher at fullback and Dun Wright at slotback.
Co-captain Pete Pleasant, last year's lending ground gainer, will direct the second unit, known as the ""meat squad,"" at quarterback.
Returning to action tomorrow night will be three-year veteran senior guard Ron Strasburger.
He suffered a severe sprain of his lower back in pre-season practice and has missed the first two Riley for Six Weeks Proves GG Leadership This past summer Colorado College sent die juniors who were in Advanced R.O.T.C. to Fort Riley for six weeks of military training.
At the end of camp the cadet ratings were averaged from each school and then the schools were ranked.
Of the thirty-seven schools participating Colorado College finished second, seventeen hundredth's of a point behind the first place school.
It's easy . . . just clip the coupon below or gel an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the (en game scores.
Simply send an empty Viceroy package or reasonable rendition of the Viceroy name with each entry.
Next contest will be on games of October 21— when you'll have another chance to win.
However, October is the lit month for these students to apply to these various pro■ams.
Applicants will expected to have a demonrated capacity for independent ind a good academic recti.
They will be required to subdan of proposed study that carried out during the iir abroad.
Qualifi.tions for application are identito those for application to the ulbright Program.
Successful apkants will receive tuition costs arying amounts for living ipenses. third group, the Marshall tholarships, are available for udy in British universities.
Additional informatinon jil applications for the Fulbright HE grants may be obtained I' the Fulbright Program advisDean Worner.
Variety Show lets Sought ember 14, 15, 16, and 17 are le dates of the Colorado College f""'ety Show, an annual benefit r ^e Community Chest Drive. ""usiness Manager for the event Uda Pierce, and the student r Mors are Carol Fisher and n(1 Pierce.
If interested, ^ contact the student direc£ of Mr Woodson Tyree Kgh Rastall Center Desk.
Known as the Chaplain of Fleet Street (the Press Center for Great Britain), Dr.
Morgan is in continuous contact with the British Foreign Office, the British News Service and the churches of Great Britain.
He is one of the founders of Church Illustrated, the largest magazine of the Church of England.
He is also known as the historian of the Lambeth Conferences, which are the .meetings held every ten years of all the Bishops of the Anglican Churches throughout the world.
Morgan said that he wishes to speak about the most vital issues before the contemporary world in the light of Christian convictions.
Mr Paul Bernard, Assistant Professor of History, and Mr Thomas O Brandt, Professor of German, will discuss Berlin, particularly in reference to the rest of Germany, at the Tuesday Assembly on October 10, at eleven o'clock in Perkins Hall.
Mr Bernard will deal with the historical developments in Germany since 1945, as a background for the present situation in Berlin.
Mr Brandt, whom the Federal Republic of Germany officially invited, with seven other professors, to go to East Berlin, will talk first about his observations of the obvious differences between east and west Berlin, particularly during the four weeks previous to the closing of the border.
All members of the college community and the general public are cordially invited.
Sigma Chis Hold Watermelon Bust The annual Sigma Chi Watermelon Bust will be held this afternoon from 2:30 to 4:30 in the Sigma Chi parking lot.
Pete Law, chairman of the project, has announced that 1800 pounds of watermelon have been ordered for consumption by CC students.
Ray Krantz and his band will provide background music for the festivities while Wes Bradley of KRDO radio acts as emcee.
The Housemothers Watermelon Eating Contest, featuring several courageous fraternity and sorority moms, will begin at 4:00m.
These candidates are Sue Halton, Alpha Phi; Cheryl Betts, Delta Gamma; Karen Tucker, Gamma Phi Beta; Ann Brooks, IWA; Sharon Shackleford, Kappa Kappa Gamma; and Merle Miller, Kappa Alpha Theta.
Off Campus students— Rastall Center lot and street parking within the vicinity of Campus.
Parking is available at all times in Slocum Hall parking lot, Rastall Center lot and Jackson House parking lot, also in the parking lot north of Kappa Kappa Gamma lodge.
Failure to comply with registration rules will result in a §10.00 fine.
If cooperation is still lacking, revocation of Campus driving privileges will result.
The last step in the violation of the traffic lules is suspension from the College.
Your Student Traffic Committee needs your cooperation and support for the safe operation of traffic on our crowded campus due to construction and increase of faculty and staff.
Traffic tickets will be issued to violators beginning Monday, October2, 1961.
Brooks, in the first of tures, questioned the ability of tutions to withstand the acceleration of technological and social changes taking place in the world today.
The political scientist made it clear that there is no immediate danger of machines taking over the decision making functions of government.
But he did express deep concern about the little time our leaders, pressed by rapidly developing political events, have for making key decisions.
Speaking of national defense, Brooks said, ""The most commonly recognized fact is that with modern weapons systems as they are, and with the stakes of war and politics mounting so high, if anything starts to pop in the world, there will be no time for extensive consultation, ""The American people will not be consulted,"" he said.
Brooks noted the problem facing the nation is the need to gather accurate information quickly and to employ it for making split-second decisions for the defense of the country.
I am convinced that we cannot survive if we cannot provide for genuine political reflection.
The second lecture in the series will be presented this coming Tuesday by Professor Carlton Gamer of the Music Department.
Mr Gamer will speak on ""The New Fact and the Creative Life,"" at S:15 P.M. in Perkins Hall. a series of Fall Faculty Lecour established political instiProf.
Malyshev Russian Instructor With the appointment of Alexey N Malyahev as assistant professor of Russian, Colorado College has taken the first step toward launching its first regular curriculum in Russsian language and literature.
Thomas O Brandt, chairman of the department of German and Russian, auid the college expects to offer a major in Russian in the next four years.
More than 27 students already have signed up for classes in elementary Russian.
State Department's advance team which worked out details leading up to the Kennedy-Kruschev talks in Austria.
But through the application of these principles we hope to make THE TIGER the instrument of service to the college community that it should be.
We shall not strive to create controversy, but neither shall we avoid it.
We intend to take stands on many issues — stands which are well supported and responsibly presented.
We sometimes will reflect student opinion; yet on other occasions we will attempt to inform and influence campus thinking.
We will take full responsibility for our opinions, as presented in this column, and we will ask our contributors to do the same.
Your cooperation with the above will help assure your material of publication.
William C Click Diane Eliot-Robert McConnell Donna Duncan-Fred Weathers Conclwe at CC As an opportunity to discuss the American way of life and the international situation, foreign students from Colorado colleges and universities are meeting at Colorado College October 13, 14, and 15.
The students will arrive Friday to be greeted by their hosts, Colorado Springs families.
On Saturday, at nine o'clock, the first session will begin with the discussion of the national scene — the American Campus and the American Community.
At 3 o'clock, a second session, which will deal with the United States and the International Scene, will start.
Saturday night there will be an informal dance and folksinging from 8:00 to 1:00 in Rastall.
Sunday afternoon at 2:30 there will be a final discussion session and summary.
All members of the college community are strongly urged to try to come to part of the conference, if unable to attend all the discussion and activities.
Any questions should be directed to Ray Boyce, chairman of the Foreign Student Weekend Committee.
Lounge, the International Relations Club will present its first program of the year, featuring Dr. and Mrs.
Reinitz will concentrate on the unnique Finish culture, a culture which is independent of the strong political and social influences of neighboring Sweden and the Soviet Union.
A short .business meeting to elect new officers of I.R.C. for the coming year will precede the program.
IN MEMOR1UM Delphine Rupert Class of '61 Danforth Fellowship Applications Taken Applications for Danforth Graduate Fellowships worth up to $ 1 2,000 are now being received, Lloyd E Worner announced today.
Louis, Missouri, are open to male college seniors or recent graduates preparing for a career in teaching, counseling, or administrative work at the college level.
Applicants may major in any recognized field at the American graduate school of their choice, but should not have already undertaken graduate work.
Nominees will be judged on intellectual promise, personality, integrity, genuine interest in religion, and potential for effective college teaching.
Winners will be eligible for up to four years of financial assistance, with an annual maximum of §1,500 for single men and $2,000 for married men, plus tuition and fees.
In addition to the annual stipend, winners will be guests of the Foundation at an annual educational conference held on the shores of Lake Michigan.
Leading scholars lecture, conduct seminars, and come in personal contact with the Fellows.
Further information concerning the program may be obtained from Dean Worner.
Sue Connelly Wins President's Prize Miss Susan M Connelly of Seattle, Washington, a junior at Colorado College, was awarded the President's Prize for Scholastic Improvement.
The prize is given each year by President Louis T Benezet to the student making the greatest scholastic improvement from the end of the first semester to the end of the fourth semester.
Lloyd E Worner, Dean of the College, during convocation ceremonies marking the opening of the 88th vear of classes.
Freshmen Hazing Period Over Saturday morning at 6:30 A.M. three lonesome soplio mores and a handful of freshmen appeared on North Stewart Field.
While the frosh huddled together, wondering whether they had come to the right place, the upperclassmen grimly guarded a small flag on a fifteen-foot greased pole.
By 6:45 eleven sophomores and thirty to forty freshrner. had arrived, but since no judges or sponsors appeared, tin event was started by Bill Stafford, Tiger photographer.
The rest probably familiar . . . running . . .shouting (and garbage) . . . tussling (and garbage) . . . until Mick Ramsey, boosted up by a fellow frosh, snatched the flag from the pole.
The fight was over, and the freshmen, who had not donned their dinks and sweatshirts, could officially elaim their freedom.
WAF (Recruiter Due Captain Sara J Windland, WAF selection officer for the United States Aid Force Recruiting Service, will be at CC today to interview college seniors and graduates interested in officer appointments in the Air Force.
Captain Windland will be in Rastall Center to discuss the opportunities available to young women eligible for commissioned officer status.
Appointments for personal interviews with Captain Windland may be arranged by telephoning Sergeant Murphy at ME 3-7478.
German Club Picnic Held Despite Weather The annual fall picnic of the German Club was held on Sunday afternoon, October 1.
In spite of inclement weather, the picnic was attended by 42 German Club members and guests.
A cabin of one of the members was used as a substitute for Austin Bluffs, the original site of the picnic.
The picnickers enjoyed an afternoon of German parlor games and refreshments at the cabin.
The group was then invited to Doctor Brandt's house for an evening of singing and entertainment.
Peace Corps Exams Three examinations for the Peace Corps will be given during the current year — on October 7, November 30 and December 1.
The Colorado Springs Post Office is given as one of the sites for the examination.
For general information of the Peace Corps, students may contact Professor Sondermann, who is acting as Campus Liaison for the Peace Corps.
Any organization on campus can request funds; the validity of the request to he decided by the ASCC Finaiw Committee composed of chairman Bill Stafford, Bob Kendall, Betsv Gaskill and Mr Jack Howari financial advisor.
Any request submitted afts money has already been spent bj an organization will not be ognized.
Applications are also open for chairman or co-chairmen of thf All College Conference.
If theis are any questions, please get ic touch with Skip Meis at EX 3ft Slocum Officers Elected Gus Hart, a freshman fffli Sharon Connecticut, and Charlfc Puckett, a junior from Wilson, Oklahoma, were elected Presided and Vice-President of Slocum Hall in an intra-hall meeting Thursday.
The Young Democrats of Colorado College recently completed i successful Dollars for DemoctfB drive in the Colorado Spring area.
The Young Dems will hoW their second meeting of the y* 31 next Tuesday, October 10, to & termine plans for this year and ^ elect officers.
Colorado College Tiqer October 6, 1961 \fi Business Group Hears Railroad Research Expert The honorary business fraternity Alpha Kappa Psi, held an informal lecture on Tuesday, September 2fi.
Bradwell, Assistant Director of Research for the Denver & Rio Grande Railroad, was the guest speaker. j\Ir.
Brad well enlightened his audience as to the problems faced ■nd progress being made by the railroads of today.
Reference was mnde to the bind railroads are in, largely due to high tax and overregulation.
Research is being made in this direction and an advanced .method of keeping track of all cars is now being initiated.
Three such engines are now on order, to be made by Krauss Maffei in Germany, and could represent considerable savings in operating costs.
The reason for the reliance on German producers is the unwillingness of United States builders to experiment in this area.
Judge Urges YR's To Political Action When the Colorado College Young Republicans had their first meeting of the school year on Tuesday, September 26.
Speaker for the event was Judge David Enoch of the Fourth Judicial District.
His message, ""The Role of Young People in Government and Politics,"" was timely and well received.
Several members of the opposition were present and found the words of Judge Enoch directed at them as well.
The theme of the address was that the younger citizens of this nation have the same obligations as the senior citizens — that of active participation in political and civic affairs.
He went on to say that the active interest of all citizens would result in a strengthening of both parties.
The strength of our political organizations is the strength of our country, he added.
The meeting had been opened with a call for unity by Chairman Jean Torcum.
To close the meeting, Pat Dagg, Vice-Chairman, appealed to each member to bring at least one new member to the Club during the present year.
Crissy Mo Bill Mendenhall, Natalie Gee, Gloria Farha, Polly Thompson, Nancy Seaman.
Each empty package submitted on Marboro, Parliment or Alpine will have a value of 5 points.
Each empty package on Phillip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points.
Empty packages will be counted at Murray Drug from 1:00 to 3:00 Friday, December 1st.
Eighteen Freshmen In Commission Race At the freshman class meeting last Tuesday, eighteen members n( the ■■Ih.sk of '66 wennominated as candidates for freshman commissioners, Three of these nominees will bo elected as a result or voting by the freshmen on October 12 arid 13.
The candidates are Kent Drummond, Bob Edmiston, Marcia Irving, Sue Caudill, Mill Mendenhall, Natalie Geo, Chuck White, Polly Thompson, Gloria Farha.
Cubby Welch, Mark Streuli, George Honzel, Mick Ramsey, Bob Ward, Lynn Tondro, Frank Boydon, Nancy Seamen, and Chrisny Moon, in order of nomination.
There will be campaign speeches by each of these candidates on Sunday, Oct. * at 4:30m. in I'erkins Hall.
Center Movies Begin Sunday ""Lust for Life"" will be the first of the monthtv films sponsored by (install Center for the 19G1-62 school year.
It is the story of his failure in the ministry, his economic disasters and rescues, his ambitions, his associations and his art.
The film stars Kirk Douglas as Van Gogh with Anthony Quinn in the supporting role.
It is in color and will be shown in Perkins Hall on Sunday, October 8 at 7:30m.
Hays State14-6; Ex-CC Parker's Homecoming Rough The CC Tigers erupted for two second quarter touchdowns, then threw up a rugged second half defense and downed Fort Hays State, 14-6, last Saturday night at Washburn Field.
In doing so the Tigers contained former teammate Davy Parker, and racked up the second victory of the season against one loss.
Parker, operating at both quarterback and halfback, had four of his attemptwith a little over three minutes ed passes intercepted by an alert remaining in the third period, Ft. secondary, and was virtually Hays tackle Ray Schumaker interineffective in tryingto run against a gang-tackling Tiger line.
The Tiger's first touchdo\vn was set up when quarterback Eddie Kintz picked off an attempted Parker pass on the CC 25 and weaved his way back to the midfield stripe on the first play of the second quarter.
On a fourth and goal situation from the five, slotback Dan Wright took a reverse handoff, squirmed his way through five Hays defenders and bolted for the touchdown.
Minutes later the Tigers started another scoring drive, but a clipping penalty set them back to the Hays 30.
Kintz then hit Wright on a third down pass play moving the ball to the 15, just short of a first down.
The Bengals were unable to move against the big Tiger line, and were forced to punt from deep in their own territory.
The Kintz to Wright aerial combination again clicked on pass plays of 15 and ten yards to keep the Tiger scoring bid alive.
The second reception carried to the Hays six and on the next play Holleran breezed into the end-zone for the second CC score.
This time halfback Pete Pleasant added the extra point and sent the Tigers to the dressing room with a 14-0 half time lead.
Hays tackle Mike Pope ejected from the game. cepted a Kintz aerial and returned it to the CC 26.
From there hard running fullback Mike Worley tore off consistent gains and finally scored the first Hays touchdown from four yards out on the first play of the fourth quarter.
Perker's attempted pass for the two point conversion was deflected from the hands of the intended receiver by Kintz, and the score remained 14-6.
Hays threatened twice more, but both scoring bids were squelched by the spirited Tiger defensive line.
With Worley pounding the line and halfback Wayne Schumacker skirting the ends, the Bengals moved from their own 13 to the Tiger 31 before Holleran broke up a fourth down Parker pass and the Tigers took over on downs.
But sophomore linebacker Al Loosli intercepted his second pass of the Intramural Football Nears Final Round As the intramural football league nears the final round, four undefeated teams remain.
First West and third West are tied at one victory each in their division, while first South and first North lead their respective divisions with two victories and no defeats.
In one of the hardest fought r;ames, the Faculty managed to overcome second South 7-6, after the referee disallowed the extra point attempt which resulted in a heated discussion.
First South, by upsetting third South now appears the top contender for honors in the trophy Football Contest Open Students and faculty may enter the Viceroy Football Contest as many times as they wish.
There will be eight cash winners from this campus for every contest, and a carton of Viceroy cigarettes for every student who predicts winners without guessing correct scores.
We're not only losing professors to industry — we're losing them to government."" — Reader's Digest night and the Tigers ran out the clock.
Several times Holleran slipped through holes neatly opened by the Tiger front wall.
The Tigers will go for their third straight non-conference victory tomorrow against Westminster College in Salt Lake City.
Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEIroi 3 The Whickerblll — is a gift and card shop full of ""Happy Things"" including a Finnish milk pitcher with a green couliterally bursting at the faucets.
Sunday at P.M. will be the regular time this series, and all but one ,t will be held in Perkins Hall, ihe College campus.
The opening concert on Sunday, •tober 15, will introduce a guest list from Tulsa, Oklahoma, Mrs. s cn Kramer, who will present program of outstanding works r the viola.
Lanner, noted pianist and a d of the music department, who charge of the Winter Concert s, will be co-artist for Mrs. ramer and also contribute a solo niber to the program, j[rs.
Last Jum she received the artist diploma in viola from the Eastman School of Music.
Her earlier studies, both in violin and in viola, were done with such famous teachers as Willy Hess in Berlin, Eugene Ysaye in Brussels and Ferenc Molnar at Colorado College, where she spent several summer sessions.
Other composers to be performed are Bartok, Jacques Ibert and Gaspar Cassado.
Max Lanner has chosen the Scherzo in B-flat minor by Chopin for his solo.
The concert in November, schedules for Sunday, the 19th, will be a special event.
It will be the second John Henry Strong Memorial concert, a series inaugurated last year with the sonata recital of Sidney Harth, violinist, and Max Lanner, pianist.
This year, the Memorial will bring a return engagement of the remarkable pianist, Stephen Kovacs, who had a rousing success at his first appearance in Perkins Hall in April, 1960.
Copy Editor — John Ebey Art Editor— Vilis Berzins The Board of Review has for its ten members: Miss Seece Boyce, Miss Roseann Brown, Miss Pat Swartwood, Mr Doug Cowles, Mr Norman Colbert, Mr Bob Goldman, Mr Myles Hopper, Mr Jay Heminway, Mr Harris Sherman, Mr Michael Von Helms, and Dr.
Neale R Reinitz of the English department, who will assist the Board in reviewing material for the Kinnikinnik.
The Denver Symphony Orchestra Schedules Outstanding Artists The Denver Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Saul Caston, has scheduled its most ambitious season for this fall and winter.
Top attraction of the season will be the great pianist, Artur Rubenstein, who will be presented with the orchestra on February first in the Auditorium Arena.
The season will open October 31 with Maria Cloudes Dhority, young French-Brazilian pianist, as soloist.
The program originally was planned as an all-orchestral evening, but after having an opportunity to hear Miss Dhority, Mr Caston was eager to present her with the orchestra this season.
In November, the soloists will be Rise Stevens, celebrated mezzo soprano, on November 7 and Samson Francois, brilliant French pianist, on November 13.
Claude Frank, gifted pianist, will be heard on December 5, followed on December 12 by John Sebastion, sensational harmonica virtuoso.
Three guest conductors will appear during the season, including Eugen Jochum of the famous Concertgerbouw of Amsterdam on Januai-y 23 with his daughter, Veronica Jochum, distinguished pianist, as soloist.
Hans Erisinan, Du Pont District Manager Speaks ■John A Larabee of Palo Alto, California, Pacific District manager of Du Pout's Extension Division, will talk to students Friday, October G, about corporate image problems and the place of large business corporations in the world today.
Larabee will be a guest lecturer in Professor J, Douglas Mertz' p litical science class in Constitutional Development today.
Other soloists will include Jean Casadesus, popular pianist; Nathan Milstein, famous violinist; Rudolf Firkusny, celebrated pianist; Leonard Rose, great cellist; and Eugene List and Carroll Glenn, pianist and violinist.
Special attractions will include the Ballet Janine Charrat de France and a concert version of the Strauss Opera ""Daphne"" with Gloria Davy and Robert Nagy nnd top local vocalists.
CAMPUS COMEDY A professor hunting for a place to live went to a local apartment house and asked to see a list of the peoph' living there.
When he came to the name of a certain student, the professor said, ""Put me down for that fellow's apartment, please.
It's easy . . . just clip the coupon below or gel an entry blank where you buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the ten game scores.
Ne\t contest will be on games of November 4— when you'll have another chance to win.
Viceroy weaves those tiny strands into the special Deep-Weave Filter . . . and that's the filter you can trust to give \i_ you the good taste of Viceroy's rich tobacco blend.
Q U of Colorado □ Air Forte □ U of Wyoming n California □ lowa □ Michigan St.
Greek Weekend Begins Today Greek weekend will begin tonight when all sororities will lold open house and desserts from 6:45 to 7:45.
For this occasion each sorority has split its group into fifths (consisting of 12 girls), and each group will be assigned to another sorority.
At 8:00m. there will be a panel discussion consisting of our students and two faculty members concerning the place nf sororities and fraternities in college life.
The students will Marianna Cogswell, Gay PetzStew Ritchie, and Tom Rivers.
On Saturday at 1:15 the reek organizations will compete games which will have no effect i the intramural standings.
Chariot ace— each fraternity will have ;> lai'iot race in which a member of ;ister sorority will ride.
Saturday night an all school ance will be held from 9:00 to 2:00 at the Alamo.
The words leadership, responsibility, unity, enthusiasm, initiative, and oven Christian love were heard, but in widely varying contexts.
Bursts of enthusiasm, quiet seriousness, floor shows in the form of skits, and even a recitation of Poe's ""The Raven,"" (with appropriate substitutions of course) were some of the forms of salesmanship.
Many candidates indicated that their's is the best rated class yet, and promised to turn theory into reality.
Some had good ideas, and were determined to lick the problem of class apathy.
And a few, surprisingly enough, realized that CC is well rated and well known.
Enthusiasm, though dampened by the length of the session, seemed to be a major factor, and a choice of the best three will be a difficult CC FOREIGN STUDENTS meet in Rasta coming Foreign Student's Weekend.
Creativity Is Essential to Survival Professor Carlton Gamer, Colorado College music professor, Tuesday night warned that if man is to survive annihilation through an all-out nuclear war he must commit himself to creative activity with a religious zeal.
To assure it, we must all, every one of us, commit ourselves to the nurture of creativity, to the development of a climate in which creativity can flourish.
Creativity must become for us an ultimate value— if you will, a religious valuer — to which we commit ourselves as we would to the establishment of the Kingdom of HeavHe discussed some of the areas in which creativity must .become operative in our lives today.
These, it seems to me, are ultimately two in number, both creation of bealty and excellence, which can be seen in his art as in no other aspect of his life,"" he said.
They are producers of art, following accepted models, rather than creators.
He made it clear that creativity in personal life, ways of thinking, political and economic life, and the sciences are equally important.
Work lias become the great ruler of men's lives everywhere on earth today, Gamer said.
They are, first, the * survival of life on earth; and i ond, a life worth living.
These ends are inseparably linked, and they are rooted in the nature of ""For man craves freedom and is capable of sacrifices to achieve it.
Man loves life, but he does not love it well enough to live it at any cost.
He will choose to destroy himself, and others with him, rather than live a life which is not worth living.
And therefore. we cannot hope to survive today unless mankind as a whole can attain a life worth living.
At the same time, they are the very embodiment of man's highest creative powers, involving all man's faculties, rational and non-rational, and are therefore among the most durable of the monuments man leaves behind him.
And when he is not at work, he seeks to distract himself with entertainment, to ""mark time"" until his work begins again, he went of ""In many ways, the h leisure is the most serious loss in our lives today, for only in leisure can contemplation flourish, and only in contemplation can the seeds of creativity grow,"" he noted.
Honor Sorority Meets A tea waB given for the Colorado Springs and foreign exchange students attending Colorado College, by Alpha Lambda Delta, Sunday, October 8.
Foriegn Students Gather For Weekend Conference Assembly Features NORAD Officer N'ORAD — Its Significance and '1 Defense"" will be the topic J discussion this next Tuesdav, 'rtober 17, at 11:00 o'clock in rk ins Hall.
Colonel Herbert Rolph, United States Air Force, will be • main speaker.
He is at the "" c e of Information of NORAD ^quarters at Ent Air Force Lt Col.
Rolph will be followed ■> tw faculty members, each of a om will give a five minute ■Went of their own views on ""1 Defense.
Today, the CC Foreign Student Weekend begins with the arrival at five o'clock of 35 foreign students from seven colleges and universities in Colorado and Wyoming.
Eight hours of discussion and evaluation of world events as well as comments on and deactions to American life have been planned.
Students, faculty, members of the administration and the general public are welcome to all or part of the conference.
At six o'clock there will be a dinner at the Flying W Ranch Assemblies Committee feels ^ this assembly will be interg and enlightening and corV invites the college commu^nd the general public. for the host families, the foreign students from CC and other schools and all interested persons.
On Saturday there will be mornand afternoon discussion sessions with a break for a barbecue lunch at Chief Tyree's Ranch.
Lounge in Rastall Center, then divide into two sub-groups for discussion.
Members of the Colorado College faculty will lead the discussion The first discussion session will be from nine to twelve o'clock with a coffee break at 10:15.
THE FOREIGN STUDENT IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT, and the sub-topics are: Student purpose and expectations in coming to America.
The duties and responsibilities of the foreign student toward his home society.
The afternoon session will begin at three o'clock, with a break at four, and finish at 5:15.
The foreign students will eat dinner in Rastall Dining Room Saturday night, which will provide an excellent opportunity for any student to talk informally with them.
Saturday night at eight o'clock, there will be informal entertainment in Rastall Center Lounge, and the participating foreign students have been encouraged to bring any musical and/or talents which they may have.
For Sunday dinner the foreign students will be eating again on campus in Rastall and Taylor dining rooms.
At 2:30 Sunday there will be a final discussion and summary session for which both groups will meet together to examine more fully some main points of interest coming from the two previous sessions.
Any questions may be directed to members of the Foreign Student Committee; to David Hite, president, ME 4-3511, Ray Boyce, chairman of the Foreign Student Weekend Committee, or Janet Cosby, publicity chairman, ex.2.
However, the administration's views here at CC seem to be at odds with the dominant view expressed above.
Here political and ideological groups are given freedom to organize and to meet.
Discussions or activities of a controversial nature are accepted, or even encouraged, although the disfavor and contempt of the local press and of large segments of the community may be incurred.
And yet, in this unusually free atmosphere, few students take active part in groups which deal with political and ideological issues.
Young Democrat and Young Republican clubs have very few active, acutely aware members.
A campus organization of real note, Commitment, won the dedication and effort of a few students last spring.
Even though CCs administration and faculty do not enforce the ""hygienic concept"" of isolating students from the issues of the outside world, the students accept and enforce that isolation on their own account.
We at CC have the opportunity not generally afforded college students to face the issues of the day squarely, without fear of banishment by an overly-cautions administration.
But if we are to make our college experience a valuable one when it comes to facing complex political and ideological questions in the future, we must cast aside our own bland acceptance of isolation.
We must make use of this opportunity — a far more crucial one than we realize.
Your cooperation with the above will help assure your materia] of publication.
Carl L Roberts, associate professor and chairman of the Colorado College psychology department, has been awarded a S5000 research grant by the National Institute of Mental Health.
Roberts has been studying the effect of certain sensory changes on the learningprocess in an effort to learn more about the nature of behavior determinants.
The CC psychologist has been working on a pilot project of the study for the past two years.
Roberts, who joined the faculty in 1957 as an assistant professor, said he would be assisted in the initial phases of the project by senior students Jerry Northern of Denver, John Clark of Fairhaven, Michigan, Judith Stander of Pueblo, Colorado, and Richard Dugdale of Cascade, Colorado.
But as the research develops other students will be brought into participation in the experimental work.
I have heard so much about the minimum job when it comes to college work.
I should very much like the chance to tell all such students why they should read more than just enough to pull the wool over the eyes of their Profs.
I would start out by asking why they are going to college in the first place.
Even these persons that feel they will get by as easily as possible would probably have a lot of high idealistic reasons for taking courses they are trying to slip through.
If we continue to live up to our standards I am sure we will decide it really isn't too bad to do the complete assignments and perhaps a little more.
By BOB GOLDMAN How to Use the Library This article has been written to acquaint the student with Coburn library.
The answer is found in understanding that this library really belongs to Mr Coburn.
It's all his and he doesn't have to let any of you use it unless he wants to.
In order to find a book in Coburn Library one is forced to use the card catalog.
The library has a large collection of periodicals which are available for student use.
It is, however, a mistake to ask the librarian for copies of Sun-Bather's Monthly, View or other such magazines.
You will notice that a librarian will spend all day with her nose buried in a book.
With hardly any effort on your part you can make her life more enjoyable.
After about twenty minutes of juggling microfilm cans she will return and begin to put the film in the projector.
As she leaves a comment such as ""Well, out of sight; out of mind"" will probably give her a chuckle.
When the librarian finally returns with the correct copy and inserts it into the projector you turn to the want-ads and look them over for about fifteen seconds.
Another method for amusing the librarian takes a bit more effort but I believe that you'll find the rewards make the project worthwhile.
At this point you dash for the door leaving a trail of books in your wake.
It is usually advisable to stay away from the library for a few days after this as the librarians are rather forceful when expressing their gratitude.
Of course, you will rest securely with the knowledge that you have brought some excitement to an otherwise dull life.
In conclusion, I want you to remember that the library is here for your use.
It is commonplace to say that many of us walk around with our eyes closed and ears shut to the beauties and gratifying possessions of life.
There is that within us which can spoil and destroy the community and our surroundings, be it a fraternity or a state, even when we may be sensitive to the deeper things of life.
The purpose of Professor Burton's sermon is to examine our lives in the light of Christian faith and to point to the fact that through an apprehension of what the Christian faith offers and teaches, the individual may live to the fullest of his power as a child of God.
Shove Choir Seeks Additional Members Membership is open in the Shove Chapel Choir, and all interested persons are invited to join.
Everyone, students and faculty alike, is eligible; one does not have to be a member of the college choir.
The choir, under the direction of Mr Donald P Jenkins, sings for the Sunday morning service at Shove Chapel and will also sing the ""Buxtehude Cantata,"" and ""Rejoice Beloved Christians"" for the Christmas vesper service.
The choir rehearses at 4:15 on Thursday afternoons in the lecture room of Shove Chapel and also rehearses Sunday mornings at 9:45 before the service.
Anyone interested in singing please come to the rehearsal Thursday afternoon.
CC Players to Stage ""Rashomon"" Rehearsals have gotten under way at The Colorado College for the CC Players' production of ""Rashomon,"" to be staged in Perkins Hall Oct., 27, and 28.
The Japanese drama by Ryunosuke Akutagawa features a cast of nine college students under the direction of William E McMillen, associate professor of speech and drama.
Thev include Lynne Hare and William Fisher of Colorado Springs; Carl Chard of Boulder, Colo.
The story set in the outskirts of a small Japanese village a thousand years ago, is a dramatization of the belief that out of the ashes and refuse springs new hope.
Freshman la [the asta tli< ight iled [its * tions will be Thursday and Fri< of this week.
Thetas Win Booth Prizi At Watermelon Bust Water, watermelon, and confu sion highlighted the annual Sipt Chi watermelon bust held last Fri day afternoon.
A playe throw darts at balloons, and if ft were broken, a Kappa pledge hs ;toi to ""walk the gangplank"" into 3 | ( pool of water.
The object of the Kappa Al] Theta ""KAT"" booth was to pi the right rope and douse a pledg with a bucket of water.
Am much ""confusion,"" judges ""E Stabler, Mr Rudoff, and Capl Pistone declared Sue Halton Alpha Phi as queen.
Program Notes The Folk Singers Inc., Color College's own folk singers, display the talent that has m them a favorite of people thi'oug; out the Pikes Peak Region Sat; day on Moods in Music.
Dkk Dm dale, host for Moods in MoS will introduce the Folk Sing 1 Inc., live from the studios KRCC-FM at 1:00m.
The hi long special program will inch such favorites as ""Darlin' Cor ""John Henry,"" ""I Never ^ Marry"" plus many others.
The f' singers sparkle the dead monii of turning between songs < interesting and humorous q 1 about their songs.
The Colorado College radio tion, KRCC-FM, has annoutf that it will broadcast live the A Faculty Lecture at 4:15m.
Kinnikinnik Deadline Is October 24* Colorado Colleqe Tiqer October 13, 1961 Berlin Featured in ludoff, Pistone Present lackground, Alternatives Mr Robin Rudoff, instructor in history, and Captain Louis ist one of ROTC gave a talk on the problems and implications [ the Berlin Crisis Thursday, October 6 in the WES room at astflU Center.
Mr Rudoff gave a brief, but complete summary | the historical events which form the background for the jghtening situation in Berlin today.
He ,te*l that is is generally accepted Washington showed little resight in this matter.
Although Ber110 miles inside the Russian ■, is was chosen as the natil capital of Modern Germany. 194(5 the British and Amerijnes merged to form 'BisoThe four zones were deoying the unity of Germany. ie was a separate and que city-community.
On May 12, 1949, the blockade was formally lifted, but the Russians still felt they had the authority to control all transportation to and from Berlin.
On May 23, 1949, the Western Powers united their sectors to form the Western Republic.
Soon afterwards the Russians, who had refused to join the Hepublic, officially formed the East German Republic.
It is a moral commitment a an economic and political necessity that we stay.
Kennedy also said he no longer cared if Khrushchev did sign a treaty with East Germany.
We can withdraw from Berlin and lose NATO and all it stands for, our political prestige and leadership of the Western World.
We promised to support West Berlin and we should not fail in our obligations.
This is a tremendous responsibility which can lead to war and one which could well escalate into a nuclear war.
This is power politics, the most dangerous of all to fool with, but it is now the only position America can take.
General Johnson is the political as well as military governor of Berlin.
He approves all laws passed by the West Berlin legislators, heads REAS (our propaganda agency), and supervises the polizei.
This ratio of 1 to 6 is considerable, large enough for the Russians to take the offensive at any time.
Our 7th Army depends upon STRAC and its ability to mobilize its forces quickly enough.
If an all out attack should occur the forces in Berlin could hold out two to three days.
Of several possibilities, other than peace, the possibility of East Germany attacking with Soviet reserves is the most likely.
In this case the Army could hold out at least two weeks without reinforcements.
Lunch Dinner Try Our Fresh Pizza or Tacos In the first Assembly of the year, Professor Paul Bernard of the History Department, and Dr.
Brandt related his recent experiences in West and East Berlin The lecture was attended by a capacity audience. in East Berlin was the dendly silence and utter stillness in the city, with relatively few cars and people on the streets.
Professor Brandt noticed an abundance of flags m East Berlin which brought back in a sense the atmosphere of Nazi Germany.
The title of the lecture was somewhat misleading, for there was no attempt to discuss or consider the various alternatives that the Western powers face today in the Berlin Crisis, But it did provide a good background for further discussion on one of the most vital problems of our time.
Bernard stated that until October of 1943, the Allied powers had not considered the problem of handling a divided Germany.
Latei in that year an Allied conference in Moscow first brought forth the suggestion of a divided Germany and Berlin.
In 1D44 there were many conferences that discussed the re-oecupation mvf division of Germany, among these was the Quebec Conference.
The ""Goat Pasture Plan"" proposed to design Germany as an agricultural state.
Then Professor Bernard recounted the important aspects of the Potsdam Conference, including our access to through air corridors, u railroad, and a highway to West Berlin.
He stated that the harassment came in 194G when the Russians stopped the flow of .supplies such as raw materials from Mast Germany into West Berlin.
This in turn forced the western powers to start shipping supplies to the isolated city.
The Russians faced a great defeat in the 1946 elections when the Communist part.-' only obtained 20 per cent of all votes cast.
All these things finally culminated in 194S when the famous Berlin Blockade began.
The revolt in 1953 Bernard attributed to West Berlin's prosperity and East Germany's povery.
Bernard nsserted that in 195S the Soviets renewed their tough policies by giving the Western Powers a sixmonth ultimatum to get out of Berlin.
After backing down, Mr Kruschev said ""there is a season fo every vegetable and the mandrake and the bitter herb are upon Dr.
Brandt referred to liis visit to Berlin, which occured only four weeks before the closing of the bonier.
He commented on the people, traffic, stores, buildings, churches, and progress of West Berlin before describing his visit to East Berlin.
Brandt's comments came when he described the West Berliners as ""relatively unconcerned"" with their various problems.
With Max Lanner at the piano she will perform a concerto by Tartini, the ""Sonata in E flat"" by Brahms and a group of shorter pieces.
It was played in the eighteenth century, but there are very few artists today whn can perfoim on this instrument.
Violation tickets will be insued for parking in front of Cutler from 8:00m. to 5:00m.
ME Z-0B8T J October 13, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger Tigers Tie Parsons 6-6 Westminster College's bare-footed place kicker Dave Branch missed an attempted 20-yard field goal in the final 15 seconds and enabled the CC Tigers to salvage a 6-6 tie with the Parsons on a dismal day at Salt Lake City last Saturday.
A steady morning drizzle soaked Dane Hansen Field, contributing to the sluggish offense displayed by both teams.
Each team was able to launch only one scoring drive, both touchdowns coming in the second Tiger Cagers To Open Drill The CC Tigers take the first step in defense of their Rocky Mountain Conference Basketball title when they open practice sessions Monday at Cossitt Gymnasium.
Head Coach Leon Eastlack has lost four of his five regulars from last year and is faced with a major rebuilding job.
Gone from last year's NCAA small college tournament team are all-conference performers Jim Hanks and Jim Wexels.
Also lost via the graduation route are center Art Ackerman and starting guard Tony Sellito.
Eastlack does have five returning lettermen including backcourt men Dan Wright and Farrell Thompson.
Thompson took over a starting guard position last year when Wright was declared scholastieally ineligible at the end of first semester.
Eastlack has more backcourt strength in sophomore Willy Pelz, a regular on last year's successful freshman team, and Gregg Smith, transfer from Pueblo Junior College where he was a starting guard for the national junior college champions.
Eastlack's real problem seems to be in finding replacements for Wexels and Hanks.
To do so, he has returning lettermen Dave Krell, John Reid and Farrell Howell; junior college transfer Carl Cabinnas, and sophomores Ed Loosli, Al Lizzul and Jim Haley.
Vying for the number one center spot will be Bill Burke, a transfer from Trinidad Junior College, and sophomore Steve Sabom.
The Tigers are also scheduled to play in a holiday tournament in Galesburg, 111., Dec.
Coach Eastlack asks that all freshmen interested in trying out report for practice Monday at 3:30m.
The Parsons scored first when Terry Hunter pluned into the end zone from the tow.
The Westminster drive started on their own 48 and carried to the Tiger three where Ron Hauser lost his grasp on the wet pigskin and the Tigers recovered on their own two.
On the next play, CC fumbled the ball right back to the Parsons and two plays later Hunter crossed the goal line to give Westminster a 6-0 lead.
The Tigers struck back with two minutes remaining in the second half when quarterback Ed Kintz sneaked over from the two capping a 64 yard drive.
The march was sparked by three pass receptions from Kintz to end Jim Wujcik, and a 23 yard burst by halfback Vince Greco.
Neither team was able to put together a scoring drive in the hard-fought second half.
The Tigers threatened twice, but each time their scoring bid was stopped by fumbles.
CC had one final chance to break the deadlock with three minutes left in the game when freshman center John Grose pounced on the loose ball at the Tiger 30.
But once again the Tigers lost control of the slippery ball and Westminster recovered on the CC 35, setting up the last ditch field goal attempt.
Tigers Open Conference, Meet Bruins at Greeley Colorado College opens its bid for Rocky Mountain Conference football honors when they take on the always-tough Colorado State College at Greeley tomorrow night at 8 in the Tigers' Conference opener.
In four non-conference games, the Tigers have compiled a won 2, lost 1 and tied 1 record, while the Bears from Greeley have dropped four straight contests.
The Bears lost their first three non-conference affairs to South Dakota, Omaha U and Drake, and dropped their conference opener, 10-8 to Western State last week.
The comparative team records, however, leave no indication that the Tigers will have any sort of breather tomorrow night.
Jerry Carle is in his sixth year as head Tiger coach and has yet to see one of his teams defeat Colorado State.
Mainstays in the Bear offense so far this year have been halfback Henry Morgan and end Ken O'Rourke.
Morgan does most of the running and O'Rourke has been the number one aerial target.
The Bears have so far been without the services of all-conference, all around back, Butch Gardener.
He was injurred in preseason practice but may be ready to go against the Tigers tomorrow.
Nelson Carlson has taken over Gardener's duties at quarterback up to now.
CC will again rely on the running of Terry Holleran and the right arm of quarterback Ed Kintz, the RMC's leading passer.
Kintz's favorite targets have been slotback Dan Wright and end Jim Wujcik.
Members of the winning team were Hunt Cudahy, John Rinderknecht, George Graham and Jim Hutchins.
Nine men qualified for the final eighteen holes that will be played today and tomorrow at the Patty When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Or a CONFIRMED TICKET If You Want to Get There AIRLINE RAILROAD STEAMSHIP XMAS Reservations and Tickets WORLD WIDE TRAVEL SYSTEM Two Doors East of Uto Theatre ME 4-8833 m the i dividual championship.
Hunt Cudahy, Kappa Sigm a Bob Magie, Zeta, 79 John Rinderknnecht, Kappa Sj Lee Hunt, Unaffiliated, 84 Mike Irsfield, Sigma Chi, 85 Coleman Robinson, Beta, 86 Bill Hybl, Sigma Chi, 8G George Graham, Kappa Sigj^ Jim Sehultz, Phi Gam, 89 ,nd'""l fc. „;i.ir As U ,, tn PORTS Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave The Year A Rounder Memo from the Shopkeeper We endorse the Meticulous lines of our distinguished Raincoat: Fly front, Slash pockets, and Tab collar.
For all its technological advances, this fast-moving world has done nothing better than to reveal the weakness and finitude of man, thus uncovering his need for religion.
Dewi Morgan, Secretary of Society for the Propagation of ' gospel, and one of the outfiling religious journalists in land, gave two talks at Colo■ College last Sunday.
His general theme for both ~ 3 sions was ""Christianity and ' World Crisis."" is the title suggests, Dr.
The effects of world „[ s on man, and the role of J' r istianity in that crisis.
Changing intel.(gal attitudes and capacities p, a iso rife and are witnessed by U things as literacy camji'gns and radio propaganda.
This age is not jus in the Christian sense sessarily, but in the sense of an ;e r\vhelming realization of the ■ed for something greater than In this era of religiousness Christianity is challenged, declared Dr.
Christianity must be committed to the spreading of God's word throughout the world, since its basic function is mission.
Christ, as the word of God made flesh, came to the earth to make witness to God's love.
Christians, through baptism and belief, are a part of Christ, and therefore involved as witnesses.
The Christian mission is important, especially today, and cannot be less than total.
Morgan again presented the essentials of his morning Herman and then called for a discussion of Christianity and the Christian mission.
The discussion centered chiefly around problems and attitudes in missionary work.
Any CC student who would be interested in attending all or any part of this conference is urged to contact Dr.
Fred A Sondermarm, Faculty Sponsor of the CC International Relations Club, for arrangements and other information.
Programs for this year will include plays, movies, dances, and other functions.
The National Academy of Sciences — National Research Council has been called upon again to advise the National Science Foundation in the selection of candidates for the Foundation's program of regular graduate and postdoctoral fellowships.
Committees of outstanding scientists appointed by the Academy Research Council will evaluate applications of all candidates.
Final selection will be made by the Foundation, with awards to be announced on March 15, 1962.
Fellowships will be awarded for study in the mathematical, physical, medical, biological, and engineering sciences; also in anthropology, psychology (excluding clinical psychology), geography, economics (excluding business administration), sociology (not including socai work), and the hiBtory and philosophy of science.
They are open to college seniors, graduate and post-doctoral students, and others with equivalent training and experience.
All applicants must be citizens of the United States and will be judged solely on the basis of ability.
This tion, administered by the Educational Testing Service, will be given on January 20, 1962, at designated centers throughout the United States.
The annual stipend for post doctoral Fellows is $6000, Limited allowances will also be provided to apply toward tuition, laboratory fees, and travel.
The deadline for the receipt of applications for regular postdoctoral fellowships is December 18, 1961, and for graduate fellowships is January 5, 1962.
On display was an assortment of military weapons including a .30 cal. machinegun.
An ordnance man from Fort Carson donated his time to explain the new M14 rifle, which is currently replacing the Ml.
He also brought a new M60 machine gun with which the Army is now being supplied.
This gun is considered one of the most advanced weapons of the Army's arsenal.
A movie, Operation Hollywood, filmed by Pershing Rifles members two years ago, was shown for the entertainment of prospective members.
For the benefit of those who could not make it to the Smoker and are interested in this organization, meetings are held at 7:30 Thursday evenings in the ROTC building.
JERRY NORTEHERN gives orders of the day to staff officers Captains Murphy, Stetson, Diack, Fisher, Major Moe, Captains Gilbertson and Dalby.
Among the employees are faculty andministrutors and other members of the college staff.
The directory lists the 1,326 students enrolled for the current academic year.
The Foreign Student Committee believes that this program is of the widest general interest and strongly urges members of the campus community to take advantage of this opportunity to meet and discuss with students from the world over problems, the answers to which might prove most beneficial for living in and changing the present and continuing state of the world.
With the Foreign Student Weekend starting today, the Foreign Students Committee realizes that many of the students on campus do not know all the six official one year of reign students nor the three four year students.
Theodora Brodin, Linkoping, Sweden, is particularly interested in the art of acting, stage management and history of the theatre, music and literature.
Theodora plans to attend a Swedish university, after this year, leading towards a B.A. and a career as a stage manager.
Allen Johanssen, Helsingfors, Finland, who is living at the Sigma Chi House, is interested in all kinds of sports, especially swimming and shooting.
His major field of study is natural and applied sciences, with concentrated study of higher mathematics and atom physics.
Reuven Rosefelder, Haifa, Israel, is living at the Phi Delta Theta House.
He also studied humanities and economics during Vijay is his second year in Indi living in Slocum Hall.
Magdalena Finchensen of Poland has not arrived on campus yet, due to complications in leaving her home country.
Viceroy's Deep-Weave Filter is made of vegetable material that's pure and safe.
Q U of Colorado G Air Force □ U of Wyoming □ California □ Iowa □ Michigan Si.
Solomon Nkiwane, Neh; Chingola, Northern Rho^ wants a college education So he will be better equipped to tinue his teaching career.
His fields of study will be in the manities and Social Sciences, omon's interests include sp* debating, and music (conduct Both Abiodun and Solomon living in Slocum Hall.
The college community glad to see him again this as well as extending a heart; come to all the first year fort students.
Ano 'acult iatnrt :0ung or fo: •efa the Vii «lll h It Ft ant |uelej Ball S Pres Knua Way tan l; 'iiiint Sah itht '1 '3G ornei Frosh Pick Caudill, Mendenhall, Boyden Ike newly elected freshman commissioners are Sue Caudill, Bill Mendenhall, and Frank Boyden.
Sue, with 79 votes is president, Bill with 11 is vice-president and Frank with 65 votes is secretary-treasurer.
Homecoming Schedule II Keep Students, Alums Busy The traditional homecoming festivities will begin on Friday, Nov. at 8:30m. with the Pep Rally on the North end of Washburn Field where Jerry Osborne, Chairman of Homecoming, will crown the Queen.
The annual Homecoming ade, built on the theme ""Quotable Quotes,"" through the mtown business section Saturday morning will be followed )y the dedication of the new fraternity houses at their sites.
The football game at 1:30m. against Adams State will be highi ■ ■ CI ■ J jf&X^XSM Assembly Slated ilrs.
Benezet will give a reception ii Rastall Center Dining Room 'allowing the game and the sorority, fraternity, and independent organizations will have Open Houses Dm 5-6m.
The Alumni activities will start m Friday Nov. at 7:30m. in iastall Center with an Alumni irum on ""The Changing AcademScene at The Colorado College."" 'he new program will feature Coloado College Professors Bernard (■ Arnest, J Douglas Mertz, and Thomas H Rawles, and Colorado diversity Prof.
Another new feature will be the Jaeulty-Alumni Coffee to be held »aturday morning in Bemis ■Mnge to provide an opportunity * former students to become betr acquainted with members of e faculty.
The third annual meeting of the freedom and Authority"" alumni (i| l consider ""Our Current Notions '* Freedom and Authority Relent to a World Confronted by Nuclear Catastrophy"" in Palmer ' a 'l Saturday morning.
William R Hochman of the History Department will speak about the United States Peace Corps this Tuesday, October 24, at 11:00 o'clock in Perkins Hall.
Hochman will speak about the purpose for which the Peace Corps was set up, the nature of the program, and its plans.
He will explain how one can prepare for the Peace Corps, and how application and selections are made.
He will also talk about the Peace Corps examinations and the training program.
At the one-day testing sessions a candidate may take the Common Examinations, which include tests in Professional Information, General Culture, English Expression, and Non Verbal Reasoning; and one or two of thirteen Optional Examinations designed to demonstrate mastery of subject mater to be taught.
The college which a candidate is attending, or the school system in which he is seeking employment, will advise him whether he should take the National Teachers Examinations and which of the Optional Examinations to select.
A Bulletin of Information (in which an application is inserted) describing registration procedures President Benezet will give his ma y be obtained from college of^Ual ""Report to the Alumni"" Satficals, school superintendents, or K at the Homecoming Lunchdirectly from the National Teacher Examinations, Educational TestJ n Rally in the Rastall Center ^ n '«S Room.
Completed applications, accompanied by proper examination fees, will be accepted by the ETS office during November and December, and early in January so long as they are received before January 12, 1962.
CC, Faculty Members to Be In la Boheme' Production Six members of the faculty and staff at the Colorado College are participating in the Colorado Springs Opera Association's production of ""La Boheme"" to be performed at the Fine Arts Center here Nov., 3, and 4.
J Julius Baird, instructor in organ and organist at Shove Memorial Chapel; Donald Jenkins, instructor in music; Norman S Cornick, assistant professor of dance; David R Austin, instructor in violin; Earl A Johas, associate professor of music; and Janet LeMieux, secretary.
A graduate of Oberlin College and the Juilliard School of Music, he was an instructor at Juilliard before joining the faculty here last year.
A graduate of the college, he has been a member of the faculty since 1956.
She sang the lead in the Gilbert and Sullivan opera ""Trial by Jury"" at St.
The opera later went on the road in Wisconsin, presenting 25 performances.
Scheduled for February 22, 23, and 24 are ""The Impresario"" by Mozart and ""Trouble ni Tahiti"" by Leonard Bernstein.
The season will close with ""The Mikado"" by Gilbert and Sullivan on April 26, 27 and 28.
Season tickets are $6, and single tickets, available one week before each performance, are $2.50.
Members of the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, teachers and students have the privilege of borrowing books, pictures and reproductions available in the library, and they are welcome to take advantage of the reading room.
William A Fischer, professor and chairman of the geology department, in the last of a series of annual Fall Faculty Lectures suggested future Hoods could again cover much of the earth's land surface.
The geologist noted that man represents the highest form of life on earth thus far.
He said evidence from the fields of astronomy and geology all suggest that the earth was formed about 5 billion years ago.
The earth was initially hot, gradually cooled, developed atmosphere, a hydrosphere and geological processes began to operate.
Foreign Service Exam Scheduled The State Department has announced the 1961 examinations for appointment as Foreign Service Officer of Class 8 for December 9, 11)01.
Denver is one of the centers where the examination will be administered.
The application to take the examination must be made on State Department Form DSP-24, which must be received by the Board of Examiners, Department of State, no later than October 23, 1961.
In order to be eligible, a person has to be between 21 and 31 years of age, a citizen of the United States for at least 9 years.
Candidates who are successful in the Written Examination will be required to take the Oral Examination within 9 months after the date of the written examination.
Government informed of developments abroad, to protect American citizens and interests in foreign countries, and to cultivate and maintain friendly relations with peoples of other nations.
Officers may expect to perform a number of these functions during the course of their careers.
Sondermann or write directly to the Board of Examiners, Department of State.
Outings Club Meets The Outings Club will present its first program Saturday, October 21, at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge.
The program will include a slide show of a trip made this summer by the Cycling Club, a film entitled ""Ridin Round the Peak"" presented by Oskasita, and some slides of various climbs made by the Mountain Club.
Protected Embassy CC ROTC Instructor Decorated A Colorado Springs Army sergeant who last December aided in protecting the United States Embassy in Ethiopia during the short-lived revolt against Emperor Haile Selassie was decorated by the Army here last Thursday.
Charles K Morton, 2624 Meadowlark Lane, was awarded the Army Commendation Medal.
He is assigned to the CC Reserve Officers TrainingCorps as instructor and the presentation was made by Lt.
Morton was with the Army attache group in Rthiopia during the abortive attempt to overthrow the royal government.
Army and Air Force personnel fought both loyalist and rebel forces in preventing them from storming the embassy compound.
There were no American casualties, although some members of the embassy staff suffered minor injuries.
Morton described the fighting as being particulary heavy on December 13 and 14, first two days of the revolt.
The revolt, led by an Ethiopian prince, was put down and Haile Selassie retained power.
Future Youi The Air Force needs college trained men and women as officers.
This is caused by the rapidly advancing technology that goes with hypersonic air and space flight.
You've probably heard about Officer Training School. ..where the Air Force takes certain college graduates, both men and women, and commissions them after three months of training.
Base pay, tax-free allowances, free medical and denial care, retirement provision, perhaps flight pay.
You don't have to be an eco major to see it adds up to an attractive package.
Future Yom As an officer you can apply for the Air Force Institute of Technology.
At no cost, and while on active duty some officers may even win their Ph.D. degrees.
There's a place for professional achievement in the United States Air Force PORTS Soccer Team Wins; Seeks New Players October 11, true international cooperation was illustrated in the Pikes Peak region when individuals of six different nationalities pooled their respective resources to defeat the Fountain Valley School in a soccer scrimmage.
Following a two-minute warmup, the first half of the game ensued with the Colorado College players, who had not worked together before, attempting to locate their positions and retrieve their wind.
By the end of the second half of the game, CC's players had dominated the play with good control of the ball and the result was two goals to Fountain Valley's count of nought.
The first goal was the result of a carefully placed shot by Edward Kuiper's foot, clad in a volleyball shoe.
The second goal was a bullet off the bedroom slippered foot of Abiodun Afonja. me soccer players held anothj scrimmage with Fountain VailSchool on Wednesday, Octcjjj 17th and hope in the futui ganize games with the Uni( f States Air Force Acadenv other schools in Colorado soccer teams.
Anyone who terested in fostering a truly j n ^ national sport at Colorado Colb is cordially invited to join us practice every weekday afterm at 4:00m. on the field north the library.
It was the first time since 1952 that a Tiger football learn had been able to defeat the CSC Bears.
The two teams traded leads throughout the first three quarters and early into the final period.
The Tigers opened I ntramuralS Cudohy Shoot's 155, Slocum Football Playoffs Slated ■he storing midway through the first quarter when Terry Holleran plunged into paydirt from the Bear pne yard line.
The score was set uP when slotbaek Danny Wright f a ]red a reverse run, then found jim Wujcik wide open on the opposite side of the field and connected with him on a 40 yard aerial lhat carried to the Bear eight.
Three plays later Holleran scored, ari d Jim Blair added the extra point to give the Tigers a 7-0 |e3d.
The Bears struck back in the second quarter when Henry Morgan intercepted a CC pass attempt and returned it to the Tiger 34.
From there the Bears stayed on the ground with Morgan finally bursting into the end zone from „ne yard out.
The attempted PAT we nt wide, and the Tigers held a narrow 7-6 halftime margin.
The only score in the hotly contested third period came when Blair boomed a 32 yard field goal, giving the Tigers a 10-6 lead.
Once again the Bears came back, this time scoring in the early moments of the fourth period on a one yard sneak by quarterback Tom Carlson.
CC took the kickoff and larched to the CSC 17, where they were confronted with a fourth and five situation.
On the next play the Tigers scored their second touchdown on a perfectly executed fake field goal.
Quarterback Eddie Kintz took the snap, sed up and hit Wright who ting with a wall of blockers The pledge class of Phi Gamm.
Delta challenges any other pledg dais to a touch football game +■ be held Saturday afternoon, Octobe 21, 1961.
The two teams then traded punts and with a little over four minutes to be played, the Tigers forced a CSC fumble and recovered on the Bear 34.
From there, CC drove in for their final touchdown with freshman halfback Ron Taylor punching over from the five.
Once again, the Tigers put forth a fine team effort, but it was the determined running of Holleran and Deutscher, the vicious blocking of Wujcik, and the all-around play of Kintz and Wright that spelled the difference.
The Tigers will rest this weekend with an open date before playing Western State at Gunnison October 28.
Freshman dominated the second round of the intramural golf tournament, which was to determine the tournament medalist, as five of the seven finalists were members of the class of 1965.
Schultz birdied five of the first eleven holes last Friday, but ran into trouble on the long par four holes on the back side.
Expert Shoe Repair College Shoe Shop Slocum Hall men enter the last phase of their intramural football program this week when the championship playoffs are held.
Both Third West and First North have 3-0 records while the Faculty and First South are 2-1.
This tournament is the highlight of the Slocum football season, and will provide good entertainment.
All games are to be played on the fields between Slocum and Cascade Avenue at 4:15.
Since the football season is virtually finished, Slocum is busily preparing for the next event in this year's intramural program, pushball.
This game is new to the CC campus and should prove to be interesting, providing that a ball can be found to be pushed.
After an unfortunate accident with the pushball during Greek Week, Slocum is without his vital piece of equipment.
FACULTY-STUDENT PANEL Harris Sherman then asked the students on the panel to imagine CC without Greek groups.
People need friends, commented Miss Cogswell; they band naturally together for security and if there were no organized groups small cliques would form, thereby distracting from school unity.
Mr Boyce stated that there were only five fraternities and five sororities for 1,200 students.
Miss Cogswell stated that for a Greek group to gain anything, it must be kept at a workable size.
The best time for us to see how valuable the sororities and fraternities are to this school and its purpose, stated Mr Rudoff, is in the nine ensuing months of school.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton Product of l/ft* ^'/mtHt-tf n ■Ji.C-UJXO-'i^rrtaany — MWttffO U October 20, 1961 Colorado College Tiger Summer Srience Institute Starts to Pay Dividends YR 's Help Organize High School Groi A pix>gram launched six summers ago by CC for bringing junior and senior high school science teachers to the forefront of current developments in major scientific fields is beginning to pay off in unexpected ways.
In addition to preparing the secondary teachers to present more stimulating science courses in their own schools, the program has resulted in the development of new science teacing methods at the independent liberal arts college, and appears to have encouraged some of the college's top science students to consider teaching as a profession.
The first summer science institute for secondary school teachers was undertaken by The Colorado College through local support in 1956.
Since 1957 the institutes have been supported by National Science Foundation funds.
Experience gained in conducting the summer science institutes is encouraging faculty members in some fields of science at the college to de-emphasize formal lectures in favor of a round-table seminar approach to teaching.
One of the important developments that has emerged from The Colorado College's science institute program is a special threesummer-session graduate program for secondary school science teachers.
The rill progra the teachers to obtain a Master of Arts in Teaching degree with emphasis on science subject material, rather than on education courses.
About 45 teachers, all with at least five years of science teaching experience, currently are involved in the program.
When the State Central Co tee of the GOP put their Teen Age Republican program into motion Saturday, Pat Dagg, vicechairman of the CC YR's was on hand as coordinator for TARS activities for the party's College League.
Senior party members, College YR's and teenagers came from throughout the state to formulate plans for a concerted organizational drive.
Elizabeth Priest of Lakewood, representing State Republican Headquarters, those attending were able to work out a format for the campaign.
Both Mr Ethell and Mr Wells stressed the importance of younger citizens beinginterested in politics, a growing ers of the party.
J k Wr Sular »tUn Wies E an '■■ aft 411. ipglish Author Colin Wilson 'Existentialist' \o Open Annual Lecture Series Colin Wilson, Britain's most controversial young writer, TJ1 1 be on The Colorado College campus Sunday though puirsday to talk with students and faculV participate in two student seminars, and give a public jjture.
He will Existentialism and the Modjjj predicament."" author of five books, all jng with ""far-out"" ideas, Wil'"" hold seminars for selected Uents and faculty at 4m.
He will probe deeper g existentialism and lecture on artist and the world in which lives. 'he 30-year old writer broke ,to print five years ago with a ijosophical book of criticism till The Outsider.
Colin Wilson Wilson's latest work, a novel till, Adrift in Soho, (London's boinian quarter) , rolled off the esses earlier this month.
Adrift in Soho, deals with a ung Midlands poet-philosopher to London to ply his ade.
The former Nietzschean is tryt to dispel the idea that he was ( England's ""angry young 31' a British beatnik.
He now lives in a house by the Cornwall, which he says is ( "" stocked with books, records wine. j addition to The Outsider and Ft in Soho.
Wilson's books inle Religion and the Rebel, The ture of Man, and Ritual in the ""It.
The latter is a novel based the life of the 19th century «erer, Jack the Ripper.
Dance Today in Hub ^is afternoon there will be an J°""nal dance in the Hub.
Chuck and his Combo will perJ for all interested students at ^ Rastall Center has chosen w ay to celebrate Halloween, l0 Pes that an informal aftern party may catch on as a Pilar.
Everyone is invited to at^ and is urged to come in school ^ae s f or an nour or so f danc-'elaxing.
Seminar Highlights Alum Homecoming An unusual kind of alumni reunion will be held here Nov 4 when scores of former Colorado College students and seven faculty members gather around a huge seminar table to re-examine their notions of freedom and authority.
The occasion will be the third annual reunion of alumni of C.C.'s Freedom and Authority seminar.
Freedom and Authority alumni have been holding reunion discussions at homecoming since 1959.
William R Hochman, associate professor of history, will act as moderator of the round-table this year.
Dean Lloyd Worner, Dean of the college; Philosophy professor J Glenn Gray, currently on a Guggenheim Fellowship; Carlton Gamer, composer and assistant professor of music; Dr.
George Mills, lecturer in general education and assistant director of the Fine Arts Center; Mr J Douglas Merts, professor and chairman of the department of political science; and Dr.
All seven faculty members have taught the Freedom and Authority seminar.
They regard the course as a joint quest by both students and faculty into the nature of freedom and the kinds of authority that restrict it.
The college homecoming also will include an Alumni Forum on ""Continuity and Change in the Liberal Arts Curriculum;"" an Alumni-Faculty Coffee; dedication of three fraternity houses; a homecoming luncheon and rally; the traditional homecoming parade in downtown Colorado Springs; the Adams State-Colorado College football game and the homecoming dance.
Benezet Addresses WES President Louis T Benezet will address the annual luncheon of The Women's Educational Society of the Colorado College Saturday, October 28, at 1:30m. in Bemis Hall.
Julie Bohlke , a psychology major from Hastings, Nebraska; Dottie Bush , an English major from Arlington, Virginia; Nadine Chang (Independent), a French major from Kauai, Hawaii; Sue Connelly (Kappa Alpha Theta), an English major from Seattle; Fran Ferbstein , an education major from Akron, Ohio; and Joan Seelig , a philosophy major from Atherton, California.
Debators at CWC Eighteen members of the Colorado College Debate Club are in Denver, Colorado participating in the Colorado Women's College Forensic Tournament this Friday and Saturday.
Eight of these students are returning members of last year's highly successful debate squad.
Chris Griffiths, Dave Furgason, Robert Thrasher, Max Power, Charles Puckett, Linda Pierce, Nancy Dehlin and Dave Bitters.
Susan Caudill, Max Power and Robert F Williams are participating in Extemporaneous Speaking while Williams, Jo Heller, and Peter Trushel are entered in Original Oratory.
That labor organizations should be under the jurisdiction of anti-trust 1 egislation.
CC coaches for this tournament, which will include colleges and universities from the entire Rocky Mountain Region, will be Mr James A Johnson, Economics Department, Mr Robin Rudoff, History Dept, and Captain Louis J Pistone, ROTC Dept.
Japanese Students Will Visit Campus From Nov. to Nov., Colorado College will play host to three Japanese visitors.
Kinnikinnik Sets Later Deadline The Kinnikinnik deadline has been extended until Sunday, November 5.
Students are urged to turn in contributions on or before this date to Rastall Desk, or to Terry Kidner, Peggy Benham, or John Etiey.
Art contributions may be left at Rastall Desk, in the Basic Design Room at the Fine Art Center, or may be given to Vilis Berzins.
Prizes of fifteen dollars each are being awarded for the best poem, bestp rose contribution, best art, best phtography, and for the cover design.
Mr Aramak feasor student affai senior maj assistant proand head of 1 Mr Demizu, in economics and head of the student association at the university are here, sponsored by the Asain Foundation, to study the aspects of studentuniversity relationships.
They are especially interested in observing such things as the student union, studentfaculty relationships, guidance and testing services, and student placement.
Several CC students will act as hosts and hostesses to these visitors, taking them to some of the various homecoming activities, showing them around campus, introducing them to some of the college administrators, etc.
Editorial A commentator on the college scene, writing; in the October HARPER'S MAGAZINE, made a couple of challenging observations in regard to religion on our campuses.
The standing assumption is that ultimate questions are in principle unanswerable, and hence not worth asking seriously,"" he contended.
These articles, we believe, indicate something of an active approach to the problems presented above.
The campus religious program, under the very able direction of Mr Kenneth Burton, is developing along two main lines.
First, it is presenting to the non-Christian student a means of exploring Christianity and of determining its relevance and its values.
The assumption underlying this program is that ultimate questions are indeed important and meaningful.
If they are unanswerable, they nevertheless have great significance, and the religious program is attempting to give the student, be he Christian or not, a way to explore both the significance of these questions and some possible answers to them.
In relation to the second point quoted above, Mr Burton lias made it very clear that the student's approach to ultimate questions is extremely important to the religious program.
Only through the expression of students' thinking can religion become meaningful and relevant in the context of the campus.
We believe that there is among many students a real concern about the meaning and purpose of their lives and of life in general.
The religious program is now embarking on a commendable course which will enable these students to examine the Christian approach to these ultimate questions.
We strongly recommend the Sunday chapel services and other programs under the direction of Mr Burton and the Religious Affairs Committee to the inquiring and perplexed student — Christian or non-Christian.
So far this year, two of these programs have been presented — one on Berlin, the other on religion.
Both have been sharp and enlightening, but, unfortunately, attendance has been poor.
We should like to commend and encourage those who are responsible for these programs and to urge more faculty members and students to attend these informal, informative sessions.
We believe that it makes very well a point which needs desperately to be made, and so we have reprinted it here.
On the same day the President and a former President have given the American People the same good counsel.
Dwight Eisenhower reminded them that many of their forefathers faced equal insecurity courageously, even happily.
People today, confronted by the threat of nuclear war, are tempted to believe their hazards are unprecedented.
For the man trying to plow a straight furrow with a rifle on his back an Indian arrow could be as large as an H-bomb.
Men and women who experienced wartime bombing need such reminders less.
And they discovered that in rallying to meet attack many people threw off the mental ills of softer times.
Surely the dangers of our day should prompt urProgram Notes KRCC-FM has two new programs slated for this weeks entertainment.
The first is ""Rapsody"" with Gary Zeigler from 12-1:00 Monday through Friday.
The approaching week portrays the unique in Russian composers as well as the Don Cossack Chorale.
On Fridays, KRCC-FM is presenting the first all jazz show from 10 until .midnight ham.
This program is possible due to Brigham's extensive knowledge and collection of jazz records.
Copies of the KRCC-FM schedule can be obtained either at the Rastall Center desk or in the Tiger office.
Comment By PETE TRUSHEL Then' is much talk at Colorado College of the non-existence of a social need to join a fraternity.
Sincere feeling, no doubt, is behind this talk; however, feeling will do hardly anything to face the problem.
The college is all too willing for the fraternities to take the responsibility of most social events.
The most effective way for the college to show that we don't have to be ""Greek"" to have a social good time is for it to sponsor some social functions of its own.
The blame for the deplorable control fraternities have over this campus must not stop with the college administration.
When the college sponsors functions, the independents should come out in droves.
The administration must sponsor more all-college functions— both formal and informal; 2.
All material will be retut with the above will help assure yoi ned if so indicated.
Your r material of publication. ,i,e Sl en an ''""""iHTai,,. show from r . n /""ll Dick Brig, trom the Uhdir Hank Rase, ASCC VP Certainly, the college experience contributes much more than just an academic fulfillment.
Indeed, the atmosphere of college and the enrichment one attains covers a wide variety of experiences.
It would seem that here at Colorado College there are many ways in which the students can actively express themselves.
The many clubs, organizations, discussion groups, lectures, assemblies, and governing bodies offer a multitude of creative outlets.
I would like, on behalf of the Associated Students of Colorado College, to encourage you to participate in the various groups on campus.
United Airlines recently in atJ urated a special Youth Fare, nfare allows young people throw the age of 21 to travel at a r» duced rate.
However, these passs gers are unable to secure rest, vations for a specific flight njj three hours before departure t^ Many young people who plant, use this special fare will face dif, Acuity during the Thanksgii^ and Christmas holidays.
For q ample, we understand that on &» tain dates there will be nearli 1,000 military youth fares pass® gers standing by at the Dpnve airport.
May we request that you pa$, this information on to the stu dents of your institution and un, that they purchase full fare tick ets.
They then may make ressr vations and avoid the disappoinj ment of serious delays en rout*, Very truly yours, L Ellsworth Perry United Airlines Sales Manager-, Denvt Last Run to Ogden On Saturday, Nov., the Unioin Pacific Railway will operate, for the last time, its sole remaining steam locomotive, number 844, from Cheyenne, Wyo., to Ogden, Utah.
All persons inteersted in this historical event are urged to contact Steve Sparling, ext. 329, for further information.
Center Activities Anyone inteersted in the chairmanship of Rastall Center Movies contact Will Johnson at X232.
The job entails publicity for movies of the current year and selection of the program for the 1962-3 school year.
A Poster Workshop will be held next Thursday at 7:30m. in fiastall's Crafts Shop.
But history can provide useful perspective and combat fevers of fear evoked by assumptions of total catastrophe.
And such good counsel can antidote calculated terror and foster sane resolution — resolution which itself is a deterrent to aggressive war The counsel, coming from two men who have had to learn to live with the responsibility of possibly having to order nuclear countermeasures, carries extra weight.
Another comment of Mr Eisenhower's in a remarkable television interview presented by ""CBS Reports"" bears on this problem.
He questions the assumption that one bomb would automatically set off a holocaust.
He notes that there are forces working to prevent an accident and double checks which would operate to limit the effects of one For instance, the Soviet authorities know that the U-2 would not have come alone if an attack were intended.
The desire to get the ""tension eased"" is understandable under some conditions laudable.
But Mr Eisenhower pointed out that one effect of tension is to evoke alertness to a challenge.
And it would be well to recognize that the challenge is not likely to be soon removed.
It remains even when not visible and can visibly be turned on overnight in the Kremlin.
Of course ""learning to live"" with any wrong condition involves the danger of too-easy acceptance of it.
But it will be best prosecuted in an atmosphere free from self-induced panic.
To that end let us seek undistorted facts and heed wise counsel. be demonstrations followed by dividual participation.
This Sunday, The Mounl Club will hold its first in a sens of Rock Schools.
Everyone is invited, n should wear rubber soled sho& The Cycling Club and all into ested will leave Rastall ParkiiJ lot at 9m. sharp on Sundii morning for Canon City.
Leader: Christianity is not just more religion or one more ethic* path but represents, especialll now in the midst of the niegalo' bombs and the Berlin crisis, ' genuinely new understanding <j life, which doesn't simply fit fy but rather challenges the old, a t,: offers the possibility of ^ hope of a real change in your W and your view of the world.
The sermon po^ out that actually Jesus is the t^ ically new in Christianity— becaiS of Him, the Church speaks of "" wine, a new song and the Testament.
T the f remai play, onion pie d ieht conicof th done GC Hochman Tells Assembly About Peace Corps Dr.
Wili am Hochman of the History Department de scribed the principes, functions, and actions of the Peace Corps in the Tuesday assemby.
Hochman referred to the Peace Corps as ""a new outllet"" for serving our country besides the normal military and diplomatic channels.
The Peace Corps became a reality under the guidance of the Kennedy Administration.
Hochman described its leader, Sargent Shift MEDIUM [TERRY KIDNER) reveals one aspect of Rashmon's complex plot.
CC Players Present 'Rashomon' Rashomon, a play by Fay and Michael Kanin based on a Japanese story by Ryonsuke Akutagawa, takes place in Kyoto, Japan around the year 1200.
A woman has been raped, a trial has been held, and a priest , a -wood-cutter, , and a wig maker, are discusssing the happenings at Rashomon gate when the play begins.
As the three men discuss, flashbacks of the trial and the crime appear on the stage.
The accused gives his and gives his interpretation of each person's character.
Then tim gives her i, and the victim's husband, (through the Medium, Terry Kidhis.
Only a fourth interpretaeveals the true situation and the true reactions.
For the presentation of this flashback structure some fairly staging has been arranged.
Two sections of the stage, to the far right and to the far left, remain unchanged throughout the play.
At stage left one sees Rashomon gate and the three townspeople discussing the case.
At stage right lies the witness stand where each interpreter gives his story to the court.
The flashbacks of the crime' itself take place in the midfile of the stage in which there is a revolving 'set arranged to accomodate the four re-enactments of the crime.
All set changes are <W with blackouts, the curtain not lining used at all.
The Colorado College drama department gave its first performance of Rashomon last night, Thursday, Nov. and will present it again tonight and tomorrow night.
After a series of ""breakfast conferences"" with various Congressmen, Dr.
Shriver was able to convince our national leaders that the Peace Corps was a vital and important organization.
The Peace Corps will work with United States' agencies, United Nations' agencies, various American universities, and different private groups such as CARE, besides having a program of its own.
Several projects are underway in Chile, Columbia, East Pakistan, the Phillipines, Ghana, and other areas.
Most of the Peace Corps volunteers are involved in forms of agricultural work; in various teaching positions on the secondary school level; and in areas of technological skills such as electricians, carpenters, and draftsmen.
Eighty-four percent of the present Peace Corps are college graduates and of these, 19 percent have done graduate work.
A college student in a libei'al arts school would have his best chance for becoming a member of the Peace Corps by trying for a teaching position.
Interested Colorado College students should do well in their courses, especially in developing language skills.
A major in education is not necessary in order to attain a teaching position in the Corps.
Hochman also encouraged interested students to become involved in overseas experiments or to participate in national groups such as the American Friends Service Comm.
First, there is a questionnaire which evaluates knowledge and interest in languages, history, special skills, and activities such as athletics and hobbies.
It also asks about your college background, and what organizations you have participated in.
The second part is a comprehensive 5% hour examination which covers American history and culture, language apptitude, personal qualities, and one's area of competence.
MElrose 3-6069 ""* N T,| 0n ME 4-0102 ^] October 27, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger need of his skill.
There are no racial, religious, or political qualifications except for a loyalty oath.
Hochman explained that the selected volunteers will then be sent to training centers located at American universities where they will undergo a vigorous training program aimed at perfecting a language and perfecting one's special skill.
The last supplement program is held in the rugged Puerto Rican mountains where the candidates will undergo a rough program of physical conditioning.
In their designated country, the Peace Corps members will live on the same level with their counterparts.
This means that they will receive no special privileges and they will only receive a living allowance.
Hochman illustrated that this program would lead the way to a better world where relations with other countries would be based on peace rather than on a military basis.
Artcarved diamond rings must meet traditionally high standards lor color, cut, clarity and carat weight.
Every Artcarved ring carries a written guarantee for quality and permanent value that's recognized and respected by fine jewelers from coast to coast.
Stop in at your jeweler and he sure to see all the exquisite Artcarved diamond rings— the rings you buy with confidence and wear with pride.
Discussion Slated National Magazine on offbeat items Benezet Article Explores Problems of Excellence nusual program will be giv en Sunday, October 29th at 7:30 m. at Professor Burton's house, 1228 Wood Avenue.
The Reverend Jack Alford of the staff of the National Council of Churches will play a number of modern records — jazz, off-beat, ""Sick,"" numerous — and will comment briefly on them.
The records will be entertaining and interesting in themselves but Mr Alford's intention is to encourage his audience to ask themselves what these records are saying in protests against some aspects of our society and about the nature of man.
Mr Alford is a graduate in Fine Arts of the Art Institute of Chicago, served with the army in Korea, has been responsible for youth work in the Churches of the Chicago Area and at present is serving as a field worker for the National Council of Churches among migrant workers and Indians in southwestern United States.
The article 'Adrift in Soho r Reviewed by Terry Kidner ""Freedom, Freedom everywhere, and not a drop to <t Adrift in Soho is a half glorifying, half condescend tale of the penetration of London's beatnik kingdom by* naive nineteen year old named Harry.
Colin Wilson's ] a L hero finds himself adrift from the RAF and working „■ manual laborer in the Midlands.
GANO DOWNS MBN'fi CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND OIFTB BROADMOOR HOTEL When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Hill Cy s Standard Service See Cy Belo re You Buy Pick Up S Delivery Go Oil Lubrit alion Tires Batleriei Exper T one Up Dale & Nevo da MEh ■ 4-9883 Far those who cherish individuality, our distinctive natural shoulder clothing hand-tailored Fine imported worsted fabrics styled with the distinctive look, supple softness, and hand detailing you expect from the custom maker.
Mr Wilson's book gathers both speed and sympathy upon Harry's arrival in London.
In a pub he meets Doreen, the New Zealand girl destined to drift two-dimensionally through the work, and Charles Street, an unemployed actor simultaneously embodying joi de vivre and a surprising concern for the freedom of the individual.
With an acceptable talent for the theatre and an exceptional one for bumming food, Charles deftly guides Harry through the artsy, aesthetic, accepted and abnormal strata of Soho life.
The portraits of Charles' friends and fans are dryly and adeptly drawn.
All subscribe to some form of the ""freedom"" philosophy — freedom of the individual from the oppression of society, freedom both to create and indulge oneself at the same time.
But for Harry, struggling to ""get to grips with the subtlest shades of one's emotional experience,"" the ultimate in self expression is not to be found in empty coffee cups or sleeping bags on bare floors.
For me, that's not tt^A. — it's only the appearance of fo dom."" first person narratj a continual Harry's generates a continual emphfeeling.
In reaction to the erionrBplace of London, he quotes Eliot, re , rushin esoteric books, and then gravis toward the strength of Chg^itb friendship.
Yet where Wilson succeeds Harry, he fails with Doreen, New Zealander who makes Han, tea and platonically shares bed.
WhethffiP this constitutes gentle sarcasm lack of ability is debatable.
Harry spends the hulk of I book adrift and searching he eventually finds is dubious.
D) een and he have obviously fon that they prefer sugared tea rolled marijauna, but Harry, e the optimist, continues to liven Charles and his friends.
Sophor iradu: Visitor iOTAl Wc Ti „ ligers Meet WSC Tomorrow XlESt!?!: CC Tigers, currently deadjed with Adams State and Colo'jdo Mines at the top of the Rocky oU ntain Conference will travel v Gunnison today in quest of their Loud straight conference victory ' a inst Western State's MountainnL Game time is scheduled for i-30 i> m tomorrow.
The Tigers have had a two week ;t since their Oct. conquest Colorado State and should be in D shape to put the clamps on halfback Bill Farnsworth and his Mountaineer running mates.
The off again, on again MounCC Enrollment Up Colorado College has a fall semLter enrollment of 1,324 full time iludents.
Full time undergraduate student Inrollment totaled 1,171, compared ;o 1,153 for the same period last real 1 , according to Mrs.
This was jght above the number enrolled it the close of 1960 registration.
They scored a 10-8 victory over hapless Colorado State College and dropped a 29-0 decision to defending champion Adams State in their two league outings.
In non-league play Western has disposed of Chadron State and Eastern New Mexico while losing to undefeated Idaho State and powerful New Mexico Highlands.
The Tigers will again rely on the passing of Ed Eintz and the running of equally capable backs Terry Holleran, 'Pete Pleasant, Vince Greco and Wayne Deutscher.
Football Contest Winners Announced The winners in the first Viceroy Football Contest were announced this week.
Sophomore Ed DeGeorge took second prize of $50, and third place, worth $25, went to Barry Anderson, another junior.
Runner-up awards of $10 each went to Scott Bruntjen, Jack Real, Bill Stafford, John Kieser, and Prof.
II IAST PIKES PiAK HE3r*M *-5801 ighty-three persi ttendance at the ""Skier's ning' program held last Sunday evening, October 22.
This kickedoff the 1961-62 ski program and triggered some activities designed for ski bunnies and schuss-boomers as well.
Skier's Evening centered around information for the beginning skier primarily.
Rollin Poe asked for a show of hands to indicate interest in forming a ski club this year, and the response was great.
A steering committee was formulated and soon will be busy considering a Skier's Evening II, a SkiDitioning program, club membership, group trips, transportation for those without cars, etc, Tony Ptaczek, a registered Ski Patrolman, gave some do's and don'ts for the beginner and Beth Kendall followed up by giving definitions to some thirty ski terms.
Bob Nussbaum and Karen Clausen gave mention of ski clothing, the essentials, how to cut costs, what to wear in different conditions, etc.
Bob Kendall acquainted the group with the ski areas in our region and what they have to offer in the way of lifts and runs.
The group was reminded that the famous Warren Miller ski film was to be shown at the Broadmoor International Center, Tuesday, Oct.
Carl Cabiness of title to defend, Coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack was pleased with the way Colorado College's 19G1-62 basketball team was shaping up at the end of the first week of practice.
Twenty men reported for practice last Monday afternoon, working on defense fundamentals and rebounding positions.
The squad includes five returning letter-men from last year's conference-winning team.
They are Dan Wright, Farrell Thompson, Farrell Howell, Dave Krell and John Reid.
Eastlack said he was extremely pleased with the work of three Carl Cabiness of Independence, Missouri; Bill Burke, Chicago, Illinois; and Gregg Smith of Canon City, Colorado.
Cabbiness played at Cameron Junior College in Lawton, Oklahoma; Burke at Trinidad Junior College; and Smith at Pueblo Junior College.
Three of the returning lettermen are seniors; Wright, a guard from Muskegon, Michigan; Thompson, a guard from Jerome, Idaho; and Krell, a center from McPherson, Kansas.
Howell, a forward from Albuquerque, New Mexico, is a junior; and Reid, a forward from Colorado Springs is a sophomore.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton Produd of J& JVmt-ut-an S^CCt^&'m.
Burton Outlines GG Religious Program Reverend Kenneth Burton spoke on ""The Possibilities and Scope of a Religious Program on the CC Campus,"" Thursday, October lft at the Coffee Hour.
It is difficult to preach to members of all faiths and of no faith, but it is a challenge.
A Religious program on this campus should be directed to those students who are religiously non-connected, the enquirer or agnostic, and must also help and nurture the Christian student.
The question of Peace and War, the fate of the U.N., and the refugee problem all stimulate him to thought and, wherever possible, action.
All students are concerned about the Meaning of Life and of Death, but not formally.
To their minds there is a total lack of connection between the Church and their questions.
On Sunday evening, October 29, at Reverend Burton's home there will be a get-together to listen to jazz and tell sick jokes, and discuss the influence of such things in our culture on the young adult of today.
Through informal discussions such as this on Life and its values, through retreats and study groups, Religion can be connected with our life from day to day.
Religion is not just an hour of worship on a Sunday morning, it is part of one's whole life.
Benezet Article Explores Problems of Excellence He warned that excellence also may be assuming class overtones.
Second, the faculty should be persuaded to place its direct teaching attentions more on the first two years of college than on the last two.
Third, we should try harder to end the cold war between professors and student personnel officers — it is a real block toward achieving excellence in the student as a person.
Fourth, a sustained effort should be made to throw out false and superficial inducements to learning.
In one way or another most of these refer to our obsession with grades.
Fifth, colleges should move to reward real learning among students and real teaching among professors.
For the former, plenty of rewards will come to mind once the stranglehold of grades has been broken.
For the rewarding of teaching, we must solve ""the publishing racket"" by freeing them from arbitrary pressure to publish scholarly articles.
We want to give you and everyone at CC the best possible paper, but, in order to do that we need more help.
If you can write, type, read proof, take pictures, or even offer moral support you can do us and the college community a great service.
If you are interested in working for the TIGER, please fill out the adjoining coupon and return it to us in Rastall Center.
Clif Rouse, Business Major, Class of 1963 (Photo at left) walked awey with Viceroy's first Hundred bucks prize money.
Ed DeGeorge, class of '64, took second prize of $50.00 and Barry Anderson '63, got third prize of $25.
Any stud nl or faculty rr ember on this campus may enter e»eept employees o Brown & Williamson, its advert sing agencies, or memb ollheir imm diate families. e the properly ol Brow iirned.
Entries m ed or dropped n ballot bo* or campus no later than Wednesday nidnighl belore he games are played and received by n Friday of the ame week.
The ghltodiscontinu efulureconlestsisieserv On M sado on an Official Entry Blank or piece of paper ol the same size and lormat. write your predictions ol the scores of the games and check the winners.
Enclose an empty Viceroy package or a reasonable rendition of the Viceroy name as it appears on the package front Mail entry to Viceroy at the 6oi Number on the entry blank, or drop In Viceroy Football Contest Ballot 3.
WES Lounge, Rastall Center. oming Queen — SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 4 ..—Alumni Officers' Breakfast — WES Lounce, Rastall Center. .—Registration— Pick up tickets — Rastall Center. —Alumni-Faculty CofFee — Members of the faculty will be on hand to greet former students.
Francis Van Derbur, chirman, Interfrateinity Research and Advisory Council — Site north of Palmer Hall.
Shove Chapel). —Homecoming Luncheon -and Rally — Reunion tables for Classes of 1921 and 1936 — Report to the Vlumni by President Benezet — Rastall Center Dining Room, — Football Came — Adams State vs.
Colorado College — I arade of winning floats, crosscountry meet — Washburn Field. .—Individual Dedication Programs — Kappa Sigma Phi Delta Theta and Phi Gamma Delta House.
Benezet Center Dining Room, will greet alu and friends of the college — Rastall Sororities, and Independiturday morning in Bemis ™&ge to provide an opportunity former students to become betacquainted with members of faculty.
Nuclear Catastrophy"" in PalmSaturday morning. lent Louis T Benezet will s annual ""Report to the putf"" Saturday at the Home|"">»>e Luncheon Rally in the ""■tall Center dining room, 'ne of the highpoints of the *end will be the Saturday ■anting dedication of the new JQ.000 Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta 3 Phi Gamma Delta fra[""% houses.
Francis Van Der_.. of the Interfraterp Research and Advisory Council be the speaker. annual Homecoming Parade, 1 on the theme ""Quotable |tes,"" through the downtown F^ss section Saturday morning followed by the traditional glball game at 1:30m. in Unburn Field when the Tigers T Adams State. aturday activities will wind up n a reunion dinner of the class of the Broadmoor Hotel.
Homecoming weekend activities will conclude Sunday with the dedication of the Rastall Center Memorial Lounge, honoring the Colorado College war dead, following The Colorado College church service in Shove Chapel.
Laurence Frederick, a staff member of the Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, will speak on the topic ""The Sun's Neighbors,"" in Perkins Hall, Wednesday, November 8, at 8:15m.
This lecture is sponsored by the American Astronomical Society and the National Science Foundation.
Frederick has made notable contributions to the recent advances of astronomy and will attempt to tell something about them in non-technical language.
E James Brady, 70 Marland Rd., Broadmoor. .—Homecoming Dance — Semi-Formal — Presentation of Trophies — Bob McGrew and his orchestra — Broadmoor International Center.
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 5 '■ — Colorado College Homecoming Church Service — The Rev.
Arm in B Barney, '20, chairman of the college's Board of Trustees and president of the Coorado Springs National Bank, will preside during the ceremony.
The three buildings form a courtyard plan with the open-end facing Palmer Hall.
All have steelbeam concrete construction, with brick and stucco exteriors.
Designed to house 34 fraternity men and one housemother, each of the houses can he expanded to accommodate additional students.
The interiors of the three fraternity houses are identical in design and furnishings.
The main floor includes a spacious lounge, furnished with solid, comfortable furniture; a well appointed dining room; and a gleaming modern kitchen.
On the second floor are 18 bedrooms, each accommodating from one to four students.
Denver businessman and president of the Nation Interfraternity Research Foundation, will be the dedication speaker.
Mr Van Derbur, president of the Olinger Life Insurance Company, is chairman of the Interfraternity Research and Advisory Council, chairman of the board of the Denver Better Business Bureau, director of the Central Bank and Trust Company, and past chairman of the Nation Interfraternity Conference.
Kenneth Burton, assistant professor of religion and minister of Shove Memorial Chapel.
Dedication ceremonies will conclude with the presentation of the buildings to the three fraternity chapters.
An opportunity to inspect the three houses will be provided before the homecoming lunch at 12 noon in Rastall Center.
The new fraternity complex is located on a three acre plot just north of Palmer Hall.
LandThe basement contains a recreation room, a chapter lounge, a laundry room and a trunk room.
In addition to the housemother and a maid, each fraternity house has a fulltime professional cook who prepares and serves lunch and dinner.
Colorado College is one of the few colleges in the nation conducting a fraternity feeding program.
The fraternities will hold open houses and individual dedication programs at 5m.
This year Pershing Rifles will again sponsor the fabulous Falconaires of the Air Force Academy.
Such great names as Harry James, Les Brown, Frankie Karl, Gerry Mulligan, Hal Mclntire, Bob Crosby and Russ Morgan are represented by the seventeen players.
This band is known from coaBt to coast and have appeared on the Bob Hope ""Buick Spectacular"" as well as Radio Monitor.
Ck.rn.lo Springs, Colucudo 'Beware the Terrible Simplifiers' Today we face complex and critical challenges, and the consequences of our response to those challenges present some terrifying possibilities.
The way in which we answer the questions of armament, the manner in which we interpret the needs and desires of the masses in underdeveloped areas of the world, and the institutions we construct to keep pace with our technology will determine whether civilization itself lives or dies.
It is against this backdrop that the ""terrible simplifiers"" are at their best.
Our insecurity and frustration, our fear, resulting from our inability to resolve the pressing problems which face us, provide a fertile ground for the seeds of radical panaceas.
Those who would propose radical solutions to our problems generally simplify matters in two ways.
First they lay the blame for those problems at the feet of some collective demon or another.
Return to the principles and methods of the past century and strike down anyone who advocates or supports change therefrom.
The former, in addition to ignoring the complexity of modern life, forget to tell us who's to take care of the government, of the solution of those complex problems.
The latter, also ignoring those complexities, fail to explain how removing the changes of a fast-moving century will eliminate the problems which caused the changes.
The radicals on either hand, moreover, advocate schemes which would stifle individual endeavor and excellence under a strict pall of conformity.
The examples of the application of these points of view show that they have yet more in common.
Both for instance, are based on fear and suspicion; both use secret police tactics to a great extent.
The frightening thing is that radicalism is no longer an academic question for us.
A radical revolution of the left now controls our neighbor, Cuba, and evidence of a growing radical right can be found in many parts of our own country.
This is not to say that conservatives or liberals, in the vague, general meaning we give these terms, are selling America down the river to totalitarianism.
But the reasonable conservative and liberal positions which hold basic the longstanding broad concepts of Our Constitution and which recognize the complexity of the problems we face will very likely become harder to maintain.
As fear and frustration mount, the simple, black-and-white pronouncements of the radicals will have wider appeal.
The greatest service we Americans can do the international Communist conspiracy is to cast aside our principles in fear and suspicion, and to turn to radical factionalism of the kind which viciously attacks not only those principles but also those whom we have chosen to maintain them.
Freedom is most in danger from those on the far left and on the far right who cry loudly that their radical schemes will preserve it.
Center Activities The Photography Workshop will be held Thursday, November 9, in Rastall's Crafts shop at 7:30m.
Following the demonstration, all those present will be qualified to use the lab at any time.
Rastall keeps an inexpensive camera at the desk available for check out at any time.
There will be a scoreboard on the Rastall Center Desk giving upto-the-minute scores of all CC away games.
The scoreboard is to inform the college community as promptly as possible of all CC athleticevents.
On exhibit now in the Rastall Center lounge are works by Colorado College art instructors and students.
Mr Arnest, Mr Wynn and Mr Snyder are showing a painting each; in additioil there are prints from the graphics classes.
There was no coffee hour this week due to Homecoming activities and mid-term tests.
Anyone inteersted in working on coffee hours contact Diane Johnston or Nancy Delhin, co-chairmen of the Coffee Hour Committee.
They are Kathy Bertrong, Nancy Bowers, Rachel Jensen, Sue Louthan, Jennie Moore, Nancy Newman, Marsha Nye, Mary Nelle Webb, Melinda Wells, and Carol Wright.
Its members are selected on the basis of good citizenship, enthusiasm, and support of the althletic teams.
Ts he to tum his back upon it, or is he to b*. come completely immersed in jp It is hoped that the Bible's du a i attitude will be resolved and the dangers and opportunities inherent in the Biblical concept will be made relevant to our day and ag e This week only the Chapel Serv ice will begin at 10:45m.
The service will be followed bv the dedication of the Memorial Lounge in Rastall Center at lj Program Notes KRCC-FM will be on hand to bring you on-the-spot interview and news for the gala Homecom. ing weekend ahead.
The interview with the Homecoming Queen candidates will take place this afternoon at 4 :30.
Further exciting moments of Homecoming will be covered by KRCC-FM on Saturday.
In short, a happy Homecoming to all from the staff and studios of KRCCFM, your campus radio.
Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least three weeks before the electa) Section The ASCC Election Committee shall check the eligibility of each nominee.
No change The person elected as tain a grade point a^ at semester during hi shall be removed frc President must mainerage of at least 2. ; term of office or he office.
Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least two weeks before the election.
Any person who was a candidate for President of ASCC and was defeated in the Presidential election shall be declared a candidate for Vice President, Secretary, or Treasurer at his request without submitting another nomination petition.
The defeated Vice President, Secretary, or Tareasurer candidates shall be allowed to run for commissioner in their respective classes after presenting an additional petition containing names of thirty students from the nominee's class.
Nomination petitions shall be presented to the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee at least five days before the election.
Those declared eligible shall be announced in the Tiger at least one week preceding the election.
No change The persons elected to each of the positions must maintain a grade point average of at least 2. at semester during his term of office or his position shall be declared vacantThis shall be the responsibility of the ASCC Election Committee.
No change Section III Class Representatives Nominations for representatives of the sophomore, junior, and senior classes of the following year shall be made by petition containing names of thirty students of the nominees' classes.
No change Nominations for representatives of '"" e freshman class shall be made from the flo» r at a freshman class meeting conducted W the ASCC Election Committee.
All candidates for freshing class representative must give speeches at Freshman Class meeting held prior to W election.
Colorado College Tiger • November 3, 1961 Ho mecoming Gome tigers Face Indians |n Decisive Contest Rocky Mountain Conference powers Colorado College and idams State College come to grips tomorrow at Washburn Field in CC's homecoming encounter that probably will decide ,1^5 year's conference champions.
Game time is scheduled for 1:30m. in what should be one of the best football battles j n the region this week.
Both the Tigers and the Indians are undefeated in conference play and are currently Kgtiloeked in first place with idenlical 2-0 records.
Adams scored a 29-0 victory over Western and disposed „f C-State 7-0 last week in the gear's homecoming game at Greeley.
Defending champion Adams State wasp re-season favorite to take the crown again this year in j walk-away.
The Tigers were ■riven only a slight outside chance ([ capturing the conference title.
But their worth wtih impresive wins over C-State and Westerns and the experts now feel that tomorrow's game could go either way.
The Tiger's offensive punch will again lie in the running and passing of Ed Kintz, the running of ffaye Deutscher, Terry Holleran, pete Pleasant and Vince Greco and the all-around offensive .brilliance of slotback Dan Wright.
Tomorrow will be a tine test of the Toger's stout defense as they attempt to quell the offensive minded Indians.
The Tiger's have j-ielded an average of only 9. points per game in their six outings.
Coach Jerry Carle is concerned, however, about the present strength of the CC forward wall.
Two of the mainstays in the Tiger defense are injured and will probably be used sparingly tomorrow.
Dianovsky suffered a severe sprain of his left ankle against Western last week, and Melton is still slowed by an aggravating charley horse suffered in play against C-State.
That leaves big Sylvester Carroway and not so big Dan Kaltenbaugh and Bill Geary to hold Adams' huge array of tackles in check.
They run from a lonesome end T-formation and occasionally switch to a double wing.
Also featured in the backfield will be strong running 220'o. halfback Ed Hodnick and speedy Walt Weaver.
Nearly the whole town of Alamosa is expected to be on hand to Aeer their Indians on to a posible conference championship.
At last year's homecoming Same, the Tigers rolled over Western State in a howling bliz*M on Washburn Field.
More l ""an 3,000 fans turned out for the clash which commenced under a *arm sun.
The third contender for the Rocky Mountain championship is Colorado Mines, which rested this pa st weekend.
W\ November 3, 1961 ' Colorado College Tiger Adams State has a 5-2 record for the season, compared to Colorado College's 4-1 and a tie.
They take on Colorado Mines November 11 and meet Nebraska Wesleyan November 18.
Tiger Cagers Schedule Set Head Coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack recently announced the Tigers' 1961-62 basketball schedule.
Eastlack said the Tigers, last year's Rocky Mountain Conference winners, will enter 23 contests, 10 of which will be home games.
Socratic Seven Lose In Intramural Finals Intramural Director Jim Hanks reports that the Slocum Hall touch football league finished this past week with a series of tough and tumble championship games.
In first place was the 1st South Wing, knocking the ""always tough"" Socratic Seven out of their championship perch of last year.
Lee Hunt is the Intramural Manager for 1st South and seemed very proud of his men.
The second place berth went to 3rd West; spirited on by Terry Jones who was injured in the final game.
William Hochman seemed to think with effective recruiting this summer they would be back to get the first place slot next year.
Finishing 4th in the tournament play was 1st North led by manager Butch Weymouth.
Trophies will be awarded at Slocum's first Fireside Program of the year on November 9th.
The touch football league kicked off the Slocum Intramural program which is showing tremendous growth and participation over last year.
Intramural managers are already laying groundwork for the other approaching sports . . . swimming, basketball, volleyball and even two field days including showshoe races and tugs of war.
In Memoriam CHARLES LEMMING TUTT The Tigers, picked as pre-game underdogs, made Denver newspaper predictors squirm in embarrassment when they raced for four second half touchdowns to completely outclass the favored Mountaineers.
The Tigers, operating in an Iformation from which they shifted into their slot-T, failed'to generate much of an offensive punch in the first half.
They were unable to pick up a first down until midway through the second quarter.
CC spotted Western a 7-0 lead when quarterback John Hancock scored from the one early in the second quarter.
The Mountaineer drive started after Bill Farnsworth returned a CC punt to the Tiger 37.
The Tigers did manage to muster one scoring drive in the closing moments of the second period, climaxed by a five yard scoring pass from Eddie Kintz to Dan Wright.
The attempted kick for the extra point fell short and the Tigers left the field at the half trailing 7-6.
The Tigers abandoned their I-formation, designed to throw off defensive adjustments, overcame the cold and blistering wind and stormed downfield to score after the i-eceiving the second half kickoff.
The drive was sparked by the determined running of Wayne Deutscher and the aerial combination of Kintz to Wright.
The pair clicked for three long receptions and Terry Holleran finally cracked in to score from five yards out.
Wright made a circus catch of another Kintz pass for the two point conversion and the Tigers took a 14-7 lead.
The rugged Tiger defense, fast coming to be respected as one of the best in the region, stifled the Mountaineers the rest of the afternoonw hile the Tigers soared on to score thre more touchdowns in the final quarter.
On the first play of the fourth quarter Wright took a reverse pitch from Kintz and scooted eleven yards to score.
With five minutes left in the game, halfback Gary Sparkman took a handoff from Kintz on the Western State seven and crashed his way to paydirt carrying a couple of Mountaineers with him.
Pete Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers held a comfortable 27-7 lead.
The desperate Mountaineers then went to the air in an attempt to strike back, but Holleran intercepted an enemy aerial on the Mountaineer 20 and twisted his way to the end zone for the final CC tally.
Again Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers led, 34-7 with 20 seconds remaining to be played.
There was a number of outstanding individual efforts, but once again it was the overall team performance that contributed to the victory.
He has a severely sprained left ankle and may miss tomorrow's homecoming encounter with Adams State.
Artcarved diamond rings must meet traditionally high standards (or color, cut, clarity and carat weight.
Every Artcarved ring carries a written guarunlee for quality und permanent value that's recognized and respected by fine jewelers from coast to coast.
Stop in at your jeweler and be sure to .see all the exquisite Artcarved diamond ringsthe rings you buy with confidence and wear with pride.
Rashomon Recapped Opera Group Presents La Boheme' Ten leadingsingers in the first production of the Colorado Springs Opera Association for the 1961-62 season will travel a total of 1,000 miles to participate in the three performances of La Boheme, scheduled at the Fine Arts Center November 2, 3, and 4 under the direction of Dr.
Two singers from Denver ; CC Builds for Future By Haii JafTe Rashomon by Ryunosuke Akutogawa as adapted by Fay and Michael Kanin was produced for three nights at Perkins Hall last week.
Despite the few usual technical lapses found in all college productions, this was a very effective performance.
All the leads did commendable jobs, but James Fox and Carl Chard were particularly excellent.
Terry Kidner in a smaller part made her short stay on the stage one of highlights of the play.
In all respects, from the movable sets made by Mr David Hale Hand to the costumes and makeup by Mrs.
However, the audience attendance was not commensurate with the effort put into this play.
He is the owner of Mario's of Aspen, Denver's unique restaurant featuring the Mario Singers.
HOMECOMING SPECIAL TRY J's FRESH PIZZA Sausage, Mushroom, Pepperoni or Anchovy LARGE 12"" PIZZA 12"" CHEESE PIZZA Reg.
You'll come out on top because they tit so well and keep their good looks.
LUE OR WHITE *3 95 3 for li.OO Also new striped Oxfords, with button-down collar 4.50 Custom Tailors — Men's Furnishings French Shriner Shoes Cor\Hw>r< The role of Mimi will be sung by Mrs.
Berge has been a soloist with the Colorado Springs Chorale in addition to extensive musical experience before moving to Colorado Springs two years ago.
She has sung in the operas Madame Butterfly, Rigaletto, and The Gondoliers.
FBI Special Agent Edward J Rodgers Jr., will sing the role of Colline, a philosopher.
Semon took second place in the Cook County division of the Chicago Music Festival, sang in the regular chorus of the Chicago Lyric Opera, and in April, 1956, was Susanna in Marriage of Figaro directed by Sir Thomas Beecham.
Johnson is an employee of Colorado Interstate Gas Company and sings in the First Presbyterian Church choir and in the Colorado Springs Chorale.
Donald Jenkins, instructor of music at The Colorado College, will sing the role of Schaunard, a musician.
David Porter, a music teacher at Cheyenne Mountain School, will be Parpignol, a toy vendor in La Boheme.
Two often-seen performers are Charles M Johnson and Stuart Creighton, Johnson, a graduate of Colorado College, is a music teacher at Widefield High School.
In addition to his interest in music, Johnson has played featured roles in several Civic Player Productions.
Johnson is cast as Benoit, a landlord, and Creighton will play a customs guard.
Erling Foss is chairman of the selectionc ommittee for the 1961-62 operas.
Season tickets are $G and single tickets, available one week before each performance are $2.50.
La Boheme will be sung in English as will the productions to be given in February and April.
Members of Reserve Officers [raining Corps and reserve com■orients of the armed forces, including the National Guard, are quired to register.
Only persons I a ctive duty in the armed forces at not required to register; but , ey must register within 30 days liowing separation from services born after August 30, 1922, and lt previously registered.
Shortly after registration each mg man will be mailed a regisiition certificate that he is retired to have in his personal posssion at all times.
If the cerPjcate is lost or destroyed, a dup■ate may be obtained from his cat board.
Department of Justice and m ay result in induction before the irmal time.
The local board is located at the Colorado Springs Post Office, [jcond floor, and office hours are 8:30m. to 5:00m., Monthrough Fridays.
Debaters Receive Air Force Invitation Colorado College is one of thiry-two colleges and universities iwited to participate in the Nalional Invitational Debate Toumanent to be held at the United Slates Air Force Academy Decemm 8th and 9th, 1961.
Although only in its third year Ike USAFA tournament is already recognized as the leading national debate tournament held king the first semester.
Colleges and universities are selected on the basis of their overall records for the previous year.
More than half of the freshmen class at CC this fall have a higher scholastic ability than 90 per cent of the average college and university freshmen throughout the United States.
Dwane Collins, associate professor of education and director of the college's Counseling Center Services.
Collins based his report on the results of the School and College Ability Tests given on the campus last Sept. to entering freshmen.
The Colorado College freshmen scores were then compared to the results of a normal national sampling of entei'ing freshmen at 99 leading colleges and universities across the nation.
Collins said the scholastic ability of the Colorado College student body, when compared to the national sample, is nearly twice as high as it was six years ago.
He attributed this to an admispolicy designed to select colstudents who can profit most from a high level liberal arts and science education.
In comparing the results of freshmen at the liberal arts college here to the national sampling, Dr.
Collins found that 98. percent scored better on the ability tests than the top 50 per cent of the national average.
A review of reports issued over the past years shows that the scholastic ability of students at The Colorado College is improving measurably each year.
For example, only 54. per cent of the entering freshmen in 1954 scored higher on the School and College Ability Tests than the top half of the normal sampling, compared to the current 98.4.
The percentage increased from 54. in 1954 to 05. in 1955 and to 83. in 1956.
It should be obvious to regular readers of this column that this week's title is merely a ploy aimed at attracting the multitude who, week after week, skip over these writings.
She hadn't done this for five days and had decided to get it over with this morning.
Laura Kastor had finished her task and started to prepare for an early lunch at the Hub.
Laura Kastor overheard the lady tell Alan Peterson that there were no pickles.
PROJECTS OF THE BELL SYSTEM range from the reaches of space to the depths of the sea Our job is providing communications of all kinds, wherever needed — whether in the northern snows to flash word of possible enemy missile attack, or in your home or college, or in serving the nation's business.
When we can't fill a need off the shelf, then we start fresh and create the answer to the problem.
Then we developed the world's first undersea telephone cables to speed calls between continent's.
And we have started development of an important world-wide communications system employing satellites.
When industry and government needed a way of gathering huge amounts of coded information from distant points, we were ready with our vast telephone network and Data-Phone, which can transmit mountains of data at extremely high speeds.
And so it goes-Long Distance service, Direct Distance Dialing, the Transistor, the Solar Battery-a succession of firsts which goes back to the invention of the telephone itself.
Universal communications-the finest, most dependable anywhere-are what we deliver.
BELL TELEPHONE SYSTEM, Colorado College Tiger Student Relates Problems of Uncommitted Nations By Rusty Bastedo One half of the world's population is caught in the maelstrom of the Twentieth Century, a new force which is destroyingcivilizations and societies which have been stable for hundreds of years.
Politically these transitional societies are called the ""neutral,"" or ""uncommitted"" countries.
What these countries believe, why they believe it, and how we can take into account these beliefs in formulating foreign policies are major problems for the United States today.
All of these countries are proud of their new independence and after centuries of colonialism they would like to be left alone to work out their own individual forms of government, depending on neither the East nor the West.
Att he same time, however, they need huge amounts of money in order to grapple with the problems of transtition; and no money comes wtihout qualifications attached.
The problems of transition facing the newly independent countries have no historical precedents.
The answer is that there is no way to evaluate what will happen as the result of an action taken today, and this makes the new nations extremely wary of long-range policies; the idea is to remain flexible, cross the bridges when they come, do not get committed in advance, for the present problem will change.
Yet because both the East and the West are fighting for their friendship, the power of the neutrals is magnified and their decisions take on an importance which is many times greater than their status would suggest.
While the new nations would like to pursue a policy of ""flexibility,"" the major powers of the world want concrete decisions and commitments; or, at least the United States and its allies do.
The Soviet block hopes for the same, but it goes about achieving the results more carefully.
In order, then, to fight a winning ideological battle with the East, the West must understand the code of operations it fights against.
The Soviet block understands and sympathizes with the neutrals' wish for flexibility and is content to give huge sums of money to nations it deems important for three-to-five yeai*s, so that these countries may accomplish their primary objectives.
In excange, the Soviets hope to tie these new countries to them economically.
The new nations are aware of this underlying motive, and they hope that when the Soviet payments slow down that they will be able to break away and find another benefactor.
The importance of General Nasser to the countries of Asia and Africa cannot be denied; his prestige as a ""neutrals' neutral"" is enormous.
At any rate, he is the only one who has succeeded in taking from both sides without being recolonized.
Call ME 3-0076 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop E Bitou St.
As a catalyst for the Soviet pattern of spending, there is the incentive of the European Common Market.
If the Market becomes a reality, discriminatory tariffs against non-members will be five or six times those charged to members.
All former colonies still send their crops to the old colonial paver to be processed, in exchange for European goods.
Nigerian cocoa beans go to England to be processed and return in tins along with cloth for Nigerian dress, Nigerian hats, shoes and other goods.
The new nations do not have factories to process their own crops; they must spend their money on schools, hospitals and a higher living standard.
In Africa the Japanese, Israelis and now the Canadians, are filling the vacuum, attracted by the mineral wealth which is being discovered in these new countries.
But Japan, Israel, and Canada cannot fill the gap alone, and so the Soviet bloc hopes to establish economic dependency, simply through lack of competition.
American business can go into high gear for the next fifty years or more if it realizes the possibilities; and the payments will come back in mineral form, minerals which are indispensable to us and many of which we are running out of.
For the rest of us, we hope to see strong new nations, taking their rightful place in the world, able to participate equally, perhaps equalizing the power struggle with a strong neutrality which could discriminate economically against violators of its wishes.
And finally, we must realizet hat this is going to happen, with us or without us.
We have no choice but to support the present governments, though they be good or bad by our standards, because they are going to change as more and more of their people become educated andd issatisfied.
There will be upheavals, most of them peaceful, we hope, a great .many within the next ten years, all of them in the next five after that.
In most of the underdeveloped countries small political business cliques control the country.
With more and more schools and universities being built and more and more wealth coming in, this restriction of wealth will have to disappear, as surely as it has whenever and wherever these things happened.
Debators Score High at Tourney The Colorado College Debate Team combined experienced debaters with talented freshmen to finish high in the standings at the Colorado Woman's College Invitational Debate Tournament held in Denver October 27th and 28th.
Eleven colleges and universities from the Colorado and Wyoming area participated in the meet in which two CC teams narrowly missed taking honors.
Charles Puckett teamed with freshman Jo Heller in the senior division and lost but a single round of debate as did Harris Sherman and Linda Pierce in the junior division.
Only one of the seven teams entered from Colorado College had a losing record, and this was a junior team moved to the senior division in order to gain experience.
In the individual events freshman Sue Caudill placed 1st and 2nd in her two rounds of extemporaneous speaking, and Jo Heller took third in tow rounds of original oratory.
Max Power, Robert Williams and Pete Trushel also participated in the individual events.
In adition to Heller and Puckett in the senior division of debate, Chris Griffiths, Max Power, Robert Thrasher, and David Bitters were entered.
Sue Caudill, David Furgason, David Helms, Marc Streule, Faith O'Reilly, and Susan Heidel also participated in the junior division.
Professors James A Johnson, Robin M Rudoff, and Louis J Pistone accompanied the team as coaches.
The sitar artist is making \ \t wo first full-length tour of the Unj ed States.
The musical director of All IiHr e f r dia Radio, he has composed il background music for a numbi . 'j of internationally famous India ■ motion pictures.
The sitar is a gourd and teal wood instrument with 19 strinj and 20 frets.
He says that almost no form compositions for the sita Sitar concerts are somewhat lil jazz concerts in that the perfom er improvises on traditional thei somuch that the composition i most never comes out th way twice.
Delta Epsilon to Hea Arizona Astronomer ■mlri, brin; cm t I'M be a meeting of WJ..,,„ Epsilon in the WES lounge, """" tall Center, at 4:00m., No«Jhb w ber 7.
Colorado College Tiger • November 3, 1961 I 1 Fur jn's tlorad fash (tail ■:r 'e lool IGoc tebl] nd thi had 1 IS IGER tation Cla ® i on® Kauff Colorado Springs and ioracio College are sponsoring lie's Campus MerchanThis plan is already in feet on many campuses throughil (he country.
The purpose of i,, CMP is to give girls who are Oersted in fashion careers an Spovtunity for experience in this of work.
Nancy £ Sue Graham, Diane Johnston, Nan Burroughs, Ann Holmes, and ■jriingion.
Vivian Arviso, Betsy James, Ellen Price. i Mcllvaine, Nan Augenstein, and Nancy Keens. ashion Panel Selected in Mademoiselle Plan promotional ideas for both the benefit of the store and the college.
Helping her is the College Board, consisting of representatives from the dorms, sororities and IWA, who were selected on the basis of their interest.
Throughout the year this group will be sponsoring fashion shows, good grooming sessions, makeup demonstrations and other pertinent programs.
The first fashion show, ""Budget Boutique,"" will he at Kaufman's on Friday, November 17 at 4:00m.
Peter John Trushel ierman Club Gives rizes for Slides The German Club will hold its coml meeting of the year on lursday, November 9, in the ES room at 7:30.
These will be Jown at the meeting and prizes pen for the best pictures.
KER DEADLINES For non-staff contributions: 12 noon on Monday prfceedniB puliation.
MB i£ LAST WORD IN FASHION H Novembe 3, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger American Friends' Presentation Today Two weeks ago in the Tuesday assembly, Dr.
Hochman, in his Peace Corps speech, mentioned the value of work camp experience such as that offered in the American Friends Service Committee.
Today Mr Warren Witte, program assistant for the North Central Regional Office of the AFSC, is on campus.
He will show slides and discuss summer service projects, peace projects, and civil liberties.
In addition to its imaginative and skillful photography and interesting background rhythms and .music, the film carries a very real message for those concerned about peace and war and the attitudes and feelings which express themselves on the faces of the American people.
The Society of Friends, in conjunction with the Religious Affairs Committee, invites and encourages any interested students to attend the showing of this film today at 4:30 int he Shove Chapel lecture Alums Schedule Admission Panel A group of Colorado College faculty and administrators will join a number of alumni in taking a thoughtful look at the college's admission picture at a special Admission Workshop on the campus Friday afternoon November 3, as a prelude to Homecoming Weekend activities which get under way later in the evening.
The workshop will open with a luncheon at which college administrators will discuss the kinds of students attending the college, the kinds of students desired, and future admision problems.
Brossman, Dean Lloyd Worner, Admission Director Richard E Wood, and Professor Wilbur H Wright of the physics department.
Immediately after the luncheon, the workshoppers will meet in four separate sessions during the afternoon, to be followed by a guided tour of the campus and a dinner.
To be considered in the work sessions will be such topics as how the admission procedure operates at the college, financial aid to stu• Handy Hints & Kinks Within two hours the college was alive with the news.
In order to check on the situation, the administration sent Professor Paul Stratton to the Hub.
Paul Stratton didn't want this assignment, but the choice wasn't his, and he planned to do the job.
As Paul Stratton walked toward the Hub, he knew what had to be done, and he steled himself for the task.
As he returned to make his report, Paul Stratton knew, for the first time in his life, what it meant to be alone.
He had just completed writing the order that would close school for the day, As he sat, quietly weeping, his wife entered the room carrying his cup of hot cocoa.
CC Variety Show Tickets Available Tickets for the 14th annual Colorado College Variety Show— a benefit for the Community Chest Drive and United Fund Campaign — are on sale at Rastall desk now for 75 cents.
The show, to be held November 14, 15, 16, and 17 in Perkins Hall at 8 :15, features Colorado College student talent.
Try to get your tickets for a night other than Friday because of the limited number of seats.
Sherbet ME 5-2740 dents, new prospects, and case studies of applicants.
For the latter, those attending the workshop will be provided with copies of a manual containing actual admission cases that have come before the admission committee during the past few years.
Alumni will study each case and vote as though they were members of the real admission committee.
Actual decisions rendered by the committee will be announced together with a follow-up on the applicant, following each vote.
William L Pfeiffer, Arthur C Sharp, W Marshall Cross, George H Keener, Mrs.
Edward B Liddle, and Terrance M Golden of Colorado Springs; Mr and Mrs.
Henry Williams and Miss Anna Maud Garnett of Pueblo; Frank E, Muynes of Dunvngo; Mr and Mrs.
A returning Harvard alumnus stopped in Cambridge long enough to visit with a favorite professor at his alma mater — the only Republican professor, he believes, in the Harvard government department.
Naturally, he asked the professor what he thought about the depletion of the staff by the Kennedy administration.
It's easy . . . just clip the coupon below or get an entry blank where yon buy cigarettes and fill in your predictions of the len game scores.
I (Attach Viceroy package or facsimile here) kfllP , V ceroy College Football CONTEST NO 4 He re are my predictions Tor next Saturd ty's games.
G New Mexico □ Colorado Q Nebraska I G Air Force G Bay.or I G Colorado Coll.
El Pomar Foundation, L -h owns the world-famous lilist. letreat Slated In Bonhoeffer Land-Grant Group ient in United States history, Professor Geiger is the author of three books and numerous articles.
Colorado Springs, Colorado, November 10, 1961 Colorado College Charter Trustee from 1934 to 1950.
During this period a continuing series of philanthropic moves by the El Pomar Foundation brought hope to the College during some of its most difficult times. joadmoor Hotel, has through the His keen insight into business ade numerous grants to trends was of significant help to College and provided the Endowment Fund.
Warships to countless students Befllmg the independent liberal ^ Tut1 > C0]ltinU(Jtl actWe rtsand sciences college. interest jn ^ wdfar& Qf ^ Cq1 _ Xffo years ago, Mr and Mrs. lege.
Annual grants for faculty u tt gave their family home on salaries continued; the number and orth Cascade Avenue to the colextent of El Pomar Scholarships ge. increased.
The hockey program The text of the resolution passed matured and the head of the t the college's Board of Trustees Broadmoor was loyally present s followseacn IU £ ht at tne games.
It was the faith of the El Pomar Foundation which decided the College Trustees to build an entire new heating plant without funds in sight; the Foundation's The Religious Affairs Commitcornerstone gift launched a sucS of the college is sponsoring a cessful drive to make the heating iscussion retreat over the last plant possible.
In similar vein, the eekend of the month of Novembuilding campaign of 1960 was set a at La Foret Camp in Black in full momentum by the great itest.
This retreat has been argift of the Charles Learning Tutt mged by Professor Kenneth BurLibrary.
Louis G Gei profesS or Bi in letters and papers which and chail . man of the historv de . iggled out of h ls concenpartment at Colorado College, will amp.
An authority on tin-progressive fs discussion will continue after ppper closing the, evening with Creation or informal discussion ^ chats together.
He is the :|l ° are interested are asked to organizer and president of the ^ntact Mr Burton and he will North Dakota Social Science Assoish further details. ciation.
Sylvia Stenavec and Jane Thomas in Their Variety Show Act Panel Discussion Slated For Nov.
Education versus Job Training and/or Cultural Veneer"" will be the topic of a short panel discussion and questions from the audience next Tuesday, November 14, at eleven o'clock in Perkins Hall.
Stephen Kovacs, internationallyknown Hungarian pianist, will give a solo piano recital at 4m.
The recital, sponsored by the music department, will be the second event in the Strong Memorial Concert Series, which was inaugurated last year with the violinpiano recital hy Sidney Harth and Max Lanner.
Dress rehearsals will be held Sunday and Monday for the Colorado College's colorful Variety Show which opens Tuesday evening at 8:15 for a four day run in Perkins Hall.
Proceeds from the two-act show will go to the United Fund Campaign and the Community Chest Drive.
Co-directors are Carol Fisher of Pasadena, Calif., and Jane Pierce of Tucson, Ariz., with Woodson Tyree, associate professor of speech, as faculty advisor.
The show opens with a scene from Birgadoon by Norman Cornick's Dance Theater group.
It features Jim and Jeannie Bramweli, Holly Menkle, Bill Brooks, Jenny Moore, Ann Williamsen, Peter Webster, Margaret Speer, Hadley Taylor, James Francis, Carrie Sanborn, Seece Boyce, Pierre Adam, Esther Geoffrey, Patricia Adams, Susan Huges and Cornick.
Cornick will present three other numbers, including ""A Time to Embrace"" with Cynthia Lamb, ""Pas de Deux"" from ""Cakewalk,"" and a number called ""Jazz,"" with Fifi Maroney, Steve Kersey, Jane Thomas, Sylvia Stenovec, Mary Emmanuel and several from the opening number.
Other numbers in the show will include ""Hi Fi,"" in which Wally Schultz chats with himself on a tape recorder; folk songs by Mary Lee Turtle and Ray Chatfield; a Japanese dance by Kasoko Kosugi; a hula by Judy Hooker, Barbara Bunnell and Lee Boynton; a skit called ""Father Dear Father,"" featuring Betsy James and Boots Stockton; guitar music by Louis Arrieta; songs by the CC Folk Singers; and barbershop numbers by the Hi Chords and the Majors and the Minors.
Also featured will be the Brigham 4 Combo and the Gibson 4 Combo, a monologue by Ethel Six Geary, an AbioAfrican Congo Chant, a Philippine dance called ""Tinickling,"" folk songs by the Weekenders, piano performances by Barbara Couey and Ann Collins, songs by Vivian Arviso, and a judo demonstration by Shoji Hoshira, Susie Holmes, Jay Lewis, Dan Martin, Frank Rouse, and Bill Lang.
In charge of sound effects are Wallace Schultz, Jay Vickerman, Jim Bolick, and Dick Dougdale.
Lighting will be under the direction of Norman Larson, Drane Wilkinson and Joan Carter.
Colorado 'Dull Meetings and Useless Tradition' At Monday's ASCC meeting, Freshman Commissioner Sue Caudill said that she had heard some complaints that such meetings are dull and that ASCC does nothing but fill the traditional requirement that there be a student government.
Perhaps, then, it would be wise for us to explore the current operations of ASCC more closely.
President Griffiths has expressed his goals frequently, both before and after his election.
First, the mechanical functions of ASCC should be executed competently and efficiently, and the organization itself should be modified so that future ASCC members may continue such execution without confusion.
Secondly, ASCC should deal with substantive issues concerning the student's position on CC's campus.
If it is, then ASCC can push, on a sound basis, for meaningful, progressive policy changes.
First of all, President Griffiths, taking a lead from far more important deliberative bodies, realizes that committees can most effectively handle the details, and deliberations about details, of student government.
The result is that the ASCC's Monday meetings are able to deal with fifteen or more areas of student government swiftly and finally.
If these meetings seem dull, then that is the price of effective student government — or the price of ignorance of what is involved in the business conducted.
The progress of ASCC toward the goals mentioned above has been encouraging, but much, certainly remains to be done.
The Constitution Committee, under the hard-working leadership of Commissioner Bill Greeley, has already produced needed amendments to the constitution, and more are forthcoming.
The Judicial Committee, ably chaired by Bob Kendall, is currently conducting an exhaustive study into the workings and the scope of our student judicial bodies.
The finance committee, chaired by Treasurer Bill Stafford, has studied money requests thoroughly and proposed the budget which appears in the TIGER today.
Many other examples could be mentioned here, but it is our hope that they will, by their actions, speak through the news columns of this paper in the coming weeks.
We do not hold that the measure of student government is the length or heatedness of its meetings, the intensity of the publicized controversy among its members or the number of headlines it or its members get for attacks on the school administration.
We look rather for its sound and enduring accomplishments, for its hard and honest effort and for the quality of its work.
On these grounds, ASCC currently compares very favorably with other student governments with which we are familiar.
If our student government can continue to set forth accomplishments of quality and lasting value, generally obtainable through plain hard work, we shall be content that ASCC has a great deal more meaning than simply the manifestations of a useless tradition.
We recommend to ASCC's critics that they attend its meetings and the meetings of its committees, that they set forth their own ideas and that they base their criticism on knowledgeable foundations, pointing out where the council has failed to meet its purposes or has wrongly interpreted the issues at hand.
Criticism of this kind cannot help but make student government more than a bothersome custom. llllllllIllllllliflDllllillllllllllllllllllli When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
This sermon is based upon the incident at Bethany where Mary, the sister of Martha and Lazarus, awaited Jesus with some very costly ointment.
It is hoped to show that it is worthwhile to commit oneself to something finer and greater than ourselves and utlimately and supremely to God Himself.
Three years ago when the last inventory was made, 44,800 books were missing.
These books are the ones most frequently used and many are out of print.
Some of them were periodicals which can only be replaced by photostatic processes.
Last year when the freshmen English classes were assigned term papers about one half of the books on Shakespeare were taken.
Ellsworth Mason head of Coburn Library, stated that since the end of World War II most college libraries have experienced a sharp increase in book loss.
He also said that since then the American attitude towards honesty has changed for the worse.
He has already contacted several dorms and Greek organizations . might be hurt, for in the past we have seen so little protyjj displayed that there is little danger of this.
Our reason desiring that informal war cease is that this war in the p^ has done little to cement relations between CC and Mines, fact, our relations have become so shaky that there is a gofj chance, if another riot should occur this year, that all con petition between CC and Mines will be discontinued under |J by-laws of the Rocky Mountain Conference.
It would seem foolish if we were to allow a few gl 0] seekers to deprive us of good competition.
We therefore as that everything possible be done to discourage activity thi reflects badly on the school and on the competition behvee mot CC and Mines.
Fellows if you must fight, do so behind the stands whet you can be effective without police interference.
No on stands a very good chance of getting hurt — the safety numbers will protect them all.
For whatever else they may be worth, policy recommendations serve to clarify the thinking of those who participate in their formulation.
The Soviet Union is possessed of the same religious fervor that motivated the Crusaders in their quest to enlighten the world.
She cannot be expected to approve a settlement that might yield comparable results.
That the West is able t il* maintain a bastion in a sea of ft eign imperialism manifests its cm tinued strength and determinate to resist further Russian e croachment.
II [AST PIKES PEAK MBlrOM 4-S501 Oil Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
Wilson's great personal warmth Da.i rid magnetism were immediately Client as he established an unus■apport with the students IJjch lie had apparently not ex; ° D erienced at other colleges.
Perhaps Wilson's most outstandg and endearing characteristic ras his immense willingness to ;ive of himself and his time.
He delivered his scheduled and seminars, but lecured several classes as well.
The .offing of the coat and seizure of ater glass became a prelude nulating discussion and careconsidered answers to almost iny question.
The faculty's reaction to the nlocaust seemed in general to be me of poorly concealed hostility.
To both points seem irrelevant, iresenting his case for ""optimistic existentialism"" and the unrealized potential of mankind, Wilson tapped a new vein of thought in many students.
Whethis rich in gold or not seems mportant than that it might awaken other previously dormant concepts and ideas.
Wilson must fe commended both for what he *aid and what he did — the impact f an exciting, forceful personalty which imprints its surround'""gs in such a way that the image quite return to jts former state.
Irish Writer Lectures December 7th Sean O'Faolain, one of Ireland's ""■est distinguished writers, will « a public lecture at The Colod| J College on December 7.
The majority of the students who attended his lectures felt that while his lecture on ""Contemporary British Authors"" was well presented and informative, the one on ""Existentialism and the Modern Predicament"" Authors,"" and considered the eveHere was vague, disorganized and very difficult to understand.
As to what, if anything he was trying to put across, opinions are somewhat diA student, who attended the lectures and the seminars, stated that he was reasonably impressed.
Wilson's thoughts were not too well organized, but at least the ideas were there.
The student added that he thought Wilson's conduct was deplorable for a campus guest.
A student who talked to Wilson personally and got to know him better than most CC students, believes that he is a ""pleasant and personable man, sincere about his feelings and his topic.
Having this kind of visitor can be stimulating, provided we are not overwhelmed by names-in-print or exotic backgrounds.
Wilson threw himself into the visit, and exerted himself in every respect, Mr Reinitz added.
It would seem that the students and faculty, on the whole, were not too favorably impressed by Colin Wilson.
Center Activities Nothing could be more opportune than a Friday afternoon in the Hub enjoying a little twisting or just sitting around listening to some music.
Again this week Rastall Center will sponsor the successful and enjoyable Friday Afternoon Club.
If you missed the first F.A.C. two weeks ago, be sure that you come over to the Hub this afternoon around 4 :30 to take part in the fun.
Rastall Center announces the formation of an all college bowling team of six men.
These men will be chosen from their past records, but will be open to challenge by anyone.
The team already has plans to compete with Pueblo Junior College and has contacted several other nearby colleges in hopes of having matches with them.
Any college group that is interested in challenging this group is welcome to and should contact the Games Area desk.
This Sunday evening Rastall Center will present the outstanding Japanese film, The Golden Demon in Perkins Hall at 7:30m. to all interested.
The film is in color and stars Fujiko Yamamoto as Miya and Jun Negami as Kan-ichi in a setting around 1890 in Tokyo.
The film is based on the unusually popular Japanese novel, Konjiki Yasha and is one of the best films to come from Japan since the war.
The Rastall Center Memorial Lounge was dedicated this past Sunday with about 60 relatives of the war-dead present.
President Benezet made the presentation and Erv Hinds accepted for Rastall Center and Colorado College.
Following the dedication everyone adjourned to the dining room for lunch.
To Speak Mr Robin M Rudoff, instructor in history at CC was honored with an invitation to address the Southern Historical Association at Chattanooga, Tennessee, yesterday.
Miss Pat Weaver, America's National College Queen, revealed her feminine taste as well as her practical sense when asked about diamond rings.
She selected us her favorite tho lovely Artcarved Evening Star -one of Artcarvcd's awardwinning designs.
You sec, every Artcarved ring is guaranteed in writing for all the years to come by America's most respected ring maker.
Visit your local Artcarved Jeweler and see why Artcarved diamond rings have been the choice of millions for more than a century.
The Miners, traditionally a single-wing team, this year have abandoned their power type offense.
Coach Fritz Brenecke has has Orediggers now running from a T-formation Rock climbing, frequently fused with mountaineering, can be said to be either a sport in itself, or as is usually the case, only one of the many divisions of mountaineering.
In the latter case, it could be grouped with nearly everything pertaining to mountain recreation, including rescue, geological study, hiking, camping, high-altitude medical research, and many others.
In the interest of persons wishing to learn more of the sport, the Colorado College Mountain Club is offering an elementary rock school scheduled to run for live weeks, including lecture sessions and practice in the Garden of the Gods.
For more information please refer to the sign-up sheet at the Rastall Center Desk.
Still no word on the push ball but as soon as it arrives Slocum will hold a tournament and the CLOSED MON DAYS Blueberry Pancakes Banana Pancakes or Maple Honey) Added 1o Our Complete Breakfast Lunch & Dinners Tacos & Pizza CC campus will have its first intramural contest of pushball.
The coming winter season will be a busy one for Slocum Hall with the basketball, bowling, and volleyball season providing the entertainment for Slocum men.
Slocum Hall has adopted a new trophy which will be presented to the wing that has accumulated the greatest number of points throughout the intramural season.
This is not unlike the method already employed by the fraternities in which points are awarded to teams who win or place in a contest.
This trophy will be of the traveling type and the winning wing will have their name engraved on it.
Indians Score U In First Half Swamp Sluggish Tigers 25-8 Adams State hit for four first half touchdowns, rui^ CC's homecoming and took a major step toward their second straight Rocky Mountain Conference championship by ^ feating the Tigers, 25-8 last Saturday at Washburn Field.
Adams scored on their first series of downs when Bob Hidalgo hit speedy Walt Weaver on a touchdown pass that covered 53 On the ensuing kickoff, the Indians forced a CC fumble and recovered the loose pigskin on the Tigers' 22.
From there Adams moved in to score in a matter of minutes with Hidalgo hitting Frank Smith on a three yard scoring pass.
John Blatnick kicked the extra point and the Indians soared into an early 13-0 lead.
The Indians capitalized on another alert defensive play early in the second quarter when Ed Hodnick intercepted a CC aerial and returned it to the Tiger 13.
Each empty pacfcage on Phillip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points.
The drive covered yards and was capped by a yard pass reception from £ Kintz to Jim Wujcik.
Wuj< hauled in the pass on the Indiai. 22 yard line and raced unmolested into the end zone.
Kintz then hit Mike Minelli for the two point conversion and gave the chilli homecoming crowd of "" faint glimmer of hope.
But the Indians took the ensuing kickoff and marched methodically downfield to register their fourth touchdown on a 75 yard drive tha finally saw Hidalgo sneak in |i ^ score from a yard out.
The Tigers' aerial game was tM^c, effective as ever as they hit fa; 15 of 25 passes covering flj yards.
Last May he acted as an interpreter for the United States State Department's advance team which workq out details leading up to the Heiv nedy-Khrushchev talks in Austria.
Figur& on a base of 1162 full-time students enrolled for the first ,mester and with an attrition rate of 5%, 1100 students, for k e second semester, the approximate operating fund for this y is $18,000.
This amount is an increase of $1.00 per student, per first considered, for it was felt Depression Grads of '36 Reunite at Homecoming CO IRG Schedules Communist China Discussion Nov. by the Committee that since each student is entitled to these publications, their benefits and costs are distributed most fairly.
Next, the committee considered the requests of other organizations on campus.
The proposed appropriations for these organizations and its utility to the student body.
When members of Colorado College's 1936 ""depression year"" graduating class gathered here at homecoming Saturday to reneV acquaintance after 25 years, they discovered that their former classmates lost no time in establishing themselves in the world.
Statistics released by the college show that today the men who earned their degrees in the bleak year of 1936 have an average income of nearly $20,000.
The average annual income of the 22 men replying to an anonymously conducted income survey is $18,838.
We are very much opposed to the huge proportion of our tax dollars that go into military expenditures, so we try to keep our income below the taxable limit.
Fourteen are in the professions, eleven are executives, six own their own businesses, two are self-employed and two are in service occupations.
Research physicist, professor of chemistry, professor of microbiology, lawyer, public accountant, medical director of a hospital, structural engineer, bank president, clergyman, production manager of a major oil company, assistant managing editor of a newspaper, a freelance composer, art director, and federal government executives.
Professor Mertz will discuss opportunities in the field of Law; Professor Brooks will cover opportunities in State and Local Government and in Federal administrative positions ; anil Professor Sondermann will speak on job opportunities in the foreign affairs field.
The faculty members will trace the background of American recognition policy and will outline the problems involved in the current situation with respect to Communist China's admission to the UN and its recognition by the United States.
All interested students, faculty and administration are cordially invited to attend this meeting, which promises to be one of the most interesting events of the current semester.
The International Relations Club is open for membership to all students who are interested in its program.
In 1945 he gave the Christian Causs lectures on contemporary literature at Princeton; lectures that later were published in his book, The Vanishing Hero, Since World War II, O'Faolain has traveled extensively in Europe and in the United States.
South lo Sicily, and many shorter pieces, some of which appeared in Holiday Magazine.
The Irish Revolution, in which he took an active part, is reflected in much of his work.
He has become one of the best known interpreters of Irish life, and his books on modern Ireland and its people are praised as realistic and sympathetic.
Summer Jobs Offered In Continental Europe Summer jobs in Europe are now available to almost every American college student.
The American Student Information Service, known as ASIS, has more than 3,000 summer jobs in their files awaiting applicants.
In the past four years ASIS has placed thousands of American college students in various summer jobs throughout 11 European countries.
Jobs are mostly unskilled and many do not require a knowledge of a foreign language.
Monthly wages range from room and board in Spain to §150 for the highest paid positions in West Germany.
Jobs include factory work, resort work, construction work, farm work, hospital work, child care, camp counselling positions and many others.
Students will receive the dame wages as the Europeans with whom they are working.
In addition to an opportunity to personally get to know ""the man behind the counter"" in Europe, a summer job in Europe can defray the cost of the trip as much as 50 per cent.
For further information and complete details write to ASIS, 22 Avenue de la Liberte, Luxembourg.
GreggSmith, Education Major, Class of 1963 (Photo at left), walked away with the second hundred bucks of the Viceroy football contest.
Walking away with third prize money of $25 was Jim Shumaker, Class of 1963.
DeWavne Crumb Class of 1962 DeCourcy Graham Class of 1963 Don Jorgensen Class of 1962 Prof.
Any student or laculty n n this campus may e nter except employees ot advertising agencies. liate families. s become (he property jf Brown & Wlllijillfr.ilone will be relumed.
V nners will be notified weeks alters ch contest, Wi nes may be published paper.
Viceroy name as it appeal on the pactape Inml M,il enky In Viceroy at the Bo* Number on the entry blank, or drop in Viceroy Football Contest Ballot 8ox on campus.
The CC Ski Club steering Committee promises a good program with a movie, pop corn and drinks, information on ski-ditioning, ski instruction and Club activities.
Ski posters will line the walls and the displays of various equipment will help the beginner to become acquainted with certain specialized features of this sport . . . differences in skiis, bindings and apparel for varying weather conditions.
Ski Club membership cards will be available for one dolriday afternoon the F.A.C. rittoy Afternoon Club) sponsorwister"" in the Hub.
The ir this occasion was profed by a five piece band comatl of Chuck Gibson on piano, Sabom and Ed Mason on iters, John Barker on drums and ink Weible on sax.
By five o'clock the floor of the was completely mobbed with ous types of twisters.
Besides confusion on the floor, a great of enjoyment was shared by e drinking coffee and observfrom the sidelines.
The communist religion of the state will be reflected in P public worship of Lenin and the pride in industrial growth ipetition with the United \ glimpse of Russian hisjy will be shown by the historilandmarks such as the Kremaml various Tzarist palaces — f& have been preserved and ilo re<l by the Soviet regime as t,0 nal monuments.
Mr Neale Reinitz, associPmfessor of English, went a predominantly Finnish p from Finland by train to J 1B Rrad and Moscow.
Mr RichPaine, assistant professor of ittcs, went privately by i to Leningrad and Moscow.
Julie Bohlke went with an Occidental College group by bus to Leningrad, Moscow, and Kiev.
Oscar Soule went privately by airplane to Leningrad, Moscow, Kiev. and Odessa.
All four found that while guide servics was always available, the tourist is free to take it or not and can even go off by himself.
Mr Alexey Malysev, assistant professor of Russian, is helping with the organization of the two part Russian Assemblies which are designed to answer some of the mutual curiosity about our rival for power in the international world of tension.
The first program, on November 21, will be a visual picture, through slides and movies, taken by members of the group, as described above.
November 24th is the date and many recall the fun they had last year traveling over a sixty mile course in cars, guided only by a list of hints.
Driver Al Petersen and navigator Jim Dyson crossed the finish line as winners and thus gained the privilege of tapping the trophy keg.
Both names appear on a plate attached to this colorful traveling trophy and it will be interesting to see whose names will be engraved this year.
Further details as to the starting place and time will be available there.
As in the past, the terminating point of the rally will be kept a secret, but it promises to be a fun place complete with food, music, dancing, and movies of European rallies.
Drivers are again urged to offer rides to interested freshmen and it should be stressed that this is not a race but a skilled drive over a course, outlined by hints and regulated carefully by accurate and indicated speed averages.
Women drivers did very well last year and are encouraged to enter again.
T2 Concerts at Fingertips Renowned Pianist Will Play Program of Audience Choice World-renowned pianist Stephen Kovacs, who will give a piano recital at -Im.
November 11) in Perkins Hall, likes to go on concert tours with more than a dozen separate programs ready, submitting them to members of the audience to vote on the program they want him to perform.
The concert, open to the public without charge, is beingsponsored by the music department.
All Young Democrats are urged to attend and participate in the above programs.
Student Conduct Committee Passes On Drunk Driver A case of misconduct, driving under the influence of alcohol, was brought to the attention of the Student Conduct Comrnitttee.
Thp decision of the council was as folThe individual was placed on disciplinary probation for one year and within that time he shall report to the Dean of Men on two occasions.
If there is a violation of thisp enalty he shall be suspended pending a hearing of the committee.
Also the committee elected two new members to fill vacancies — Sue Hoyt and Mareia Moses.
The Strong Memorial Concerts are an endowed series in memory of the Baptist minister, teacher and musician.
They were inaugurated last year with the violin-piano recital of Sidney Harth and Dr.
Max Lanner, professor and chairman of the music department at the college.
Mr Kovacs made his debut in Colorado Springs in April, I960, when he appeared in Perkins Hall.
His success was so sensational that a re-engagement of the artist was planned immediately.
Born in the famed Tokay mountains of Hungary, Stephen Kovacs passed the difficult entrance examinations at the Franz Liszt Royal Academy of Music in Budapest at the unprecedented age of five.
Fourteen years later he was graduated from this distinguished music school with the highest honors.
A triumphant debut followed in Berlin where the leading critics compared him with the greatest masters of the keyboard.
In a long career of concertizing, Mr Kovacs has fascinated audiences wherever he was heard, and held his listeners spellbound.
This enables him to keep thirteen complete and formidable concert programs under immediate command.
Those who heard him here in April, 1960, will remember that they voted for one of the programs, whereupon Mr Kovacs walked on the stage and played it.
However, the audience will also be handed the complete program of all thirteen recitals to convey the scope of Mr Kovacs' tremendous repertoire.
Mr Kovacs reportedly is the only artist on the stage today who offers the unique feature of playing any one of thirteen concert programs on a moment's notice.
Max Power placed 1st and 2nd in two rounds of Extemporaneous Speaking to take second place overall in the tournament in which twenty-three Rocky Mountain area colleges and universities were ent -red.
Susan Caudill took a 1st and 3rd in two rounds of Rxtoinp, ami Petfi Trushel finished 2nd In his round of Poetry Interpretation.
Two CC Junior Division teams composed of David Furgason, Nancy Dehlin, Harris Sherman and Dave Helms won three of four rounds of debate.
Robert Thrasher, David Bitters, Susan Heidel, Faith O'Reilly and Karen Johnston were also entered in junior debate.
In the Senior Division Colorado College teams composed of Chris Griffiths, Max Power, Charles Puckett and Susan Caudill continued to receive high ratings but lost important rounds of debate by close margins.
Professors James A Johnson and Louis J Pistone accompanied the team as coaches.
This meet normally attracts strong teams from the California and Alpha Kappa Psi Kovacs Will Hold Piano Workshop Steven Kovacs, brilliant Hungarian concert pianist, who will be featured in a recital Sunday, November 11, in Perkins Hall, has agreed to remain at Colorado College one extra day to hold a Piano Workshop on Monday morning from 9 to 12 in Perkins Hall.
This session will be free to all music teachers and advanced piano students who are interested to attend.
Mr Kovacs will lecture on problems of technique and interpretation, and will also listen to a few advanced students to give constructive, artistic advice.
Students should pur chase within the week an> hooks still needed for the curren Alpha Kappa Psi, CC's business fraternity, held a highly successful initiation dinner last Sunday night at the La Logando Italiana Restaurant.
Sixteen people were present including the new members, who were honored, and their guests.
This was one of the many upcoming events planned for the future by the recently re-organized CC chapt'-r of Alpha Kappa Psi.
Panel Discusses Goals At this Tuesday discussion a list of eight goals for CC was discussed by a panel consisting of President Louis T Benezet, Mr Ellsworth Mason, Dr.
Official Colorado College Student Publication Business Manntrei ri,oili.i.>n M:uu. lohlke, Carolina Cr,-yk,idnur.
Within the next few weeks, the committee should recommend several important changes in our judicial system.
It is very likely that the Dean of Men or the Dean of Women can far more effectively and justly handle certain cases that can student boards.
The Deans, after all, have a great deal more experience and are much less susceptible to papular student pressure.
We hold no bias here for or against student judicial bodies or administration disciplinary actions.
We simply ask that the committee, in its proposed revisions, try to determine from which authority will the individual student, and the student body as a whole, be able to expect more justice in particular cases. :i) It may be that the committee will find it necessary, once organizational reforms are effected, to review and revise procedures and practices of the various judicial agencies.
We trust that these procedures will be closely evaluated so that the merits of each case, and not procedural confusion and discrimination, will be the basis for decision rendering.
It is our belief that, if ASCC is able to accomplish the major task of judicial reform, the value of student government relevant to student life will be proved.
We urge every interested student to offer suggestions or constructive criticism, together with his cooperation, to the committee now involved in this important undertaking.
Mr Malyshev, who has worked as an interpreter for the State Department, will be discussion leader.
These assemblies are the result of returning members, even though their visits were brief, who want to pool the benefits of their experiences in order to provide a better understanding of the Soviet Union and its people.
The Assemblies Committee feels that these assemblies will be of great interest and urges all curious members of the College Community to attend.
Curriculum Committee Discusses Programs For Junior Year Abroad by Nan Burroughs Junior year abroad programs, the new system in the psychology department, and library hours were some of the topics discussed Thursday, November 8 in the A.S.C.C.'s Student Curriculum Committee meeting in Rastall Center.
The official purpose of the committee is to serve as an intermediary body between the faculty and the students concerning courses and class procedure.
The meetings are not regular, but are tentatively scheduled for Thursday afternoons at 3:00.
Any suggestions concerning courses and procedure would be very welcome and may be left at Rastall desk. shove chapel ' Local ACLU Holds Membership Meet Shove Chapel; Sunday, November 19th, 11:00m.
Burton The purpose of this service is to examine this strange, seemingly misplaced passage in John's Gospel.
The incident is not so much concerned with the woman's behavior, but with that of her accusers and with the compassion of Jesus for the sinner and his anger against the hypocritical, gloating of the sensation seeking crowd.
It is hoped to bring out the essential meaning of this passage and to relate it to our own attitudes towards people, and perhaps especially those less fortunate than ourThe fall membership meeting of the Colorado Springs chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union will he held at 8m., Monday, November 20, at Rastall Center on the Colorado College campus.
Fred So dermann, associate professor of political science at Colorado College; the Reverend Sigurd E Burch, junior pastor of Trinity Methodist Church and chairman of the Colorado P.T.A. committee on Character and Spiritual Education; and the Rev.
Harrison, vice-president of the Boulder chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Own*; (IOWA ot TEJONEti.72 WORD IN FASHION | R,ed Top Drive In 1520 So.
ROTC lias consistently been the most criticized institution on this campus.
Most Americans hold the belief that their government is — or should be — run by the educated citizenry.
There is much to learn in Military Science that can not be learned in civilian life for one does not come into close contact with the military in any other place.
Yes, ROTC does move us closer toward the goal of a more educated citizenry.
Then there is leadership training for which ROTC Cadets get out on the field once a week.
I have made a lot of fun of this, but lately I have wondered just how good training it must be for one of my friends to tell me my brass definitely is not up to par, or that my black shoes are turning brown, or that haircuts aren't really that expensive — yet.
If a person can tell a friend his faults and get any action, then he must have a degree of true leadership.
If we can't run ROTC down with legitimate reasons, let's get behind it with our support.
Slocum Open House The first Slocum Hall Open House for 196I-G2 will take place on Sunday, November 19th, from 2:00m. to 7:00 m.
Awards Offered For Ethical Code The Alpha Kappa Psi p 01]|ll tion, a non-profit foundation voted to education and resear'™ established by Alpha Kap Pa p ° national professional business f' temity, announces awards foit i composition of a Personal Code Business Ethics.
Each entr Some should stress those ideals of Per sonal and professional conduct j business which should be observi by the individual in order that h may be a credit and an asset ( business, community, and natio a s a businessman and as an Amp, ican citizen.
The lectures are ached uled for November 8 and 29; De cember (> and 13; January 10 a 17.
The November 15 lecture v NOT be given in Perkins due the Varsity Show.
Each Sun day 7:30 to 10:00m hostess for ""Music and Poetry which call attentk cultural events in Colorai] | Springs and Denver.
Stay tuned to KRCC-FM 1m., nad 12-1:00m. and 4-1 m. weekdays for the latest cam pus news and music to suit ; tastes.
FOR YOUR SKIING PLEASURE THS SPORTSMAN'S STORE SKI SHOP Features the Finest and Latest in SKI WEAR and GEAR • Northland Skis • Garmisch Henke Booh • Dovre • Ski Free Bindings White Stag and Franconia Clothing • Waxes Poles • Mitts • Caps • Sweaters • Sox RENTALS NEW SKIS POLES AND BOOTS 75 Weekend BUCK Sporting Goods Co.
The modern, four-level Ijrary is scheduled for completic , r ly next summer.
The new library, designed by Jndmore, Owings and Merrill, fjs named in memory of the late jharles Learning Tutt, president ,{ El Pomar Foundation, who died Vrt'fitiber 1stulti-million dollar building rogram got under way Iter President Louis T Benezet ook over the reins of the college i 1955.
From the bottom up, the new library consists of a garden level opening on one side to a sunken court, a glass-walled main floor, and third and fourth floors walled with pre-cast concrete panels measuring 11 by 22 feet each.
The two upper stories will be pierced by six-inch wide vertical strip windows.
The entire building is supported by 35 eighteen-inch-square concrete pillars, flared at the top to form a modern version of a colonnade.
Providing more than 70,000 square feet of floor space, the library will contain seminar rooms, typing rooms, microcard room, a special collection room, tape recording rooms, a periodicals room, administrative offices, and stacks.
Heating Plant Debt Free The Colorado College fired up its ew heating plant Friday evening *ith a flaming half-million dollar rtgage note at a special cereny naming it the Williams Heat}i riant.
The modern plant was named for e late Leon E Williams of Pu™j generous benefactor of the Inject, and his four sisters.
Mr Williams left $100,000 toM the construction of the .370 heating plant and distrib""'""g system, which was completed n April of 1960.
More than 2,000 feet of the pipe ""i the standup tunnel running "" e r the campus.
Plans Emerge For Historical Society Two Colorado College history professors said last week a permanent organization to promote the study of the history of Western America may be in the making.
Professors Louis B Geiger and Harvey L Carter said western historians already are taking steps to organize a conference on the history of Western America.
Preliminary plans for a permanent western historical organization emerged at a conference of western historians last October 1214 in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
An organization committee will meet in Milwaukee Valley Historiing the Mississippi Valley Historical Association Convention, to discuss plans for holding a formal organizational meeting in Denver next October.
A proposed constitution, by-laws, and the formal name of the proposed organization will be worked out at the Denver meeting.
Professor Carter is serving on the program committee for the October meeting.
CC Chemistry Professor Meets with High Schools High school science students from three southwestern Colorado communities will have an opportunity Monday to hear about recent developments taking place in chemical research.
Eldon T Hitchcock, assist-, ant professor of chemistry at Colorado College, will spend the day at the Montezuma County High talking with local students and science students from high schools in Dolores and Mancos.
The Colorado College scientist, who is conducting research on acidbase reactions, will discuss colloids, and the modern theories of acids and bases.
The visit is one of a series Colorado College science professors are making to high schools throughout the area.
The trips are co-sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Colorado Wyoming Academy of Science.
A cast, made up of faculty and students, has been selected for the Colorado College production of tinGreek drama, ""Oedipus Rex,' scheduled to open December 7 for n two-evening run in Perkins Hall on the campus.
Eleven members of the faculty and 24 students have been chosen for roles in the 2,500-year-old play by Sophocles.
It will be under the direction of William E McMillen, associate professor of speech and drama.
It was used extensively by Aristotle in his analysis of what a tragedy should be and for the requirements of the tragic hero.
William R Hochman, associate professor of history, will have the rote of Oedipus; Dr.
Neale R Reinitz, associate professor of English will play the Priest; John H Lewis, instructor in geology, will play Creon; Dr.
Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, as the messenger from Corinth; Dr.
Kenneth Burton, assistant professor of religion and minister at Shove Memorial Chapel, as Choragus.
Two students, Ethel Six Geary and Mary Pat Hill, have been double-cast in two roles.
Each will play the part of Jocasta and the part of the maidservant of Jocasta, alternating in the two roles on different nights.
Students cast in supporting roles include Leland Larson, Caspar Benzins, Ann Brooks, Dennis Sauve, Patricia K Dodge, Linda Hamilton, Barbara Blair, Ingrid Swenson, Polly Miller, Sarah Jamison, Caroline Sanborn, and Johanna Waller.
The chorus, which in Greek plays provides the necessary exposition, includes three faculty members and nine students.
Paul Kutsche, junior, assistant professor of sociology and anthropology; Robin M Rudoff, instructor in history; and Dr.
Students in the chorus include Vernon Olivier, Ray Boyce, Fred MeKee, Christopher Flower, William B Grabouski, Dale Spall, Ben Lyon, and Carl Chard.
Dean Reid Elected Veep of United States Chess Club Juan Reid, dean of men at ColoPueblo. rado College, has been re-elected as vice president of the United States Chess Foundation for a three-year term.
One Of 24 vice presidents of the federation, which is the official governing body of chess players in this country, he will be responsible for organized USCF activities in Colorado, New Mexico, and Oklahoma.
Dean Reid currently is president of the Colorado State Chess Association and the Colorado Springs Chess Club.
One Board for the Colorado Springs Club in the inter-city matches with Fort Collins.
Boulder, Denver, and The Colorado College administrator said be learned to play chess at the age of 40.
This is Reid's second term as vice president of the National Chess Federation, which represents the United States in all international matches.
He placed second in the Colorado State Chess Tourney in 1057 and ill 1360 tied for 18th place with Dr.
Miss Pat Weaver, America's Nulional College Queen, re vealed her feminine taste as well as her practical sense wild asked about diamond rings.
She selected as her favorite tin lovely Artcarved Evening Star — one of Artcarvcd'a nwurd winning designs.
You see, Artcarved ring is guaranteed in writing for all the ye come by America's most respected ring maker.
Visit your local Artcarved Jeweler and see why Arte diamond rings have been the choice of millions for than a century.
AI-.o o£ ncuresi Arlcarml Jeweler. cntlosiiiK 'Or lu cover liundlinj; unJ jiualugo.
MEIrose 3-6069 November 17, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger Honor System Explored By Caroline Creyke Last spring, a poll was taken of the student body to determine the effectiveness and value of the honor system.
Among the suggestions made by those who felt there was not adequate orientation were to improve the quality of freshman orientation, stressed the fact that the basic have "" the individual professors concept of the system is up to the rient their classes in additio orientation by the Honor Council members, and in advisor conferences the honor system should be discussed with the freshmen.
Support of the present violation system (two violations are necessary for dismissal) was shown by the* fact that 64% of the students agreed with it.
However, 15^ felt that penalties should be administered accordingto the degree of the violation.
In another section of the questionnaire, a student stated that he felt the honor system was somewhat weakened by the fact that many professors don't follow the rules.
Another commented that it was hard to adjust but was worth it ""not to the system, itself, but to the fact that my personal integrity was on trial.
The honor system has great significance as a basis for independent achievement plus integrity and personal pride — these are the bases of all human relationships.
Recently, several Honor Council members and professors were asked how effectively they felt the council was working this President, Stew Ritchie, says he feels it is working quite well.
In the past years the H.C. has heard about a fairly consistent percentage of the cheating, and this number has been going down.
Stew stressed the necessity, responsibility and obligation for people to turn in suspected violators and let the H.C. decide whether or not cheating occurred.
An honor system offers ""advantages to the individual for further development of his self mastery and self development,"" Stew stated, Ruth Snodgrass, a three year member of the council, feels that the system is ""only effective in its ideal.
The honor system, she stated, has to judge a case on the basis of one person's word against another's.
And ""the minute we have to come in in an enforcement capacity, we've failed.
Bob Kendall, also a three year member, says that judging by the surveys and polls, the system is quite effective.
The honor council can't really tell how much cheating there is, but he's sure that there is some that the council doesn't ever hear about.
He feels that the public relationships and orientation program of the honor souncil are quite good.
He would hate to work in an institution that didn't have ""If an honor system is not properly operated by those in it, it will fail.
The students must report it when they see violators, they must not be hesitant or afraid,"" he stated.
But, he added, if a professor can get the kids on his side and then explain how important it is scholastically, morally, and emotionally, the system will succeed.
The women howl on Monday and Wednesday evenings and have scheduled a 30-game seaThe teams are recuited from among the women employees of Cutler, Ticknor, Cossitt, Bemis, Rastall, Buildings and Grounds, ROTC and Slocum.
Ed., and a faculty wife — Pat Eager, whose husband is part of the Art School faculty.
There is room for two more teams in the league; any woman interested in regular bowling — or bowl ing substitute — may contact Mr Powell, Games Area Manager, for further information.
Th> workshop is designed to acquaint the teacher of reading with new means and methods of instruction and to show how these techniques can be incorporated successfully into present school reading programs.
For best results please submit all material in double-spaced, typi iillr i form al.
As Veterans Day rolled around Saturday, officials at Colorado College took a nose count of veterans enrolled in classes at the independent liberal arts and sciences college.
All were men — ranging in age from their midtwenties to their early sixties.
They are the children of servicemen who died during, or as a result of, their military service.
The veterans currently enrolled at Colorado College come from 4 states.
Officials at the college recalled Saturday that veterans have been enrolled in classes here continously since 1044 when the first disabled servicemen returned from the Alum-Tiger Hockey Revived This Season The Colorado College Alumnd Tiger Varsity hockey game which has been discontinued for the p a3l ' five seasons will be resurrected this year, the Athletic Department announced recently.
Featuring some of the greatest hockey stars who have ridden tk CC Tiger down through the years the game is scheduled for 8:15m' Saturday, November 25, at tin) Broadmoor World Arena.
Hockey coach Tony Frasea said that some 20 alumni, dating back as far as the 1946-47 teams, li aV( , agreed to turn out for the annual Alumni-Varsity meeting.
Most of these are from the Colorado Springs and Denver areas and will include names like ""Bullet"" j 0e Slatterv of the '48 team, Defensemen Milo Yalicb and Ron Newsom, Andy Gambueci, left wing of the 1950 CC National Champions, and Len Maccini, the 1950 All-AmenSince this is a special game, and not part of the regular scheduled season, the Athletic Department has announced that student body cards and faculty cards will not be honored that night.
Admission will he$l per seat, and there will be no reserve seats for this particular game.
All proceeds from the AlumniVarsity game will be used for tlie Freshman hockey program.
So far, Coach Frasea says that he has lined up eight freshman hockey games and hopes to schedule two more for a ten game freshman season.
The loss shoved the once title-contending Tigers into a third place tie in the RMC standings with Western State and left the Miners in second place with a 2-1 record.
Mines lias a chance to shave the conference a freak series of ball exchanges, title if they can knock off undeMines had driven deep into CC feated Adams State tomorterritory only to have a pass interasketball Business ooking up this Season is the hint of a healthy the face of Leon ""Red"" istlack as he ambles about the Jorado College campus this fik.
The prime reason for this is the iult of pre-season hoop turnin Cossitt Hall druing the last weeks.
As the guiding light of the CC bucket-bouncers, Eastlack ; feeling that the entire liketball business for the fnrthniing season is looking up. pointed out that this CC cagers will sport five ilermen from last season's titlefling squad.
Dan Wright, FarThompson, Farrel Howell, ,-e Krell and John Iieid are k on the maplewood and in d form.
In the last few years Eastlack :d his squads have become rather tached to the Rocky Mountain inference title, and after the two ctice the coach is makI optimistic sounds about the nihilities of the 'Gl crew keept it snugly in the Tigers' lair.
Kappa Sigma, behind the running of Tony McGinnis, captured first in the crosscountry race held at halftime of the Adams StateCC game.
Kappa Sigma Phi Gamma Delta Beta Theat Pi Zeta Sigma Chi Swimming will be held at the Palmer High School Pool Tuesday, November 21, and Tuesday, November 28, beginning at 9:00m.
Kappa Sigma 8 Beta 8 Sigma Chi 2 Phi Gam 1 Phi Delt 1 Zeta Frasca Enthusiastic As leers Slate Scrimmage Tony Frasca , the slender exAll American Colorado College hockey coach, 1 s not a man to put all his eggs in one basket.
Or, it seems, all his i iremen on one line. row on the Indian's home field.
It was the Tigers third loss of the year, all coming on their home field, and the second time that two safeties have spelled the margin of defeat.
CC also dropped an 1814 opening game decision to Washburn U., the four point difference coming as the result of the Tigers twice being spilled in their own The upset loss proved to be a double heartbreaker for the Tigers.
Not only did they lose a hardfought battle to their ancient rivals from Golden, but they also lost the services of scrappy senior quarterback and co-captain Eddie Kintz.
He underwent surgery immediately following the game and naturally will miss CC's final game of the season tomorrow against Nebraska Wesleyan.
CC started off as if they were going to make a shambles of the Miners and do it in rather easy fashion.
They took the opening kiekoff and with Kintz hitting on two key passes, moved easily downfield to score in the opening two minutes of play.
The touchdown came on a 15 yard aerial from Kintz to halfback Terry Holleran.
Pete Pleasant added the extra point and the Tigers were seemingly on their way.
But CC spent most of the rest of the afternoon in their own territory, and after Kintz was hurt, were able to cross the midfield stripe only twice.
The only other Tiger scoring threat came in the fourth quarter when they were able to penetrate as far as the Miner 17.
Freshman quarterback Cubby Welch, who had taken over for Kintz, hit Mike Minnelli on a pass play covering 23 yards to spark the drive.
But the Tiger attack was quelled when Holleran was thrown for a long loss on a third down situation from the Miner 20.
MB 2-0887 ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% 1 1 7I/2 Eo*t sche La Pood cepte-d by Wayne Deutscher at the Tiger eight.
On the next play, however, an attempted Kintz aerial was picked off by Miner end George Brinkworth and the Orediggers were again in scoring position on the Tiger 25.
Two plays later Deutscher again intercepted for CC, this time on the Tiger seven, but seconds later the Tigers fumbled the ball right back to Mines, again on the CC 25.
This time, Mines managed to keep possession of the elusive pigskin and Grant Owen finally crashed in to score from the CC two.
The extra point attempt went wide, but the Miners went in to an 8-7 lead by virtue of their first safety scored in the first quarter.
The first seemingly unimportant two point safety came after the Tigers had stopped a Mines threat on the CC two.
The Tigers took over there on downs, but seconds later Kintz faded to throw and was hauled down by Pansze.
With time running out and the Tigers with their backs to the wall, Welch attempted a roll out pass and Pansze again crashed through to pin him for another two points for Mines.
CC had one final chance to pull it out when they took over on downs on their own 25.
Welch completed one pass to Jim Wujcik, but his second aerial attempt was intercepted by Owen and Mines ran out the clock.
Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning Frasca says his theory has nothing to do with a line system.
The Tiger stiekmen have been turning out for nearly a week now, and Frasca says the squad is showing a lot of drive and enthus"" We've been doing a lot of shooting, passing and skating to get in condition this week,"" Frasca said.
They staged a regular inter-squad scrimmage at the Broadmoor World Arena on both Friday and Saturday evening November 10 and 11, he said.
There's no admission charge for the scrimmage games, Frasca pointed out.
He said hockey fans are invited to come out and nee how the squad is shaping up.
All in all, Frasca felt that the league this year would be much stronger than it has ever been.
Although the Denver crew lost many good men via the graduation route, Frasca doesn't believe that they will be much weaker than their l'JOO League sweeping champions.
He feels that North Dakota, Michigan and Minnesota also moy be tough nuts to crack.
GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHINf! — FURNISHLNOS AN BROADMOOR HOTEL ^ ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave.
President Robert F Six said last week that with permission of the Civil Aeronautics Board, Continental will introduce a jet economy service December 1 to supplement its present luxury first class and Club Coach jet service.
Fares for the ""no frills"" economy service will be approximately 25 per cent lower than present jet coach fares, Six said.
There will be no change in fares or service standards for the company's Golden Jet deluxe first class or Club Coach service.
Continental's Golden Jets are scheduled between Denver and both Chicago and Los Angeles.
The Boeing 707's also are operated from Kansas City to Denver, and over Chicago, Kansas City Los Angeles and Houston, San Antonio, El Paso, Phoenix, Los Angeles routes.
Pure jet operations represent over two-thirds of the total capacity operated by the company over its 7,000-mile, ninestate system. nee m ni There is a ride book at Rastall Desk for those driving home for Christmas who want riders and for those who want rides.
Somewhere and somehow those Niblet people had changed the entire character of the Green Giant.
No longer is he the gruff green man who would stalk the corn fields clutching a can of Niblets to his chest.
Instead, we find the Green Giant sitting on a mountain top with his head resting on his chin and, across his face, a beatific expression.
The picture shows corn stalks in the foreground and a charming little red farm house in the center.
Folks in Green Giant land say the Green Giant is so proud of his corn family that he often sits and watches it grow inch by inch.
The Green Giant doesn't have the time to sit around and watch corn grow inch by inch.
Last year the Birdseye people contracted for 35 Green Giants to supervise corn production, and when the corn season came around, only hired 10. — (to be continued ■ CC Folk Singers Inc.
Helping to find the right answers (because the wrong ones could be very expensive) is the job of Carl Horn, a telephone company economist who graduated from college just last year.
His studies and estimates help management make important forecasting decisions.
Carl Horn of Illinois Bell Telephone Company, and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies, help make your telephone and communications service the finest in the world.
ELLSWORTH MASON, librarian at the Colorado College, s an original page from the first edition of The King James Bible.
I ; one of several first edition pages given to the college by an imnus living in London.
Assisting him is a student part-tir the library, Miss Margie Taylor of Sidney, Australia. nployee Original Editions Given to Library A Colorado College alumnus who c lives in London has given th illege a folio of pages from origial editions of some of the more aportant books printed in Engmd.
The pages are from works sting back to the English RenIssanee in the early fifteen-lvunffds down to the twentieth cenwry; nearly all 12 pages in the are from first editions.
The which are not come from exely rare editions. ie collection was sent to the ge by Dr.
Taylor formerly was chairof the humanities division at too State College in California.
In the folio are original pages mm Pynson's Froissart, published 1523; The King Jame Bible, 11; the Second Folio of Shake*are, 1G32; The Well at the Grid's End, 1896, and others.
Ellsworth Mason 1 , librarian Cobum Library, said the pages ""vide a fine example of the hisir y of printing in England, and a t some of the best printing in 'gland is to be found among these *ges. £he page from The King James pile currently is on display in 'torn Library.
He said he hoped 8 display would interest students fine printing, and encourage e m to become collectors of origW editions.
Lord Ber:f s translation of Froissart is redded as his most important p'ub^h'on.
The King James Bible, the work nf some 40 translators, was printed by Robert Barker, the royal printer, who helped finance the editorial work.
Some of the other pages in the collection are from the second edition of Dr.
The folio is just one of many valuable gifts from Europe's rich storehouse of original editions, early music scores, and other collector's items that Dr.
Taylor has presented to Colorado College during the past few years he has lived in London.
The privilege of tapping tiif Keg is awarded to the winners, whose names will later appear on a plate attached to this colorful traveling trophy.
It is recommended that those who have already entered and those who register before 3:00 m. today in Slocum have flash lights, full gas tanks, and cars in good condition.
Student Guide Service Aids GG Administration Last Springs a new group, the Student Guide Service, was formed for the purpose of aiding the school administration, particularly the Admission Office.
The main duty of the group is to show the campus to prospective students and guests of the college.
The Student Guide Service was started under the leadership of Rastall Center Board, with Lani Markisen in charge.
She worked with Mr Nicholl, the assistant Director of Admissions, in setting up the purposes of the service.
Each member of the group is expected to know much about the past and future of Colorado College and what this college can offer to the prospective student.
The guides, the admissions office feels, can answer many questions of the prospective student which do not come up in an interview with the admissions director, and the prospective student may be able to get a better idea of the school's qualities from a member of the student body.
The people making up this year's Student Guide Service are Suky Arentz, Suzanne Armstrong, Mary Bardone, Bradford Chase, Betsy Crockett, Polly Franklin, Ann Gourley, Donna Hampton, Walt Hecox, Erv Hinds, Raechel Jensen, Diane Johnston, Ben Lewis, Ben Lyon, Karen Mcllvaine, Leilani Markisen, Skip Meis, Lynn Miller, Max Power, Judy Reagan, Julie Rolfe, Fred Simpleton, Clay SoiTick, Traer Sunley, Ingrid Swenson, Mary Tarr, Jean Torcom, Kitty Tytler, Johanna Walker, Robert Williams, and Carol Wright.
This group hopes to become independent of Rastall Center and become an honorary club like the Black and Gold and Tigers Clubs, within the next few years.
Washington — Another round of Peace Corps Placement Tests will be given on November 28th and 29th in testing centers throughout the nation.
The tests will begin at 8:30m. and last for six hours, with one hour out for lunch.
One is designed for men and women who would like to be considered for positions as secondary school or college teachers.
Many of those who will take the examinations will be applicants who have sent in a Peace Corps questionnaire since the last round of testing.
Both men and women who are interested and who have not yet filled out a Peace Corps questionnaire will also be permitted to take the examinations.
They will be accommodated on a ""space available"" basis at the testing centers.
The local testing center is the Main Post Office on Nevada and Pikes Peak.
Four Facets of Russia Portrayed in Assembly ""Saint Nikolai"" Lenin and the country he created from Romanoff ruins were on prominent display at 11 o'clock Tuesday morning when ""A Visual Picture of Russia"" was presented as the first of a two part assembly program on the Soviet Union.
The color slide and film format portrayed four main facets of modern Russia.
Mr nitz's slides reflected the intense Soviet emphasis on industrial and agricultural success.
Russia's historical past was reflected as Julie Bohlke commented on her slides of Leningrad, and Mr Richard Paine gave the audience an inside view of the Kremlin.
Miss Bohlke not only pointed out such landmarks of the ""Venice of the North"" as the famous Winter Palace, but also emphasized the great popularity of soda and ice cream stands along the Nevsky Boulevard.
Mr Paine reminded the audience that the inside of the Kremlin is as large as downtown Colorado Springs, The many onion-domed cathedrals and the huge two-hundred ton ""King Bell"" were of particular interest.
The face of modern Russia was reflected in the conversion of prerevoliition palaces to office buildings and in the stark modern architecture of massive apartment houses.
Both Mr Reinitz and Mr Soule emphasized the great pride the Russians take in their parks and monuments.
An excellent example was the fantastically ornate, chandeliered Moscow subway station.
In portraying the attitudes of the Russian people, Mr Reinitz mentioned that the general public usually appeared somewhat shabby, although it was by no means true that all Russians wore poorly fitting clothes.
The high cost of clothing ( fifteen dollars for a rayon slip) was emphasized.
Both Miss Bohlke and Mr Soule dwelt on the friendliness of the people, even when communication was limited to sign language.
Mr Alexey Malyshev, who helpfully performed the necessary translations, will participate next Tuesday, November 28, as leader of a panel discussing the impact of the Soviet Union and its people on the travelers.
College teaching and scientific research are two professions requiring training at an academicgraduate school.
Members of the Graduate Fellowship Committee, which consists of Professors Champion, Brooks, and Reinitz, will be at the meeting.
The curiosity of the Russian people about all things Western, and in particular American, will be one of the subjects taken up at the panel discussion in the second assembly program on the U.S.S.R. next Tuesday morning nt 11:00 in Perkins Hall.
Mr Paine, who speaks ■ fluent Russian, engaged in a number of impromptu street-comer and park-bench conversations.
Oscar Soule, another panel member, was most interested in the Russian conception of life in the United States, particularly with regard to segregation.
The attitude of the Russians toward their own government, their own expressions of opinion on such topics as war and peace, and some of their feelings on moral and social questions will he among the other topics considered at next Tuesday's program.
Mr Alexey Malyshev, assistant professor of Russian at CC, will contribute his knowledge of the Russian character to the panel.
Janet Cosby has been managing this series of programs for the assembly committee.
Lanner Attends National Music Meet Professor Max Lanner, chairman of the Colorado College music department, will represent the college at the 37th convention of the National Association of Schools of Music meeting in Denver today and tomorrow.
This information was made public this week in an attractive fourpage brochure prepared by the college's admissions office.
Those receiving assistance are averaging about $1,200 for the academic year.
A great many more also hold campus jobs, working from one to four hours a day ""We estimate that nearly half of our student body receives or earns financial aid from college and outside source,"" Wood said.
EDITORIAL STAFF MAX POWER ;harles Puckett _ Jim Dunlor Letters to the Editor it** Official Colorado College Student Publication STAFF; Heather Kirk.
BUSINESS STAFF TIM MOE , PEEKLESS PIUN'TlNr, Mr Sam and Mr McCormack In the past week, the reader has undoubtedly seen greater tributes to the deceased ""Mr Sam"" than we can pen.
Yet we feel compelled to add our voice to those of eulogy, and also to look for a moment beyond the fact of Sam Rayburn's death to the state of congressional government.
He served in the House of Representatives from that day until one day a few months ago.
For one third of his 48 years on Capitol Hill, he served as Speaker of the House.
His steady hand guided the House from the New Deal through world war, through the Fair Deal, through McCarthyism, through Modern Republicanism, and through Cold War to the New Frontier.
His guidance was consistent in fairness and firmness, in integrity and respect, in political realism and foresighted statesmanship.
Sam Rayburn, as second most powerful man in the land, held the respect of four presidents, untold congressmen, and countless Americans in public and private life.
We can add little to the eloquent tributes paid Mr Sam by these people.
Yet we do want to say that the United States has lost one of its greatest incarnations of the ideals of representative government.
But we wonder if this statement does not also point up the seriousness of Mr Sam's passing.
It was unifying a body of individuals who are in a large sense independent of the President, the Speaker, and one another.
It was using the full force of a great and respected personality, of political compromise and fairness, to meet the crushing demands of world tension and mass society — demands magnified by the lack of time.
There are many congressmen, unknown outside their districts except to the closest observers, who work and work very hard, year after year, to promote the ideals represented by Rayburn himself.
Any one of them could rise to the occasion, and could probably, given the pressure of time, build quickly the respect and prestige which served Rayburn as a powerful tool time after time.
Unfortunately, the most likely successor to Rayburn, John McCormack of Massachusetts, is not, in our opinion, one of these men.
He does not now command sufficient respect among his own party — many are dissatisfied with his majority leadership.
McCormaek's open and publicized break with the President over school aid makes him an unlikely successor to the tradition of conciliation left by Mr Sam.
There is little evidence that Mr McCormack has or can exercise the far-ranging and far-sighted political judgment which characterized Rayburn.
Many of his less-known colleagues, on the other hand, could exercise such judgment.
Finally, we must refer to the closing weeks of the last session of Congress when McCormack took the Speaker's chair.
We believe that the House, in the best interests of itself as an institution and of the nation as a whole, must replace Mr Sam with a man who, if not like him, can at least serve as well and who can build the stature necessary to do so.
Our readers who agree would do well to write their own Congressmen of their concern.
We wish to help, in what ever way possible, to make representative government a continuing, worthwhile and vital part of our society.
Dear Sir, As a full-time student and a participant in the basic ROTC program, I feel compelled to reply to Mr Trushel's article (""Comment"") in last week's Tiger.
Would Mr Trushel have us believe that, when two years ago, the faculty voted two to one against compulsory ROTC their individual decisions were based on mere whim or flight of fancy.
In regard to this vote (which had no effect on the administration) the following actions were taken by the ROTC department.
Indeed, I should be interested in Mr Trushel's assessing the value of the ROTC's The Red Menace at Home and Abroad and The Care and Feeding of Your M-l against 2 extra hours of Russian or political philosophy.
I feel that Mr Trushel forgets that his friend is being a ""tine leader"" in an entirely imposed and unnatural circumstance and that he, as a cadet, is obeying out of a fear of demerits or punishment.
If it is Mr Trushel's belief that the ability to observe dirty brass and to say ""two demerits"" is ""True leadership"" then I wonder what he might call the man who, in the midst of a fire, leads other victims to safety.
Mr Trushel next tells us that ""the most common gripe"" is that ROTC is compulsory.
November 26, 1961 Ages ago Jesus told a parable about a businessman who, when he was about to be dismissed for incompetence, embezzled funds belonging to his employer in order to insure that he himself would be provided for after his dismissal.
And Jesus, according to the original form of the account, praised the businessman and said he had shown himself to be wiser than many of the faithful.
This is the kind of statement we'd expect to hear from a cynic, not from Jesus.
And yet, as the sermon demonstrates, this parable doesn't run counter to Jesus' message as we know it elsewhere in the New Testament, but rather has a lot to say to all men, particularly those who are realistic enough to be aware that their own hands are not entirely clean. tp^EM^Qt (Continued fr Now if there's anything more terrible than 25 unemployed Green Giants I don't know what it is.
Well, of course there was collective bargaining, etc., so even you can see how busy the Green Giant must have been.
It should be obvious that he certainly had no time to sit around watching corn grow.
Only someone who has spent his life in a telephone booth taking notes of the behavior of Margret Mead wouldn't know that.
And when the kernels reach that one fleeting moment of perfect flavor, the corn is picked licketysplit.
The room is painted a corn green and the conference table has yellow chairs.
A.K. : I've called you to this meeting because the three of you representt he finest thinking in corn.
It seems to me, chief, that America is just not thinking Niblet I Jim: I don't know; maybe they just don't like the stuff.
WonderfulK you've solved the problem. ty.r get to work on it immediately We'll soften up that nasty i giant.
You know, Jim, I've W thinking for some time that yo might need a trip.
You' not allergic to corn are you, Jjnji I suppose it's pretty clear w^ happened but, you know, on col, nights when I'm lying slug-a-h in Sloeum, just listening to t] trucks go by, I can hear the Gre, Giant stomping through the cor fields; world-weary but still read] for action; singing the fe-fi-fa, fum chant for all the world hear.
First the honor system considers college gir]| mature enough to turn themselves in when they are late, but th< dorm restrictions on girls' noun assumes that they are not mature enough to decide how late to stay out, or what nights to study.
This system can still be moldd into something very worthwhile with more change on emphasis than on the system.
First, the freshmen girls should be told that they will be given choice, as freshmen, as to what the school policy on hours will be for them.
If they prove they can follow the restrictions of the dorm system and the honor code that goes with it, then they will be given the chance, as Sophomore;, to set their own hours on a honor system that is truly an honor system.
If the; unable, in the first semester of their sophomore year, to maintain a decent grade average, they will be put on the same system freshmen.
Second, as seniors, all girls wta have a 2. should be allowed to live in an honor dorm.
They will set their own hours, for as seniors they have cei'tainly at sometimewhether at home or during some summer vacation — had sorm perience in deciding their hours.
They will still have to sign out as signing out is more for the benefit of the girls than it is regulation against them.
If one these seniors gets below a 2. her first semester — even if it ' 5 unlikely — she should be put in ; lower class dorm or at least hBV hours in the senior dorm.
The girls would be getting practice in showing their matuntj'i and the school will have the P a ^ in that growth facter that should.
The girls will be g iven . a questionaire on Monday the 27t&On this questionaire they are p*j ing asked to tell what they thin* of the present school dorm system and if they have any suggestionIt is very important that the B»J that like the system as it is shou' 1 state why they think it is a g ood program.
In either case I ^°Q the girls decide what should W done and then see that it is don e ' Colorado College Tiger ■ November 24, 1961 "" *-\ CC Soccer Team geats Air Force The CC soccer giants whipped L Air Force Academy's freshen soccer team by a tally of three goals to one on Tuesday jfternoon November 21st.
After a goal-less gjst half, the CC giants came back ^th redoubled efforts which bore fruit in the tenth minute of the -econd half.
Edward Kuiper collated a perfect in-swinger from f ny Gaskill and by a beautiful j^dy movement clearly waltzed di s way between two Air Force defenders.
He lobbed the ball into Ifie net, leaving the Air Force goalkeeper sprawling helplessly on the marshy goal -mouth.
Two minutes later the Air Force icademy gained an equilizer, but the CC boys were undaunted.
A beautiful pass found the feet of Soloman Nkiwane, who sold a dummy to his opponent and swit-hed the ball to Ed Kuiper.
Eddie teat one man and passed the ball to Soloman, who in a solo effort beat three men in a row, after nfiich he sent a sizzler which went s few inches below the crossbar to plump into the corner of the net for a homer.
In the dying minutes of the game, ""wonder boy"" Eddie sealed the hopes of the Air Force with a perfect grounder.
All attempts by the Air Force boys to reduce the goal feast were foiled by the CC defenders.
ROTC is an infringement upon the academic freedom of the American college student, of questionable value in a student's education and a great waste of some student's time.
In the third paragraph we leani that, basically, the educated citizens control the army and that the ROTC program enables ""inexperienced freshman"" to better fulfill this duty.
If the reasons presented in this letter and by the faculty in their two to one vote and at other times are illegitimate, are *e then to suppose that, equal arguments against dope addiction being invalid, we should support it.
Would Mr Trushel have us support nuclear bombs if we can't get rid of them or perhaps we might rapport cancer or syphilis.
Perhaps Mr Trushel should look at the situation obketively before writing his comments and stop attempting to Merely be goodness incarnate.
The easy victory enabled Coach Jerry Carle to clear the bench as the Tigers registered their fifth win of the year and sent Wesleyan reeling to their ninth straight loss this year and their seventeenth straight loss give Wesleyan their first six over a two year period. points.
After forcing Wesleyan to punt on their first series of downs, the Tigers took over on their own 46yard line and minutes later moved in to score the game's first touchdown.
On the next play, the Tigers again called on Deutscher and the hard running fullback obliged by powering bis way the final seven yards to score.
Later in the first period, freshman halfback Ron Taylor fielded B W' -iryan punt on the Plainsmen's 44-yard line, headed for the right sideline, and behind a wall of blockers raced unmolested into the end zone for the Tigers' second score.
CC's third touchdown came in the second quarter when Jim Blair broke through Wesleyan's defense to block an attempted punt by Norm Washburn.
In one motion, Blair picked the ball off Washburn's toe as if he had intercepted a pass, tucked the pigskin away and hustled 25 yards to score.
At this point Carle called on his reserves, and late in the second quarter Wesleyan finally managed to hit pay dirt.
Tiger quarterback Cubby Welch fumbled late in the second quarter and Wesleyan recovered near the mid-field stripe.
Seconds before the half ended, Washburn clicked on a 45 yard scoring pass to Dan Johnson to nd the Tigers left the field with a 21-6 halftinie advantage.
Neither team could generate a scoring drive in the third quarter, but the Tigers got rolling again in the last period and rucked up two more touchdowns.
The first came on a 22 yard scoring pass from Gary Sparkman to Dan Wright.
This"" time Mike Romero split the uprights for the extra point giving the Tigers a 28-7 lead.
With a little over six minutes remaining the Tiger aerial arm again connected for a touchdown.
This time Welch found slotback Ed DeGeorge alone on the Wesleyan five yard line and hit him for a 25 yard scoring pass.
The Plainsmen's final touchdown came minutes Inter when halfback Dwnyne tiichorb gathered in a Fred Emmerling punt and scooted 76 yards to score.
Wesleyan picked up two more points in the final seconds of the game when Welch was trapped in his own end zone for a safety.
The two points came after the Tiger reserves had staged a tough goal line stand that stopped a Wesleyan scoring threat on the CC one.
They tied for second in the Rocky Mountain Conference with Colorado Mines and Western State.
Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finger lickin' good"" Take-Home Department Open m. to 12m.
OPEN 3-6 Weekdays 9-8:30 Friday t 3 l November 24, 1961 ■ Colorado College Tiger Varsity leers Tangle With Alums Saturday The Colorado College hockey team will open its season tomorrow night at the Broadmoor World Arena against an alumni squad composed of former CC greats.
Head Varsity Coach Tony Frasca, a former All-American, at CC in 1952-53, will take the ice with about 20 other area alumni, some of them dating as far back as 1946-47. w iH or third,"" he said, ""they're all of Besides Frasca, the alumni will feature such former greats as Bob Kahoot, Tom Love, Don Hersack, Harry Whitworth, Bill McDonald and ""Bullet"" Joe Slattery.
The varsity squad started workouts Oct. and Frasca has been quite pleased with their work up to date.
He pointed out that the Tigers have no one outstanding individual performer.
He mentioned that veteran defenseman Paul Kilbreath has shed some weight, and has worked well so far.
Frasca currently has his team divided into three lines, not according to ability, he says, but rather according to how well his stickmen play together as a team.
Frasca indicated that he is very undecided as to who will he his number one goalie.
Veteran Norm Laurence is currently engaged in a battle with Pete Doyle and Art Warwick for the number one spot.
Warwick was injured when he caught a puck in the shoulder at practice last Monday and it is not known whether he will see action tomorrow night.
Students and faculty members will not be admitted to tomorrow night's game with activity cards.
Proceeds from the game will go to improve this year's Freshman team schedule.
Returning Lettermen Build Frasca's Hopes A note of optimism ran through the Broadmoor World Arena last week as Hockey Coach Tony Frasca whistled his Colorado College Tiger ice-men onto the rink for their first practice session of the year.
With seventeen returning lettermen from last year's squad, Frasca looks forward to icing a greatly improved team for the forthcoming season opener against Denver U at Denver.
Norman Laurence, Stan Moskel, Larry Gilbertson, Mike Minelli, Jim Frolick, Alex Yankovich, Doug Hill, Gil Grabowski, Dan McGill, Brian Dutkowski, Don Stouffer, Ken Cairns, Archie Prestayko, Gary Martin, Art Berglund, and Pete Doyle.
Looking for a much improved club after viewing his potential material, Frasca said that he would cut the squad turning out to about 18 men within the next couple of weeks.
He pointed out Denver IT., North Dakota, Michigan and Minnesota as particularly rugged obstacles.
Center Activites There will be a Christmas card workshop on Tuesday November 28th, in Rastall's Crafts Shop.
Both silk screen and block type methods of making Christmas cards will be demonstrated.
This is a chance for anyone to cut down the cost of their cards and at the same time be original.
This Sunday the Cycling Club and all others interested will leave Rastall Center parking lot at 9:00 m. sharp for Waldo Canyon — weather permitting.
This may well be the last ride this Fall, so all those who have been intending to ride and haven't had the chance will not want to miss this beautiful ride.
Ideas about planning and different types of Union programming were exchanged.
Vmtxie-an (Ai&CO-C^niMW — i/i/l iitfg 'Doc' Stabler Cast In Local Production student plajj i ^oraii, Colorado Collegi and a zoology professor ing leading roles in the Col Springs Civic Players production of the play, Look Homeward • n scheduled to open November ^7 f '■tnio'' ■''night run at the Fine AiS Center.
Playing the part of the Pro , taganist, Eugene, is James H p J a sophomore from Swarthmore Prof.
Paul, Minn' The play, based on the first noi of Thomas Wolfe, deals with t M( problems of youth growing up j n small Southern city.
Art Exhibit Includes Works of Art Prof, Works by a Colorado Collep art professor are included in a traveling collection of oils, water. colors and drawings by some the nation's leading artists now being exhibited in galleries ani museums across the country u n( j e j the auspices of the American Fed eration of Arts.
The painter is Bernard P Arnest, professor of art and director of the School of Art at Colorado College.
Included in the traveling collection are works by such American masters as Ralston Crawford, Preston Dickinson, George Gross and Max Weber, regarded as the dean of modem American painting, Arnest, who studied at the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, has been on the faculty at Coloradt College since 1957.
WAGES, Ow« Traditional Sport Shirt Arithmetically tailored with trim tapered bodies for campus and classroom from from the 5.
Debussy's , Clair ile Lune,"" Chopin's ""PolO' Emotion Marks Kovacs Concert By Onica Friend for the second time in two years kins Hall has resounded with ^jons for Stephen Kovacs, ^jd-j-enowned Hungarian pianIn his recital last Sunday at the second in the Strong pJD-. : Stravcheiluled insel Hangers Needed Every CC student who can hang piece of tinsel is invited to help istall Center get ready for the hristmas season on Thursday siting, November 30 from 7:00 i 9:00m.
Trimming the tree ill finish a day of decorating istall, On Thursday afternoon the sority pledge classes, under the Hjrdination of Jr.
Panhellenic, jd the Bengals, the freshman i's pep club, will put up other jcorations. ird for the tree trimmers is iiisic by a combo, food, and singthe lounge.
Throughout the hour and fortyfive minute concert, Mr Kovacs' love of music was evident.
He seemed to long to be a part of the piano and the music appeared to eminate from not only his fingers but from his whole being.
With each piece in the second half he became more emotionally involved.
In fact, the ""Polonaise"" suffered somewhat from an irregular tempo as he strove to project his intense feeling.
Panel Slated on Travel Abroad A Panel Discussion on ""Student Travel and Study Abroad"" will be presented by Cap and Gown on Tuesday, November 28 at 7:15m. in the W.E.S. room.
Oscar Soule, Bob Seelig, Gay Petzold, and Jeannie Gibbs will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the various programs available to students such as the Experiment in International Living, Junior Year Abroad, and Independent Travel.
After a brief presentation, moderated by Mariana Cogswell, the floor will be opened to questions and discussion.
This year, Cap and Gown consists of 10 members and has elected Karen Williamson as president.
They are in charge of coordinating the Sunday Shove Chapel Coffee hours and plan to serve the College through projects like the Student Travel and Study Panel.
Foreign Policy,"" Robert R Pauley, President of the ABC Radio Network, announced.
Money towards the winners' tuitions to post-graduate school will be contributed by stations of the ABC Radio Network, by the AFL-CIO, which sponsors the weeknight ""Edward P Morgan and the News"" program and by Furman, Feiner and Company, Inc., agency for the sponsor.
All ten will receive complete sets of the 1962, 24-volume Encyclopedia Britannica.
Plans call for the winners to corrverse and dine with Cabinet members, senators and congressmen representing key committees, and the heads of various federal agencies.
DON ODEN, one of CC Stockton and Betsy James. ety show highlights, lllllllllllllllillliilllllllillllllllllllll When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
WILLIAM R HOCHMAN, a somber and statuesque Oedipus Rex, in a scene from the Greek tragedy of that name which plays next week in Perkins Hall.
Oedipus Rex' 11 of the 39 roles in the 2,500 year-old"" Sophoclean tragedy.
William E McMillan, associate professor of speech and drama and director of the production, said this marks the first time in years faculty members have been cast in major roles.
Colorado College stage productions previously have had all-student, or nearly all-student casts.
Neale R Reinitz, associate professor of English, plays the Priest; John H Lewis, instructor b Geology, plays Creon; Dr.
Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, plays the messenger from Corinth; Dr.
Douglas freed, assistant professor of psychology, is the messenger from the Palace ; and the Rev.
Kenneth Burton, assistant professor of re'igion and minister at Shove Memorial Chapel, plays Choragus.
Paul Kutsehe, Jr., assistant professor °f sociology and anthropology; ^obin M Rudoff, instructor in history; and Dr.
Public performances of the famed Greek drama are scheduled for December 7 and 8 in Perkins Hall on the college campus.
Faculty members have been cast CC Debators Host High School Meet The Colorado College Debate Club is sending representatives this weekend to two separate tournaments in addition to hosting a large high school tournament on the CC campus, Professor Al Johnson is taking nine students to Albuquerque, New Mexico, to participate in the Duke City Invitational Tournament, and Jack S Walker is taking four students to Ft.
This meet, normally one of the largest high school tournaments in the state, will include debate, oratory and extemporaneous speaking.
Student chairmen for this event include Chris Griffiths, David Furgason and Nancy Dehlin.
Novice debators are Robert Thrasher, David Bitters, Faith O'Reilly and David Helms.
Peter Trushel is entered in poetry interpretation, and Power, Caudill and Heller are entered in other individual events.
James Heckman, Peter Bonavich, Mark Streuli and Karen Johnston are entered in the novice division at the Ft.
Jack Walker, a former debator forced to give up active competition because of ill health, will accompany this group as coach.
Public Lecture Irish Author Speaks Thursday One of the most versatile literary figures of our time will be on CC's campus next week to give a public lecture and to discuss the crafts of fiction, poetry, biography, criticism, and travel book writing with students and faculty members of Colorado College.
He is Sean O'Faolain, Irish writer and critic, who will give a public lecture at 8m.
The talk CC Defeats AFA In Chess Tourney The Colorado College Chess Club defeated the United States Air Force Academy 8-4 in a match held Sunday, November 2G at the Air Force Academy.
Twelve CC students and professors under the leadership of Professor Paul Rernanl participated in the dual meet.
Winning players for Colorado College included Dean Juan Reid, Professor Bernard and Professor Alvin Eoderman.
Also winning their boards were John Reid, James Cotton, Joe Wilcox and Wayne Maxwell.
Professor Al Johnson and John Keiser drew their games, while Professor David Van Becker, and Terry Rosen and Fred Luft were unsuccessful in their attempts.
The Mademoiselle College Board is presenting a fashion show, ""Budget Boutique"" this Friday, December 1st. at 4:00m. downtown at Kaufman's.
Active and spectator sportswear, class and date dresses, cocktail and formal dresses, and coats will be shown with an emphasis on the holiday season.
The members of C.C.'s College Board will be the models for this first show.
Later on in the year other girls on campus will ,be given an opportunity to model for the fashion shows.
Advent Vespers Slated for Dec. will be open to the public without charge.
His first writing was done in Gaelic, although this was an acquired tongue.
His latest book of short stories, ""I Remember, I Remember,"" was published by Aalantic-Little and Brown in October.
O'Faolain is known throughout the world for his novels, short stories, literary essays, biographies and magazine articles.
He is the author of an article on New Orleans in the November issue of Holiday Magazine.
The Irish man of letters told reporters in Philadelphia the other day he was the ""only humanist in the group"" of a half-dozen distinguished scholars speaking this year at colleges having Phi Beta Kappa chapters.
He said he is able to ""retire back into myself"" from time to time during his busy lecture schedule to do some work on the autobiography he is writing.
O'Faolain said he thought it was going to be a short book, but that it might take a year to complete.
The Irish writer, who has lived and traveled in the United States extensively since World War II, said one of the main drawbacks of this country is that it has no pubs.
He has become one of the best known interpreters of Irish life, and the Irish Revolution in which he took an active part.
Lewis Knnpp of the English Department will road selections from the Christmas poetry of many different centuries.
This will be a beautiful and inspiring service, and all members of the college are warmly invited to attend.
New Life of Russians Featured in Assembly The new and interesting life of the Russian of today was portrayed at the 11 o'clock Tuesduy morning lecture by Professors Malyshev, Paine, and Reinitz, and students Julie Bohlke and Oscar Soule.
All five panel members, who have been recent visitors to the Soviet Union, described personal experiences they had with Russian people.
The five found the Russians to be most interesting and extremely curious as to our ways and customs of life.
Russian people were described generally as very friendly and courteous toward American travelers.
They seemed to be most interested in our material goods and our capitalist way of life.
With the appearance of an American automobile, Russians are eager to see the capitalist who owns it.
Mr Soule brought out the constant problem we face in foreign policy today resulting from our "" is in the South.
He stressed the fact that there is no religious persecution in Russia today.
The home may encourage religion but the educational institutions will not.
In conclusion it was agreed upon by the panel that Russian people and their government are extremely interested in living in a peaceful, friendly world. racial proble nmented i it** Official Colorado College Student Publication EDITORIAL STAFF POWER Manafri Editor rhnrle.H Puckett Dunlop ■ Boh Ike.
Sin-inns, Colorado Time and Activities This past weekend, we had the good fortune to attend a retreat at Camp La Foret.
Burton as part of his newly-developing campus religious program, was a very worthwhile and stimulating affair.
Such programs are valuable additions to CC's already good assortment of extra-curricular or co-curricular programs.
One of the real advantages to be found among these is that a student may choose to take in or to participate in those which have special interest or meaning to him.
Of course, the pressures of time and conflicts in scheduling often limit a student's involvement in these activities.
Yet we wonder if most students are aware of the advantages to be found in these organized activities.
Even when the conflicts of time and scheduling are recognized, we still find that attendance at many such programs —g. last weekend's retreat, the Thursday coffee hours, the Tuesday assemblies — is poor.
Perhaps we are being unfair, many will say, in that the purpose of the college is education, and the student's first obligation is to his studies.
We might retract the words of the preceding paragraph but for two considerations.
First, we are far from convinced that most students spend most of their waking hours studying.
What generally happens is that the student is faced with apportioning considerable amounts of non-study time to other activities.
Very often, no time is allotted tc these organized extracurricular activities simply because the student is not aware of them or of the value they hold.
Secondly, many of these organized activities, from Mountain Club to International Relations Club, serve an educational purpose.
One might learn about useful physical activity, about faraway lands, about railroad research, about political organization on the precinct level, about army ants, etc., by participating in such activities.
We shall try to continually remind our readers of the many activities taking place on our campus and of their advantages — educational, recreational, practical, social, or what have you.
A Second Loss The ranks of Congress have suffered another severe loss, the second in a matter of weeks.
Senator Styles Bridges, Republican of New Hampshire, was, at 63, the ranking minority member of the United States Senate.
He was ranking Republican on the powerful Appropriations Committee and second-ranking on the crucial Armed Services Committee.
Senator Bridges defended his conservative principles knowledgeably and convincingly both in the committee room and on the Senate floor.
His character and ability won him the esteem of his colleagues, Republicans and Democrats alike.
As chairman of the Policy Committee, Bridges consistently brought the diverse elements of the Republican minority together into an effective, constructive opposition force.
This in itself stands as an unusual tribute to a great statesmanpolitician.
Proposed By-Law Amendments to Article 1, Sections 4 and Onica Friend. _ tilth Snoti(fTas8, ;i H ,|,, Trear Sunley.
BUSINESS STAFF , r TIM MOE atrer . — JOHN HANEY , u lLant BRUCE FRANKLIN SECTION 4 The members of the Executive Council shall take office during the month of May and shall serve one calendar year.
Representatives of the outgoing senior class shall serve until the end of the Spring Semester.
SECTION 5 No change No change No change (di No change The election of freshmen representatives shall be conducted the same as the other class representatives.
OMIT No change In case of a tie-vote for any ASCC office a run-off election shall be held within a week following the initial election.
All rules pertaining to the initial election will be valid during the run-off election.
The person in each class receiving the highest number of votes in the class commissioner elections shall serve as president of that class, the person with the second highest number of votes shall serve as Secret ary-Treasurer.
The President of ASCC and the Election Committee shall tabulate the ballots.
A written report of the results of the election shall be sent to each candidate by the Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee.
The Chairman of the ASCC Election Committee will submit a report of the election results to the TIGER within one week following the election.
The ballots shall be packaged together with a copy of the results and stored in the ASCC files for one calendar year and then destroyed.
No change Should a vacancy occur within one month before the end of either semester for any reason in the position of class commissioners, a class meeting Writj :ted by the ASCC Electioi held within the first two weeks Committee shall be of the academii mester following the vacancy.
The class election S be conducted by the ASCC Election Committee j will be held within one week after the primary e i"" tion.
Executive Council shall approve his eligik; ity before the appointment is made valid.
The president, or th acting as such, shall be delegated the powe point any eligible student to fill an interve cancy of the ASCC Executive Board until a tion for this office has been held.
Nomii tion petitions shall be presented to the Chairman the ASCC Election Committee at least one week be fore election.
The subject of women's dorm hours was considered in last week's ""Comment"" column in preparation for a questionnaire received this week by the women dorm residents.
The article misrepresented, to some extent, the ideas behind this questionnaire and its immediate purpose.
The Hours Committee is investigating the problem of women's hours because the present system seems faulty and is constantly being contested, at least verbally.
It is felt that while the present hours are necessary for freshmen, sophomores, and probably juniors, a senior woman is practically ready to go ""on her own"" and be considered responsible for all her actions by her society.
The fact that as a senior she is still restricted seems a poor preparation for the life after college.
The Hours Committee feels that one of the primary purposes of a liberal arts college is to help the student's ability to adjust and carry the responsibility for his studies now, as well as to help make him ready for later life.
The idea of an honor dorm for senior women is one way of bringing responsibility back to the student.
Each girl would have her own key and would be responsible only to herself, although signing out would still be required for purposes of safety.
Those senior women not interested in the honor dorm would live with underclass women and abide by the existing hours.
If the results of last week's questionnaire seem favorable towards the idea of a senior women's honor dorm, a letter will be sent to the parents of this year's junior and senior women to find out their feelings on the subject.
We want some people that cai actually paint good pictures, pla) a musical instrument, wi short story, and many things — even if their major litical science.
They have been prepared to do well m their chosen field, but can not P beyond into the world of othei things that call— or should callus all.
We need to show Have You Seen 'Oedipus Rex7 connection between now seem in f>' unrealted fields.
Then we may ^ fewer math majors say that the> hate art, and fewer art majo fi say that our colleges would turn out a * e men who are more than just "" e ""' versed in many fields.
Then tbtf would turn out some men ^"" could actively and creatively ta** part in many fields, and in the )rocess further the human race Colorado College Tiger December 1961 ir; ■PillChape Ihtft kn; :eloc ,,u»*i■C'hri Ibe ( Karei Fred ; jrst Xmas Concert fill Be Held Dec.
The first Christmas concert of e season after the Advent Vespy Service will be ""The Christmas «oi7t"" or "" D 'e Weihnachtsgesehi|ite,"" by Carl Orff.
It will be preyed in an assembly sponsored « the Music and German Departien ts of Colorado College on Tuesav December 6 at 11m. in Shove Chap el Carl Orff, composer of the famis ""Carmina Burana,"" and one of e foremost of modem composers, ;; known for his use of medieval M jlodies and instruments and a luasi-medieval orchestration.
His ■Christmas Story,"" written in 1948, ■ill be performed under the direcn of Mr Donald Jenkins by the College Madrigal Choir, soloists, , n d an instrumental ensemble of recorders, celli, percussion and guiThe speakers, coached in Bain by Mrs.
A translation of the dialogue from the original Bavarian dialect into English will .be /ovided to aid the audience in understanding this unusual work.
Drane Wilkinson ;rmon Title: Death and the Christian Traditionally the season of Advent deals with the ""Cast things"" iated with the coming of t; death, hell, judgment, is a great deal of confusion ated with these events and people imagine that the Bible speaks about some vague, wy notion of these somehow happening after this life is over.
It has been characterized by the phrase ""pie in the sky when you The object of the sermon is to try and point out what *ipe ble actually says about death id to emphasize the ""this worldly"" character of the biblical mes;e and its relevance to our comn life now.
Many Christian peohave non-biblical concepts mixed up with their faith and asiate it with what is called the spiritual, whereas the Bible which speaks of the ""incarnation — the made flesh,"" is vitally concerned with the material.
We can see Ms in the way the biblical writers ;peak of this theme of death.
Outstanding Juniors Receive Perkins Prize Two juniors at Colorado College have been awarded Perkins Prizes for outstanding academic achievement.
John S Power of 16(50 S Lincoln, Denver, and Miss Lynne Vincent, daughter of Mr and Mrs.
The two had the highest academic averages of the sophomore class la st year.
Robe of zoology Z Bn prof> at Colorado College, discussed the social life of army ants before a joint meeting of the Scientific Research Society of America and the Sigma Xi last evening in Rastall Center.
This Friday at the FAC (Friday afternoon club) is sponsoring a Big Bopper at 4:45 in the Hub.
The music will be furnished by the Rythm Tones consisting of three electric guitars, a drum, and piano.
Since this is quite a chunk of money, the student may be inclined to wonder just what his money is paying for; how much actually goes for the books, how much for operating costs, and how much is profit for the bookstore.
Mary C Vickerman, manager of the Colorado College bookstore provided enough room to house the 5000 the following information.
The prices on all books are set by the publishers, not by the bookstore.
Five percent of this goes to pay the postage in order to get the books here.
Vickerman, manager of the bookstore, stated that it takes approximately a 16%. margin on which to operate, so actually no profit is made on textbooks.
And, at the end of the year, any profit goes into the general college fund.
The taking back and re-selling of used books is handled on a consignment basis.
Used books are sold for 75% of their original cost, the student receiving 50% of their original cost.
Vickerman stated, however, that all of this goes to pay for the red tape operations, such as bookkeeping and auditing, involved in the handling of these books.
Vicmentioned that someday she hopes the bookstore will be able to cover the paperback field.
MC Perry KRCC-FM is now presenting music and news each weekday from seven to eight in the morning.
On Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays Vivian Arviso and Sam Coleman head the show with soft strains of ""Winter Wonderland"" type music and then present a half mour of national, regional, and campus news.
On Tuesdays and Thursdays Stanley Zagrodnik follows the same schedule of news and light, eye-opening music.
Ellis Will Judge In Short Story Contest Miss Amanda M Ellis, professor of English and writer in residence at Colorado College, has been named one of three judges for the annual short story contest sponsored by the Denver Women's Pi-ess Club.
Judging with Miss Ellis are Margaret Cousins, Doubleday editor, and Anne Einselin, assistant editor of the Ladies Home Journal.
Aside from the paperbacks used as texts, the store does carry 1,500 titles.
Any other listed in the paperback catalogue can be ordered for a student or professor with a delivery service of only three to five days.
GC's Rastall Center Featured in Natl, iag, Colorado College's Rastall Center is the subject of a cover story in the November issue of a national magazine.
It was written by F Lamar Ketsey of Colorado Springs, architect of the modern college union building, completed last year.
Featuring an exterior view of the center on the cover of the magazine, the article contains eight photographs and a floor plan of the §800,000 Colorado College building.
The Colorado Springs architect said a half-million meals were served in Rastall Center during its first year of existence.
But they also learned about diamond rings — discovered there is a way to be sure of the diamond you buy.
They saw how Artcarved guarantees every diamond in writing for color, cut, clarity and carat weight.
And, they were most delighted with Artcarved'a magnificent assortment of award-winning styles.
Visit your local Artcarved jeweler and see all the wonderful Artcarved styles, including those selected as the ""10 best"" by the College Queens.
MEIrose 3-6069 I 1961 * Colorado College Tiger Radio Programs to Feature CC ""The Role of the Private College in Higher Education"" will be discussed by four Colorado college presidents at 9m.
Louis T Benezet, president of Colorado College, Colorado Springs; Richard F Ryan, S.J., president of Regis College, Denver; Sister Frances Marie , president of Loretto Heights College, Loretto; and Eugene Dawson, president of Colorado Woman's College, Denver.
During the following 12 weeks, life on the four private college campuses will be depicted.
The series will feature Regis College on December 10, Loretto Heights on December 17, Colorado Woman's College on December 24, and Colorado College on December 31.
The programs will continue in this order in January nd Febaruary according to Dale Morgan, KHOW program director.
Here Are 1906 Regulations Three Renowned Musicians Return to Campus Three renowned guest artistteachers of music will return to the Colorado College campus next summer.
AU three have made extensive concert tours of Europe and the United States.
In addition to giving private lessons and ensemble classes, the three musicians will join with Professor Lanner in presenting six faculty concerts at the Fine Arts Center.
Summer Session dates at Colorado College are June 18 through August 10.
Our aim is to have a wellrounded record collection, and additions in the areas of jazz, folk music, classical music and popular music have accomplished this.
Come and try The Turkey Bowl, held in Rastall on November 20, 21, 22 was won by Bill Evans with a high series of 631.
He was awarded two free turkey dinners at the Chicken Shack on Thanksgiving.
SUN DOWN SKIING will be held again next Thursday night for the second of three programs to be held at the Broadmoor Ski Area.
It will leave the Rastall Center parking lot at ti:30m. after an early dinner in Rastall.
The bus is free to all ski club members along with free instruction for any interested beginners.
Further information about this will be posted on the ski club announcement board in Palmer Hall.
Undergraduates shall submit all plans for entertain^, to the Dean of Women some time in advance, and shall attej only such entertainments as are approved by the authoritji of the College.
Undergraduates shall not leave the campus on excursions of any kind without registering at the Dean's office.
Seniors and Juniors only may go on trips with men, either walking, driving, or riding, without a chaperone, in parties of not less than four or not more than eight 4.
The young women of the three upper classes only may ride or drive without a chaperone.
In all cases of riding, parents' approval is necessary, and the party must consist of at least two.
In the case of driving, if two horses are used, a driver must be taken from the livery stable.
Freshmen who wish to ride or drive must be accompanied by an older person who is an experienced horsewoman.
Undergraduates shall register place and character of evening entertainment, chaperone, and hour of return with the House Mistress, and report to her in person on return, 2.
Undergraduates shall not be out more than two evenings a week ; Freshmen, not more than one.
This does not include evenings THE WHICKER BILL is o GIFT AND CARD SHOP full of ""Happy Things"" including a Swedish Piggy Bank with a Laurel Wreath annual his bacon region.
Undergraduates shall not out with men in the evening; q$ out a chaperone, except cases when men are allowf corts.
General spreads and othei tertainments encluding girls onl; shall be confined to Friday 10.
Undergraduates shall not i tertain men on Sunday (exci those from out of town) or atten church services with them 11.
Chafing dishes may used until the owners have signt the chafing-dish regulation have deposited them with ti President of the Executive Board.
Arrangements must be mad with the House Mistress befoi™ using chafing-dishes in the publ rooms.
Undergraduates who are «j tertaining out-of-town men sha observe the same rules that pertai to College men.
Dan Wright, 22; Dave Harrington, 24; Farrell Thompson, 23; Al Lizzul, 33; John Reid, 44; Farrell Howell, 34; Barry Anthony, 45; Steve Sabom, 41; Dave Krell, 42; Bill Burke, 31; Ed Loosli, 32; Carl Cabbiness, )5; Greg Smith, 21; and Bill Pelz, 25.
Coaching staff, from left; Trainer Roosevelt Collins, Coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack, Manager Fred Singleton, and Assistant Coach Jim Hanks.
Against Creighton „ . , n n , Alumni Hockey, Eastlack s Cagers Prepared Basket yj Games For First Game Tonight Reported Page 6 The rattle of basketballs formed a measured canopy of sound over Cossitt Hall this week as Coach ""Red"" Eastlack's Colorado College cagers weave their way toward their opening game tonight.
PORTS ""There might be tougher teams in the nation,"" Eastlack said, ""but Creighton is about as tough as you can schedule them.
Red will have a better idea after the middle of the week how his manpower is going to shape up.
He hasn't made up his mind at all yet, he says, but adds that many of the younger Tiger cagers are showing plenty of fire and ability.
Last week Ed Loosli, Bill Burke and Barry Anthony were stand-outs in inter-squad practice.
Eastlack is also looking forward to the addition of senior Dan Wright to the squad this week.
A veteran of last year's championship team, Wright has been busy with the gridiron Tigers throughout the season and will start his basketball practice this week.
Even more important than the lopsided score was the glimpse that the 2,500 hockey fans received of a greatly improved CC varsity ice squad, Although they played against a badly over-matched alumni, Tony Frasca's Tigers showed that they quite possibly possess the skill and ability to climb the tricky ladder of the Western Hockey League and end ar>m I heir dark horse standing.
Both teams move to the Broadmoor World Arena Saturday night for the second game of the series.
Although the Pioneers lost heavily from last year's NCAA Championship squad via the graduation route, Coach Tony Frasca of the Tigers estimates that they will be anything but a pushover this year.
To face them, he has 17 returning lettermen and some skilled transfers.
They all saw action against the alumni Saturday night and proved that they can put the puck where it counts when the chips are down.
Leading Saturday night's scoring were two of last year's crew, Duke Dutkowski and Gary Martin, and a sophomore, John Simus, all of whom rang the red light twice.
Each of the three racked up a goal in the first period, and one more from veteran Alex Yankvich and another from Marv Parliment rocketed the varsity squad ahead at the end of the first period, 5-0.
The alumni managed to find the range in the second period, firing three scores for their total of the game.
Hersack scored the second himself with an assist from Len Maccini and Gambucci went in for the third with assists from the ever-present Hersack and Bunt Hubchik.
But they failed to hold the varsity scoring down with John Simus, Ken Cairns, Jim Froelich, Gary Martin and Archie Prestayko all hitting the net.
Slowing down from the hot pace in the third period, the grads managed to hold the Tigers to two goals fired by Wayne McAlpine and Duke Dutkowski, but failed to score themselves.
And the action against the grads — who were nobody's easy mark — seems to prove Frasca's contention.
How they will stack up against a fired-up Denver team next Friday is open to question, .but Frasca picked out some mistakes his crew made Saturday night and it's a sure bet they'll put a lot of time on these during the week's practice session.
Saturday night's tilt against Denver will be the only home game the Tigers plav until they meet Michigan Tech ""here in the latter part of December.
Faceoff time for the Denver game at the Broadmoor World Arena will be 8:15m., Saturday, December 2.
Varsity, Alums Clash Coach ""Red"" Eastlack's 1961-62 hoopsters polished off a final round of scrimmage opponents as they made final preparation this week for the forthcoming season.
Paced by Jim Wexels, Jim Hanks, and other familiar names such as Art Ackerman, Ron MeCarty, Paul Mott, and Leroy Williams, the alumni was able to hold a lead until the final seconds of the first half when the score was tied 34-all.
The story was nearly the same in the second half, as the alumni jumped to a quick ten point lead, but the training and conditioning of the varsity began to show up late in the third quarter.
The alumni, however, continued to hold its lead, due to some excellent second effort attempts by Jim Hanks, and to a slightly superior scoring punch.
By the time the fourth period rolled around, the varsity had overcome its jitters, and was able to organize an effective offensive drive.
THE LAST WORD IN FASHION Cy's Standard Service See Cy Befor e You Buy Pick Up S Del very Gas Oil Lubricati >n Tires Batteries Expert Tune Up Dale & Nevada MElr Dse 4 9SS3 Colorado College Tiger ■ December I, 1961 'Horizons Unlimited' Returns This Year Due to overwhelming response last year, The Theodore Fisher Management has carried ""Horizons Unlimited"" into its second season.
This week, John M Goddard will present ""Kayaks Down the Nile,"" the story of his amazing journey from the source of the Nile in equatorial Africa, 4200 miles to its mouth on the Mediterranean Sea.
His trip has been ranked with the conquest of Mount Everest and the voyage of the Knn-Tiki and should prove interesting.
There will be a matinee on Sunday, December 3 at 2:30m., and repeat performances Monday, December 4, at 7:15m. and 9:15 m.
I ji ■ ""^m The staff of Mademoiselle S I azine is again offering §500 and publication in their magazine to NAVIGATOR TOM SIMENSEN and driver, Steve Frink, congratulate the winners of their annual art and ^msetves on placing first in Rally for the Keg. college fiction contests.
The fiction contest is open to Rally for Keg Proves Successful SKSSrS The Rally for the Keg, held last «« ° f 2500 to 5000 words.
All storKridav, November 24th, proved to ,es must have fictitious characters 'successful as last year's Eal;ini1 situations or they will be disThe cars were led bv instrucAnnouncement qualified.
Judges for the 1061-62 art contest The route took the participants to Black Forest and the Garden of (he Gods and ended at the Iron Springs Chateau.
Here the group of 21 cars and over 80 people enjoyed dinner, dancing and European Rally Films.
First place went to driver Steve Frink and navigator Tom Simensen, who ongratulated on their driving skill.
They were allowed to tap the traveling Keg and dispose of its contents.
Sue Brackney and Jerry Macon captured second place •hile Rod Mayo and Bob Blauvelt took third.
Rastall Center's December art exhibition is a showing of paintings and prints by Louise Hovey, a Colorado College student majoring in art.
These works will be on sale, and interested buyers should inquire at Rastall Desk.
The prints and paintings would make nice Christmas gifts or would be good in one's own collection.
Unipersilg S6op (Lee's Llyod Goodrich, Whitney Museum of American Art; and Roger Schoening, Art Director of Mademoiselle.
The two winners will be asked to illustrate one of the winning fiction entries for publication.
Additional information and contest rules may be obtained from the same address.
Wood Elected Prexy Of Admission Group Mr Richard E Wood, Director of Admission at Colorado College, has been unanimously elected president of the Rocky Mountain Regional Conference of the Admission Associates of Co-Educational Liberal Arts Colleges.
This appointment will make Mr Wood the most powerful admission-policymaker in the organization, together with giving him considerable influence in any major decisions.
Mr Wood entered the CC admission after two years as Executive Director of the recent and hugelysuccessful Building Fund Campaign, which was responsible for the current multi-million dollar program presently underway.
BILL PIGOT Six years ago Bill Pigot graduated from college with an engineering degree.
Today he is responsible for the performance of 12 microwave relay stations, numerous communications cables, and other equipment.
COMPANIES Bill Pigot of Pacific Northwest Bell Telephone Company, and the other young engineers like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES '') December I, 1961 • Colorado College Tiger Relreaters Discuss Bonhoeffer's Works A dozen students, three professors, and two ministers found in La Foret Camp and in the writings of the German martyr-theologian, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the ingredients of a very stimulating weekend last Saturday and Sunday.
Burton and the second by the Reverend Joseph Carroll of the First Congregational Church, dealt very thoroughly with several exerpts from Bonhoeffer's Life Together, dealing with the Christian Community, and Prisoner for God, written while Bonhoeffer, who opposed National Socialism in Germany, was confined in a prision camp.
In addition to the discussion, the retreaters participated in volleyball, soccer, and pingpong matches, community singing, dancing, and even the highland fling.
A vesper service was held in the camp's Spanish-style chapel Saturday evening.
Mr Burton has expressed his hope that more such retreats can be scheduled and that those in coming months will be better attended.
The brochures are considered one of the finest sources of student travel information available today.
They include information on special summer travel — study programs in France, Italy, Japan and Latin America, hostel and work camp programs, and prices for steamship and airline transAtlantic passage as well as other pertinent information.
In addition, the brochures contain itineraries for each of the general NSA programs.
These programs include East West Tours, covering Europe from Holland to the Soviet Union; NorthSouth Tours, beginning in England and visiting in turn Scotland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Switzerland, France and Italy ; Central European Tours; Southern European Tours and many others including a Drive-It-Yourself Tour, the Wayfarer, the inexpensive Hobo Tour, short Whirlwind and the Sea-Sky Tour.
A special highlight of each NSA program is a party with students living in every country which a group visits.
Professor Brown and Sc ; faculty members from Sev ' leading colleges and unive^;, making up the advisory panel*, in Washington, D.C., WednJ through Saturday, November 18, considering the proposals Schools selected will tejj NSF grants to offer free to J fied elementary teachers gen science institutes, which si vera eight weeks in length.
Some elementary teachers, superv 1 and principals attended the j tutes last Dr.
WAQER, Own* Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Col.
Curphy. ) en ny, Stetson, Kuehnert, McNeill, Johnson, Greening, Gilbertson, Thiesen, Strassburger.
Cook, Worchester, Nussbaum, Lavers, Fisher. effort to members nite the advanced military brc ihHih.-d. fraternity will be in charge Military* Ball, all advanced iOTC functions, and all social unctions of the ROTC department urado College, first formal initiation was t the Fort Carson Officer's Jlub.
General Iward Dunn, Commander of Fort irsoii; President Benezet; Dean lid; Col.
IMA Carol Sing Siated Thursday The Independent Men's Associa)n of Colorado College will prent the Second Annual Christmas ""ol Sing, December 14 at 8:00 K in the parking lot just north *e Bemis Quad.
The sing will be an all-achooi ^""together around a bonfire to 'H carols before students leave ,r [ lie Holidays.
Donald P Jenkins, CC choir *Mor, will be present to lead ""* singing, and I.M.A. will be »g hot chocolate for all.
Present Orff Work By Onica Friend As all of those present in Shove at Tuesday's performance of ""Die Weihnachtsgeschichte"" can testify, Mr Jenkins and his ensemble of speakers, singers, and instrumentalists did a beautiful and moving production of Carl Orff's musical settingof the Christmas Story.
The medieval modes of the work, characteristic of Orff, are perfectly suited to the quietness, beauty, and mysteriousness of the birth of Christ.
Instead we see Campus Drinking Discussed In Coffee Hour Program At the Rastall Coffee hour on Thursday afternoon, a panel of two professors, Dr.
Sue Dare as the only lady was given the dubious honor of beginning the discussion.
She felt that boredom is at the heart of the issue, which Rastall Center solves to a great extent by bringing more activities „_ , , , , v reshmen are hit hard with 'social drinking' when they arrive Oil campus, 1 ' said Sue Dare.
Drinking livens up a party, but often today it becomes a compulsive social drive.
As they can no longer be held in the city parks, the danger of having to drive long distances is a serious one.
Boyce suggested that we ""rent' the parks from the city as the city officials would probably welcome the money as long as our functions are scheduled events with planned agendas.
The reason is that this is a condition expressly stated in the college charter which Dr.
Lewis also emphasized the legal problem involved if the administration were held responsible for the actions of inebriated individuals.
Colorado College spirit, it is a relief to find someone who has not forgotten the essence of the birth as it must have appeared to those present.
Orff's shepherds represent Everyman, uncomprehending but awed by the splendor and mystery, and as such add the touch of realism so needed as man's view of the Event becomes more and more obscured by clouds of incense and the flickering light of midnight candles.
No longer do we have the simplicity to say, as did the Third Shepherd, ""Get down on your knees, and honor him, the heavenly child,"" We can not see Mary the opulence of our society as it makes its yearly pilgrimage.
The beauty and simplicity has been pushed far into the background, but this production of the Christmas Story has recaptured it at least momentarily.
The instruments and the Madrigal Choir under Mr Donald Jenkins were nicely balanced and carried well through the Chapel, and the speakers and soloists did an excellent job of projecting their parts to the audience.
AH concerned are to be thanked for a moment of the true Christmas spirit.
French Club Plays Scheduled Tuesday The Colorado College French Club will present two one-act comedies at 8:15m.
Both plays, to be acted by students of French, will be presented in the original French.
Wallace C Boyce, professor of French and chairman of the romance languages department, and members of the college's drama department are assisting in the production.
Directing ""The School for Widows"" are Ruth Snodgrass, a senior from Flushing, Long Island, N.Y., and Herving Madruga, assistant professor of French.
Anyone who is interested in competing for this award should submit his plan, in as full a form as necessary to make it completely clear, to the librarian before the end of the first semester, January 26, 1961.
Submissions will be judged on the substance of the plan proposed and its practicality rather than on length or literary merit.
Rastall Announces Photo Competition Rastall Center is sponsoring a photo contest from nqw until January 10.
It is open to all students, members of the faculty, and administration.
The black and white photos must be 8x10"" prints, and be in a white cardboard frame.
Not more than four black and white prints and/or three slides in each class may be entered.
First, second and third places on each class will receive $10, $6, and $3 gift certificates from Stewart's Photo Shop.
Entries must be turned in no later than January 10 at Rastall Center Desk.
Ik Another aspect of these 'picnics' which the sororities have considered is the possibility of serving food to act as a ""sponge"" to the beer.
Those who don't drink should not expect to be entertained but should bring their own fun, using imagination and games.
In answer to a student's question of why a person will drink weekend after weekend despite an endless succession of ""sad Sundays,"" Cordy said that in our society of rigid social standards it gives an individual an 'excuse' to act crazy.
The ti'iisioi of the wee k demauds a highly e nergeti fo m ol entortainm ent.
Lewis ""and maybe the time will come when these dec isiuns 25 High School Meet In CC Debate Contest Nearly two hundred high school debaters and their coaches took part in CC's annual invitational debate tournament last Saturday.
The tournament was directed by Professor Woodson Tyree, Professor Robin Rudolf, Chris Griffiths, Dave Furgason, and Skip Meis, Palmer took first place in the tournament, with Regis and Denver South walking off with second and third places, respectively.
Individual victories in the extemporaneous division were Jim Cavalar, Regis, first place; Dave Fisher, Lincoln, second place; and Ken Sandoral, La Junta, third place.
In the oratory division, Bob Knight of Lincoln placed first, Dominic Enrietta of Trinidad placed second, and Mike Albi of Regis took third.
Caroline Crejke GaUHalporn, Terry Kidner, Dan Jnffe, Carol Sue Brackncy, Beth Fincke, Onica Friend.
Ever since the Kennedy administration began, reports have come out of Washington concerning Bowles conduct.
He often bypassed Secretary Dean Rusk to present his new ideas to the President himself, often snarling or counteracting the policies of the State Department.
Conducting our foreign policy is, after all, a complex day-to-day operation which requires not only new insights but also responsible, experienced administration.
The replacement of Chester Bowles with a proven and experienced administrator from within the State Department is a step forward in creating an effective foreign policy.
We believe, at the outset, that some of these activities are much more valuable than others.
Moreover, we would argue that a student benefits more from these activities by allotting his time well, and from devoting his extra-curricular efforts to a few substantive activities.
One student, however, might believe that certain activities have such value, another not.
In any case, the point is simply that a value judgment is involved in selecting activities, and a student ought to make that judgment with some thought and consideration.
A second facet, then, in addition to this value judgment, is that of the time involved.
We would contend that students suffer in either of two ways by misusing the time they set aside for extra-curricular activities.
They either give time to so many activities that they can participate fully or effectively in none, or they can get so involved in a single activity that they deprive themselves of any of the benefits of other activities.
Our extra-curricular activities are an important part of our college experience.
In this class the students would be expected to complete a full length book, poetry collection, or any of the other modes of creative writing.
In fact, the only part of the work that would be done in the classroom would be that which the student desired to do;e., if a student should have some general or specific writing problem, we would be free to consult his professor at certain specified times.
At the end of the first semester, the student would turn in his completed work for criticism; if this course was intended to run two semesters, the students working on the shorter problems would revise their work of the first semester, and those working on novels, or other extended assignments would spend the second semester finishing and polishing their work.
The student enrolled in this course should be allowed complete freedom of choice in his selection of the type of writing he desired to do; however, an attempt should be made to limit the choice to the type of creative writing at which the professor was particularly proficient in explaining.
The truly creative student does not need the enticement of credit and possible publication of his work to write.
Many students would take a course in creative writing feeling it would be a ""snap course,"" and would be in over their heads.
It is true that many people are creative without added incentives, but it should not be necessary for a student to sacrifice time that could be used for a credit-course in order to write.
Also, a creative writing class would make it possible for many students to discover talent they were not aware of, or develop a writing hobby into a writing career.
I feel that there are a sufficient number of interested students on this campus to make such a course worth the college's time and effort.
It is up to those who read this article, and who are interested in such a plan, to make their wants known.
Jurisdiction A Any member of the college community has the right to submit a case of student nonacademic misconduct to the Committee on Student Conduct.
B Any student in the college accused of nonacademic misconduct has the right to have his case heard by the Committee on Student Conduct, subject to the approval of a Jurisdiction Subcommittee composed of the deans of men and women and the chairman and a duly appointed representative of the opposite sex from the Committee on Student Conduct.
C The jurisdiction which is not defined below over all cases of student nonacademic misconduct which might involve major disciplinary action shall be deeded by the Jurisdiction Subcommittee.
D Same as paragraph B of the existing Section II, except that Inter-Hall Council should read IntraHall Council.
G Each month during the school year, or more frequently if the subcommittee decides, the Jurisdiction Subcommittee shall meet to discuss all cases that were handled by the respective deans of men and women since the last meeting.
For best results please submit all material double-spaced, | v written form to the TIGER bo material.
All material will be r( with the above will help assurt in Rastall ned if >ur material of publication.
Your coop eralj J Ttom the Chair By Chris Griffiths We in college find ourselves in a unique social situation.
A great deal of confusion arises when we feel that we are expected to act as adults and are treated as children.
We often do not recognize ourselves as responsible members of a society.
Since we are not financially interdependent, we feel no social interdependence.
We live in close contact with one another and yet we do not recognize the need for social order.
He is watching over us and our only responsibility is to avoid his all powerful hand.
We are perfectly satisfied to let him run things until his all-powerful hand slaps our patties, at which time the cry of oppression is sounded.
By recognizing society and by acting as resp oris ble members of it we can bec 0B j our own ""all-powerful"" hand. \\ presently have student judj e j bodies which are designed to fa c j| itate internal order in the study body.
The problem with ma these organizations is that many of their cases are refers to them from above that, disciplinary acts have the app ea ance of parental slaps on the ha when they are intended to be ce sures from one's peers.
If we are to be treats riday, as adult members of society w Mes tl must become such.
It concerns a W ^son intimately, in his economic, Slltical, religious and personal and not just some ""religious KRCC Presents ■■ Shove Chapel KRCC-FM 91.
MC Lau Perry Throughout the week, KRCC-FM ill present a Christmas program insisting of five special transjibed programs from the British toadcasting System.
Bedes the unique BBC tapes, a loudleaker over Rastall Center will Mideast traditional Christmas awls.
The speech classes heard at 5:30 lily will discuss the various hristmas customs.
OwflW Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Col.
The awards are for persons preparing for careers in editorial journalism, mass communications research, and advertising and media research.
LETTERS to the EDITOR Center Activities This Sunday, December 10, Rastall Center is presenting ""The Beachcomber"" with Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester.
Charles Laughton's portrayal of a troublemaking beachcomber on a Pacific Isle is a masterful accomplishment in this Somerset Maugham story.
These records from, ballet, popular, and classical areas will be offered for sale starting today.
The sales will be on the first come, first served basis, so come and build your own record collection at our expense.
The Mountain Club will leave from the Rastall Center parking lot at 1:00m. tomorrow afternoon for its annual Christmas hike to Barr Camp.
Be sure to wear warm and waterproof clothing if you are interested in coming.
Watch for another Sun Down ■Skiing program next week if the snow permits us to go.
The first program was enjoyed by everyone and many people benefited from the free instruction offered.
There is always confusion about this time of year as to what happens when books fall due during Christmas vacation when students are not on campus.
Our policy is to consider a book due the first day after vacation, in this case January 5, 1962, if the book falls due during the Christinas vacation.
The Newspaper Fund desires to help promising undergraduate members of college newspaper staffs find summer news jobs which will give them a chance to broaden their experiences.
Each summer there are u number of attractive jobs for young men on top-quality, medium-sized newspapers.
The Newspaper Fund offers to help interested students find the interested editors and will counsel thsee students on how to apply.
This opportunity for summer work is primarily planned for sophomores and juniors who may have some interest in newspaper work, but who have not had a chance to make contacts in the newspaper field.
Applications are sought especially from colleges where extensive journalism training has not ben available for the student.
A particular effort is being made to attract individuals who are now working on college newspapers.
The Newspaper Fund is supported by grants from The Wall Street Journal and has the cooperation of a number of newspapers in this effort to find summer newspaper jobs for promising students.
The whole college community is invited to attend the AWS Christians party for the Spunish Mission Orphans on Saturday afternoon, December 9, from 1:110 to 3::t0 in Hemis Lounge.
CHUCK HENSON, business major, cluss of 1902 won the Viceroy's Football contest for the third week.
Taking second and third prizes of $50.00, $25.00 respectively were John Kiescr and Cregg Smith.
Dept, Connie Windle, '62 (pju£ —A carton of Viceroys to all students who got all the winners right, regardless of scores' 3 l December., 1 96 1 • Colorado College Tiger Mei Si.
The Tigers took the long trip last week to face a tall, strong Bluejay squad that obviously is on its way into the top ranks of the nation's cage teams.
Even CC coach Bed Eastlack adNorthwestern College of Alv mits that the Tigers probably were 68.
The Tigers CHRISTMAS PARTY — Susie Kellog, Raechel Jensen, Trish Adams, Mary Bardone, and Gretchen Ferde prepare for the Tiger Club party to be held December 10 from 2 to 4 for the children from the Colorado Springs School for the Deaf & Blind.
Keglers Meet Pueblo JC to Recoup Losses The Colorado College bowling team will leave Sunday morning at 8:30 to compete against the Pueblo Junior College team.
Members of the CC team are Bill Pelz, Dale Shaw, John Evans, Jim Talman, George Bumoster, and Chuck Rowland.
Eastlack's Tigers faced an even taller loop team Wednesday night when thev tangled with St.
The Cavaliers from Dodge City sport a fantastic height this year with most of their manpower towering over the 6 foot, 4 inch mark.
Eastlack felt that the Cavalier height would hurt his shorter squad but that the Tigers can make up the disadvantage with speed and hustle.
Of course, they were good last year too, and we split the two game series with them then,"" he noted.
Plan come to the all-college Sock Hop sponsored by the Freshman Class The Hop will be held from 8-11 m. on Friday, January 5 i Rastall Dining Room.
Yet things weren't juite as bad as they looked, and even in the process of losing, ae*ony Frasca's icemen performed in a manner that should a lce CC hockey fans sit up and take notice.
Even the doubt until the last second ly the jump the pioneers ained in the first stanza gave hem the game It looked at first as if DU ' n the Tigers off the ice imping into a four point lead the first period with Duffus wring off Wilson, Sampson scornassisted, Lacomy hitting off lit and Art off Johnston and towhan.
CC goalie Art Warwick lanaged 11 saves in the first pei«l but was almost blanketed by barging DU blue-liners most of it time. e rang a different tui nth the beginning of the second eriod with CC scoring twice and olding DU to one goal.
Pioneer Emory Sampson while had hit once to keep the ung. obvious fact that loomed hough the two final periods was tat the Tigers were anything but i'e<l and that the entire attack 1 switched to the Denver desive zone.
And in the final ito it became even more evident tat Frasca has a hustling ice club kt won't take ""no"" for an anr and can easily create head3s for any league team it meets year. oing into the third period with •2 lead, the Pioneers saw it as Archie Prestayko again sted in a long one, this time . listed and Art Berglunri Wed up a loose puck and fired Past Goalie Larry Beauchamp. was still pressing, forcing the ' icers to literally fight for their N when the time ran out, givaiso say that his Tigers may give a lot of people trouble before the season is out.
Saturday's battle proved that they possess the type of hustle that topples thrones and with a little more polish they can be a tough crew to heat.
They'll undoubtedly obtain some of that polish during the next two practice weeks before starting their road trip and meeting Minnesota at Minneapolis in a doubleheader on Dec.-16.
Third South emerged the victor, edging out the close behind First South.
Third South scored a total of 18 points to take first place honors with First North a close second with 17.
Intramural points were awarded to the various wings on a 5-3-1 basis for first, second, and third places respectively.
Considering all conflicting events, such as chemistry and math tests the next day, there was a very good turnout for the meet with 8 out of the 11 wings scoring points.
The table tennis will have been completed by the time of adjournment for the Christmas vacation.
It is now in the final stages of the second round, or the quarter finals, and should be finished soon.
We've an authentic collection Vested Suits „. from 59""^ Without Vests _ ___ from 4995 from the . . . llmpersit£ SAofl Chemistry Professor Explores Reactions of Acids and Bases A Colorado College chemistry professor is using a high frequency oscillator to study the reactions of certain acids and bases in a long-range research project that one day may provide chemists with new information they can use as a research ""tool"" in such areas as rocket fuel production.
Eldon T Hitchcock, assistant this that professor of chemistry, frequency oscillator to the of chemical problems.
The five megacycle frequency oscillator employed by the Colorado College scientist, operates much like an FM radio transmitter.
It enables chemists to study the reactions of certain acids and bases that could not be observed by more traditional laboratory methods.
This electronic equipment is opening up a new field of chemical research, Dr.
The high frequency oscillator enables the scientist to observe how compounds are formed, helps him to better understand the speed of chemical reactions, and aids him in substance analysis.
Throughout the years, he said, most chemical reactions have been carried out in water.
Hitchcock has been conducting his experiments in such liquids as benzene, acetic acid, and acetonitrite.
The advantage of these liquids is that they permit certain reactions to occur that could not take place in water.
The Colorado College chemistry professor said acid-base reactions conducted in the medium of water are limited because of the acidic and basic character of water itself.
He has been observing the reactions of compounds such as aluminum chloride and stannic been attempting to apply the high tudy chloride with alcohols, ethers, and various nitrogen-containing compounds.
He noted that research chemists are concerned with compounds that can be used in controlling the speed of reactions.
Susan Caudill received an award for third in the extemporaneous speaking of the tournament.
In the debate division of the tournament, CC did well, as Max Power and Jo Heller finished the first day's rounds with a 3-0 record, but dropped some close ones on the second day of the powermatched tournament.
Though not finishing so well win-wise the other senior division team of Charles Puckett and Susan Caudill finished high on the list in terms of team and invidiual ratings.
This weekend Max Power and Chris Griffiths will represent CC at the Air Force Academy Tournament to end the pre-Christmas Chicago Offers Sixty Senior Fellowships Sixty fellowships ranging in amount from $500 to $2000 have been made available for qualified college seniors who are interested in preparing for a career as a scholar-teacher in the secondary school.
The scholar-teacher program, developed with assistance from the Ford Foundation, integrates the study of theoretical concepts, extensive practice in the art of teaching, and graduate study and research in one of twelve areas.
The twelve fields for which the program provides preparation are biology, chemistry, English, French, geography, German, history, mathematics, physics, Russian, Spanish, and social studies.
Students with good undergraduate records of preparation in the liberal arts and sufficient concentration for graduate study in onL> of the twelve teaching fields are eligible to be considered.
Criteria for selection includes intellectual capacity, scholarly aptitudes, and assessment of personality and other characteristics relevant to effective teaching.
STEPHANIE ROW AND TED WORCHESTER rehearsals for the French Club's production ""The Schc around durin ol of Widows.
CHUCK GIBSON PLAYS THE sing and decorate the Ras+all C PIANO as CC students gathei enter Christmas tree.
Again, all students are cordially invited to come to this discussion at 4:00m. in room 203, Rastall Center.
II Colorado Springs, Colorado, December I 5, 1 96 I OTaolain Termed Literate, Charming Author, Personality By Terry Kldner The very personification of the gravely literate Irishman with charmingly burred speech a twinkle in lv.s eye, a pipe in his mouth, and a bit of the leprechaun, could be seen last week in the imposing form of Mr Sean O'Faolain.
Mr O'Faolain, lecturing under the auspices of Phi Beta Beta Kappa's Visiting Scholar Program, arrived suffering from food poisoning, but stayed to fulfill the promise of his perceptive criticism and poetic short stories.
In talking to students, Mr O'Faolain communicated inobtruiHOWN ABOVE IS THE SITE PLAN for Colorado College's sports center.
At the left is the new iports building, in the center is the new full size ice rink, at right is Rastall Center, and above is Cossitt reshmen to Hold Iromo-Seltzer Ball Coming back to class and real1% that finals are only two short reeks away could be quite a shock three weeks of leisure.
With few Year's Eve only four days past, CC's students could be seritnsly affected by such a swift enriromental change.
The dance will be kid in the Rastall Dining Room torn 8 to 11m. and will be open CC students.
The party will include dinJ* and dancing to the music of the William Fisher Trio.
A high point °[ the festivities will be an exchange f ""white elephant"" gifts ^ the Christmas tree with Dr.
T he annual Faculty Club gather""fcwas organized by J Alan JohnX assistant professor of econom""j 5 and business administration and S°b president, and members of the 'lenitive committee. fund-Raising Effort Launched Benezet Announces Plans For Modern Sports Building A maximum fund-raising effort to provide an ice skating rink and a modern tri-level sports building at CC was announced this week by President Louis T Benezet.
The $1,200,000 sports center will be located to the west of Rastall Center, and to the south of Cossit Hall, CC's halfcentury-old physical education building, to form a unified recreation complex.
The full-size outdoor rink, with its artificial ice surface, will be located on the site of the old Cossit Hall ampitheater between the college union and the new sports center.
The rink will afford both recreational skating and a greatly needed practice rink for freshman and intramural hockey squads from November through March.
All home varsity hockey games will continue to be played at the Broadmoor World Arena.
Raising funds to finance construction of the new sports facility has top priority in the Colorado College Campaign program for the coming year, though Harold C Harmon, chairman of the campaign, says $250,000 has already been raised.
A keystone gift was made by Gerald L Sehlessman, class of '17, and members of his family.
In addition to the ice rink, the sports center will contain an indoor swimming pool, a regulation varsity basketball court with a potential seating capacity of 3,000, a gymnastic area, a wrestlingboxing area, locker rooms, classrooms, and offices.
For education in the sixties we now have superb facilities on their way in the Tutt Library, the Olin Science Hall and the renovations going on in other class buildings.
The new sports building, being designed by Colorado Springs architects Lusk and Wallace, features a multi-valt roof.
The Olympic-sized, glass-enclosed swimming pool will be at the east end, near the outdoor ice rink.
Memorial gifts will be emphasized throughout the fund-raising campaign.
The names of contributors of more than one thousand dollars will be displayed on a special plaque in the sports center foyer. sively the presence of a man of letters fully cognizant of both the world and how to write about it.
His literary sensitiviey was wittily expressed as he spoke of the attributes of various authors and maintained that ""a true writer does not feel fulfilled unless he writes a little every day.
The Irish author and critic's Thursday night lecture was entertaining, informative, and a welcome relief from the slightly aging onslaught of the New Criticism.
While titling his talk ""Trial by Pleasure,"" or ""It's Good if You Like It,"" Mr O'Faolain admitted that his actual subject would be the role of pleasure as a critical tool, particularly in reference to the noval.
He maintained that the arts were originally created from an impulse whose satisfaction gave the creator a sense of delight.
He then examined the extreme subjectivity which essentially limits this sense of delight.
Thus, just as one projects one's self into a painting, the reader ""dives"" into a novel to become immersed in a vicarious existence.
The fact that the experience is contained in ""a number of black dots on a white page,"" yet may become, for the moment, actual, is indicative of the illusory nature of art and the deceptive character of pleasure.
Mr O'Faolain suggested that the modern reader, properly indoctrinated by analytic handbooks, judges a novel bifocally— measuring delight and ""critical"" worth — and is unwilling to lay aside his rationalistic shield to let the work communicate emotionally and sensuly.
In order to project Ids ideas, the author must break through this ""filter"" composed of traditional concepts, .moral values, and religious and political ideas.
O'Faolain accused the New Criticism of fostering this filter by attempting to impose the ""pure light of reason"" on emotional Impact.
When the novel is placed on the dissecting table, the sum of its parts often does not equal tinwhole.
French novelists led the list of works which Mr O'Faolain felt pierced the filter.
Included were The Red and the Black, Malraux' Man's Fate, Provost's Munon Lescaut, and Laelos' Leu Liuisonw Dangereux.
Portrait of the Artist, by James Joyce, Maughm's Of Human Bondage, and Turgenev's Torrents of Spring comprised the remainder of the list.
While seemingly denying the functional need of one facet of his profession, Mr O'Faolain later admitted that literary criticism is relevant and necessary, at least until one develops an inherent critical faculty.
Since comparisons are inevitable, the reader is advised to make his own.
We would rather like to pose some serious questions to those who pause to read these columns.
The real meaning of Christmas lies far deeper than just in the event of Jesus' birth.
It lies in the panorama of human experience — joy, sadness, tragedy, despair, bitterness, and hope — through which Christ moved in the thirty-three years following the first Christmas.
Christ and Christmas are meaningless unless the reality of human experience and the well-spring of hope, both inseparable part of the life, death, and rising of Jesus, are taken into account.
We suggest that the 'Christmas Spirit,' to the Christian, should not be manifested in a diversionary or abstract joy, but in reflection upon the whole meaning of Christ's coming.
It should be rooted in the quiet hope of Bethlehem's winter night and of a certain dawn, some thirty-three years later, when three mourning women came to an empty tomb.
Even if one doesn't accept the theology of Jesus' coming, he can still find, in the life and death of the carpenter from Galilee, much to ponder.
For that life and that death were not abstracted fairy-tale style to take place somewhere in the clouds.
Jesus lived among men and shared their common experiences, dealing with them as a man.
Finally, we might suggest to Christians and non-Christians alike that they explore the ""Christmas Spirit"" among men to see if there is within it some good, some enduring quality which offers hope that man may yet compensate for some of his own shortcomings.
We seek only to pose questions here, not answers, in the hope that those who ponder these questions may find real meaning in this Christmas season.
Judicial Reform The proposed changes which appeared in last week's TIGER for the Student Conduct Committee's constitution represent a sound achievement on the part of student government and a step forward in student-administration relations.
First, they resolve the ambiguities and confusion over jurisdiction which have plagued CC's judicial system in the past.
Second, they give students more of a voice, accompanied by more responsibility, in handling disciplinary problems.
First, they take a realistic account of the powers, prerogatives, and qualifications of the college administration.
Finally, the changes, by being realistic and flexible, ought to serve the college community well for many years.
Our congratulations to Commissioner Bob Kendall and his Judicial Committee, to the Student Conduct Committee, to the Committee on Undergraduate Life and to President Griffiths and the ASCC Executive Council.
All have made major contributions to these proposals, and the proposals represent a major contribution to better student government.
Examination of classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit the convenience of students and instructors. is on leave in Sunin this year.
Dear People at Colorado College, Sunday is my usual letter-writing day, hut it just occured to me that there is something about a deadline for newspapers, and that there is something railed Christmas vacation looming on the hori zon, and that somehow an anachronistic letter has no flavor.
With the temperature these days hovering around freezing, people who can afford heaters of Butane gas are considered wellto-do, while the rest of us keep warm with the traditional charcoal braziers.
The meals continue to be superb, although the diet would be too starchy for most Americans' taste.
The tomatoes and oranges are on the sour side, which is just the way T like them, and if California and Florida will forgive me, I still say that there is nothing like a Valencian orange.
The meal hours continue to be weird; breakfast when you get up, lunch any time after two and dinner any time after ten.
There is a 2-3 hour break for lunch for the working people, and although it has been tried many times to put them on an ""American schedule,"" they continue stubbornly to be Spanish, The favorite pastime for the men continues to be going to the local barf and the connotation of bar here is quite different from that at home), and solving the problems of the world.
Sometimes the problems of the world consist of playing dominoes or shooting dice.
The big day for the children is Epiphany, when the Three Kings come with their gifts.
Twelfth Night also has a special cake, with trinkets baked in, and if you get one, it's good luck.
Then there are the New Year's Eve parties (the best ones are the private ones with small groups of friends), where you eat twelve grapes— one at every stroke of midnight.
Today is Assumption, a very important holiday in Spain, and because it preceeds a weekend which precedes a very short week before vacation, the students ""make a bridge,"" and go home now.
The sixth year medical students were threatened with being flunked if they went home now — yes, they went.
I hope you are all having a good year in that faraway world over there.
Boyce mentioned Homecoming in a letter, and I couldn't even imagine it.
But I do imagine you, and I want to wish all of you, but especially colleagues and those who have been my students, a very blessed Christmas and a happy holiday season.
Sincerely, Laurie M Perry 2 Students' Views On 'Oedipus Rex' [SEE PAGE FOUR) BrtWHler Crnce.
Fifteen hours after leaving San Francisco my plane was settling me down in Tokyo to the strains of Japanese music being broadcasted to the passengers.
And then, suddenly there has been nothing but round, intense faces awed by the tall, blond, absurd creature.
Acculturation problems are drowned in this urge to touch and feel it all.
Subsequently I have set out to learn the language as rapidly as possible.
Yet I am sure there will be a gap between my first response of reaching out and trying to grasp and my actual grasp, in which there will be much discouragement and despair.
Last night I visited the ""Ginza"" (Tokyo's Broadway) and was overwhelmed with neon lights, displaying characters and lighting up the sky with gaudy colors.
And yet where I live and work, it is an endless maze of narrow streets, with shops, smoke, and again round faces.
I am very fortunate in that my living habits ' have been forcibly molded into Japanese style.
I even am finding myself using the few words of Japanese that I do know automatically.
I never know when I might get on a wrong trolley and wind up miles from where I want to be.
In adapting to a new world I have left many things of the old world behind which are undesirable in any world.
I don't think about the same worn-out worries, and instead become totally absorbed in the new sights and life.
This week I am off to Kyoto and Osaka, but it is strictly, I'm afraid, business.
I am going in order to introduce myself to workingcamp circles in those cities and there are all kinds of appointments to be kept which will prevent me from seeing the temple, etc.
Saturday till 6:00 Profs to Discuss Civil Defense Nee Perhaps the greatest qu fe .. facing Americans today is {},,. our own survival in the nun age.
One alternative, Civil hc_h'. has become a highly controvn^ question throughout the \jJ States.
Lotoj Professors Bailey, Boderni off, Werner, and Wright will ri cuss the value and important Civil Defense.
The discussion being sponsored by Commitme a student organization studying \ implications of and alternatives nuclear war.
Harris Sherman as President a selected Mr Van Becker and j Gamer as sponsors.
Commit^ will study disarmament in a serl of round table discussions tliroue out the year and sponsor vavln speakers to discuss the Cfuestion neuclear war and its alternatta Choir Presents A Stimulating Xrnas Concert Mr Donald Jenkins and Ins Co rado College Choir performed stimulating, exciting Christm Concert Tuesday morning sit Sho Chapel.
The choir, singing wi full, sustained harmony, present a program of wide diversity ran ing from Vivaldi to Brahms tn f traditional Christmas Carols.
Richard Dering opened the prog and was followed by Viva ""Gloria"" for solo voices, clip and organ.
Although having sli difficulty at the outset, the cho finished the ""Cum Sancto Spit movement with special brilliai The most difficult work w; Brahms' Motet (Op., No which continually pitted eoi melodies against one another v the timing was three against Gustav Hoist's ""In the Bleak Winter,"" proved to be a beau work as the choir used delicate ba ance and near perfect hanm The concert culminated with se era] traditional carols such to The World"" and ""Silent Nigh' to end a highly successful and ei joyable Christmas Concert.
In regard to Mr Trushel's Con ment column published in the D* ember 8 edition of the Tiger, 1; in favor of the creative writin class proposed.
Sincerely, Steve Terry Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Cy's Standard Service e You Buy Lubrication Dale & Nevada Pick Up « Deli"""" i Expert Tune UP MElrose 4-98U Colorado College Tiger • December 15,1961 N St> » New Poll Reveals Faculty, Student Feeling on ROTC S tatistics, Comments On November 9, a group of students undertook the task f polling the faculty and all the male stuldents of Colorado College.
At this time we wish to clarify a statement in the letter by Robert Goldman in the Tiger two weeks previous.
It is incorrect that there was a two to one faculty vote against ROTC two years ago.
In actuality, the vote was much closer and differed only by a few votes.
It is the Tiger's hope that this poll will help clarify the positions of various campus groups.
If you're hunting for travel bargains — you'll find Sheraton Hotels the best place to atay.
Generous group rates arranged for teams, clubs and other XV\ college groups on the move.
As a result I don't feel that this questionnaire deals with a large or serious subject.
It is virtually impossible to support the goals and ideals of a nation without leaders at the lower level.
Because we are forced into a position of defense, a 4 year program of leadership development is vitally necessary to the preservation of our Nation and its ideals.
Any questions may be directed to Inst year's trieditors, Jerry Osborne, Marie Buulock and Ann Gourley.
Today he is a salesman introducing Bell System products and services to business executives.
Loren Cergens and his sales staff have improved the communications efficiency of many firms by analyzing their operations and recommending advanced Bell System products and services.
Loren Gergens of Mountain States Telephone & Telegraph Company, and the other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help make your communications service the finest in the world.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES Decembe ado College Tiger Campus Scene of Greek Tragedy Sophocles' Tragedy Chosen As CC's First ""Guinea Pig"" By James H Fox The rise and fall of the proud, dynamic heir to the curse on the House of Labdacus, and his inevitable, grief -stricken realization of who he is not, and part of who he is, is an awesome challenge for any company of players.
The suppliants, extras, jewelry and ""Dido"" costumes might be interesting in Purcell's opera, but simplicity of production is the rule when performing Sohpocles.
The backdrop's glaring symbolism sacrificed taste on the altar of artiness.
William Hochman almost redeemed his failure to fully express the title role's driving curiosity and enormous compassion and vanity.
He received a respectful applause from his fellow actors, as well as the audience for creating an Oedipus of stature and intelligence.
I have mixed feelings about the chorus, at least half of which obviously did not understand what they were saying, nor that they were on stage during their periods of silence.
However, Donald Jenkins, dividing his voices into tenors and baritones, occasionally achieved striking effects, particularly in Ode II, ""Let us all be reverent in the ways of right,"" before the entrance of the Corinthian Messenger. the production's impressi' climax.
Mr Roberts pushed his blocking dangerously close to overacting, but his energy and control kept the audience engrossed.
In the bitter, ironic scene between Oedipus and Tiresias, Paul Barnard's blind prophet, powerful in vision, was delightfully human in fear, anger, and finally pity for the doomed ruler.
Although sufficiently logical and conservative, John Lewis was only superficially Creon, a simple, direct, basically good man, who has no desire for the responsibilities of power.
She possessed the voice and appearance, but lacked sensitivity, as did the wooden, weak.gestured Priest, who almost suffocated the play's kick-off, and the nervous, flippant Palace Messenger, who almost killed a vital scene of exposition.
Laurels go to Kenneth Burton, as Choragus, for beautifully, simply expressing devotion and some understanding of the protagonist's suffering.
David Hand's lighting design, delicately working from dawn to sunset, and his well-proportioned and playable steps, pillars, and platforms added technical strength to the show.
Tocos & Pizza CC Greek Production Rated As ""Admirable"" Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of last week, CC witnessed a production of Sophocles' tragedy Oedipus Rex.
Those who concentrated on the lines, the essence of Greek drama, could not miss Sophocles' powerful presentation of the workings of fate.
However, the modern audience is oriented to the reality of action— not long dialogue.
Therefore, especially during the choric odes, the audience tended to become inattentive and thus lose much of the play's significance in spite of the good articulating of both actors and chorus.
Also the fact that the translation itself was generally inferior and even ludicrous at times in its attempt to modernize the script definitely weakened the play as a whole.
Another factor which weakened this production was the cluttered appearance of the stage.
The general set design and lighting were very good, but there too many people on the stage for its size.
Most easily dispensed with would have been the suppliants, whose floating and hovering about was very distracting and added nothing but confusion and clutter.
Hochman made a tragically imposing Oedipus (although he seemed .much older than his mother); Dr.
Bernard was convincing at Tiresias the blind prophet; and Reverend Burton made a forceful Choragus.
Unfortunately, the weakest character appeared at the end in the person of Dr.
His FlashGordon appearance and excited delivery detracted a great deal from the double tragedy of Jocasta's death and Oedipus' selfbinding.
Nevertheless, the productio a success, for it had the power to move those who understood it and appreciated it for what it was.
Winter Kinnikinnik Out in January The winter issue of the Kinnikinnik will be out the second week in January.
This issue will have about forty pages, and will be divided between art and poetry, with a few prose pieces.
Prizes of fifteen dollars each will be given for cover design, poetry, and art, and will be announced in the issue.
The Kinnikinnik spring issue plans a March 15 deadline on all contributions, with a publication date the first week in May.
There will be no extension of deadline for this issue, so if you have material you may want to submit, begin finishing it now.
Prizes of fifteen dollars each will be awarded for cover design, art, photography, prose, and poetry, if the contributions received merit these awards.
Art contributions turned in for the winter issue may be picked up in the Basic Design room at the Fine Arts Center.
ME 3-0075 Call Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St.
This contest is open to all third, and fourth-year students of accretf ited American Colleges and univer.
The philosophv of the founding fathers of the United States £ writing 1 the Constitution.
The individual's obligation to a government which derives its just power from the consent of the governed.
Can an individual's actions af. feet the fortunes of a nation?— Give an example from the last % years.
From the same period, give an example of a nation whose fortunes were adversely affected by general indifference to patriotic ideals.
Tf the above points are covered, the paper will be considered on their merits, even though the conclusions may not coincide with the society's concept of patriotism.
The first and second award-winning papers will become the property of the society, with all rights reserved.
She will be intelligent, attractive, and will typify collegiate women throughout America.
She will receive a trip to Europe as one of her prizes, She will also win an automobile, a diamond ring, and many other awards.
Mary's fresco Shuffles Squad jockey coach Tony Frasca is ref fling his entire squad this >U as a result of a serious injury W benched, for the season, one -This key players.
Mary's of the Plains hoop squad Wednesday, December 6. and dropped the Cavaliers to a ground shaking R9-60 loss.
Mary's crew towered in the rare 6 foot, • r ) inch air on the average, it made little difference to Coach Red Eastlack's shorter, faster squad.
In both contests the Tigers will be staring down the mouth of a cannon.
The Minnesota team, second only to the xemen with 19 points through the bucket and a 6 foot, 4 inch rebounding sophomore, Bill Bruke, added materially to the chopping by controlling the boards on both ends of the court.
It was the Tigers' home game opener at Cossitt Hall and their first win of the season.
However, the most impressive item to CC basketball fans was undoubtedly the fact that Eastlack was able to substitute a full crew at a time if he cared to without any appreciable difference in scoring.
This depth will be a telling factor in Rocky Mountain Conference play, which starts next week in Golden territory when CC faces Colorado School of Mines. great Denver ice squad in conference play last year, is slated to skates, sweep everything out of the rink and come up with the NCAA title this year.
CC Smith Wright Thompson Loosli Cabbiness Sabom Krell Burke Anthony Totals St.
Mary's Hicks Harvey Desjardins Go van Streit Kurtz Hudson Hopkins Totals FG Ff TP Traveling to Minneapolis to tangle with their home-town university are wing Ken Hanson, goalie Pete Doyle, and wing John Simus.
Senior defensonum Larry Gilbertson hails from Grand Forks, North Dakota, and will undoubtedly plav over his head against the Sioux.
Tony has been priming his Tigers for two weeks for the big meeting with Minnesota Friday and Saturday.
He is also counting on other teams to blast A practice session is set up al Minnesota Friday, The Tigers play there Friday night and Saturday night and leave Minneapolis Sunday by train for Grand Forks, North Dakota, the ( nfen to e wide-op.; the Tige this boost •rale.
Some of the giants have already fallen, with Michigan and Michigan Tech trading losses and the same going for Michigan State and North Dakota.
In the season opener, Denver twice beat CC, but won the second tilt by no The outlook al Grand Forks indicates that the pressure might be lighter against the Sioux.
North Dakota lias a team building program going this year, and, as a result, is faced with problems similar to CC's.
However, CC has IB returning lettermen to the CC icers whereas North Dakota is building most of their squad from last sensoli's freshman team.
On their part, the Tigers will he hampered in both contests by a few injuries.
Front line center, Garry Martin, is out from a knee injury received in practice last week, and Frasea reports that both Duke Dutkowsk'i, last year's high scorer, and Dan McGill will he nursing bad legs.
ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEIrose 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudr.
THE LAST WORD IN FASHION GREGG SMITH OF CC goes for a quick two poir St.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% CASH AND CARRY 117'/, E«>t Coche I Poudr.
COLLEGE CLEANERS [Across from Slocum) Bring Your Laundry wifh Your Dry Cleaning MEIrose 3-7883 "" ^XiWsmrm, , I THE Christian Science Monitor Subscribe Now at Hall Price* You can read this world-famous doily newspaper for the next six months for $5.50, just half tha regular subscription rate.
Use couThe Christian Sclenco Monitor P-CH One Norway St., Boston 15, Mou.
NSF Grants $ 170,000 For Summer Institute Colorado College has announced receipt of grants totalling $170,000 from the National Science Foundation for three science institutes to be conducted next summer for high school teachers.
This the second such series of grants the college has received from the foundation.
The faculty development grant is designed to encourage additional professional development of individual teachers at Colorado College.
The grant to the three science departments is designed to ""recognize the critical importance, especially at this time, of teachers of engineering, mathematics, and the physical sciences,"" Upchurch said.
Piano, Violin, Cello Alberneri Trio Set For Concert at CC Thursday Colorado College will present the internationally famous Alberneri Trio — piano, violin and cello — in a special concert on Thursday, January 18 at 8:15 in the Fine Arts Center.
The violinist, Giorgio Ciompi, is well known to Colorado College and the community, since he has been a member of the artist faculty in the last three Tryouts Arranged For 'Guys & Dolls Field Biology.
The Field Biology Insti,ute will be given at Aspen in cooperation with the Aspen Institute ■if Humanistic Studies.
Richard G Beidleman, associate professor of zoology and NSF director on the campus, said that the institutes are designed to keep high school science teachers posted on recent dvelopments in the i i' fields and to help them crease their classroom effectiveness.
He said $88,000 was earmarked for the Institute in Science and Mathematics, About 70 high school teachers will be enrolled in the eight week course.
Two-thirds of them will be participating in the college's three-summer program leading toward a master of arts ""> teaching degree.
The Institute is open to qualified science and mathematics teachfl ^ in junior and senior high schools and in junior colleges, This Program is under the direction of Or, Beidleman.
The National Science Foundation set aside $40,300 for a Chemistry Institute to be held on the campus here for the first time.
The six-week-long Chemistry Institute is designed to provide chemistry teachers with new insights that will enable them to present chemistry from a fresh point of view when they return to their classrooms in the fall.
Lester A Michel, professor and chairman of the chemistry department , said 40 high school chemistry teachers are scheduled to take the course.
Beidleman and Robert B Lewis of the Aspen Institute of Human Studies, are co-directors of the new eight week Institute in Field Biology, for which the NSF has appropriated $42,500.
The program is open to 32 high school biology teachers with at least three years of experience on the high school level.
Editor Sought Applications are M w open fo ■ Editor of the Student H indhook.
Examination of classes not included in this should be arranged to suit the convenience of and instructors.
Ian.— Friday Jan.— Saturday 'an. — Monday Jan.— Tuesday Jan. — Wednesday Jan.— Thursday 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 9-11 2-4 me allotschedule students Esso Gives $3,500 For CC Operations Colorado College last week received a $3,500 unrestricted grant from the Esso Education Foundation.
The money will be used to help meet the educational operating needs at CC in the coming year.
A check for the amount was presented to President Benezet by J B Wadell and William M Mayger, representatives of the Humble Oil and Refining Company, an affiliate of the Standard Oil Co.
Alien Registration Deadline Revealed Distinct Director John T, Clingan, of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, stated that aliens in the United States will be required to report their addresses to the Attorney General within the near future.
All aliens, with few exceptions, who are in the United States on January 1 each year must report their addresses by the end of the month.
Forms with which to make tinreport can be obtained from any Post Office or Immigration Office during the month of January.
The law provides penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirement. summer school sessions.
The two members are among the top performers on their instruments, and had distinguished carers before joining' the Albeneri Trio.
The Albeneri Trio was organized about twelve years ago, and is today accepted throughout America and Europe as perhaps the foremost piano trio.
The artists are performing in Denver the previous night, and it is only through a lucky circumstance that they could be presented in Colorado Springs between their other concert engagements.
One major work by Beethoven and Brahms will be tin' special musical highlight.
Tickets to this event will be $1.75 and can be secured at Perkins Hall or at the Rastall Center desk.
Edalyn Burger, nationally acclaimed mezzo soprano, will give a voice recital at Perkins Hall January 14.
Her accompanist will be Charles Day, well-known Colorado Springs concert pianist and teacher.
Miss Barbara Couey, a Colorado College sophomore from Trinidad, will be the co-artist.
Burger, a graduate of Colorado College, has called Colorado Springs home for the past 20 years.
She holds a master of musicdegree from the American Conservatory in Chicago.
Tryouts for th, Spring; Musical, tiuys and Dolls, will he held on Perkins sln B e, J a nwry IS through •20.
A sigll-Up sheet will be posted this weekend Oil the bulletin hoard in Perkins Hall, Tlu.se interested in ANY PART WHATSOEVER should sign up for one of the tryout periods — singers, chorus, speaking, walkons, etc.
Lawrence F Hill, and the ""Rise and Pall of European Colonialism"" will be given by Dr.
Jim Dunlor> Official Colorado College Student Publication STAFF; Heather Kirk.
BUSINESS STAFF TIM MOE JOHN HANEY BRUCE FRANKLIN Printed Fridays by PEERLFSS PRINTINC CO., Colorado SpH ROTC — I The columns of the TIGER, in the few weeks before Christmas vacation, were responsible for awakening again the belabored, and at that time dormant, issue of ROTC on CC's campus.
In the first place, an issue of this sort, in a community such as this with a very rapid turnover in its population, is never finally settled.
The issue must, it seems, be reassessed by eveiy passing college ""generation,"" and this is probably a good thing.
But more importantly, a new insight, or perhaps a new emphasis, has come out of the columns, letters to the editor, student comments, and statistically inadequate polls which have appeared in these pages recently.
The realization has emerged that the question of ROTC is related to the larger questions which face our society.
The United States is today faced with the necessity of maintaining a massive military establishment.
Throughout history, the existence of such a military establishment has proven ' itself incompatible with constitutional democracy.
Those who developed our government in the United States have long recognized this to be true, and, consequently, standing armies have always been kept at a size less than military thinking would term adequate.
The mainstay of our defenses has been the reserves — the citizen-soldiers.
The purpose of the ROTC program is to train officers for these reserves.
It is not particularly aimed at shaping career officers, but rather at adequately training men who can, after college, take time out from their civilian pursuits to help maintain our defense system.
The alternative to reserve officers, trained in an arts and sciences background, is the leadership of all our armed forces by academy-trained, professional soldiers.
One need only look at the present situation in France, among others, to see how really dangerous this can be to constitutional democracy.
Given these two alternatives, college-trained citizenofficers over against a professional, elite officer corps, we see little choice.
The Department of the Army would not, under present regulations, maintain the ROTC program on our campus unless a certain number of students were guaranteed for the program.
The only way, at present, to meet that guarantee is to make basic ROTC compulsory.
If ROTC continues on a compulsory basis, then male students will be deprived of their ""academic freedom"" to some degree, and they will be subjected to some unpleasantness.
If, on the other hand, the program is discontinued, those who desire to serve as reserve officers, or even those who simply desire some basic knowledge about the military, will be deprived of their means to do so, and the Army will lose a source of well-and liberally-educated officers.
This kind of program is disturbing to most students at an institution where freedom is supposedly maximized and distracting unpleasantness minimized.
Yet we believe, that, at present, the ROTC program has more value than the charges against it can overbalance.
This is not to say that there are not severe shortcomings in the ROTC program.
We believe there are, and we will soon offer some constructive criticisms and suggestions.
THE WH IC KERBI LL is a Gift Including and Can a Silly Shop full of Happy Things — Looking Octopus Windbell.
January 14, 1962 Sermon looking back on Christmas and discussing the conscience of the Christian, pointing out why Christmas is unsatisfying to many of us, leaving us with a bad conscience — yet also pointing out that a bad conscience is not always a bad thing, that it may be a sign of faith, of God's grace, whereas too good a conscience is often, from a Christian point of view, a fatal thing.
Here Are Plans For Choir Tour Plans for the Colorado College Choir's 1962 spring tour were announced last week by conductor Donald Jenkins, instructor in music at the college.
The 55-voice choir is scheduled to make 12 appearances during March and April in Albuquerque, New Mexico; Los Angeles and San Francisco, California; Reno, Nevada; Salt Lake City, Utah; and Denver, Colorado.
Jenkins said the programs are especially planned for presentation in churches during the Lenten and Faster seasons.
Sanders' Kentuc Icy Fried CHICKEN ""it's finge liclcin' good"" <r3§> Take-Home TTTt*^ Department «j±TR> Open 1 1m. to 12m. or call ME 4-0881 Y.s, wg tiov.
Tejon MEliose 2-18 4S Colorado College Tiger 12, \1b1 CC Students Often Enter Professorships Students at CC stand a better than average chance of becoming college or university professors, a nation-wide survey shows.
In fact, Colorado College is one of two, and the only private college, in the entire eight-state Rocky Mountain region ranking amoung the nation's top fifty institutions in the production of college teachers.
His report showed that an average of more than twenty-four out of every 1,000 students at Colorado College will become college or university teachers.
Announcements Student Conduct Committee x\fter reviewing a case concerning the mutilation of library material, the decision was made that a $25.00 fine plus the cost of the defaced magazine he assessed to the individual.
The committee felt that the destruction of library material was a flagrant abuse of our privileges and ask student support in alleviating this problem.
Skier's Evening III is slated for Sunday, January II at 7:30 in the WES Lounge.
The CC Skiers will report on the successful Sun Down Ski Program where students had an opportunity to learn how to ski prior to the Christmas holiday.
An announcement will be made about a approaching Alpine Ski Lodge party and about the first all-club trip to Monarch ski area.
A club announcement board has second tloor ght outside Patronize TIGER Advertisers been located on of Rastall Cent the Student Activities Office, and contains information on ski conditions, club notes, ski equiptment for sale or trade, a ride board for Honor Council On December 7, 1961, The Colorado College Honor Council issued two first warnings for violations of the Honor System occurring during the mid-semester examinations.
The violations occurred in the Department of History. sktevs wanting a ride or riders to a ski area and other items of interest to the skiing enthusiast.
Photographed on the snow-clad, sun-bright slopes at Aspen, Colorado, in full color.
Membership cards will be available at the door and the new CC ski club patches should be in.
PIONEERI Somewhere out there, beyond the realm of man's present understanding, lies an idea.
Gradually, as it comes under the concentration ot disciplined minds, it will become clear, refined, mastered.
Planning the use of satellites as vehicles for world-wide communications is one.
Another is the Optical Gas Maser, an invention which may allow a controlled beam of light to carry vast numbers of telephone calls, TV shows, and data messages.
Breakthroughs like these will one day bring exciting new telephone and communications service to you.
The responsibility of providing these services will be in the hands of the people who work for your local telephone company, Among them are the engineering, administrative and operations personnel who make your telephone sendee the finest in the world.
Address Benezet Calls for American Support For Liberal Arts Pointing to rising tuition rates, Colorado College President Louis T Benezet last week called on Americans to ""take whatever steps are needed"" to make sure the nation's independent liberal arts colleges continue to provide an opportunity lo top students from all backgrounds.
President Benezet said the independent liberal arts college has three distinguishing features which make it a basic element if nut the core element in the strength of American higher education.
Ownw January 12, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger On Home Kink leers Lose lo Powerful Tech, Drop Two to Harvard, 5-4, 6-4 The CC Tigers still have not been able to get their hockey machinery operating smoothly this year.
They dropped four games over a five day stretch at the Broadmoor World Arena during the Christmas break.
Friday and Saturday night, December 29 and 30, they dropped a double-header to the powerful Michigan Tech Huskies, 7-4 on Friday night and 9-4 on Saturday night.
Opening the new year at the season opener against the CC Broadmoor, the Tigers led the A lumni 12-3.
Crimson Tide of Harvard UniverThe Tigers are on another road sity throughout most of the game.
However, they gave up two goals in the final minutes of play to lose 5-4.
On the following night, Harvard came back stronger and led most of the way to win a tight game from the Tigers 6-4.
The complete series added another four losses to the hapless Tigers' losing streak.
To date they have lost 12 games this season, winning only their non-scheduled trip this week to tangle with two tough hockey squads from the state of Michigan.
Totals Goaltenders Normand Laurence Art Warwick Pete Doyle Totals 13 Games Coals Against ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEIrose 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudre lllllllllllllllllDllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Eastlack Finalist for Sports Award Colorado College basketball coach Leon ""Red"" Eastlack has been included in the ten finalists for the Colorado Springs Quarterback Club's sixth annual Sports Achievement Award.
Eastlack, who has coached the Colorado College Tigers to two consecutive Rocky Mountain Conference championships, has been coaching Tiger teams since 1969.
He came to CC from Trinidad Junior College where he coached for 10 years.
The annual Sports Achievement Award will be presented sometime in January, the date to be announced later.
Former winners include Air Force Academy coach Ben Martin, two CU Ail-Americans, Joe Romig and Bob Stansky, and former Colorado College figure skaters Hayes Alan Jenkins and David Jenkins.
Saturday till 6:00 Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 GANO DOWNS J'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL IntramuralS Ping-Pong, Long-Pong To Highlight Slocum Intramural Program Slocum Hall will conclude it table teenis season this weeken, with the championship matches i r the singles and doubles being featured during, half time exhibition for the Ccj CSC basketball game Friday nigh* The doubles long-pong will folloj Saturday night during half time of the Tigers second encounter with the Greeley Bears.
T'ut.mity to see some great baskethall and also see a match between some of Slocum's finest table ten iris players.
This week Slocum Hail will n | s , hold its first annual bowling tournament at Rastali Saturday, Jann.. uary 13 at 1:00m.
The tourna m ■'nt will feature eleven teams each representating a wing of Slo cum.
The teams will volley for the bowling trophy to be awarded, but also to try to accumulate additional points towards the final goal the Slocum travelling trophy to bt awarded at the end of the year to the wing which has accumulated the largest number of points throughout the intermural season.
Symposium Opens Feb., Features Prominent Panel An outstanding program is planned for the 1962 Symposium, which will take place February 27th through March 1st, 19662.
Pub Board Acts Students ited to and faculty at CC are ttend a series of afteri teas"" this afternoon.
Monday and Tuesday afternoons, from 3:30 to 5:00m. in Loomis Hall lounge.
Puckett, a junior, was the only applicant for the editor's job considered by the Board.
Hite was nominated for business after he and another applicant were interviewed of Santa Monica, California.
Brodie is the author of many books and articles on the relationship between policy and strategy, and has given particular attention to questions of naval and air strategy.
Fred A Sondermann, associate professor of political science, is trying to answer through a carefully designed two-part research project, believed to be the first of its kind in the Rocky Mountain region.
Sondermann is measuring the amount of foreign news stories appearing in four locally-read newspapers, and interviewing a cross-section of the city's population.
For tho first phase of the project, he is trying to determine how much of the total news space is devoted to foreign news by two Denver newspapers, the Post and the Rocky Mountain News, and two Colorado Springs newspapers, the Free Press and the GazetteTelegraph.
Assisted by a number of undergraduate political science majors, he is measuring the amount of news copy, photographs and captions, and headlines dealing with not only the quantity, but also the foreign news developments.
Quality of the foreign news is being "" in accordance with the of the globe that are receivoverage. manager in an executive session of the Puckett, presently the TIGER's tuanaging editor, brings a lengthy record of newspaper work, dating Wit to his early high school years, 'o his new position.
In addition, he is co-chairtnan for Parent's Weekend, and ^ has held various offices in Phi Delta Theta.
In addition to editing the TIGER, Puckett will continue to ^rve as vice-president of Slocum Hall, He is an active veteran of to CC Debate Team.
Puckett and Hite will succeed tax Power and Tim Moe respectively, on February 1.
The terms f °r both editor and business manner run until the end of the fall Dniester in 1963.
Rubenstein In Denver On February First The February first appearance of Arthur Rubenstein, universally acknowledged as one of the master pianists of the world, with the Denver Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Saul Caston, is certain to rank among the top musical events of the year.
The concert will be presented in the Auditorium Arena to accommodate the large numbers who wish to attend.
The symphony management has announced that tickets are being sold rapidly and that the loge is already sold out.
Season ticket holders will be assigned seats comparable to their regular holdings.
For his Denver appearance, Rubenstein has elected to play the Mozart Piano Concerto in A Major and the Saint-Saens Piano Concerto in G Major.
An opportunity will thus be afforded to hear the great virtuoso in two contrasting works.
His book, POLITICS AMONG NATIONS, was a landmark in the evolltion of international relations as an academic lield of inquiry.
The Symposium will begin Tuesday, February 27th, with an allCollege Assembly, where the three participants will discuss basic assumptions concerning war or peace.
This will be followed in the afternoon by small-group meetings for further consideration of some of the points broached in the morning session.
Professors Freed, Hochman, und Warner will lead a discussion on this film immediately after the showing, At 4:00m., Messrs.
Brodie, Millis and Morgenthau will sit in on some small-group meetings to discuss the points raised in previous sessions and raise questions for forthcoming parts of the Symposium program.
The final day of the Symposium —Thursday, March 1st — will be marked by a tour and briefing of North American Air Defense Command for interested students, and a wind-up session at 4:00m., at which the participants will answer questions and make final statements.
The program is being sponsored by the Committee on Undergraduate Life, under the direction of Dr.
Fred A Sondermann, Associate Professor of Political Science, with a committee of faculty and students working on the project.
All events are open to all students, faculty, administrators, and interested citizens of the area, erence works will be available at Suggested readings lists and refCoburn Library in early February, and students are urged to prepare themselves for more meaningful participation in the discussions of the Symposium.
In addition, tht; International Relations Club, in cooperation with the ""Commitment"" group on campus, will sponsor three follow-up meetings to discuss and further explore points raised during the symposium.
These follow-up meetings will take place on three successive Thursday nights in March. #*fc&* EDITORIAL STAFF (A* Official Colorado College Student Publication ' Dan Jaffa, Carol ke.
BUSINESS STAFF i Mnnamr ___^__ TIM MOE JOHN HASE\' URU'-IE FRANKLIN PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Spri ROTC — II Last week, we expressed the belief that the basic principles of the ROTC program and the alternatives to maintaining that program dictate that we continue it here at Colorado College.
We believe that, although compulsory ROTC may infringe on a student's academic freedom, it is not inconsistent with the classical concept of liberal education.
In fact, this classical concept of liberal arts— a broad education— may often stand in conflict with a student's freedom of choice.
It should strive to clear up misunderstandings which plague it and to win the respect necessary for its proper and continued performance ; 3) Course material in ROTC classes should be carefully organized to better orient the student, to more adequately deal with the relation of the citizen to the military, and to challenge in some way the student's intellect.
We realize that these are general, unrevolutionary, and for the most part unintriguing comments, but we hope that they will cause some serious thought on the part of the college community and some serious re-evaluation on the part of the ROTC Department and even the Department of Defense.
We see no reason why, given the opportunity, the ROTC program cannot evolve as a means for broadening the liberal base of a liberal education , for providing future citizens with an insight into a military system over which they must retain ultimate control, and for providing topquality reserve officers.
Three weeks from now, you will be reading a paper put together under the able direction of Charles Puckett.
We know that his first issue, and every successive one, will show great improvement over this issue and its predecessors.
Throughout our stint in the Editor's chair, we have come to realize that the TIGER would be an impossible venture if it were left only to those who are paid to manage it.
Without the untiring help of those people mentioned at the head of this column — our staff — we could never have produced a paper, let alone a paper worthy of student support.
The College Public Information Office, moreover, has been a cooperative and valuable source of news.
To all the people mentioned above, particularly our staff, and to those who have encouraged us and who have made suggestions and contributions to improve the TIGER, we want to express our gratitude.
May we ask all of you to continue your efforts for and your cooperation with the TIGER, in order that it may be a newspaper characterized by quality and comprehensiveness.
Your cooperation with the above will help assure your material of publication. 12 noon on Mon. preceeding publicatio ass A) 12 noon on Monday preceedii n Tuesday preceeding publication, submit all material double-spaced, Cutler.
I have in my possession a considerable amount of literature concerning summer work camps and job opportunities.
These are, of course, mainly sponsored by agencies and they vary from projects where the participant has to make some contribution toward the cost to positions which pay a small renumeration for the service received.
Most of them appear to be very interesting and with them are opportunities of study, discussion, and fellowship with fellow campers and the people of the community.
There are projects in downtown areas of large cities and also in rural areas, If any student would like further information would he please contact me either at Shove Chapel or at Jackson House room 307.
A week ago Tuesday night (January 9) I happened to attend the meeting on Civil Defense sponsored by Commitment.
A rather organized discussion was held which presented .both sides of the question and the views of the panel members.
Mr Kudoff and Mr Bodrman feel that CD is necessary as a deterrent force for avoiding nuclear war.
Mr Van Becker feels that we should be spending the money we spend on CD for peace and the project of increasing our CD would make us familiar with warw ords and thoughts which could tend to make us become machines.
Mr Bailey would like to go a step further and have unilateral disarmament.
Mr Wright, serving as the moderator, kept the discussion within the grasp of the audience's comprehension.
I am not trying to contain the thoughts presented at the meeting in one paragraph, but I want to illustrate the diversity of opinion that was shown.
In the first place, I was disappointed that more students are not interested enough in their future to listen to a discussion of something that is presently affecting the budget of the nation, is playing a part in our relations with Russia and could possibly be vital to them in the event of war.
Perhaps they know so much about CD that this kind of discussion would only waste their time — I wish this were the case, but I doubt that it is.
In the second place, I think that Commitment should be thanked for sponsoring such a discussion.
I am not a member of that group, but I would like to say that I think many of us on campus have gotten the wrong idea about them.
Commitment, as I see it, is actually a group of students interested in the intellectual activity of thinking.
Their man purpose is to promote activities which lead the participants into making a personal commitment to a specific side of a question — it doesn't matter what side as long as one reaches a definite conclusion based on rational endeavors.
Finally, I would conclude that their purpose was well demonstrated and furthered by the particular meeting about Civil Defense. — Ann Armstrong Red Top Drive In 1520 So.
Regretably, however, the audience was com. posed mostly of townspeople, even though the two reeitaliatj are closely connected to CC, one being a student and the other a graduate. companied Mrs.
The criticism of the program would ""\L the over-sentimentality of the W group of songs with the exception of ""What a Movie,"" which Wa , quite lively.
The outstanding characterise of the recital, however, was Ji rs Berger's ability to portray tht_ emotions of her songs with a skillful combination of facial expres, sion and vocal technique. character, from the half-mad u sy to the captive falcon, was beautifully delineated and complete, The graduate, Mrs.
Edalyn Berger, is well known in Colorado Springs not only for her beautiful voice and acting ability, but also for her promulgation of the Colorado Springs Opera Society.
Berger's talent was evidenced by a well-diversified program of opera arias and art songs.
She opened with ""Mio Fernando"" from Donizetti's La Favorita, which immediately showed the fullrich intensity of her .mezzo-soprano voice.
Not having program notes, she explained and partially translated the foreign language songs and arias of the first two parts of the program.
However, far from being a hindrance, her spoken voice provided an excellent transition for the various moods of the songs.
Gretchaninoff's narrative of a young caged falcon, ""Le Captif,"" concluded the first part of the program.
Berger was followed by Barbara Couey, well-known on campus for her piano artistry.
Hageman's ""Music I Heard With You,"" Carpenter's ""The Sleep That Flits on Baby's Eyes,"" the Missouri folk song, ""Deaf Old Woman,"" and the aria ""What a Movie"" from Berstein's opera Trouble in Tahiti.
The program as a whole was very enjoyable and showed the diverse artistry of the two recitalists.
Carnation Adds Grant To Mounting Receipts Colorado College received an restricted $1000 grant from the Carnation Company Foundation of Los Angeles on January 11.
Accompanying Adams was Mr Armin B Barney, Chairman of the Colorado Board oi Trustees.
And yet, ■rsdox of Christian faith pressed yi apears to he one side of the extremes.
We know that Jesus a ,ne ""in the form of a servant"" ' n d that he humbled himself even jpto death.
He was lowly and ■eJt, strong and gentle, and yet also asked of men that they iiild forsake all else and follow i, This sermon will examine the tare and claims of the Christian religion and its relationship to life and to other faiths.
This service will be broadcast W KRCC at 1:00 There will be no worship service j Shove Chapel Sunday, January 28.
The first service of the new semester will be on Sunday, Februry 28. at 11:00 The preach■r will be the Reverend Professor Kenneth Burton and the worship leader will be Dr.
TEJON Attention Skiers We Are Completely Stocked with the Finest Ski Equipment SKI RENTALS NEW BOOTS AND POLES 5.50 SPECIAL PRICE FOR YOUR SEMESTER BREAK ICE SKATES SLEDS TOBOGGANS BUCK'S Sporting Goods Co.
The members of the team who will participate are Susan Caudill, a freshman who has compiled an impressive record in her first year of college debating, Charles Puckett and Max Power, juniors and veterans of the CC squad, and Chris Griffiths, of over all team ratings.
Both senior and president of ASCC. teams have scheduled matches with top teams from the Ah* Force Chuck Gibson, a sophomore from Arvada, Colo., and Joanne Schmitz of Denver are co-chairmen of Rastail's Friday Afternoon Club.
Under their leadership FAC will undertake very extensive programming that might very well include such events as an all school twist contest, a street dance, and playmate party.
CC's two teams, Puckett and Caudill, and Power and Griffiths, particiapted last weekend in a regional tournament at Colorado State College at Greeley.
In that meet, Power and Griffiths tied for first place with a 4-1 won-lost record, but took third on the basis Academy in order to prepare for the gruelling Harvard competition.
Caudill and Power, who have each won honors in Extemporaneous Speaking in the region this year, together with Puckett, will represent CC in the Exteinp divsion of the tournament as well a in the debate.
Johnson and his squad plan to be on hand again when classes begin February 5.
Today is Jim Olson's responsibility to look ahead and forecasl the communications needs of growing neighborhoods i Seattle, Washington.
He anticipates what kind of com munications will be needed by new apartment buildings — or determines the number of telephone lines and te\ephones that will be required along a new major parkway.
Northwest Bell Telephone Company, and the other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help bring the finest communications service in the world lo the homes and businesses of a growing America.
BELL TELEPHONE COMPANIES U] Colorado College Tiger • January 19, 1962 CC Mountain Club Sets Break Trip The Colorado College Mountain Club will visit the Four Corners Area of Arizona and Utah during the coming semester break.
The trip will span 10 days, lasting from January 25 to Sunday, February 4.
Among the major attractions of the trip will be the towering pinnacles of Monument Valley, along with a variety of Indian Ruins and natural arches.
This spire, which has been climbed only three times, is known to mountaineers throughout the world.
A special feature of the trip will be a visit to Rainbow Bridge, a natural arch located among the jumble of canyons that crease the Arizona-Utah border.
Among other places of outstanding interest in this region are the Navajo National Monument and the Canyon deChelly, which some members of the trip will visit.
On the return trip many of the climbers will ascend Shiprock, a 1700 foot tall monolith in northwest New Mexico.
The trip is open to anyone with hiking experience, although the club will not be able to furnish sleeping bags or other equipment except to members.
Further information will be available at the CCMC meeting in the Berg Heil Room of Rastall Center on Tuesday, January 23, at 7:30 pm.
The Tiger kittens upset the DU frosh at the Broadmoor World Arena last Friday 3-2 and on a traveling trip to the DU ice palace dropped a hard-fought battle, 8-5, Monday.
Both games were tough tussles with the freshmen icers showing nn amazing amount of Students, Faculty Clash with Brooms Center Activites A special opportunity is being offered to all Outings Club Members who may be interested in taking the Standard Red Cross First Aid Course.
The Intercollegiate Bridge Tournament will be held on Sunday February 18th. at 2:30m. in Rastall Center's W.E.S. lounge.
Last year's campus winners were Charles Beemer and Keith Warrenburg playing the North-South hands and Charles Greening and John Reynolds who also won the regional East-West championship.
The Intercollegiate Billards Tournament also will be coming up in the near future.
Any man or woman interested in this competition should contact Ben Lewis at Ext.
Friday's battle went scoreless (luring the first period with DU forging ahead via a goal by Jim Ross earlv in the second stanza.
The CC frosh returned the shot with a hack to back goals by Bob Magie and Steve Gustafson.
DU tied the score in the third, but CC's Jeff Gover fired in the final tally late in the last period to give the game to the kittens.
Monday's tilt was a tighter situation than the 8-5 score would indicate.
CC's frosh matched the favored DU icers goal for goal, entering the final period with a 5-5 tie.
A four minute penalty called on a CC deienseman left the Tiger kitens with only two defensemen to skate for the full four minutes.
The rugged pace took its tool, allowing DU to fire in three more goals to take the second game of the series, 8-5.
CC freshman Hockey Coach Tom Brennan expressed satisfaction with his young icers after Monday's game.
That four minute penalty really hurt us and sort of took the skates out from under our two remaining defensemen.
On February 2-3, they tangle with the hockey crew from Macalester College in St.
They are waiting until after final examinations to take on the faculty in two suddendeath broomball games on the ice at the Broadmoor World Arena.
Both faculty and students will select players this week to represent them on the ice as the mid-year vacation gets under way.
The principal differences between broomball and hockey are that brooms are used instead of hockey sticks and a volleyball replaces the puck.
The two 10-minute breaks between periods will be lengthened to 15 minutes each to provide more time for the broom battles.
Robert Stabler, professor and chairman of the zoology department, will announce the two tilts; and he can be counted on to enliven the performances with his observances about the playing of both students and fellow faculty members.
Monday and Tuesday JANUARY 22 and 23 A buyer from the largest book clearing house will be on hand to purchase all kinds of college textbooks.
Western State moved on top when CSC upset the 1961 conference champion Tigers 6G-65 in a fiercely contested battle in Cossit gym.
After Hasting's game-winning shot, the Tigers had another chance but lost possession of the ball on a bad pass.
Larry Balman, 6'4"" CSC senior, hit 21 points-the game's high to carry the Bears to the point where Hastings' clutch basket settled the issue.
CC had a 52. percentage on field shots, but took 21 less pop 5 at the basket than CSC which had a 39. percentage.
In tl 'lions, sted *ding -■ it po ints i Jihor '1 an -Mm . lenior ROTG Cadets Hage Court Martial Thursday, January 11, the SenKOTC cadets staged a Court ,-rtial in order to give them a {King 'dea of how a geneial flr t matrial under the Uniform nje of Military Justice would he Hiducted.
The cast fur the case suplied by Department of the Army con> e( j of members of the .class e McNeal was the defendant, was accused of staeling a diaf 0\ bracelet.
It ilted as if NcNeal were guilty ,ti] his sharp counsel presented major loop-hole.
However, Al lerson, who was giving Perry i a run for his money, caught 'V flaw and drove his point impressively. ;rson overlooked only one of the seven-man court, five McNeal's fraternity brothers, » walked out of the courtroom a verdict of not guilty.
The new approach was put forsrd by Fred Sonderman, associirofessor of political science, 3 lead chapter of a book callternational Politics and Forpj Policy, recently published by Free Press of Glencoe Inc., a on of the Crowell-Collier Pubg Company.
But, they neglect to study the and dynamics of the inter.itional system itself, which imcertain limitations, and preribes certain policies to the parapating states, he continued.
The Colorado College professor iggested that the present trends 'study in the area of internationrelations are similiar to the atipt to study American governnt soley by reference to various 'Jitical parties and other group's irticipating in the political pronitting consideration of the institutional system, the broad census of the people and other aifying elements which restrict e freedom of decision and action J the political parties and other roups.
In the area of international regions, the political scientist suga broader approach proving from the interaction pro^s itself, rather than solely from 'e point of view of the particints in the process.
Profesor Sonderman earned his '■D. at Yale and joined the facly at Colorado College in 1953. ■ is the author of numerous arles in political science and coiforr of a book entitled The Thefl and Practice of International Nations.
Commitment Panel Debates United States Civil Defense Needs Tuesday, January 9, witnessed a discussion on the morality and practicality of civil defense by a panel of five Colorado College professors.
The discussion, sponsored by Commitment, was held in the WES room of Rastall Center and drew a considerable number of people interested in this timely dilemma of whether the current emphasis (not to mention expense) on civil defense is an aid or a detriment to our national security.
It is the express purpose of Commitment to present all factors concerning the*current national crises to those who will listen in the hope that better informed, they may be able to make their own intelligent decisions as to the state of affairs and possible remedies.
Their endeavor Tuesday night was undoubtedly successful in presenting both sides of the Civil Defense question, for the panel was evenly divided, pro and con.
Wilbur Wright, professor of physics, serving as moderator, opened the discussion by stating that the theme was to be the morality and practicality of Civil Defense, He then turned the matter to Dr.
In a nuclear war, the effectiveness of a shelter would be extremely limited.
The money spent negatively on shelter should instead be used positively as aid for the helpless.
Civil Defense and arms stockpiling are necessary to show our enemies that we are prepared and that their attack would bring only retaliation.
We must show our allies that we are prepared to defend the freedom which we extol.
Th money spent for CD diminishes the probability of attack and so is spent positively.
Mr David Van Becker, professor of English and Commitment's other unofficial advisor, sided with Dr.
Bomb shelters, not fallout shelters, are necessary to survive a nuclear blast.
The recommended two-week food supply is insufficient, as radiation will continue to be dangerous for a month or longer.
It is impossible, either humanly or economically, to launch an adequate Civil Defense program as it would take an estimated ten years and a tripled national budget.
Living in shelters will reduce man to a survival machine in a de-humanized world.
The fact that we assume war to be inevitable greatly increases its probability.
Civil Defense is a program for national defense and unless it is taken, no one will be saved.
We should save as many people as possible to carry on the purpose of those who died.
Wright reiterated the dangers of the number's game, making the significant point that there are so many indeterminate factors in an offensive attack (i.e., weather, detection, aim) that it is next to impossible to make any kind of a reliable estimate of possible destruction.
An attempt at survival, even at the expense of dehumanization, is better than total destruction of the human race.
A realistic, ""intellectual"" fear is essential to combat complacency but must not become mass hysteria.
Money for shelters should, instead, go into the founding and operation of an international Peace Council to investigate means of maintaining peaceful co-existence.
Money should continue to be spent on shelter research, as advanced technology could raise the survival percentage.
All panel members, as well as members of the audience who participated in the open discussion following the panel debate, seemed to have a clear conception of the distinct possibility, and even probability, of nuclear war.
But at the same time they held that there is a middle ground between annihilation and Communist domination upon which we now stand and may continue to stand indefinitely if only we follow the correct path.
Results of Photo Contest Revealed Rastall's first Photo Contest turned out to be a complete success.
In print division, Evan Heckel won 1st place, Russ Sperry won 2nd place and Rusty Bastedo 3rd.
Bill Stafford took 1st place in the colored travel slide class, while Harry Onufroclc took 2nd and Dale Hicks 3rd.
Stafford took a 1st place for the second time in the open slide class, while Harry Diack took 2nd and Richard Dangremond Michel Seeks Answer A Colorado College chemistry professor is working on a research project designed to help petrolem engineers recover more oil from underground deposits where pressure has dropped.
Lester A Michel, professor and chairman of the chemistry department, will be working with other scientists at the Ohio Oil Company's Denver Research Center until next June.
In the Ohio Oil Company research project, Professor Michel and other physical chemists will apply their knowledge of surface chemistry to the oil found in the pores of certain rock formations In these formations the pores soak up oil much as water in a sponge.
Gift certificates from Stewart's Photo Shop of $10, $5, and $3 were given for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd places respectively in each of the classes.
Landon and Mr Sam Vickerman, all of whom have won numerous awards for their own photography in the Colorado Springs area.
Preparation of the entries for judging was handled by the Rastall Center Receptionist, Mrs.
Grace Dickson, who is an excellent photographer in her own right. to Oil Pressure Loss oil out of the pores and to the surface drops as a result of the recovery process.
The project is related to research that Professor Michel has .been conducting at CC for several years.
He has been trying to make accurate determination of the vapor pressure of organic liquids.
He previously was employed as a technical advisor on the Manhattan Project.
On the basis of his powerful speech, a Peace Race Committee was set up, headed by Norman Cousins, editor of theSaturday Review.
The purpose of the Peace Race Committee is to support Kennedy for the ideals he has so well expressed and to encourage strong public response to the president's proposals for the developing of United States peace-exploratory agencies.
The goal for the Peace Race Committee is to procure several million signatures on a letter congratulating President Kennedy's expressed desires for peace, disarmament under effective international control, and United Nations strengthening.
The letter reflects the everincreasing concern of responsible United States citizens to the danger of continued arms buildup.
The letter does not represent pacifist attitudes alone, but rather urges the president to strong action in his search for possible alternatives to world conflict.
Those interested in signing the letter are encouraged to see Herving Madruga.
Member of the Colorado regional office of AFSC, within the next two weeks.
Here's Text of Peace Race Letter As individual Americans, we congratulate you for your courageous and inspiring speech before the United Nations in which you call for a peace race instead of an You speak for all men whom you say we will not be prisoners of circumstances, and that we will make our own history in the light of reason.
In a time of confusion and fear, you have invoked the underlying moderation and humanity of the American people.
We agree heartily that the issue of disarmament must be tied to the larger question of security for all nations.
Each of us urges our friends and colleagues to support the general course you have charted for peace and with the full understanding that it can only be implemented in an atmosphere of mutual interest.
Heirloom amethyst and crystal necklace, probably in vicinity of Colorado College.
Howard M Olson, chairman of the Colorado College physics department, will take a halfyear sabbatical leave during the 1962 spring semester.
The physics department chairman said he plans to spend a part of his leave doing experimental work in the physics laboratory at Pomona College in Claremont California.
Olson plan to leave Colorado College in the latter part of January and return before the opening of the 1962 summer session next June 18.
Stressing the importance of the laboratory work for physics students, Professor Olson said he wants to give some thought during his leave to methods for improving instruction in this area.
With the exception of a year as a research physicist for the Hughes Aircraft Company in Los Angeles, he has been on the CC faculty since 1925.
GG Alumnus Heads NSF in Washington Former Colorado Springs resident and Colorado College graduate Dr.
The Coloradoan formerly headed the Foundation's planning group for Educational and International Activities.
His new duties will include developing experimental programs in international science coperation, administering foundation offices in Paris and Tokyo, policymaking in the area of international research support and the exchange of scientific information, and coordinating foundation programs or policies of international scope.
Shearn Explores Environment, Nerves EDDIE MACKS GARAGE 3l7l/ 2 N Tejon Dr.
Donald Shearn, assistant professor of psychology, is trying to determine how enviroment — such as the morning alarm clock, the sun's glare, or soft music— produces changes by recording variations in the electrical resistance of the skin while subjects undergo enviromental changes.
Professor Shearn is conducting the program on a $2,000 grant from the United States Health, Education and Welfare Department's Public Health Service.
He said the first phase of the research probably will be completed by midsummer.
Electrodes are attached to the surface of the volunteer subject's skin to pick up' the electrical changes.
The electrodes lead to a meter which measures the amount of electricity passing through the skin.
During one experiment, for example, the subject will listen to nervous system to activate the a noise.
This may cause the central sweat glands, which in turn cause a marked reading on the meter.
If this experiment is repeated often enough, the skin may become conditioned to change its resistance rapidly to stop an unpleasant noise.
Shearn said he is attempting to control reactions by making certain events, such as sounds, occur as a consequence of, or as a reward for these changes in the nervous system.
Some fifty students, many of them psychology majors at CC have volunteered to serve as subjects during the experiments.
The foot prospector's opportui ties have grown so that they n . include not only the preci 0D metals, but a host of other s „| stances as well, Professor p ea said.
Hi writing and research have gj V( him special recognition from elevi countries on four continents.
The interview will be conducted in DenJanuary 27th, 29th and 30th, In terviews also will be held ii ""^ J Cheyenne, Wyoming, on Februar; i)th and 10th, and in Pueblo, Colo rado, on February 16th and 17th Application Form SF 57, ""Ap plication for Federal Employment, may be obtained from the Colo rado and Wyoming State Employ' ment Offices or from the loca Post Offices.
The purpose of the schools is ti provide stateside public school ei ucational opportunities, gradi through 12, to dependents of United States military and civilian pei sonnel stationed overseas.
Th schools are located in the Azore; Crete, Denmark, England, Franci Germany, Italy, Labrador, Liby£ Morocco, Netherlands, Newfound land, Pakistan, Norway, Phillip pines, Saudi Arabia, Spain an; Turkey.
Sitting behind a massive cinder-block desk, she took on the appearance of an elderly house mother rather than ■the she-wolf of the publishing industry.
Numerous (0 nipanies and agencies have sent lt information concerning job placeC merit, and many others will visit . l1ttr campus for interviews.
February 9th Mountain States Telephone & Telegraph Company February 19th Texaco, Inc.
February 23rd Montgomery Ward February 28th United States General Accounting Office Interested students should sign .p for interviews immediately in D^an Mathias' office.
A listing of companies coming to Ihe campus in March will be posted soon.
Engli Convocation The all-college convocation, origuially scheduled for Feb., will k held at 11:00m.
Other CC students attending are Jo Heller in Discussion, Peter Trusi Oratory and Dramatic Interpretation, and Susan Caudill, Max Power, and Charles Puckett Impromptu Speaking.
John Auston and is one of Itie largest tournaments in the Rocky Mountain Region.
Universities and colleges from throughcut the region will be in attendance, Honor Violation On January 24, 1962, the Colo'ado College Honor Council issued a first warning for a violation of lh e Colorado College Honor Sysl *m.
This violation occurred JanQ ary 16, 1962, on a final laboratory examination in the geology Apartment.
This fun-filled weekend 15 being ably planned by Jean Vcom and Bill Ward.
Coulling, an alumnus of that school, who, after obtaining his Ph.D., returned to Washington and Lee to become an Assistant Professor of English.
Year in and .year out it has .been the honor system that has placed the school in its distinguished position in American education.
It is the honor system that has made possible much of the characteristic life of the college community.
It is the honor system that has helped to create an environment in which serious intellectual pursuits are possible and in which excellence is respected.
It is the honor system that attracts more praise and more interest, among students and educators from New England to California, than anything else that can be mentioned about the College.
This is so because of all we can boast here, our genuinely effective honor system is the one thing that is shared by only a handful of institutions in the nation.
And yet in recent years I have increasingly sensed that we do not sufficiently appreciate the true importance of the honor system.
We are prone to regard it with complacency, to accept it as the natural course of things, to consider it as something else here that is old and traditional.
Too many of us are either unaware or forgetful of what exists were there no honor system.
It can sap the vitality of an institution, it can make a travesty of the whole educational process, it can create an atmosphere of mutual hostility between faculty and students, and it can demoralize everyone by establishing a mood of cynicism and futility.
Whatever may have been the inadequacies of our former students, they have at least made one great and enduring contribution that is the bedrock of everything else — they have developed, administered, supported, and maintained the honor system as a vital force on this campus.
If the present and future students wish to make a contribution, they can make no more significant one than continuing the same tradition.
It is not theirs alone; it belongs to every student who through the years has faithfullyhelped establish it as an integral part of our lives.
For this reason, the enjoyment of it is not simply a right and a privilege, but a solemn responsibility.
As Ruskin said of the architecture of the past, the honor system is not ours to do with as we please; it is only ours to preserve.
A lecture series highlighting dynamic changes in modern Africa will begin next Wednesday, February 14.
It is necessary to sign up before the 14th at the Reception Desk, Rastall Center.
Charles Blooah will open with a background study of native life in West Africa.
The culture of the Djabo, a confederated group of tribes located in Southern Liberia, will be compared with other groups in Gold Coast, Congo and Nigeria.
Sir John Fletcher-Cooke, knighted just* a month ago, appears February 21.
He will analyze the relationships engendered by the multi-racial nature of several African states.
March 7, D Richard Pfaff of the political science department, C.U. at Boulder, will lecture on African nationalism and the search for political identity.
The concluding session, March 14, will examine foreign policy questions involving Africa and the United States.
Lecturer will be Major Donald Galvin of the United States Air Force Academy.
Gold Digger's Ball Will Swing Tonight Tonight is the night of the annual Gold Digger's Ball.
Couples will dance at this Sadie Hawkins affair to the music of Floyd Frame's band.
From nine to twelve Rastall Center will resound to his music as they twist, slop and maybe even dance.
The Ball is being sponsored by the Associated Women Students; the price is $1.00 per couple.
Prior to last year the Gold Digger's Ball had been an annual affair, but due to lack of interest, last year's was cancelled.
Tonightactually at the request of the male population of Colorado College— the tradition has been revived.
Peace Corps Exams The next Peace Corps placement tests will be administered on Saturday, February 17, at 8:30 at the Colorado Springs Post OffFor further information, see Dr.
It would mean my life if I were caught, and I, with three small children.
Here was money to send my three kids through college and maybe add a fallout shelter to the house.
I knew there would be no turning back once I had said ""yes,"" but I also knew that there was no choice.
I Prepare for the Infiltration Returning to my office I stepped into the washroom and shed my clothes.
I sent the office boy to the construction next door to buy me a pair of dirty dungarees.
I realized that if I could find a pair dirty and beat-up enough, half the battle was won.
He removed his other hand from his mouth as if to say, ""Here you are, boss,"" then he fell over.
With a deep breath I looked into the bag and found a pair of the filthiest pants I had ever seen.
I slipped them on and realized, upon looking into the mirror, that from the waist down I had it made.
The Meeting The Fine Arts Center is located two blocks from the Colorado College campus.
Toward this building 1 headed one brisk Colorado Morning, A light snow had fallen, and mine were the only footprints on the path leading to the entrance.
Then I would wrangle an invitation to a party and, if I was lucky, get a chance to observe one of their orgies.
I walked through the glass doors that separate the Art Center from the rest of the world and started to look around.
I tried not to appear a casual visitor, knowing that this might destroy my chances.
Instead, I acted as if I were any arty student and started strolling over to the gallery.
On my way I tipped over one or two ashtrays to give the appearance that 1 was an old hand.
I looked around until 1 found the picture that I thought was the best of the lot.
I jauntily strolled up to it, knowing that at that very moment, 20 pairs of eyes were directed at me.
Twenty seconds later a girl with striking long hair came out from behind a pillar.
She had been hiding there for the past 45 minutes but I had pretended I hadn't seen her.
This young lady, whom we shall call Jane X, was the emissary of the Set.
Nu doubt they felt they could sacrifice her should I prove to be a spy.
She meandered up to me with her hands behind her back as though she were ice skating.
Before I could say anything they descended from all sides; from behind pictures, doors and through windows.
One had even disguised himself as a piece of modern statuary which I, upon first sight thought was rather poorly done.
At first I thought it was a convention of freaks but then I regained my balance.
I realized that they were people like the rest of us . . . only different.
With an unmistakable horror, I realized that that was exactly what they were doing.
A Tense Cup of Coffee at the Hub It took approximately tw minutes to walk from the Fine Arts Center to the Hub of Campus Activity.
Just as we were about to enter the Hub, one of them called the group to a halt.
BUSINESS STAFF I'KKRl.KSS PRINTING EDITORIAL Elsewhere in the TIGER will be found two closely-related items of particular note to every student of CC as he or she begins this new semester.
One is an announcement of sently exists, a violation of CC's Honor System during the recent examination period.
It too, is concerned with an honor system, although not Colorado College's, and received its position in this week's TIGER at the request of CC's Honor Council.
It appears that as the semester passes, some of CC's students, particularly upperclassmen who have had no ""refresher"" in the policies and code of the Honor System, forget we are operating under a voluntary system of student discipline and self-discipline.
This system has been in effect at CC since 1948 as an example of student self-government, and an admission of the trust our administrators, faculty, and even our predecessors have in us.
It did not come into being as an administration mandate, and the administration has no part in its utilization.
As responsible students of Colorado College, it is totally ours to do with as we wish.
As we start this new semester, much could be gained if we would read Dr.
Coulling's article, then go back to our student handbooks and read the constitution of the Honor System.
Burton This sermon originated while the preacher was reading a set book for the college ""Freedom and Authority"" course.
So many mistaken statements were made in the book concerning the great reformers' teaching on the doctrine of election and predestination that the reader felt that he had to look at their writings and that of the Bible again.
The purpose of the sermon is to look briefly at something of what the .bible says concerning this subject.
This hopes to show that it is not such a forbidding and awful topic that people who have never properly read the reformers assert, and that the freedom of the will of man does have its place.
Indeed it is hoped to show in the words of one theologian that ""The Doctrine is the ultimate and essential expression of the evangelical doctrine of grace.
Cascade Rastall Center Movie Another Rastall Center Movie, The Hunchback of Notre Dame"", 'ill be presented in Perkins Hall n Sunday, February 11, at 7:30 This portrayal of Victor Hugo's classic novel about a deformed outcast of society in the fifteenth century Paris stars Charles Laughton, Maureen O'Hara, Sir Cediic Hardwicke, and Thomas Mitchell.
Realizing that the easiest thing to do to a losing team is to criticize it, particularly when it is in the cellar in its league and has achieved the dubious honor of losing twenty-four straight games, I shall try to objectively analyze the CC hockey program including the players, coaches, scheduling and recruiting aspects and present my own suggestions for improving the situation, Very obviously, from the record number of losses anyone can see that there is something chronically wrong with the hockey program here at Colorado College.
The question is then what are the factors that are contributing to this dilResolving this problem to simplest form it becomes one of letting the opposition score more goals than we ourselves score.
This at first might seem that I was stating the obvious and was over simplifying the problem, but upon closer examination such is not the case.
With very few exceptions, our team this year has been able to score at least three goals against the competitors, thus conclusively proving that our team has the fundamental scoring ability.
At the same time, the opposition has without exception been able to score more goals, thus demonstrating that our basic weakness in competition is our defense.
Time and again, in the home games this season (and presumably on our road trips too) the defense has not covered ""the man in front of the net"" and this opposing player has scored, not just once, but several times in the course of the usual evening.
It is virtually, impossible for any goalie to stop a well placed shot from close in like this, and the fantastic number of goals scored against us this year are deceptive of the ability of the goalies for this very reason.
No matter how talented a goalie might be, he is only as good as the defense in front of him.
The second consistent error on the part of our defense is that eveyone tries to be a goal tender with devasTHE WHICKERBILL is a Gift and Card Shop with a bamboo cricket good luck symbol of the wortd.
KIOWA at WON Ert. i»73 &» f LAST WORD IH FASHION iiiflllllllllllllllllillllNNNllNIIINNIllNNlNINNIll When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Sherbet ME 5-2740 Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 16 N Cascade Ave. tating results.
If we were to prevent the opposition from getting their shots off instead of blocking their shots (and in many cases screening the goalie), our defensive efforts would be a much more effective for very obviously if the opposition cannot shoot, they cannot score.
This concept was very ably demonstrated by the Minnesota defense last weekend.
The third and last habitually obvious defensive mistake is the persistant obsession of going after the man instead of the puck.
So many times the CC team has ""checked"" the opposition, much to the pleasure of the crowd but failed to gain possession of the puck.
Throughout the season, they have lacked a consistently ""fast breaking"" attack.
Because of this they have failed to capitalize on the other teams' mistakes.
We have also lacked an effective ""powerplay"" and have not demonstrated any repeated ability to score on the long, well-placed shot.
A note of marked improvement over last year is their passing coordination.
A word of commendation must be extended to our goalies who in the face of blistering attacks have turned in some very good performances on several occasions.
This does not exclude the fact that they have given the opposing team more than their share of gift goals more than once.
Because of the poor coaching, the coaches lack the respect of the players.
This is the reason that the players have very little ""will to win"" which is a functional part of any team.
Our coaching staff in the persons of Frasca and Brenin, fails to demand much from the players and as a result fails to command the needed respect needed of a successful team.
A coach should be the team's number one critic as well as its number one supporter.
This balance is nonexistent at CC and becomes obvious when our team plays, for the same mistakes are made game after game.
Look at his results It would seem that it was p a J of the coach's job to inspire 1^ ership and team spirit among hij players.
The record of our hockey team speaks for itself and sun. ports this fact.
I ] ize that there are many problems and complications involved, but i sincerely question whether e effort has been made to create the biggest and best schedule possible To this end I would suggest thai there are a number of teams that come down from Canada evetV year to play D.U., and it would seem that they would be very willing to play CC too.
Why can't an arrangement be developed whereby both schools could p| av more of these teams that i south of the border.
The third and final mistake that I shall bring out on the part of the coaches is the recruiting system which can only be described as a catastrophic abortion.
Besides being a fantastic waste of talent and opportunity for those concerned, it points out the inefficient planning on the j of the coaches.
While very viously it is desireable to have more than enough players vieing for the available positions on the team, we have exceeded all realms of practicality in this respect.
WAQEB, Owdm Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Col.
Rather than sake the fullest of the opportunity, :ve come to simply take it anted.
We are in the most lis hockey league in the UStates and compete against jf the biggest state supporttools in the country.
With the lid of the Broadmoor, Colorado [dlege has fielded the finest itams in the country in the past, ijid I would hope shall do it many ames again in the future.
I do not [eel that this is probable or possible if our present coaching staff ■etained for future seasons.
The ilayers that are here today have the basic ability to compile a rentable record and be justly |roud of it, but they will never io it without leadership, the ""will in,"" team spirit, and cooperaail of which are lacking as ome to the closing of this Robert F Williams viBAi ■&sFt COLORADO COLLEGE HOCKEY TEAM (1961-62] — First row (left to right]— Art Warwich, Paul Kilbreath, Dan McSill, Ken Cairns, Norm Laurence, Gary Martin, Jacques Rivard, Jim Frolick, Pete Doyle.
Second row — Pat Smyth, Don Stouffer, Archie Prestayko, Ale* Yankovich, Art Berglund, John Simus, Wayne McAlpine, Dave Lewis, Freshman Coach Tom Brennan.
Third row — Mike Minelli, Larry Gilbertson, Stan Moskal, Duke Dutkowski, Hen Hanson, Marv Parliament.
Contestants will compete with other students from across the nation by means of duplicate bridge.
Everyone who is interested in taking the Standard Red Cross First Aid Course is urged to attend.
The meeting will be devoted to organizing a time and meeting place agreeable to all interested.
The course is 10 hours in length but may be taken in several combinations.
The only cost involved is in the purchase of a book for 75c, Recent changes in methods of artificial respiration and blood control make this a valuable course even for those who may have taken it in the past.
This program is sponsored by the Outings Club and is being organized by Donald Oden, Student Activities Director of Rastall Center.
Colorado College will be represented at the Intercollegiate Bowling Tournament by Bill Pelz, Dale Shaw, Tom Brindley, Bill Evans, Jeff Goulart and Bill Kranich.
The regional section of the tournament will be held at Bowl-Mor Lanes here in Colorado Springs on February 16th. and 17th.
Competitors will be here from Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming.
Get the slouch, the beatific expression and, most important, look like you're the greatest person in there.
MAKE THEM EAT CAKE"" They started to chant, but 1 couldn't make out the words.
The hardest part was over and I was getting closer to that big fat check.
We walked in, and a hush fell over the room while everyone turned and looked.
His adding ""black"" squelched my request for a little cream immediately.
I quickly realized 1 wasn't with amateurs but smart and inspired artists, artists who knew well what art was all about.
Fine cotton oxford has been tailored with utmost finesse to provide slimmer fit.
I knew I had one friend among them; the girl with the long hair who, even now, was trying to engage me in a game of footsie.
They all took paint brushes from their pockets and held them gingerly between the thumb and forefinger of both hands.
The fellow at my right looked quickly at me and broke his brush in half (his name was Paul Y I remembered him because he put salt on everything he ate.
With a little kick to my shin bone she put her brush down . . . unbroken.
This could mean college for my kiddies or . . . the consequences were too horrible to consider.
They had been used by a workman during the construction of the Pamama Canal and smelled like the Bolivian jungle.
My hair was set and my sneakers given a few more rips for good measure. was out to make a really good impression.
As I entered, the first person I saw was my old friend, Jane X She was wearing a paint pallet and looked alluring as hell, but I was there for business.
There was a girl dressed in man's clothing and a man dressed in girl's clothing.
I took a deep breath and gave the girl in the man's suit a great big kiss.
She responded with a kick in the shins and ran off giggling to see her boyfriend who was cooking up some heroin for later.
The other person, a fellow dressed as a girl, introduced himself as Clarence.
It was then and there that I realized what was meant by the Moment of Truth.
Realizing the seriousness of the situation, I quickly forgot a witty quip, loosened my trousers and walked in.
The sight that flashed across my consciousness will laways be remembered in my nightmares.
He was smoking a thick black cigar and had two accounting majors at either side, fanning him.
A Nubian was peeling grapes and handing them to be tested to the girl who sat on his knee.
She was fantastically beautiful and had eyes that made me melt as if I were a pat of butter.
He looked at his wonw and then at his fingernails, jj. finally looked at me.
The End of My Adventu How 1 escaped I'll never know The next thing I knew I \\% forcefully dragged from the Leader's quarters and tied to a gian totem pole.
A fire was lit at ni' feet and the entire Arty Se started to dance around me fra tically.
I found myself fight ing panic as I realized that n only chance for escape was lock up in a closet somewhere in thi vast oemplex that was Coloradi Springs.
A the flames consumed her long flowing locks I thought fondl her faithfulness and love.
The Aftermath I recounting these ad' tures on the patio of my lu.xurj apartment in Acapulco, M The excitement is over and I am safe.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES Colo PEAK AVENUE Colorado College Tiger • February 9, 1962 [ 4 l Colorado College Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 16, 1962 Vol.
Convocation Benezet Views Campus Questions The second convocation of this school year was held Tuesday, February 13 at 11 in Shove Chapel.
Burton, followed by the College Choir under Mr Jenkins singing the ""Quoniam Tu Solus Sanctus"" and ""Cum Sancto Spritu"" from Vivaldi's Gloria in D Mr Chris Griffiths, president of ASCC, then introduced President Benezet, who spoke on ""Changes in the Wind"" to inform the college community of the new developments in cumpus affairs.
One change he assured the -students would not take place is a rise in tuition; about room and board, however, there was n question.
President Benezet also spoke about the fluctuation in the campus community itself.
This he attributed to an active faculty on fellowships and sabbatical leave ami involved in writing and research.
There are also 45 incoming student, some transferring, some off suspension.
Ski Races, Broomball, Hockey CC Faculty Team Featured at Winter Carnival Beginning this evening, the annual Colorado College Winter Carnival will be in full swing.
The two-day festival will include ski races, inter-sorority broomball games, interfraternity hockey games, crowning of the Hockey Queen, a skating exhibition, a twist party, and a Saturday night dance.
Today's activities will start with a twist party at 4:45 m. in the Hub.
Next on tap is a skating exhibition to be performed by Lynn Carmichael, CC senior.
The culmination of the evening's activities will be the coronation of the Hockey Queen elected from the candidates representing each of the five sororities on campus.
Saturday's program will get underway when top CC skiers compete on the east side of Cheyenne Mountain.
Beginning at 1:00m., the ski races will be held as a class competition for the, best time.
Capping the festival will be the Winter Carnival Dance, to be held in the Crystal Room of the Alamo Hotel from 9:00 to 12:30 Saturday night.
Chuck Gibson's eight piece student band will provide music for the event.
Organized under the eo-chairmanship of Bill Ward and Jean Torcom, and with the assistance of Peggy Coe, Meg Courtney, Mimi Jones, Marganne Parks, Stephanie Row, Boots Stockton and Carol Wright, the Winter Carnival promises to be one of the year's highlights.
All-College Confab March 17 and 18 Applicants Sought The position of All-School Picnic Chairman is now open.
Application forms are available at the Rastall Center desk and must he filed by March 5.
Carnival Game Rules The soroity broomball games shall be five minutes in length.
Using brooms and a large ball, the object of the game shall be to score by hitting the ball against the back boards of the opposing team.
In case of a tie or no score there will be an overtime until one team scores.
Students Form Russian Club Tuesdc terested Alexy Malyschev, assistant professor of Russian, to form a Russian Club.
The organizational meeting concluded with the election of Marty Bonforte, president; Gloria Farha, vice-president; and Susan Merrell, secretary-treasurer.
Constitutional and activity committees were formed, and events for the coming semester were discussed.
Proposed activities include a March tea for the Russian hockey players.
Other meetings will take place in the near future. f afternoon about 15 students met with J Plays Fraternity Hockey Champions A faculty hockey team is practicing this week to take on the winner of the interfraternity hockey competition in a 14-minute game during the Winter Carnival tonight at the Broadmoor Arena.
Thus far 11 faculty men and one graduate student have volunteered to battle the fraternities' top team.
Coaching the squad is John O Howard, assistant to the business manager at the college.
Among those wearing the faculty colors will be William E Barton, instructor in business administration; J Alan Johnson, assistant professor of business administration and economics; Robert M Torrens, food service manager ; Anthony J, Frasca, assistant professor of physical education; Gerald C Carle, director of athletics and professor of physical education; Frank T Flood, assistant professor of physical education; John H Lewis, instructor in Geology; Carl L Glaser, assistant food service manager; Donald A Oden, director of student activities; Dr.
E Robert Peterson, assistant professor of French; and James M Hanks, graduate student.
Snodgrass, Logan Give Phi Beta Kappa Talks Ruth Snodgrass and David Logan, who were elected to Phi Beta Kappa in their junior year, will give the annual Phi Beta Kappa lectures on Tuesday, February 20, at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center.
Pauling is the Nobel Prize-winning chemist who has recently been involved in controversy over his views on nuclear war and international affairs.
Glenn Brooks, Phi Beta Kappa chapter president, will moderate the disThe meeting is open to the public.
Since refreshments will be served, those planning to attend are asked to notify Miss Lorna Berger, 204, by February 19.
Future of college calendar On enrollment, he emphasized the fact that such a college as CC appeals to ""limited clientele"" and that in the past seven years the student body has increased only 10 per cent while the faculty has doubled.
An informal poll of the ""ponderers,"" senior administrators, favored a maximum enrolment of 1,500 students within the next decade.
The danger of admitting students merely on grades and test scores, however, is that ""American students are pretty good games-men"" and that a ""new strain of bacteria"" may arise to leap over the College Board fence.
Wanted are students who have not only the mentality but also the potential profit from four years of a liberal education.
Benezet stated the need for an objective view of the dissention in this country over time spent on study versus time spent on campus ""affairs.
His major point was that students must, besides gaining knowledge, prepare for citizen ship in a future society.
Council should, he believes, become the real arbiters of student conduct to free the deans for individual counseling.
The main problem with student affairs now is lack of centralization which causes conflict and planning gaps.
To help overcome the problems of student government, the president urged student participation in the upcoming All-College Conference March 17 and 18.
In athletics, a perennial question is what a small college such as CC can do to overcome increased professionalism i n inter collegiate sports since it has lost financial support from gate receipts.
The answer is men willing to play without subsidy for the sport itself, a supporting student body and opponents willing to play our way.
As long as the student body wants inter-collegiate sports and as long as these games serve the college and not vice versa, CC will continue its scheduling.
He also felt that it is CC's duty to bring back soccer and swiming (the new pool is to be completed late in 1963) and that we need more skiing instruction.
Continuation of the hockey program depends 50 per cent on the acquisition of our own ice both for the team and for recreation, but student enthusiasm for the rink, which can be completed by next fall, is necessary to raise the §150,000 minimum.
With the completion of the new sports facilities there will probably be a return to required physical education for men.
Benezet said that dissatisfaction came from changing needs to make the most of the academic year.
The quarter and ""trisemesler"" systems were discredited as not strengthening the unity of a small liberal arts college.
However, there is the possibility of ending the first semester before Christmas and bridging the time between semesters with a weeklong symposium.
For the freshman class, Paul Carson, Sharon Shackleford and Cubby Welch; for the senior class, Jan Pry and Sue Hoyt.
Sondermann Forms Discussion Group A newly formed group on campus devoted to a discussion of current events met for the first time Inst Tuesday in the WfiS room in Rastall Center.
Fred A Sondermann, Associate Professor of Political Science, briefly explained that the purpose of the group was to provide a forum for interested students and faculty who wished to discuss current affairs.
He suggested an informal organization that would meet every other Tuesday except durin K exams, and he also proposed a time schedule of from 4:00 to 5:15 in the afternoon for the meetings.
A very enthusiastic response included such subjects as United States policy towards Spain; the controversy over military censorship ; and the relationship of France and Algeria, The group then turned to a heated debate over the proposed sending of two CC students to a peace conference in Washington.
The discussion was first concerned about the use of ASCC funds for the trip.
This was discussed at length and then a more general interest in the conference itself captured the attention of the group.
As the financial issue was to be decided the following day, a lively meeting of the ASCC seemed iminent from the group's reaction.
All interested students and faculty are urged to attend these meetings.
Subsequent meetings will be held on February 20, March 6, April 10, April 24, and May 8.
The next meeting will occur at 4m. in the WF.S Lounge of Rastall Center.
The topic for discussion will be the pamphlet ""Westeren Values and Total War"" which is available for 25 cents at the Rastall desk.
Probably the most important and well attended ASCC meeting of the 1961-fi2 school year tool< place on February 7.
Concerned was the request of two students, Myles Hormer and Harris Sherman, for ASCC funds to allow them to attend ;i Washington, D.C., convention.
Although certain members of the student bodv strayed from the question at hand (whether ASCC can allocate funds for participation in or observation of demonstrations by minority groups) to an attack on Messrs.
Hopper and Sherman and their views, general participation and interest among students was the most lively and pertinent seen in recent ASCC meetings.
The motion was defeated by a 9-4 vote, but a $100 allocation by the Assemblies Committee and contributions by individual members of CC will allow these two students to attend the convention as observers.
Notwithstanding the unusual and gratifying burst of zeal and interest among a student body usually devoid of such enthusiasm, two things have come to light.
First is the recognition of a need to present CC students a look at world situations and minority views.
This is something that ""Commitment"" (Myles Hopper, vice-president, and Harris Sherman, president) has tried to do for the past year,' and their organization has often met with ridicule and rebuke.
CC students should wake up and look at the world outside — college isolation won't last forever.
Observation and consideration of such activities as the Washington conference is a start in this direction.
Second, it became apparent that here is an area where ASCC is deficient.
This need has been recognized by Mr Griffiths and an informal committee has been formed to study a proposed constitutional amendment.
This amendment would give ASCC jurisdiction over requests by political and minority groups, allowing ASCC a review and allocation power over them which it now does not have.
Tlie mechanizations of this proposal have not yet been worked out, but a step has been made — again a step in the right direction.
He is a convinced Christian, and has some penetrating first-hand insights into the present political and religious situation in Central Africa.
Mr Nkiwane has received much of his earlier education at a school run by the London Missionary Society, a mission arm of the Congregational Churches of England and Wales.
ALL COLLEGE CONFERENCE MARCH 17 and 18 Boyette to Teach Ballet, Point Work Colorado Colege has a new instructor in dance, Mr Larry Boyette.
Mr Boyette, who is director of the Ballet Arts Center of Denver, will teach two classes during this spring semester.
The new dance instructor, a member of the Metropolitan Opera Ballet Company for nine years, has danced on Broadway and television.
Pi* . . . s, rC ich P„nt* COULOTTES — Shirts and Tops $3.50 up ni'LN FRIDAY IW-NINl.S GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL JIM HANKS, attended by Susan Heidel, was crowned king of the Golddiggers' Ball last Friday night before a crowd of approximately 90 couples.
Fellow Freshmen — j Two important requirements you must set for your new commissioner are that he have the ability and have I a sincere desire to help the class contribute positively to I Colorado College.
They played a sistent, determined brand of j,. ketball, made few mistakes, walked off with a richly despn. victory.
For the crowd to give the hor team an advantage is one thi] For them to hoot, mock ami if at the officials and members the opposing team is quite a . other.
I have participated in a f e varsity sporting events mys< throughout high school anil ci lege, and know the feeling of co fidence and desire to achieve f nerformnnre that is instilled by home crowd.
But it does the pla' **ood to have the crowd constantly harassing and screaming at officials and opponents.
It is point less and accomplishes nothint more than building a bad Hon for CC and having the offi cials lean more toward th sition on close calls.
I adi officiating last Saturday w; But anyone who has a knowledg of basketball must also admit tha the officials called as many ones against Western as the; against us.
My intention in writing thi ter is not to create any enemies Some of my good friends were I one whose conduct was the woi Mv point in writing the letter simply that I would once like ti see a CC basketball game at Cos sitt and not be embarrassed by thi performances of some of low members of the CC studeiv body.
It is my hope that this postponement will mean a better conference, anil not result in a lessened interest on the part of the student body At the All College Conference the student, faculty and administration are given the opporti to gain a better understanding of the problems of the college community.
For this reason, I hope that the Conference will continue to have the support of all concerned.
The Symposium, tightly packed with panel discussions, lectures, discussion groups, luncheon discussions, and the like, will feature three of the foremost authorities on the problems of nuclear war — Dr.
All sessions will be pen, free of charge, to interested WEAPON and STRATEGY T students, faculty members, and residents of the area.
The Symposium, which will deal tfith as many and varied aspects f the problem of nuclear war and the international power struggle a s time permits, will be of immense intellectual import, according to its director, Dr.
Sondermann has placed the booklet, ""Western Values and Total War"" on sale at Rastall Desk.
In addition, the bookstore has set up a large display of relevant paperbacks, and Coburn Library has many reserve materials available which deal with the questions of nuclear war.
The three discussion leaders whose views will highlight the Symposium each have impressive backgrounds.
Since that time he has held a number of academic positions, including a resident professorship at the National War College.
He has served as Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, technical expert to the United States delegation to the United Nations Conference at San Francisco, and Senior Specialist on National Defence in the Library of Congress.
He is presently a consultant and writer with the center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, and has published such studies as PERMANENT PEACE and A WORLD WITHOUT WAR under the Center's auspices.
Morgenthau, who has an extensive background as lawyer and teacher in the great centers of learning in Europe — Frankfort, Munich, Geneva, Madrid — came to the United States in 1937.
Morgenthau has taught at Brooklyn College, Kansas City, California, Harvard, Northwestern, Columbia, Yale, and Princeton.
All three of the Symposium's guests are noted writers in their area of endeavor.
Also invited to take part in the Symposium was Senator Barry Goldwater who will be in Colorado March 1.
Louis T Benezet's invitation, expressed his regrets at being unable to attend, and promised to try to visit CC in the near future.
The Reserve Officer Training Corps ceremony, attended by family and friends, was held on the CC campus Friday, January 26.
Arthur D Decker, professor of military science and tactics at the college, administered the oath of office.
Robert W Selig, Jr., of North Hollywood, California, has been assigned to the Artillery Branch of the Army and received a delay of two years in reporting for active duty to complete graduate work at the London School of Economics, London, England.
The third Colorado College graduate receiving his commission as a second lieutenant is Charles C Allen.
The oath will be administered by Army personnel at his home in La Danada, California.
He has been assigned to the Quartermaster Corps and will enter active duty on February 28, reporting to Ft.
Exchange Study in Holland Available for Junior Men EDITOR'S NOTE— The lollov. inn 1. u description ..r Ncthcrlnnd.
The Foreign Student Committee lias announced that applications are now being received for the student exchange program with the Netherlands College for Representation Abroad.
The college faculty voted overwhelmingly to replace the present system of reporting all mid-semester grades with a system for reporting only D and F grades at the mid-term.
Certain faculty members felt that reoprting grades four times a year puts an undue emphasis on grades as such and tends to perpetuate immaturity rather than to develop maturity on the part of the student.
Several times during the past decade the wisdom of giving midsemester grades as we now give them has been questioned,"" said Dean Lloyd E Worner.
Some faculty members took the view that mid-semester grades often have a harmful effect upon freshmen and their parents when they get a grade after seven weeks.
It was also felt that the time spent recording all grades might be better spent on careful consideration of the students who appear to be in difficulty.
In other action, the faculty voted to add a course in intermediate Russian, approved a junior year abroad, and accepted proposed curriculum changes in the department of sociology and anthropology.
The course in intermediate Russian, to be offered in September, will be a continuation of the elementary Russian course started last fall.
The course will review srammer and oral practice and reading in Ru; ture, civilization and science.
This means that in addition to the programs conducted by Sweetbriar College, Smith College, and Hamilton College, Colorado College students now may participate in the program conducted by Wayne State at Munich and Freiburgh in Germany.
Also authorized was the addition of an anthropology course entitled The Cultural Area. dent is interested in the position transcript of grades Deadline for this information is March 3.
Specific questions concerning the program should be directed to Bob Williams, who attended N.O.I.B. last year, or Ed Kuiper, the Dutch student at CC this year.
Indeed, its origin can only be traced back as far as the recent war, when a number of prominent Dutch industrialists planned to establish the College.
They succeeded in persuading others that there was an urgent need in post-war Holland for young men, trained to follow certain specific careers at home and abroad.
Thanks to generous financial support of companies such as Lever Brothers and Shell, and many banks and newspapers, it was possible to open the College in 1946 in an old castle, Nijenrode, about 15 miles from Amsterdam.
Nijenrode is located along one of the oldest rivers of Holland, The castle, with its magnificent park, ponds, moats and bridges, was founded in the 13th century, and now serves as the main building in which all the lectures are given.
Although the study program includes many subjects (economics, business science, statistics, law psychology, philosophy, French, German, English, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, sociology, market research, banking, journalism, etc.), the stress lies to a great extent on student life.
The Student Body, ""Nieuwe Compagnie van Verre,"" is a name commemorative of the old East India Company.
As members of the Senate and of the various sub-committees, the students fill a number of responsible positions.
Sports also take a major ■:■■:■■■• to All Sun-Tanned teams play in various leagues.
B through direct exchanges with American colleges; besides that, seven other countries are represented.
The first throe months you will have trouble in understanding Dutch, but five hourly classes every week and especially the social contacts you make in the ""lounge"" in the castle, which is run by the students, gives you endless opportunity to learn the language.
All the courses are given in Dutch, but for examinations, special arrangements are made for American students; they write the examination either in English or compose a paper on a special subject.
First, you get a good knowledge of Dutch, which will give you a good base for the study of another foreign language, such as German.
With your knowledge of Dutch you will have a better opportunity to learn more about the Dutch people.
During the Christmas vacation, December 15 — February 5, there is a great opportunity to travel through Europe and see and feel the different atmosphere in every country.
Many of the employees of THE SKI SHOP and of SPORT, INC., had the chance to watch the fun you had at Aspen and other places skiing between semesters.
Several geria, books containing photographs of the French countryside, and a life of Postuer, among others, have been deposited in the college library by Lu Bonne Volonte Franco-Americaine of Paris.
The books were given to the college in recognition of its efforts in fostering French culture in the United States and encouraging mutual friendship between the youth of the two nations.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE February 16, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger HO CHOON AND RUSSELL SPERRY, the the Slocum longpong championship.
If the new editor really thinks he belongs with the TIGER and not the Kinnikinnik, let him treat it like a newspaper.
I am personally irate because the editor cut a story (gathered and written at some pains by a staff member) publicizing the February 14 visit of Dr.
Galvin is asking CC students and others to join in an enthusiastic experimental attack on mental illness.
Volunteers will work in the state's institutions, helping inmates to realize that they are still a part of society, and helping the volunteers realize that the distinction is not so great between free citizens and those behind locked doors.
The importance of Galvin's position and the importance of his program both give the CC community a right to expect news of his visit in the only source which is read by everybody.
Other faculty members, so I learn, ""lost"" stories to the editor's pencil.
He devoted C>4 columninches, by rough measurement, to a feature satirizing the ""arty set"" which was keyed to no particular date.
Thirty-four inches went to criticize the hockey team )plus a picture 4 columns wide and 5:5 inches deep), and next week would have done as well.
Fifteen inches on page one and 10 on the editorial page described an apprently excellent honor system at Washington and Lee.
On the other hand, a total of only 38. column-inches was devoted to news of CC events which had just taken place or were about to.
Sincerely yours, Paul Kutsche, Assistant Professor of Sociology and Anthropology.
Rasketball can be a great game to watch when played well and officiated properly, However, thus far this season I have found that the refereees seem to detract a great deal from our home games with many of their idiotic calls.
Please don't mistake what I am saying for a complaint about ouilosing a couple of games; this is not the case.
I have seen calls made against both sides that are so ludicrous that I can't see how an official could make them ; further many flagrant violations have been made without any recognition of them.
I think that if something is not done about them, people will become disgusted with the games, or they will come merely to bait, torment, and ridicule these men.
The answer is probably a mixture of the two, .but in either case I think that something must be done about the officials of our games.
Foreign Service Officer To Speak February 23 Mr Richard A Johnson, a senior career Foreign Service Officer, will be on campus on February 23, to meet with the faculty and student body to discuss current information concerning careers in the United States Foreign Service.
Mr Johnson will be available to meet with students in the WES Lounge, Rastall Center, at 3:30 for informal discussion.
At 4 he will speak on the topic ""The Foreign Service as a Career-"" Mr Johnson entered the Foreign Service as an officer in 1040 and r-s since served at our diplomatic and consular posts in Naples, London, La Paz, Guadalajara, Cuidad Trujillo and more recently as Counselor for Political Affairs, American Embassy, Madrid.
The next annual Foreign Service examination will be given September S, 1062.
Candidates for the one day examination must be at least 21 and under 31 years of age on July 1, 1962.
Those 20 years of age may apply if they are college graduates or if they have completed their junior year.
They must have been citizens of the United States for at least nine years.
Candidates successful in the one day examination will subsequently be examined orally by panels which will meet at regional points throughout the United States.
Starting salaries range from $5,625 to $6,755 plus allowances, leave, and other benefits.
The Foreign Service requires officers with training in public and business administration, executive management, economics and related subjects, as well as those whose major course of study include poltical science, history, language and area studies, geography and international affairs.
The completed application form must be received by the Board of Examiners not later than midnight, July 23, 1962.
Stewardess FOR UNITED AIR LINES If you are between 20 and 26, between 5'2"" and 5'8"" and single, you may qualify for this challenging and rewarding career.
Train in the new two million dollar Stewardess Training Center in suburban Chicago.
Recreational facil ities for trainees housed in the dormitory includes a year round pool.
Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's finge lickin' good"" ffZ3j> Take-Home TTTr^ Department Trrig> Open TTTr2y 1 1m. to Jj3^ 12m. or call jssis* ME 4-0881 VasuuMJn) Yes. -ev.
Porter is an art major from janta Fe, New Mexico, whose photographs have appeared in "" "":■ exhibitions in Rastall and \ the Kinnikinnik.
Exhibitions planned for display Rastall in the future include a huwing of paintings by Paul Garpaintings by David Dunlap, in May, in conjunction with Ihe Fine Arts Festival, an exhibition of paintings, drawings and iculpture from a number of Colorado College art students.
The Kinnikinnik staff announces that the deadline for material subitted for the spring issue will be Uarch 27.
Prizes will be awarded A fifteen dollars each for prose, poetry, art, photography, and covriesign at the editor's discretion, prose contributions especially are .ui/ouraged.
The editors wish to acknowledge orman Liden as the author of the vo poems, ""Death of an Old Woman,"" and ""Festival Sketches,"" which appeared in the winter issue jf the Kinnikinnik.
A limited number of copies of this issue are lable at Rastall Desk. he new copy editor of the linnikiniiik is Roseunn Brown and Buck is the new art editor.
Fwo new members, Dan Jaffe and lames Fox, have been added to the Board of Review.
G2 Intercollegiate Bridge tournament, sponsored by the Asftciation of College Unions.
The ""mpetition will be held in RasWES Lounge on Sunday February 18th at 2:30m.
This is a contest and there■Te entrants are urged to form ^""tnerships before the actual con; t time.
Traveling trophies and plaques ""II be given to the college participts winning the national titles, addition campus winners will *eive certificates.
Last year s Beemer, Charles Green% John Reynolds and Keith 'enburg were the local campus ers.
Competing against some 30 colleges and universities, mainly from the great plains region, the CC team piled un ten points to win the top honor.
Militarv Academy at eWst Point finished second with 7 points, and Buenn Vista College at Storm Lake, Iowa, finished third with 6 points.
Colorado College won three first pl ace trophies and one second place in various events.
Mary Jo Heller, a freshman from Denver, was the top speaker in discussion and teammate Susan Caudill, a freshman from Houston, Texas, was second.
The team of Heller and Caudill received the first place team trophy in discussion.
Miss Caudill also won first place in Impromptu Speaking by capturing 7 first place decisions out of 7 in four rounds of competition.
Max Power, junior from Denver, failed to make the finals in Impromptu but received three second place ballots in three preliminary rounds.
Competing in Debate will be Chris Griffiths, senior from Pueblo, Max Power, Charles Puckett, junior from Wilson, Oklahoma, Susan Caudill, David Ferguson, senior from Denver, Jo Heller, David Helms, freshman from Shawnee Mission, Kansas, and Faith O'Reilly, freshman from Des Moines, Iowa.
Jim Heiberger, Jim Talman and Dale Shaw, representing 3rd South, won 2nd place with a team total of 1442.
Rounding out the top four teams were 1st North with a 1416, and 2nd South finished in fourth place with a respectable 1360.
There were 11 teams representing the various wings and idthougli the tournament was hampered by continual mechanical breakdowns, it may be termed a success.
It is hoped that a tournament of this type may become a permanent part of the Slotfum Hall intramural program.
The championship games in' both the singles longpong and regular doubles were featured at the half time of the CC-CSC basketball game.
The team compiling the most points in the tournament was 1st West who won the doubles regular, and were also able to place second in the singles longpong.
In addition, they captured two third place honors to compile a total of 11 points, and thus win first place.
There was a tie for second place between 1st North and 4th North, both teams having 8 points.
Scoring was based on one point awarded to a team advancing in the bracket, the team winning a division would have advanced four times, thus being awarded four points, second place three, etc.
The next event of the intramural season will commence tomorrow at 11:00m. when we have the tipoff of the basketball season.
The Tigers, although losing six key men as academic casualties, looked very much a team as they outscored Michigan 2-1 in the first period and 2-1 in the penalty-ridden third period.
The second period caused CC's downfall when MU scored five quick goals to give them the game-winning lead.
Rastall Center Speaker This coming Tuesday, February 20, at 7:30m. in Hastall Center, the Sigma Chapter will present Captain L Gelas of the Air Force Academy.
Saturday CC bounced back to a three point lead at halftime and, paced by Dave Herrington and Bill Pelz, found the range for a L5 point, going-away victory.
Herrington, a freshman, topped the scoring with 21 points, including eight field goals.
Pelz contributed 17 while Phil Coulter, Western's leading scorer was limited to 14.
Meanwhile, Dave Krell collected 12 rebounds Friday and 13 Saturday to lead the board control for the WSC series.
SiiilcColic Wl-hI. in Statu THE WHICKERBILL is a gift and card shop . . . mouse ivith a leather tail.
WAOEB, Om« GOOD FIT is always in season firm line slacks Slim, trim and tapered is the line for men who know a good thing in slacks.
Says Pretzel Bender, ""After the amphitheater I relax and have a Tareyton.
Colorado College Tiger • February 16, 1962 Colorado College Colorado Springs, Colorado, February 23, 1962 Vol.
Brodie, Mil lis, Morgenthau Featured in Symposium By James Heckman The pendingSymposium on War and Peace in the 60's irings together at Colorado College a triumvirate of leading American foreign policy advisors and planners.
This unusual md college-wide seminar involves students, faculty, and stratify experts in a lively three days of discussion, debate, and lefinitive thought on the issue of survival in the Nuclear Age.
BerI Brodie, a former Yale Uni,ity professor and an expert ,(i missile and air strategy.
He is member of the Rand Corporam, a non-profit organization of ientists, humanists, and other gments of the intellectual, miliry and social community which engaged in actively seeking both imediate and long-range soluins to world problems.
He is well Tiown for his pragmatic and 'realistic"" attitude toward world olitics, and so may be expected o articulately defend a rather Hugh policy in world affairs.
Millis of tt be Center for the Study of DemoI ratio Institutions, is a former 01 far correspondent and military ian, and he is the author of Permanent Peace and A World flt I'ithout War.
He is expected to __ iloquently present a thesis of Tactical peace and constructive teal ism.
The potentially challenging and porous debate will begin when h speakers 'face-off' on Tuesgy, February 27, at 11:00 o'clock J an All College Assembly in p erkins Hall.
At this initial lee^e, students will hear three varied statements about the United States and the world situation, and possible solutions to the larger problems.
After this initial encounter, there will be a luncheon given in Rastall Center at which 55 interested students will be able to eat with the lecturers and faculty to discuss the initial propositions.
Students interested in attending this luncheon should register at the Rastall Desk.
The same afternoon, at 4m. in Rastall, small groups of students will be able to discuss their views with the three intellectuals.
Morgenthau will speak on ""Political Consequences of Nuclear Power"" at an 8:15 lecture in Shove Chapel.
Morgenthau, violently discuss the ideas presented, or will go home enraptured or intellectually ruptured to begin to contemplate man's role in the universe.
At 4m. there will be further discussion in Rastall Center of the various issues up to that point.
Mertz, discuss various ideas with the trio of intellectuals in attendOn the heels of this di will come further debate from Dr.
After the customary intellectual jousts throughout the night, students will be offered the unique opportunity of touring NORAD Headquarters, the nerve center of North American Air Defense.
The tour will commence at 10m., and all interested students are urged to register at the Rastall Desk.
The climax of the formal Symposium will be held at 4m. in Taylor Hall where the three antagonists will make concluding statements and resound to questions.
The conclusion of this discussion will technically end the 1962 Symposium.
To prepare students for the Symposium, a monstrous, but easily mastered reading list has been provided and posted in various centers of campus activity.
A special display of reserve books has been established in the library.
The real value of this Symposium will come from the dialectical exchanges, and the violent, but logical, arguments advanced by the participants.
The range of topics considered will not be narrowly confined to technical aspects of nuclear war.
Topics including American Philosophy and Morality as well as world economic and social issues will allow the thoughtful student to deepen his knowledge of the world and the world situation.
It is hoped that the Symposium will never really end, and that firm and thoughtful conclusions will only be reached when the participants vote and directly participate in pol itical affairs.
Ski Bums' Ball On Friday, March 2, at 9m., the Ski Club, in conjunction with Rastall Center, is sponsoring the Ski Bums' Ball.
He has previously appeared at the Greek Week Dance and the Gold Diggers' Ball.
The first discussion groups will begin at 2 in., Saturday, and the weekend will end at 4 Sunday.
All students are urged to spend the night at the camp, if at all possible; we believe that the group spirit will make for more cohesive, intense, ami rewarding discussions.
The form of these discussions will be that of small panels whose duties will be to make short statements to channel the beginnings of the discussions, after which the meetings will be open to the audience, to arirue. villify. or justify as they see fit.
The idea of the conference is not to have formal speeches by faculty and students, but rather to have informal, free-wheeling discussions and exchange of ideas.
Are the college's reasons for our attendance (see catalog, 5) applicable to its students, and do we have responsibility only to our selves, or do we have an obligation to share our abilities.
Announcement Tickets for the hockey game with DU Saturday night will be available at the Rastall Desk until noon tomorrow.
During lunch, tickets will be available at a table set up between the lunch lines.
Sponsored by the ASCC, the rally will begin at 7:00 on the north patio of Rastall Center.
The ideas mentioned underneath the topics are only preliminary guidelines, and if you have new angles, proposals, or suggestions you are urged to attend.
The All-College Conference Committee is Buffic Buffuam, Karen Mcllvaine, Jan Cosby and Rusty Bastedo; faculty advisor is Mr Oden.
If you have suggestions or wish further explanation of the conference, please contact any of them, or leave a note in the conference mailbox at Rastall desk.
Benezet By Caroline Creyke In his convocation address, Colorado College president, Louis T Benezet stated that Student enthusiasm for the skating rink, which can be completed by next fall, is necessary to raise the $150,000 minimum.
Commenting on this, President Benezet again stressed the need for student interest and enthusiasm.
He mentioned that a rally is being planned for the last hockey game, and suggested that this would be an ideal time for the student body to demonstrate their enthusiasm for the sports center.
Benezet suggested also that students can help through the local press, ""by writing news articles and features on the expected contributions of the pool and skating rink, and on the ""other side of the coin"" in the hockey situation — the limited practice time.
Benezet feels that a rink at Colorado College would do the same thing for skating that the Broadmoor ski area did for that sport — help popularize and create more interest in it.
The architectural drawings for the center are being prepared now; three of them in fact have been on display In Rastall Center this week.
Benezet stated that the bidding should be completed by late spring, and the actual construction begun bv commencement.
If enough funds are available, construction on the ice rink will begin this June also, and should be completed by mid or late fall, 1962.
Twenty undergraduates and two graduate students were graduated from Colorado College at the end of the first semester.
The degrees will not be presented formally until commencement exercises in June.
However, those approved by the faculty action now are accorded all the privileges of graduates.
Charles Coulson Allen, Ruth Shaw Black, Helen Jeanine Kocher Bramwell, Juanita Presley Caroom, Carol Joyce Hammond, Eugene LeRoy Higgins, Penelope Jane Walholm Hylbom, Jack Edward Kintz, Salvatore Joseph Maffei, Con Gregory Robbins.
Joseph Michael Romero, Barbara Rae Brown Rowland, Robert William Sebg, Ruth Ann Snodgrass, George Michael Ulrich and James Robinson Wexels.
Four were approved for the degree of Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration and Banking.
After a prolonged period of lethargy and laxness, enthusiasm is reawakening among the CC student body.
Some of this lias been misdirected— for example, the expletives and insults hurled at referees and players during recent CC hockey and basketball contests.
Now, howover, the ASCC Enthusiasm Committee is attempting to harness this energy This recently expanded committee is sponsoring a rally tomorrow night before the DU hockey game and also plans to send a bus or buses to Colorado State College on March 3 for CC's final 1962 basketball game.
Now, it is certainly refreshing to find Cossitt filled when the Tigers plav at home, but only a disappointingly small number have been regularly attending the hockey games at the World Arena.
The ""We Ain't Down Yet"" rally was conceived in an attempt to fan the embers of enthusiasm and loyalty which linger on campus.
Make an effort to attend the last home basketball game Monday and the last game of the saason Saturday.
Professor Sondermann 12:45— ""Luncheon with students— SE section, Rastall dining room 4:005 :30— Small-group discussions— WES and room 203, Rastall Center.
Neale R Reinitz, English. 8-i5_Talk by Professor Morgenthau, Shove Chapel.
Wednesday, February 28, 1962 12:15— Lunch with faculty and administration.
By Meet i Snulhwi'St SPCli( nvitation. of Rastall dining room. n War and Peace,"" Perkins led by Profs.
Subsequent discussio Freed, psychology; William O Werner, economics. -Small-group discussions — WES and room 203, Rastall Center.
Dean Lloyd E Worner Thursday, March 1, 1962 10:00 — Meet in Rastall Center parking lot for briefing at NORAD Headquarters** 3:30 — Wind-up Symposium, WES lounge, Rastall Center.
Please sign your name on a list at Rastall desk, on a first-come, first-served basis.
Okay, now that I've succeeded in acquiring everyone's undivided attention, I'll explain just why we're all gathered here.
I will allow my thoroughly blemished personal record to discount the former accusation; as for the latter . . . well, personally I wouldn't iift a finger against City Hall.
This, however, will take some time since I'm currently engaged in a vigorous campaign contributing to its destruction.
Oh, and by the way, don't bother sending in any critical analyses of this column — I can't possibly tolerate any opinions which differ from my own.
Oh, I can get a cup of. coffee plus one refill, all right, but this leaves me with an unexplainably bitter feeling towards all humanity.
Basically I'd guess you'd call me an abominable pig; you could also call me a selfish degenerate, an inconsiderate boor, or a greedy lout.
And in addition to the realization of this momentous revelation, I think I know just who this devious personality is.
Biondini, Ronald Cal lender, Edward Carmichael, Lynn Cogswell, Marianna Dana, Arthur Dare, Susan Feasel, Richard Formby, John Fraser, Janet Gibbs, Jeanne Gibson, Judith Gray, Judith Jilka, Joan Jorgenson, Don Logan, David Luschak, Cecilia Maffei, Salvatore Martin, Marian Min, Karen Mueller, Dennis Norton, Donald Peck, Rodney Prestayko, Archie Ritchie, Chas., Ill Rowland, Barbara Selig, Robert, Jr.
Snodgrass, Ruth Stevenson, Wilfred Street, James Tilley, Martha (Allan A ' Student fro Kinnikinnik Deadline is March 27 15-3.40 H8-4.no 18-3.61 18-3.70 15-3.40 18-3.83 21-3.42 14-4.00 15-3.53 17-3.59 15-3.86 18-3.50 16-4.00 17-3.82 14-3.42 17-3.41 17-3.59 18-3.83 17-3.53 15-3.00 10-3.70 15-3.40 13-3.53 20-4.00 16-3.62 15-3.40 18-4.00 15-3.
This will mark her 22nd consecutive summer as dance director at the independent liberal arts and sciences college.
Miss Holm, who received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from the college in 1960, organized the summer dance program on the campus in 1940.
Her 1962 summer class for both novice and advanced students, as well as teachers of dance, will start June 18 and continue through August 10.
I know him though; and I'll sit here in the Hub until he slinks back, then I'll point him out to you . . . meanwhile, would you buy me another cup of coffee — I've already had my two.
McGrau-Hil )rce f, Publishing Company, Micro-carijust, Foundation, Micro Photo, In ional Biscuit Company, Olin Math ieson Chemical Corporation, ney-Bowes, Inc., Reader's Di£ Time, Inc., and the United Stats Steel Foundation, Inc.
Hans J Morgenthau, p r , Bernard Brodie and Mr WalMillis may indeed point the ay of some Symposium discusions.
The successful Broadway musical, featuring Colorado College students and Colorado Springs area residents, will be performed in the Fine Arts Center on March 8, 9 and 10.
Ben Lyon, a sophomore, as the gambler Skv Masterson, and Marty Hylbom, a senior, as Nathan Detroit, his buddy.
The twin female leads went to Lynn Bradley, a sophomore from Boulder, and Genevieve Vaughn, a freshman from Port Morgan.
Miss Bradley has been cast in the role of Miss Adelaide, and Miss Vaughn plays Sarah Brown.
Those selected for character parts include Dale Spall, a freshman, as Arvide Abernathv; Pennv Hylbom , a senior, as Agatha; and Larry Bowman, a junior, as Benny Southstreet; John Giannes, a sophomore, as Angie the Ox; Sunny Jamison, a junior, as General Matilda Cartwright; Robert Littell, a senior, as Rusty Charley; Chris Griffiths, a senior, as Harry the Student Conduct Committee It was brought to our attention that a group of flags were taken from a town hotel after a dance.
The committee suggests to all groups having town functions that they check over the area before leaving so that these incidents don't occur again.
The committee also discussed a case of misconduct during athletic functions.
After a hearing, a letter of apology was written to the man who was offended, by the individual involved.
Also the failure to check books and magazines out of the library was called to our attention.
Some will work on Indian reservations or in villages of Southeast Alaska.
Others will aid in developing recreation projects in the old Spanish villages in New Mexico or community service programs in the Southern Mountains and Puerto Rico.
One hundred volunteers will work in Chicago settlement houses, churches, interracial centers, and camps.
Work camps abroad, conducted under the sponsorship of the World Council of Churches, will bring together young people of various racial, national, and denominational backgrounds from all over the world.
One project will involve the construction of a medical and social center in Hualpencillo, Chile, which Announcement For those students who are interested in the eight piece band which played at the Winter Carnival Dance, it was a campus group.
Chuck Gibson, trumpet; Dave Wahfeld, alto sax; Frank Weible, alto sax; Mike Orem, cornet; Norm Liden, tenor sax; Henry English, drums; Dick Brigham, bass and congas; Steve Gress, piano.
If anyone is interested, please contact Chuck Gibson, extension 2S7. was recently ravaged by an earthquake.
Students will aid Africa's new independent nations in construction, medical, and education programs.
Still others will work in almost every European country, as well as Greece and Iceland.
Volunteers are generally expected to pay their own transportation costs.
STEVE BANKS Because of Steve Banks, who just two years ago was an undergraduate engineering student, the Bell Telephone System is closer to wiping out the noise that sometimes interferes with telephone conversations.
Steve examined the noise levels that had ""leaked"" into telephone circuits in Colorado.
His findings shed new light on the source of noise, and on the important methods of measuring it.
Steve Banks of Mountain Slates Telephone & Telegraph Company, and the other young engineers like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help make your communications service the finest in the world.
Meet the Netherlands,"" sponsored by the Dutch private and governmental education agencies.
The program lasted some five days in the beginning of November at a private hotel not far from Amersfoort in the province of Utrecht.
The schools represented were the Building and Architecture Center and the Economics College, both located in Rotterdam, the Technical School of Delft, the Agricultural School in Wageningen (said to be the finest in the world), and The Netherlands Institute for Representation Abroad.
The program itself dealt with an introduction to Dutch history, modern architecture and art, the reclamation of land, and included an excursion to the DAF autoworks in Eindhoven in the south of the country.
It's a bit surprising for the foreigner to learn that the Netherlands has experienced a great revival in painting since World War II, even greater than that in France.
The lecturer at the conference pointed out that Dutch paintes are affected to a large extent by the artificial environment created by man in his effort to gain land from the sea.
There were young men and women present from Argentina, Brazil, Ceylon, Columbia, Cyprus, Germany, Pakistan, Thailand, the USA, and of course, the Netherlands.
The make-up of the Foreign Student Committee and Colorado College must be much the same.
A group of this type presents an opportunity, which it seems to me is almost unequalled, to get to know the world we live in.
I observed this while standing in Holland, gaping at the enormous United States of America across the Atlantic.
Let is suffice to say that, if nothing else now I know clearly that there is a problem, adding that this understanding is the first step in solving it.
The conference was closed and the delegates thanked the Dutch for so ably organizing such a worthwhile event.
Dear Sir, Kenya right now is in the throes of political, economic and social adjustment; although pessimism is the order of the day on the behalf of the white settlers and other vested interests, including the Asian Civil Servants and merchants, I don't think that their worst fears will be realized.
The trouble is that too many of the immigrants here just don't have a ""frontier"" spirit — the White Collar Civil Servant mentality insists upon written guarantees and assured recognition.
On the whole East Africa is ideal if one can sympathize with the aspirations of the ""new"" African and has conditioned himself to respond to the abnormal — anyone wanting routine and an ordered life (both mentally and physically) has no business in East Africa.
I have finished the first two terms of my education training course at Makerere.
This course, like all education courses, was unbelievably easy and low-paced.
In the third term, commencing January 22, I will be practice teaching for eight weeks.
I will ,be practice teaching at a Catholic mission school outside of Kampala.
I asked to be sent there for this period just to see what the missionary life was like.
The Holy Trinity administrator, the American Priest and the Asian merchant.
I have visited several Catholic missions now on my travels in and around EA and they always extend the long, warm hand of hospitality.
I have been posted to Tanganyika which appears so idyllic politically that I am sure I will be bored.
So far I have been designated for the government secondary school at Moshi, but this is subject to change.
The prospects are pleasing, but the ""life in the bush"" might have alternate attractions.
Some of the group are extremely chagrined at their posting, especially those going to the Southern Highlands of Tanganyika.
After the lush life at Makerere many have lost their ""new frontiers"" ardor.
The overall feeling of his letter is of an exciting experience though he does not stint in a description of the possible drawbacks that might be encountered by some.
If on balance his letter has created an interest within you, here is some more of the salient information about the program.
Colorado College Receives Science Education Grant Colorado College has been selected by the Union Carbide Edu^ cational Fund as the recipient of a $5,000 Physical Science Education Grant.
The grant will go to the departments of chemistry, mathematics and physics.
When we began this program we were all prepared psychologically for the really rugged life, but then, as we kept failing to experience any hardships or anything remotely smacking of the strenuous life, the situation changed.
One of the group did go home, though, after several weeks —never had been away from home before.
Did not like the food, the people and said Makerere's library was inadequate.
Especially true of the married couples who are having the time of their life.
But there are so many opportunities here in everything that it seems foolish for people not to spend at least a few years here, contributing to the creation of new nations, in whatever way they can.
If the American lust for great achievement still exists, this is the place to fulfill it, and in a pretty significant way too.
THE WINTER CARNIVAL QUEEN and her court are (from I right) Deidre Jones, Lynn Miller, Queen Barbara Couey, Susan Mer. rill, and Susan Kellog.
Representing Kappa Kappa Gamma, Barb blond, blue-eyed sophomore who is majoring in music.
Senator Goldwater Declines to Speak Senator Barry Goldwater (R e p ublican-Arizona) has declined ar invitation from President Benezel to speak at the Colorado Co Symposium.
Republican Women at a luncheol and to speak at the United States Air Force Academy.
Richard A Johnson, Executive director of the Board of Examiners, United States Foreign Service Department of State, will speak at 4:00m. this afternoon in the WES Lounge of Rastaii Center.
Preceeding the meeting there will be a coffee hour to give students an opportunity to speak personally with Dr.
Patronize TIGER Advertisers ATTENTION — TIGERS f Blick's Annual Ski Sale J of Winter Sports' equipment * * SKI EQUIPMENT * | All Wood Skis * All Ski Bindings % Famous Name Brand Ski Clothing . . . t Stretch pants, Jackets, Sox, Gloves, ¥ Mittens, Caps, Goggles, Reverseable * Jackets and Quilts J After Ski Boots | Henke Ski Boots — Ski Racks | Men's and Ladies' Imported and * Domestic Ski Sweaters Blick Sporting Good, Co.
Unique features of the trip are an Adriatic Cruise along the Dalmation Coast from Venice to Athens and ffiother steamship cruise of the Greek Islands.
A special ""Budget Edition"" of this tour is available also which omits London, Copenhagen, the Riviera and Madrid, but is identical to the main itinerary in Europe and in all other respects.
Folders and complete details are available from Wakefield, Fortune, inc., World Travel.
Alpha Phi: Nancv Bills, Janette French, Cathy Grant, Susie Halton, Anne Holmes, Sue Igelsrud, Donna Jones, Sue Kania, Sandy Marvin, Ann Miller, Sharon Polkinghorn, Judy Reid, Nancy Smith, Mary Tom Spring, and Jearmie Whyte.
Stu Brubaker, Bob Bdmiston, Tom Ethridge, George Henzel, Ed Kuiper, Tony McGinnis, Mike Mestek, Bud Mixon, Earl Wallingford and Lincoln Westcott.
Frank Buhler, Richard Conrad, Mike Covert, Kent Drummond, William Pelz, Jim Srhultz, Ron Sher, Ron Taylor, and Cubby Welch.
Batley, Robert Bauer, Robert Bruce, Scott Bruntjen, Charles B Deaver, Michael C Emmit, James Frolick, Gilbert C Graboski, James E McCarroll, Peter M Ramsey, Wallace M Schultz, David Smith, Russel M Veach, Dennis S Zepp, and Alex S Yankovich.
Thomas O Brandt, professor and chairman of the German department at CC, has accepted an invitation to teach for the summer at the Middiebury College Deutsche Sommerschule in Middlebury, Vermont.
Students at the school sign a pledge to speak only the language they are studying.
Albert Seay, now on leave from CC on a Guggenhiem Fellowship doing research in the history of Italian music theory in the 14th and 15th centuries, will return to the campus in June to direct the program in the ""Creative Arts"" during the summer session.
They will investigate the tastes of Americans from the Civil War to World War I by examining the work of particular architects, artists, writers, and musicians.
The project, in its second year. was designed to appeal to students in colleges where relatively little recruiting for newspaper careers has been done.
Promising young men who thought they were interested in newspaper work, but who lacked contacts with the field, were asked to apply for summer jobs.
Other applicants were encouraged to seek summer news jobs on their own initative.
The individual newspapers made the final choice of the student and offered him a summer job.
The Fund, supported by grants from The Wall Street Journal, awarded each accepted applicant Alumnus of CC IN 'Hedda Gabler' Again a Colorado College alumnus is finding his place in the world, this time in the role of Tasman for the forthcoming Chicago production of Hedda Gabler, which wilt star Singe Hasso as Hedda.
Tasman will be played by Orest Kinasewich, who came to CC in the fall of 1956 from Edmonten, Alberta, to study business administration.
However, during his sophomore year drama seems to have overcome his business aspirations, and for the next two years he took all the drama courses offered and acted in almost every play produced, starring in many of them.
As a result of the drama courses he had taken as an undergraduate, Kinasewich was able to enter the Chicago Art Institute's Goodmnn Theater in the second year of its three year course.
He is now ft graduate student and has just completed a run as the father in Shaw's Joan of Arc, starring Francis Hyland.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton ■ ,,S/:^ February 23, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Mental Hospitals To Be Visi Two visits to mental institutions were planned at the meeting with Dr.
The first will be to the home for retarded children at Ridge, which will leave from the north side of Rastall tomorrow at 1:00m.
The second will leave at the same time from the same place Saturday, March 3.
The visiting groups will be shown around the institutions by members of the administrations, and the problems which these institutions face will be explained.
Anyone who is interested in making one or both of these visits is welcome, whether or not he attended the orientation meeting on February 14, It would be appreciated if those desiring to join the visits would inform Dr.
Applications Taken For Rastall Board Applications are now being accepted for membership on the Rastall Center Board.
Each one of the seven available positions, including Chairman, Executive Secretary, Business Manager, Recreation, Special Events, Cultural Events, Cultural Affairs, and Hospitality, offers a unique opportunity for participation in student affairs.
The Chairman of the Rastall Board co-ordinates the Center activities as well as presiding at meetings.
The Executive Secretary is responsible for minutes, files, and correspondence, and is also in charge of display cases.
Budget house development, and special promotions are handled by the Business Manager.
Cultural Affairs Chairman coordinates Rastall art displays, movies, coffee hours, and music.
Hospitality is concerned with the Visitors' Service, Rastall decorations, and necessary publications.
The Recreation Chairman supervises the Games Area and Craft Shop, as well as contributing to the organization of Outings Club programs.
Outdoor activities such as ""Rally for the Keg"" and the annual Bicycle Race also fall under his jurisdiction.
Term of office is for one year, and any student not graduating before next June is eligible.
Although each applicant is asked to state a position preference, applications remain flexible, and need not dictate the Board's eventual choice.
Ownw TYPI YPEWRJTEI Rhodesian Church Must Soon Take Political Position Solomon Nkiwane, a Christian from Bulawayo in Southern Rhodesia, spoke at the 11m. service in Shove Chapel on the dying influence of the Church in his country.
He noted that there was no corner of Southern Rhodesia where Christianity has not penetrated, and he praised the missionaries for their efforts in achieving this.
There is political unrest, and soldiers roam the streets and avenues of the African living quarters.
The only difference between now and the pre-missionay times, is that instead of spears and clubs we use guns for fighting, and we no longer tolerate missionary interference, meditation, or comments in our political disputes.
He concluded on a note of hope, by suggesting that the church in Southern Rhodesia still has ""an opportunity to exert considerable influence in bringing about the right solution"" if it would only commit itself.
Application forms are available at Rastall Desk, and must be turned in before March ninth, after which the present Rastall Center Board will individually interview the applicants.
Travel agents and transportation companies have realized that you are a powerful economic force and are catering to your market.
So that you get the most out of your travelling experiences, and they the most profit from your payment, you are placed with a group of other aspiring world travellers.
Tour prices includi tourist transportation, food, and second-class lodging.
Countries on both itineraries are England, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Greece, Italy and France.
For those more drawn to the Pacific, the American President Lines has special Economy Class boat rides to Honolulu (round trip $180) or a six-week special Manila and back with stops in Yokohama and Hong Kong for $612.
The student spirit is retained by dormitory living and lectures, as well as the usual shipboard games.
Mr Roberts took his bachelor of arts degree in economics at Colorado College in 1908.
He was a member of the board of trustees of the college from 1920 to 1928, and again from 1933 to 1955, serving as chairman of the board from 1949 to 1954.
The memorial lectureship calls for one public lecture each year to CC by a leading scientist.
Tacos & Pizza AFSG Peace Seminar Discusses Nuclear Age Last weekend, Ann Armstrong, Alma Cremonesi, Ruth Snodgrass, John Stickney, Shelly Thomson and Joe Wilcox from the Colorado College campus attended a seminar at the YMCA camp in Estes Park.
The purpose of this meeting, which was sponsored by the American Friends Service Committee, was to bring together students interested in the peace movement from various Colorado campuses in order to discuss various peace techniques and to consider the manner in which these techniques may be employed by campus groups.
In the opening session of the conference Saturday afternoon, each of the three areas was discussed by a faculty member.
After dinner, the group reconvened to hear McClure McCombs, director of the AFSC Work and Study Program of the Chicago Regional Office, speak briefly about present activities of the AFSC and comment on the seminar itself.
Two short films produced by the AFSC concerning peace attitudes and possibilities concluded the Saturday session.
After a brief meditation period on Sunday morning, the participants broke up into three groups in order to discuss the three areas of peace education, action projects, and service projects in greater detail.
In the final afternoon session, each discussion group reported the results of its meeting.
The seminar ended with a decision by the participants to keep in contact with each other through two representatives on each campus and to use the AFSC's services when desired, through contact with the regional secretary.
On Friday classes will b e opened to parents, followed po s . sibly in the afternoon by open houses.
Song Fest wit] be heh| j n Shove Chapel at 8:15, after which everyone is invited to a recep. tion in Rastall Center.
Saturday's events will begin with President Benezet speaking a t an 11 :00 convocation.
Ground breaking for new buildings, a choir concert, intramural activities, anil a tea are some of the possible afternoon activities.
A parent, faculty student dinner is ten. tatively scheduled for 6:15 Satur. day evening followed by the Blue Key Dance at 9:00.
The weekend will close on Sunday with a chuckwagon breakfast at 8:00 in the Garden of the Gods and a church service at Shove at 11:00.
How d you become contemporary in 1962 It was agreed that part of the answer is in informing yourself about possible alternatives to w — helping out in the ""new science of human survival"" proposed bj the American Association for thi Advancement of Science.
Colorado College Tiger • February 23, 1962 ['1 Much Information On Graduate Study Available in Coburn — by Dan Jaffe Lately a great number of pamilets and fact sheets concerning ^aduate study have been received the news office.
This latter grant pays $2,000 first year and increases the each following year.
Also [here is an extra $400 per dependent. have described this par[• grant merely to exemplify (he extent that these grants take, and there are many more of this nrt in other fields.
Colorado Col,ge has files on graduate opporinties in Coburn Library, but one jiing should be taken into consideration.
Many of the better grants ,ave early expiration dates for ipplication, so if you are interred in some form of graduate pork you should begin to look into it now.
Each experiment spends he first month as the ""son"" or 'daughter"" of a family in the itry visited.
The second month (the United States experiment group plays ist to selected family members id friends on an informal tour hroughout the country.
The United States National delation is a confederation of CC Summer Workshop Studies Human Relations One of the interesting programs scheduled for the 1962 summer sesion at CC will be a workshop in human relations.
The three-week session is designed to help teachers, school administrators, industrial workers, community workers, and other professional and volunteer personnel develop skill in dealing with problems which occur in their work.
The study in human relations begins with learning how groups are formed and how they act upon each other.
This knowledge leads to a concentrated study of misunderstanding between different races and religions in the community and in the country as a whole.
As a result, students realize the bases for prejudice and discrimination between individuals and entire groups and thus learn how to deal with them more effectively.
Some of the advantages of the NSA program are their inexpensive foreign programs because of its close relation to similar student union programs in Europe and its non-profit basis.
Also there is a considerable amount of time provided as an integral part of the program.
Two Doors Eist of Uts Th.atre Phone MElrose 4-8833 Denver Symphony Orchestra Features Various Concerts An exciting ballet, a concert version of an opera and several exciting soloists will be features of the final weeks of concers by the Denver Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Saul Caston, during the current season.
The guest soloist will be Jean Casadesus, rising young pianist, who will be heard in the Tschaikowskv Piano Concerto in B minor.
The Ballet Janine Charrat De France, illustrious dancing group of 14 stars, will appear with the orchestra on Monday, March 5.
This event originally was scheduled for March 6, but has been moved up to accomodate the Theater Guild.
Tickets purchased for the original date will be honored for this performance.
On Tuesday, March 13, the guest artist will be Leonard Rose, celebrated cellist, and a Ford Foundation Grant soloist.
Stars will be Gloria Davy, sensational soprano, and Robert Nagy, gifted Metropolitan Opera tenor.
Also in the cast will be Arthur Schoep, tenor; Donna Janzen, mezzo soprano; Jerald Lepinski, baritone; Gino Leonetti, tenor, and others.
LETTERS to the EDITOR Today I witnessed one of the most disappointing assemblies given since I've been at Palmer High School.
I'm referring to the CC Variety Show presented by what was left after an epidemic of measles.
This I realize was not at fault but I am condemming the overwhelming Uninhibited behavior displayed by some ofthe performers.
As I came across the patio to go to the assembly this morning, there was a group of boys, about six or seven, right outside the door smoking.
Smoking is strictly forbidden on the grounds by anyone, and I am sure that any high school these boys may have attended more than likely endorsed this or a similar rule.
However, this is a performing group of people who travel to present their entertainment even as far as Leadville.
There must be a better costume to wear on stage than blue jeans and sneakers, topped with a white shirt which I imagine was a tough trade to make for a shabby sweatshirt.
The Colorado College isan excellent school with a fine background and high academic standards.
Is this group cordially invites you to attend a fashion Show in the Grand Ballroom of the Acacia Hotel February 28, 1962 at 8:00 Complete showing all types of Wedding Apparel and Trousseau Clothes Refreshments Door Prizes For further information call Bette Smith Bridal Consultant MElrose 5-2564 Free Admission — No Tickets Required Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
It is no wonder that older generations look upon this generation with scorn, with pity, with regret.
I am tired of being considered a part of the generation built on standards created by such ignorance.
The American College Poetry Society is pleased to announce that its fifth semesterly anthology of outstanding college poetry is now being compiled for publication in May, 19(12.
We would be very grateful if you would again alert the interested students on your campus to this opportunity to have their work published.
Contributions must be the original work of the student (who shall retain literary rights to the material), submitted to the undersigned, care of the Society, with the entrant's name, address, and school on each page.
Poems, which may reflect any subject, should not exceed 48 linos, nor may any individual submit more than five poems.
Entries that are not accepted for publication will be returned if accompanied by a selfaddressed, stamped envelope.
The Society, this year, will oiler Recognition Awards of Five Dollars each, to the five outstanding college poets.
The poems cannot be otherwise acknowledged, nor can the Society compensate students for work that is published.
All entries must be postmarked not later than Thursday, April 12, 1962, to be considered; decisions of the Society judges are, of necessity, final.
We are sincerely appreciative of your past and present cooperation, without which our younger poets could not have received the attention and acclamation that they have through previous anthologies.
The 20 page illustrated bulletin describes in detail the 7 week program including courses offered, accommodations, travel arrangements, over lfi social and sightseeing events, complete costs and fees for the entire Summer Program.
Special Program rates for students and teachers residing in select apartment hotels in Mexico City start from as low as $451.
The bulletin, application forms and transportation availabilities may he received by writing to Dr.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE '] February 23, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Joiners to Appear In Perkins Hall Concert Series Three outstanding Denver musicians and prominent members of the Denver Symphony will be presented in the next Perkins Hall Concert which is scheduled for Sundav, March 4, at 4:00m.
Under the auspices of the Music Department, this musical event will be free to the public as continuation of the Colorado College Winter Concert Series.
Richard Joiner, solo clarinetist of the Denver Symphony, and his wife, Kathleen, official pianist of the same orchestra, will he the featured artists.
In the last number of their program, a Trio by Mozart, thev will be assisted by Lee Yeingst, violist of the Denver Symphony.
Mr Joiner, a graduate of Eastman, is one of the finest clarinetists in this country today.
Before coming to Denver in 1946, he was solo clarinetist of the National Svmphony Orchestra in Washington, D.C., and of the Marine Band, also in Washington, D.C., during the war years.
Of his outstanding teachers it may suffice to mention the world-famous Reginald Kell.
Joiner, a pianist and musician of distinguished accomplishments, is one of the most outstanding graduates of the music department at Colorado College.
She received her Bachelor of Arts degree here in 1943 and the Master's degree in 1945.
In addition to her musical talent, she was sufficiently outstanding academically to become a Phi Beta Kappa.
A mother of three healty boys, Kathleen is finding time to retain her excellence on the piano, teach privately at the Garland County Day School, be official pianist of the Denver Symphony and very active in several civic and charitable organizations.
Besides the Mozart Trio already mentioned, the artists will perform rarely heard compositions for clarinet and piano by Schumann, Debussy, Milhaud and Cardew, as well as a piece written .by our own Colorado Springs composer, Cecil Effinger, which was composed especially for the Joiners and is dedicated to them.
Science Foundation Grants Chemistry Department $5,060 The Colorado College chemistry department has received a $5,0(50 grant from the National Science Foundation to conduct its undergraduate science education program.
The program, which gets under way during the 1962 summer session and continues during the calendar year, will be under the direction of Dr.
Milton K Snyder, assistant professor and acting chairman of the chemistry department.
The undergraduate science education program is a combination of two older programs of undergraduate research participation and undergraduate independent study.
Currently the chemistry department is operating a program of independent study under a previous National Science Foundation grant.
The new grant will support two students on research projects at the college during the summer of 19C2.
It will provide opportunity for eight students to participate in the summer reading program in chemistry during the summer while away from the campus, and in addition it will aid in supporting four students on research projects during the 1962-63 academic year, and it will aid in sending students to various scientific meetings.
A number of college juniors, who are chemistry majors, will receive support in the junior independent study course offered by the department in establishing their technical libraries and to get an introduction to the area of edge punched cards for information retrieval.
The program, now in its fourth year, is designed to furnish support for able undergraduates capable of becoming creative scientists or engineers.
The stress in the program is placed upon the need of the student to grow as an independent scholar, through activities characterized by freedom for the student to demonstrate his capacity for creative enterprise with minimal supervision.
Mike Emmett and Pete Krower will provid the sounds, and the snack bar will be open as usual.
John Gotto with 18 points and Terry Itosen with 15 led the losers, while Jay Lewis was high scorer of the game for 1st South, and top point man of the day with 22 points.
Third North, paced by Stephen Gustafson and Dave Howland, with 16 and 15 points respectively, easily outscored 1st North 4723.
The Faculty fielded a very strong team, and in their victory over 3rd South displayed a form that makes them a definite contender for top honors in the tournament.
In a one-sided match, 2nd North vanquished 4th North 5415 as Chuck Denver accounted for 16 points and was high scorer of the game.
At one point in the second half the Tigers went eight minutes without a bucket.
With this loss, CC is 9-9 going into the WSC series while the Air Force Academy has won 13 and lost only 3.
SCUFFLING FOR THE PUCK durir are from left to right; Sylvester C Goett.
Refereeing are Norm Laurer '62 Golf Schedule All men interested in trying out for the Varsity Golf Team are asked to attend a meeting Monday, February 26, 4:00 at the Athletic Department office.
Colorado College was one of fifteen colleges and universities to enter the first face-to-face bowling tournament of its kind.
Seventyfive men from a six-state area participated in the contest held at the Bowl-Mor Lanes in Colorado Springs and co-sponsored by the A.C.U. and AMF pinspotters.
CC was represented bv Tom Brindley, Bill Evans, Bill Kranich, Bill Pelz, and Dale Shaw.
The A.C.U. hopes to have face-to-face tournaments throughout the country by next year, as everyone enjoyed the competition and the Saturday luncheon held for participants in the Taylor Dining Hall.
In the last thn minutes of the game, Westen State brought in their 1 but by then the game was waj out of reach of the strugglinj Cagers. p a r r e 1 1 Thompson was higl scorer for CC with 17 points, fi lowed by Dave Herrington with This loss set up a tense situatioi for Tuesday with Western State for on this game hinged thf league.
Herrington with 16 and Thomp son with 15 points again led th CC scorers.
One of the major fai ures of CC in this game was _ tin it was able to convert only six i 20 free-throws.
The last game of the season ffi be plaved here at eight o'clock Cossitt on Monday, February 26.
THE WHICKERBILL a gift and card shop . . . tea tiles ■from the latest Broadway Shows ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION Nevada Ave.
Arthur Larson, ■ctor of the World Rule of Law Center at Duke Univer; and Dr.
Clinton Rossiter, professor and chairman of the xtment of government at CorU Diversity.
Muller will open the series i'h (J when he delivers the newstablished Harold D Roberts lorial Lectures in Science.
This i reship was establ ished this in honor of the late Mr Rob) prominent Denver attorney 3 iid former chairman of the Colorado College board of trustees.
His special interests include mutation, the genetic efberj fects of radiation, human heredity, jnd the origin of life.
Larson who was director of the United States Information Agency during 1956 and 1957.
A member of the American Bar Association and the Order of the Coif, Larson served as undersecretary of labor from 1953 to 1956 id in 1957 was named assistant to rmer President Eisenhower.
Clinton Rossiter will give the uiual Abbott Memorial Lecture on May 14.
W Lewis Abbott, professor of busieconomics and sociology at Colorado College from 1920 to 1947.
He has been a consultant to the Fund for the Republic, director of studies on American communism (or the Fund for the Republic, and member of the Rockefeller Committee on Legal and Political Philosophy.
The Visit' German Club to Present Play This Sunday at 7:30 in Shove Chapel, Friedrich Durrenmatfs The Visit will be presented by the German deparment and the German Club of Colorado College.
The Visit's message is made universal by certain obvious patterns of action and specific parallels to the kinds of people one meets in everyday life.
Durrenmatt is talking about the significance of money and suggesting that it can cause self-respecting men to violate the Library Prize Given Spo.
Chairman, Executive Secretary, less Manager, Cultural Affiis, Hospitality, Recreation, and Special-Events Chairmen.
Experience on each of the seven Positions of Rastall Center offers a unique opportunity for student 'festivity through a part in planpugl and programming student [rtivities.
The Board is not .bound PS tradition, nor does it have a ; frict constitution.
Questions concerning Board Structure and areas of responsioility should be directed to preF&t board members.
Applicants pi be interviewed by the mem^rs, and new members will be lt, le to take office by the middle | March. code basic to their existence.
He i also questioning the nature of justice — who should judge, what issues are subjec-t to judgement, and how it should be administered.
Aside from insight into these moral questions, the audience is given a picturesque presentation of countryfolk.
Democracy in action is vividly portrayed and horribly distorted in this small town.
Under the expressionistic directing of Jim Fox, the cast of 24 has arrived at a meaningful interpretation of the drama.
This selfish and wicked old lady finally winds up her life's battle for the twisted kind of justice she demands.
Alfred, III, played by Stefan Feyock, is the former lover upon whom Klara wrecks her vengeance.
The character of this man, now resigned to family life and running a grocery store, is brought into question for an act performed many years past.
The spokesman for the townspeople is the Burgermeister, played by Thomas O Brandt of the German department.
This mayor assumes for the town the burden of an enormous moral responsibility.
The Lehrer (teacher), played by Normal Colbert, is unwilling to compromise to a position with the ideals of the Western world which he's been teaching for 20 years.
K 1 a r a ' s butler, played by Edward Kuipers, is her symbolic and physical link to the townspeople.
Activity Fees A letter regarding senior activity fees has been sent to all members of the Class of 1962.
If you are a senior, and did not receive one, or if you will be graduating in August, 1962, or February, 1963, and you wish to be included in the senior activities this Spring, please contact Jtn Fry, Ext.5, or Oscar Soule, Ext.7.
Stephen Spoonamore, '62, has won the award of $50 offered in December to a college student who submitted the best proposal to obtain better cooperation from the student body in the use of the library collections.
All of the proposals advised the installation of a check point at the main entrance of the library, at which books and packages leaving the library would have to be submitted for inspection, to make sure that the books were properly checked out and that the packages contained no library material.
The winner's proposal was superior to the others in its comprehensive analysis of the problem involved and the detailed list of recommendations for solving the problem.
The money for this award was contributed by two adult students at the college who wish to remain anonymous, who had become concerned at the large number of books missing from the library collections.
Announcement The Mario Singers, currently featured at the Alamo in Colorado Springs, are looking for vocal talent.
Auditions will be held next week, Tuesday, March 6, at 10:30 Those trying out are required to bring their own music, one operatic selection and one show tune.
This job is not necessarily full time; it may be just a few nights a week but may continue through the summer.
Brodie, Millis, Morganthau Discuss Probability of War The 1962 Symposium was opened Tuesday, February 27, in Shove Chapel by Professor Fred A Sondermann of the political science department, head of this symposium, and the man responsible for obtaining three illustrious speakers and thinkers with us for these three short days.
Sondermann stated that this year's subject, ""War or Peace in the 60's,"" was selected to provoke ""conscientious thinking"" on a problem affecting the shape and Russiaj but may occm , between duration of our lives.
Brodie propositioned that no one consciously wants war, neither we nor the Russians; however, man's unpredictable nature is such that it may occur regardless.
Not only that, but there is no way of finding out since no one knows how much depends upon the internal motivations of individual esteem.
Another unknown factor is Red China, which, although it does not have the means to wage a nuclear war, could possibly involve us with Russia.
Protection of retaliatory forces, which will lessen the inducement of a trigger-happy attack, and 2.
Brodie stated that we must recognize that war is possible, and that it is not immoral to use all feasible methods to save lives.
Morgenthau, enumerated the three current schools of thought concerning nuclear war and tried to find other elements to counter their pessimistic tendencies.
The current problems concerning Berlin and Germany are so insolvable that nuclear war is highly probable within this decade.
The attack will not come within 10 years, but with growing technological and psychological problems the possibility becomes acute each year.
At present neither the Soviets nor the Red Chinese have .short-range designs to take over the non-Communist world.
A non-thermonuclear war is impossible between the United States and China and Formosa.
Conventional armies have been reduced to a police force useless in nuclear war.
Since war is no longer a part of diplomatic policy, the neutral one-third of the world must be won over by other means, and regardless of which way the neutrals swing, the power balance will remain unchanged.
Morgenthau is a member of Mr Millis' first school, believing in the possibility of war within this decade.
He stated that the position of force in foreign policy has changed in the course of history.
Once it was the rational means to the ends of foreign policy, the ends justifying the moans.
However, with the revolution of nuclear power as a means, force become irrational since the ends, not to mention existing civilzation, would be obliterated.
Morgeuthau concluded that we are playera in a Greek tragedy, approaching a catastrophe which no one wants, but .which no one can avert.
Later he partially answered the problem by saying that the crux lay not in the military aspects but in the political.
The decentralization of military force merely adds to the probability,s the political differences remain unsettled.
Brodie stated, the differences between the three men lie not in their grasp of the situation but rather in their ""relative degrees of optimVinai Hockey Game The final CC hockey game will be played tonight at 8:15 at the Broadmoor World Arent against the Canadian National Team, Tickets are available at Cossitt Hall.
Tuesday 'Turn Toward Peace' Assembly Scheduled On Tuesday morning, March 6, the Assemblies Committee will present Harris Sherman and Myles Hopper, who will give their personal observations on the controversial ""Turn Toward Peace"" movement demonstration held in Washington, D.C., February 16 and 17.
The program, which will be in Perkins Hall at 11:00, will include films, slides, and tape recording from the actual demonstration.
Mr Hopper and Mr Sherman will then allow time for questions and discussion about the demonstration and peace movement.
Amonothe points considered at the faculty-student panel discussion during Greek Week last October was the lack of group student enthusiasm on the Colorado College campus It that time this lack of enthusiasm was made apparent by an absence of spectators at home football games, and until Saturday night, a very meager turnout at home hockey am Last Saturday night four buses and numerous cars full of peppy, enthusiastic, spirited CC students headed for the Broadmoor to cheer at CC's final conference game.
TheCC student body, by saying ""We Ain't Down Yet,;' displayed more than mere optimism and enthusiasm — this entailed the manifestation of a healthy spirit that has been conspicuously absent here.
Our hockey team, or any team for that matter, plays immensly better when the crowd supports it.
Why did we wait so long?— Letters to the Editor Dear Rebellious Future College Student, In regard to your disgruntled letter referring to the shoddy behavior of some of the entertainers from Colorado College at your school assembly, I would like to pass along several comments.
I am not speaking merely from a personal viewpoint; rather, this letter will be an index of the general reactions we students had to your missive.
True, illness, marriages, and other superficial circumstances reduced our Variety Show to the languid attempt which you witnessed at Palmer High.
But since the outstanding task of your letter was to concentrate on the superficial, T suppose this impediment reckoned heavily in your opinion of the show.
This consistent bent of yours to absorb negatively the sordid but (in terms of the actual endproduct) irrelevant habits of the performers allows me to assume that you would place your harsh stamp of distaste upon War and Peace if you knew that Tolstoy never changed his socks.
In fact, it would have been much more in order for you to criticize the quality of the acts themselves.
Now we are embarrassed for you, and our embarrassment is further compounded by pity; pity for the fact that you choose to judge a creative effort by the circumstances surrounding it.
You apparently are as inept in the handling of superlatives as you are in working with negatives, for you offhandedly place the laurels of excellence upon Colorado College.
This is a term which should not be applied to this institution, especially when based on cleverly planted rumor alone.
We, the ones being represented by this letter, will continue to live as we do for as long as we wish, under the supposition that the college student need not recognize the social tomfoolery which ""they"" try to impose upon us, because it has no relevance to experiencing and creating, which is What We Are Here For.
And we can only hope that you will eventually be able to shrug off this malignant legacy which we are creating for you.
Richard Brigham '64, Dear Editor, The poroxysms of trepidation which I experienced on my first readings of the ideals, goals, traditions, etc. of Colorado College can now be recalled with a rather ironic grimace.
The catalogues and pamphelts, with their undulating paragraphs full of pretty ideas and corresponding pretty pictures, left me wondering whether a finite being could ever be anything but a burden to this voluptuous utopia.
Now, obviously, it is only the terribly naive person who expects any ideal, personal or institutional, to become consummate reality, but the apparent lack of room for student idealism (pep rallies excepted, of course) in this ideal community is distressing.
I refer to the lack of cooperation which the Experimental Theater has received — more specifically, to Mr Jim Fox's inability to obtain either funds from ASCC, or the concession of some small, regular theater space from the administration.
Hermann J Muller will deliver the first Harold J Roberts Memorial Lecture at Colorado College on Tuesday, March 6, at 8:15 m. in Shove Memorial Chapel.
Muller received the 1946 Nobel Prize in medicine for proving that radiation causes hereditary changes in living cells.
Columbia awarded him an honorary degree in 1949 and the Alexander Hamilton Medal in 1961.
Muller engaged in research and teaching under the late Thomas Hunt Morgan, famous zoologist and specialist in genetics.
Muller went to Rice Institute in Huston, Texas, as an instructor in biology, where he remained until 1918.
From Germany, he went to Russia, where he served as senior geneticist at the Institute of Genetics in Moscow.
During his stay at Amherst, much of his time was spent in research in his chosen field.
Dan Armstrong, Peter Booth, Frank Boyden, John Clarke, Fred Davis, Jerry Dorsey, Peter Goodbody, Dave Hayes, Steve Livingston, Tom Malone, Dan Martin, Joe Moore, Rich Nichols, Geoff Rivers, Robbie Robinson, Mark Streuli, and Greg Wingate.
Linda Burtschi, Marcia Irving, Judy Jaccard, Caroline Jacobsen, Kay Knudsen, and Kathy Mcintosh.
The Deak U PEAKS % By Rosenfeld Suddenly I feel necessarily moved to remark on a subject which by now has probably been hacked and gouged beyond recognition.
I will, however, dismiss this minute problem since my mind generally runs three to four hundred years behind the times, anyway.
Presenting a three act play in one act entitled — ""La Dolce Vita di la Basketball Referee"" The curtain is drawn as a bent, obviously pained figure opens the door to his humble lodging.
His left arm is carried in a sling and large, bluish lumps are making themselves evident about his beaten body.
He is greeted at the door by his faithful wife, Grizelda and their three brats, Spike, Lefty, and Isolde.
Maybe it's the wild, uncontrolled frenzy of the screaming fans — the knowledge that my life is held in their shaking, clenched fists — a bad decision, a lousy call, and it could all be over.
You know I can't stand to see you blubbering like that — it makes me edgy.
The Religious Affairs Commit. tee is very happy to announce that the preacher this coming Sun<l a ; will be the Reverend William g Lea, Rector of Christ Church, Win netka, 111.
He was formerly the dean the Denver Episcopal Cathedral and a leading churchman in Cok rado.
He is visiting his fori area of work to take part ii National Science Foundation C ference at Aspen, and the college is very fortunate in being abli have him as their guest speakiShove Chapel this Sunday.
B will examine the question whetht modern scientific advance has bowed God out of His own and creation.
TIGER staff pictures for the Nuggett will be taken this evening at 5:15 in the TIGER office.
American Student Information Service, 22, Avenue de la Liberie, Luxembourg.
Bring Your Laundry with Your Dry Cleaning MEN 3 Colorado College Tiger • March 2, 1962 Other £\ ide I GOLDMAN Now that the Symposium has come and gone, the other side of the picture needs to be shown.
This tan best be done bv looking at SWEAR (Students Who Elect Atomic Retaliation), a little known group on campus.
A Fact Sheet It has been said that a highpower nuclear explosion detonated high in our atmosphere would set six states afire.
Let's not believe any of these atomic just-so stories that can't be proved.
We've heard a lot of stories about the Russians dropping a load of bombs on us and destroying our great nation.
There aren't enough bombs in the world to destroy a great country such as ours.
In the past few years wt have continuously been losing neutral countries to the Commies.
Once we were strong in Cuba with great powers such as the United Fruit Company and Pepsi-Cola.
Give the Russians five days to get out of Cuba, and if they don't, drop an atom bomb on them.
SWEAR believes that they are an unnecessary but natural tool for survival.
In the first place, they are totally unnecessary because, under SWEAR's policies, we will destroy our enemies before they can bomb us.
In the second place, if we need fall-out shelters, it is justified by our evolutionary proeesses.
Let us look at what would happen if the Russians tricked the United States into signing a disarmament treaty.
This would mean that the Ruskies would promise not to produce any more bombs.
We know the Commies are shiftless, will lie, cheat, and use sabotage to gain their goal of world domination.
While they are cheating we, the honoi-able nation, would be defenseless.
All this means that, at Russia's will, we could be brought to our knees.
If we ever sign any disarmament agreement, we do not let it stand in the way of our strengthening our nuclear defenses.
We do not believe in senseless, unproven ""facts"" but, instead, in man's God-given gift of what is right: — common sense.
Selective Service Applications for the April 17, 1962 administration of the Selective Service College Qualification Test are now available at Selective Service System local boards throughout country.
Eligible students who intend to take this test should apply at once to the nearest local board for an application and a bulletin of information.
Applications for the April 17 test must be postmarked no later than midnight, March 27, 1%2.
DUAL FILTER Tareyton Product of Ufid, \j/m*-%iean J<i(iit£i?-f~i''na., March 2, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger LETTERS to ers sweaters.
I was mistaken in thinking that the college's system of values would place theater above pep.
Perhaps the college considers the former to be precious, and the latter to be, shall we say, quasi-precious.
One more factor which might be mentioned is that, as circumstances stand at present, the people building the sets for Mr Fox's present production for the German Club will be forced to do their work outdoors.
The purpose of this letter is not to wildly berate, but to indicate an area in which, if some changes are made, the college can be more honest in posting both its explicit and implicit goals.
Douglas Cowles I read with interest and a certain amount of disgust, the article in last week's Tiger on the proposed skating rink in the Sports Center.
No, I have nothing against skating rinks, nor do I have anything against sports which I consider a necessary part of college life.
As far as I know, they have not been returned to their prior status of full tuition payment.
It was asked that students show interest in a skating rink before it could be built.
I told them that I felt a really dedicated professor would be interested in coming to CC under these conditions.
After my last reply I am deluged with accusations that CC is fast becoming a rich-kid's school, and that in a few years they expect it to receive the title of the Country Club of the West.
As you know, Communism is being widely discussed in this country, but in most cases without the Communists.
This is not only unfair because Communists are most often the targets of attack at such discussion, but also it is un-American in tradition.
It is like holding a trial without the defendant being present or having a hearing.
Many speakers on this topic are either professional anti-Communists or ill-informed persons whose material is .based on untrue, prejudiced, or outright reactionary sources.
Such speakers create the atmosphere of the witch-hunt and help ultra-Right fascist elements to the detriment of peace and social progress.
Communism is a philosophy and movement which is more than one hundred years old and has many millions of adherents throughout the world.
Communists have made heavy sacrifices in the course of these struggles.
We wish to inform you that we have set up a Lecture Bureau to make speakers available who can speak with knowledge and authority on Communism.
They will give a truthful view of the Communists on such topics as Communism, Marxism, the Mc'Digest' and 'Story' Sponsor Collegiate Writing Contest The Reader's Digest and Story Magazine are sponsoring a short story writing contest to discover talented collegiate authors.
The contest is being, conducted by Story Magazine, and the prize money is being provided by the Reader's Digest Foundation.
The second prize entry will receive $350, and the third prize will be $250.
Awards of $50 apiece will be received by the next eighteen winEligible to compete are students in any college or university, or members of the Armed Forces accredited to educational institutions anywhere in the world.
Contestants are urged to prepare entries as soon as possible, noting that the deadline for entries is April 20, 1962.
Manuscripts should he from 1500 to 9000 words in length and must be certified by a faculty member.
GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FUXNISHTNGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3l7l/ 2 N Tejon SKI BUM Bob Nursbaum urges everyone to atend the Ski Bum's Ball tonight at 9 o'clock i i Rastall Center.
It is entirely legal to have Communist speakers, as the Attorney General recently stated.
March 10 Frosh Sponsor Slave Day The emancipation proclamation will be temporarily re voked by the freshman class on Saturday, March 10.
Slaves will be sold to the highest bidders on Friday afternoon, March 9, at a twister in the Hub.
Twisting will begin at 4:30, and the selling will begin shortly thereafter.
The purpose of this auction is, obviously, to raise money, which will be used by the freshmen on their class project; bringing foreign student from overseas Bea Fertig, Linne; to attend Colorado College for a year.
People are already saving money, and devising various chores to be performed by their slaves.
Slocum will have an open house on March 10 from 2 until 5m., and boys are making plans for spring cleaning.
Since buyers will have their slaves from 8m. to 5m., there will he plenty of time for washing, ironing, washing cars, carrying books, and cleaning rooms.
Karen Tucker, Sue Thompson, Sharon Shackleford, Norma Parker, Myrle Miller, Molly McNamara, Peggy Hoover, Sue Erickson, lie.
Carrington, Pam Meredith, Mary Beth Bishop, Sue Moore, Jan Afton, Cheryl Betts, Roms Favrot, Natalie Gee, Judy Hooker, Tina Jackson, Mary Lou Meadow; Faith O'Reilly, Cindy Pate, Robi Taylor, Sandy Wood, Lucia Bates, and Jo Heller.
Gus Hart, Greg Wmgate, Tom Malone, Bud Mixon, Ror Taylor, Cubby Welch, Frank Boy. den, Don Sprinkle, Paul Carson, Mike Mayer, Bill Mendenhull, Larry Franks, and Lee Mullei.
Unfortunately, only cash will be accepted, so all prospective buy ers should cash monstrous checkahead of time.
Saturday, March 10, all owners and slaves are to report to the Hub for a re -emancipation ance.
THE WH ICKERBILL a gift and card shop ... the latest Peanuts comic book.
Tacos & Pizza Colorado College Tiger • March 2, 1962 Delano to Speak On Peace Corps Mr William Delano, General Counsel for the Peace Corps, will [g on campus today from 10:30 l to talk to interested students jbout possibilities of serving in the Peace Corps.
II meet with faculty at lunch, it 1:30m. in the WES Lounge ill show a movie on the Peace Corps in Tanganyika, Africa, and from 2:20 to 3:15m. he will discuss the Peace Corps in all its is aspects — application, testippointments, tours of duty, types of duty, remuneration, etc. — id answer all questions that may i raised.
The most immediate interest of the Peace Corps is to enlist seniors and faculty members in English, French, Spanish, and Physical Science Departments, since the peace Corps is looking for voluns with skills in these areas.
It lso interested in students with YMCA experience or generalists who might be interested in the Peace Corps' community development projects.
However, in his :orrespondence, Mr Delano indicated that he will be very happy to talk to other faculty members and itudents as well about the Peace Corps in general, and the opportunities for service in it.
After college, he spent two years in Berlin with the American Friends SerCommittee, working with youth groups and on international seminars and work camps.
In 1958, he was a member of the Bar Association's Special Committee on Passport Procedures which published ""Freedom to Travel"" after ipleting its study.
All interested students and faculty members are urged to avail themselves of the opportunity of meetingi Mr Delano and hearing his discussion on the Peace Corps. pply of material on the Peace Corps will be available in the WES Lounge.
The topic was the pamphlet, ""Western Values and Total War,"" and various alternative solutions to the current crisis in world politics were vigorously discussed.
The next meeting of the informal group will take place on Tuesday, March G, from 4:00 to 5:00 in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center.
The topic will be taken from the 1962 Symposium, with particular reference to the question of what opinions were changed by the new information and new concepts that were developed by the participants in the Symposium.
A 1 1 interested students, faculty members, and administration are cordially invited to participate.
Loren Gergens and his sales staff have improved the communications efficiency of many firms by analyzing their operations and recommending advanced Bell System products and services.
Conference Finale n DU Goalie Beaucha during Tigers Lose 6-3 Alter a 7-3 defeat Friday night, Colorado College's fired-up Tigers stormed out quickly Saturday night to take a 3-0 first period lead on two quick goals by Alex Yankovich and a point-blank score by Wayne McAlpine.
However, tile Tigers couldn't contain Denver's slashing attack and dropped their last Western Collegiate Hockey Association game of the season, 6-3.
Leading 3-1 late in the opening period, the Tigers saw the DU Pioneers come roaring back to tie it up in the second period and then walk away with the game after a three-goal third period.
The loss was the Tigers' 21st of the 1961 season and the 18th league loss.
CC's final game will be played Saturday night at 8:16 against the Canadian National team.
CC, Yankovich 3:19; CC, Yankovich 6:36; CC, McAlpine 7:29; DU, Oftebro (Duffusl 11:03; DU, Duffus 18:30.
CC, Gilbertson (tripping) 4:16; CC, Frolick (illegal zone check) 12:04.
Due to the lack of a pool on campus, the team has been working out at the local high schools, Wasson and Palmer.
CC Thinclads Begin Season Colorado College's track coach, Frank Flood, sent his cindermen into action for the second consecutive time last Saturday.
The meet was held in the Mines' Fieldhouse with no official scores being kept.
The biggest problem of the moment is to find some depth behind the top 10 trackmen.
With the addition of cagers Dave Krell (discus, 440) and Ed Loosli (high jump , the team will gain some of this needed depth.
At Golden, the big news was the two record vaults by CC men Jim Blair and Jack Schwella.
Bob Broyles and Brian Bleakney were looking at the backs of jerseys Saturday, but ran respectable 50 yard times of 6. and 6. seconds.
The only place winner in field events other than pole vault was Schwella's 5*8"" high jump for third.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE Professional Actress To Visit GG Campus Sponsored by the Religious Affairs Committee, Vera Ward, a professional actress, will visit the Colorado College campus.
This will be held at the home of Professor Kenneth Burton at 1223 Wood Avenue, at 7:30 m. on Sunday evening, March 11.
She has appeared in Summer Stock and is well knowr. in the Chicago area, where she and her husband had their own television program.
She has appeared in plays with such well known actresses as Peggy Wood, Linda Darnell, and Marie MacDonald; and actors such as Vincent Price, Edward Arnold, Helmut Dantine, and Gene Raymond.
Ward has also done a great deal of work in religious drama in the Chicago area and is very well known for the programs she has presented to anany clubs and groups interested in drama.
On Broadway, ""Man of All Seasons"" features the great English actor Paul Scholfield.
It concerns man's consicence and the enroachments of the state and the demands of the King upon the 16th century English statesman, Sir Thomas More, and his resistance to it.
This play has been very well reviewed by a number of competent and seasoned critics.
The victory moved the Tigeis into a tie with Colorado Mines for the league lead, although CC does hold a lead in the percentage column.
The Tigers' title hopes now rest squarely on the outcome of the games with Colorado State College tonight and tomorrow night.
Eastlack's cagers jumped off to a quick lead Monday night and looked as if they were going to run away with the game in the opening minutes of the first half.
With less than six minutes gone, Farrell Thompson hit a 10 foot jump shot to give CC a 13-3 lead.
The Tigers made the lead stand up till just past the halfway point when ASC began to chip away at the edge.
The Indians worked the margin to nine points and then went into a semi-stall which CC was able to take advantage of.
After stealing several passes, CC went ahead on a Barrv Anthony tip-in with just 2:15 left.
PRESIDENT BENEZET addressing CC students at Saturday night's pep rally.
Photo Competition March 15, 1962, is the deadline for submitting pictures to the 17th Annual National Collegiate Photo Competition sponsored by Kappa Alpha Mu, the photographic fraternity.
Also, each portfolio entrant is eligible to apply for the §$500 Major Wm.
This application form is also enclosed with the entry form and rules for this year's competition.
Slacum Intramural In the Slocum basketball games last Saturday, only two games were played.
Speech Tournament at the Univer-1 sity of Arizona, Tucson, with 1 ratings in debate and two firstl places in individual events.
Susan Caudill was the double-winner in the tournament as she won first in both Women's Impromptu and Women's Exterap Also entered in individual events were Jo Heller, Charles Puckett and Max Power.
In Debate CC teams barely finished out oi the running, after losing ci with California schools.
To add insult to injury, Ed Loosli hit the first of two free shots, and when the second fell short, Anthony tipped it in to give the Tigers a final four point margin.
Colorado College Tige March 2, 1962 I' bid nlorado College Springs, Colo March 9, 1962 Vol.
Prize-Winning Geneticist Muller Opens Roberts Lecture Series by Dennis Faulk The Harold J Roberts Lecture Series was inaugurated last Tuesday evening in Shove Chapel by the Nobel Prizewinning geneticist, Dr.
Introduced by President Benezet as ""the world's leading authority on the effects of radiation to genetic material,"" the spry, 71 year old Dr.
The secondary purpose was an attempt istigate an intensive all-school . of students was dissatisfied.
One commented, ""The lecturers treated us as if we were young and totally in the dark about the issues of the cold war.
One official stated that he felt the students should not have come because it would look abroad as if the United States didn't want peace.
Mr Clark, Director of Information, felt that the students were extremely well versed in the problem and even understood some of the technical problems to an extent.
On Friday evenng, 1800 students attended a rally at Calvary Methodist Church, where Congressional and Administrative impressions of TTP were discussed.
Saturday's itinerary included visits to 60 embassies, including the Soviet and Indian.
At the Soviet Embassy, an official informed the group that two students would be able to go to Moscow to talk to students there.
Harris was one of the delegation of the TTP Student Council sent to the Indian Embassy.
The conversation centered around what the neutralist powers could do in forcing the major blocs to agree to an arms control proposal.
Also on Saturday morning, 5000 students (the largest student demonstration in the history of the U.S.) began picketing in front of the White House.
The picketeers program, ""Commitent,"" on the problems of nuclear mament and student campus :tnents.
Myles explained that they had rtten involved in the project Irough correspondence with one its leaders.
Funds for the trip donated by the Assemblies littee and various individui campus.
The Turn Toward Peace movers started, Myles explained, group of Grinnell College Meats last Thanksgiving when hey proclaimed a vigil and fast in rent of the White House.
The wvement spread throughout the wntry, and a demand for organiition was registered.
It also 'Huded many initiatives that the '■S. could take for securing a justed lasting peace.
Folding these, visits were made by je T.T.P. council to various Exec[ 've and Administrative offices— fnong these, talks with McGeorge 'tidy, Special Assistant to the esident; Ted Sorenson, Technical 'isor to the President; and Jec ""'e Weisnar, Scientific Advisor ' the President.
A large group of students gathre <l in an auditorium, where they J* lectured to by five State apartment officials.
This group 20 to Be Initiated into Phi Bets Kappa Two juniors and 18 seniors have been elected to Phi Beta Kappa at Colorado College, and will be initiated into the scholastic honor society on April 19.
The following students represent the 38th group to be initiated since the society was first established in 1904.
The two juniors elected this year are Arthur Lane Dana, a physics major from Colorado Springs and Max S Power, a political science major from Denver.
Benjamin Harrison, Indiana; Gay Donley Petzold, history, Mesa, Arizona; Archie William Prestayko, zoology, Dauphin, Manitoba, Canada; Mrs.
Sheldon Singer, humanities for elementary teachers, Colorado Springs; James Osborne Street, mathematics, Wilmette, Illinois; Karen Ann Williamson, english Denver. v]y elected who first B In addition to the members, two were elected last year, also are being honored on April 19.
They are David J Logan, a chemistry major, and Ruth Ann Snodgrass, a philosophy major.
Professor Amanda M Ellis of the English department has been named chairman of a committee in charge of arranging the Phi Beta Kappa initiation and banquet at the Broadmoor in April.
Officers of the Colorado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa for 1961-62 are Professor Glenn E Brooks, of the political science department, president; Professor Thomas W Ross of the English department, vice-president; and Miss Lorena Berger, secretary of the college, secretary-treasurer.
Other members of the executive committee are Professor Kenneth J Curran, chairman of the economics department, and Professor Frank A Krutzke, chairman of the Englisr department.
Sam W Vickerman, Miss Grace G Berger, Professor Thomas H Rawles, Professor Douglas W Freed, Professor Margaret M Hans man, Professor John D Roberts, Professor Lewis M Knapp, and Professor Richard M Pearl.
Interviews for Kastall Center Board applicants will be held in Rastall Center on Sunday at 2:30m.
Essentially, Professor Muller's solution calls for a sperm bank from which parents could select the sperm which would produce in their progeny, characteristics which they would like to have in a child.
He said that the success of this idea pre-supposes a mass education which would awaken a sense of social responsibility to the maintenance of the human race at least at the level of genetic fitness it now is.
It would pre-suppose a means of genetic redistribution, and further, a program of genetic counseling.
He admits that the incorporation of his program would take some time, but that the sooner something is done, the better.
The good doctor showed that the number of minus mutations is far above the number of olus mutations, and this fact must be corrected as soon as possihle.
In the primitive environment, the minus mutations, the genetic unfitness, is no problem simply because the unfavorable mutant cannot survive.
Muller insists that the only way to save soft, super-civilized man from mental and biological deterioration, is to provide sperm banks from which can be selected the desirable, genetically fit oharacteiistics.
Presently, the professor holds that at least one-fifth of today's civilized population is genetically unfit, and that each generation produces a population, one-fifth of which is genetically unfit.
Muller offered several interesting bits of positive evidence, proving that such a solution would not dissolve family ties.
Yet these families are as close as though the parents knew that their child was part of them.
Artificial insemination has already been experimented with, and the ties of families so produced have shown evidence of being at least as strong as the ""genetic"" families, if not stronger.
Muller provided a stimulating evening of mental challenge and entertainment.
This was a truly fitting beginning for the Harold J Roberts Lecture Series, and on behalf of all the people interested it it, I sincerely thank the people who are making this series possible.
Applications for Nugget Editor and Business Manager and Student Handbook Editor are available at Rastall Center Desk till March 17.
On Thursday, March 15, at 7:30 m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Center, Dr.
On Thursday, March 22, at the same time and place, there will be a general review session where ideas and plans for further consideration of the issues raised by the 1962 Symposium will be discussed.
The Enthusiasm Committee of ASCC is now circulating petitions lor the building of the new ice skiiting rink.
CC students are urged to sign these petitions, lor if there is enough student interest generated, the committee will begin a letter-writing campaign using the number of signatures as evidence of enthusiasm for the undertaking.
Therefore, YOUR support is necessary if we are to succeed in our goal of a new rink completed by next year.
Demonstrate your support by signing one of these petitions us soon as possible.
Lust Sunday evening in Shove Chapel approximately forty CC students und faculty members under the direction of Mr James Fox presented Friedrick Durrematt's ""Der Besuch Der Alton Dame"" (or ""The Visit"" as it is titled in English] to an audience of two hundred and fifty.
Original set'design, by Serena Hayden, and original music by Horace Work added much to the understanding and effect of the drama, as did the lighting effects.
These were particularly evident since Shove Chapel's dramatic facilities are almost non-existent.
Character portrayal was generally good, with the best characterizations from Karen Kossuth, as Claire Zachanassian (die Alte Dame) and Ed Kuipers as the butler.
This is almost inexcusable, and particularly so in acoustically abominable places, such as Shove is.
This problem was aggravated if audience members understood German only slightly, as many did.
Ik-fie for two ye Pomona and CC ore similar in physic Pomona seems to me to be a beautifully landscaped graveyard.
I have been few places where the students look so much alike day after day, where the college itself is regarded by some as a temporary Limbo, where enthusiasm is officially banned.
Pomona appears to be a school sliding on the crest of a wave made long ago.
It would be ridiculous to say that the students here are not potentially enthusiastic about their environment.
The climate seems to be a habit into which even freshmen are soon drawn.
If we accept Pomona as is, or look upon it as a place to get out of, then we are fools.Pomona should be regarded as an active and workable environment, one that can change and, in a manner, over which we have influence.
One student here was very enthusiastic about the Student Lectureship Committee which he was helping to establish.
Why don't students write the paper, say something, defend or criticize.
I have been told by several people that the literary magazine is going down hill.
I would hate to be influenced by the decisions and actions that some of us will have to make at some point in our lives.
Sometimes it is helpful just to generate enthusiasm and the interchange of ideas.
One professor told me that he did not agree with generating undirected enthusiasm.
Admitted that not all proposals are valuable, that often controversies are not resolved.
If we want an interesting paper, we must help to make it so, We should contribute by making it the center, the reflection of inert — not boredom.
We can all continue to go unerringly through our academically ritualistic lives — or we can take some initiative and play a more active part.
We have one big question to pose not only to you, but also to the entire student body.
There is plenty to do in Colorado Springs on a date — and for those who don't believe this, we say, just take a look at all the theaters, fine restaurants, the Broadmoor ski slopes and skating rink, and the college itself.
But it seems to us that the many activities that are available on and off campus are not 'being taken advantage of.
By now there may be cries of protest that, given a ""golden opportunity"" by the Gold Digger's Ball, most of the girls did NOT ask anyone to it.
However, many — far more men than were asked— would have been asked IF at some earlier date they had made even a small effort by taking the initiative themselves.
After all, there isn't a person on this campus who wouldn't admit that ours is a society in which it is the man's duty to take the first step.
Somehow, however, the general attitude at Colorado College has become warped, and the men sit around waiting for the girls.
Another frequent complaint is that the girls are only too eager to rush out to the Air Force Academy, leaving CC men in the lurch.
By now this may not be so far from the truth, but, during the major part of the first semester, there were few girls on this campus who wouldn't have much preferred to date a CC man.
After all, it's not much fun for a girl to provide her own transportation to and from the Academy, often at her own expense, and then discover that her blind date has nothing to talk about but himself.
We are not trying to condemn the entire male student body, for there does exist a small minority who seem to be capable of taking matters into their own hands.
In the last issue of the Tiger, you were kind enough to print a short article announcing the visit of Vera Ward who is to give a reading of the play ""A Man for All Seasons"" at my home this coming Sunday evening.
May I crave the indulgence of your correspondence column so that I might remind your readers of this event.
This is a play about the conscience of Sir Thomas More and the pressures put upon it by King Henry VIII over the issue of Church and State in England.
This reading will be held at 1128 Wood Avenue at 7:30m. this coming Sunday evening, March 11.
In regard to last week's symposium : of the three guest speakers, I thought that Dr.
Morgenthau was more profound, more succinct, and showed far more of a ""public personality"" than either Dr.
Morgenthau, in one statement, said Tuesday night what Mr Millis was trying to say all Wednesday night,, countries with incompatible goals cannot have successful disarmament negotiations.
He had quite a wit, and periodically the audience broke into laughter from his comments.
For those who say that this is a far too serious question for humor, let me remind them that Morgenthau was considered by many to be the most pessimistic of the three speakers.
It seems to me that the one who captures that ever-elusive state of objectivity, even for a moment, cannot help but smile at man's attempts to solve problems largely brought upon himself.
This ' time when the Christian examine his practice of the Christian lif ( and takes a good, long, hard look at his interior life.
The most deadly enemy of a religious petson is his self-centeredness, his own self-sufficience, and that means his pride.
The only way to work free of the clutches of this, the most deadly of the seven deadly sins, is by living not by one's own merit, but by the enabling Grace of God.
The purpose of this sermon is to look at these ties and to help the worshipper tn look at his own life, to see it foi what it is and to help him turn from his self-centeredness to the Love and Grace of God.
John Stickney Named Ski Bum of the Yea The Ski Bum Ball, co-sponst>ml by the Ski Club and Rastall Center, was held last Friday, Mnich 2 in a beautiful ski lodge, formerly known as the Rastall dining hall.
The celebrities were John Stickily, Ski Bum of 1962, and Sandy Lazzari, who won the door prize of a pair of ski poles.
The publicity for the dance was handled by Suki Arentz and Tish Amberg; decorations by BiilTie Buffum and Joanie Schmitz; food and set-up by John Stickney and Bob Kendall.
Dave Bitters, 3rd North; Bob Carlson, 2nd West; Bob Edmiston, 1st North; Terry Fonville, 4th North; Jim Schultz, 1st West ; Howard Smith, 1st South; and Chuck White, 4th West.
GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL SKI BRECK Barney's Hotelary, Main Street, Breckenridge.
Skiers' Dorm — New Deluxe Shower $5.00 ski package — lodging plus two meals Kachina Lounge Alto Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
Colorado College Tiger • March 9, 1962 &~l \spects of Nuclear Age discussed in Symposium by Max S Power Dining the course of the recent Colorado College Symosium, ""War an'd Peace in the Ws,"" Dr.
Bernard Brodie and Mr Walter Millis addressed the Colorado Springs community on various aspects of the strains and pects of preparedness for nuclear war.
Mor[gnthau pointed out that there are less obvious consequences dan war to nuclear buildup.
One [olds that nuclear power is differonly in quantity from eonvenial power.
Two important consequences of ^clcar power to our domestic polIjcs were emphasized by MorgenThe first is the great ira^nce of power which now exists t^tween the government and the people.
Revolt, noted the eminent ■ofessor, is no longer a reliable ■heck on our government.
Secindly, the complexity of the nuage necessarily decreases the involvement of the people in p'oiiical discussions, for they feel inrompetent to make policy judgments, leaving these instead for the experts.
After all, he pointed mt, the experts are finally faced ith making value judgments, not scientific decisions.
He opened his remarks in this by pointing out that the inction of nuclear power is the first real revolution in international politics since the beginning of hisUp to this advent, violence had always been a justified initmment of policy ; however, the use of violence is no longer rapolicy execution.
Pointing to the examples of the Hberaof Eastern Europe, MorgenIhau. noted that former Secretary of State Dulles had lealized this to be true.
Further, there are serious and dangerous deficiencies in the newly emerging nationstates of Africa and Asia.
Morgenthau warned that if several nations build nuclear strike capabilities, the value of a deterent force will be lost.
In other words, the possession of nuclear weapons by several nations will make it impossible to place responsibility for a nuclear strike.
Morgenthau said that nuclear power is only the most spectacular of our new technological advances.
He went on to point out that the only two great nationBecause you know, as an officer, your military service will be a stimulating and rewarding experience.
You will enjoy the pay, the prestige, the traditional privileges of an officer. . . your military service can pay off handsomely in later life.
For example, ROTC can be tremendously helpful when a man starts his climb up the civilian ladder.
Few are born leaders; but leadership can be learned And Advanced ROTC is a great place to learn it . . you will be contributing to the limit of your potentialities in one of the biggest jobs we face today . you can help keep America so strong the war the whole world dreads need never happen.
During your 2-year Advanced Army ROTC course, there will be a subsistence allowance of $535.
There is a $117 allowance for your six-week summer camp training, plus travel allowance.
And then, Of COUrSe, there is the warm sense of accomplishment you will feel in June 1963 when the gold bars of a Second Lieutenant are pinned on your Army uniform.
March 9, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger 'Aspects of Nuclear have an adaptive effort commensurate with these advances,"" he warned.
Morgenthau made additional comments which were of a very substantive nature.
First, he pointed out that he was reporting things as he saw them— that he had diagnosed the sickness but had no cure for the disease.
Finally, he pointed out that disarmament can come much more easily if present political conflicts are settled.
Brodie, discussing ""Strains on Policy Making,"" began by pointing out that the nature of war has changed more than that of diplomacy, but this has brought several changes in diplomacy.
First of all, major powers are less willing to go to war than in earlier times.
Secondly, there has been a loss of goals— glory or territory — in foreign policy.
Military power is still necessary, commented Brodie, but the need may well be out of accord with the force available.
The rapidity of the technological changes in the military field has, according to Dr.
We are faced with shaking old views from entire organizations ,or with upsetting delicately achieved military alliances, even though these must maintain their unity.
The problems we face are, at the outset, intellectually very baffling, and this has led to the introduction of civilian scientists into the military.
Mr Brodie closed his comments by noting that the coming of nuclear weapons has given offensive strength the ascendancy.
Speaking on disarmament, Mr Millis first cautioned that we are in error when we assume that there is always one best policy.
He went on to point out that arms control and disarmament proposals have been contradictory and ineffective.
Our present policy is to maintain a strong retaliatory force and conventional arms, and to make our decisions on the basis of day to day diplomacy, said Mills.
If disarmament is achieved, it will be as a result of improved rational relations between the major powers, in which war has a decreasing place.
The two broad steps which precede disarmament are the maintenance of a balance of force while outstanding problems are resolved, and the abolition of war as an instrument of policy.
I found myself under the forbidding glare of one of the Loomis Virginity Guardians.
Now, as I see it, this is but one phase of an extensive, but subtle campaign designed to eliminate boy-girl relationships on this campus.
Now far be it from me to encourage sex, per se, in the hallowed halls of residence (at least not in print); but on the other hand, as a normal (open to debate), red-blooded American boy, I find it equally difficult to discourage sex, per se.
Instead of turning my problem, and yours, over to the psychiatrists, let's attempt a few theoretic solutions.
This way, girls, you'll only have to wrestle with your conscience — not the resident matron and your date.
Or, we might round up a bunch of romantic Chevalier types and distribute them, on weekends, among the ladies-in-waiting . . . a little preoccupation just might go a long way.
After some deliberation, though, I really think that our only solution lies in the mounting of a concentrated offensive.
Let us reenter the fray, en masse, with such open ""displays of affection,"" that we will embarrass the enemy back to their lace-covered trenches.
Sherbet ME 5-2740 Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 When It's Music Its Millers Miller Music Co.
Greek News Sigma Chi has two new pledges; Pete Krowwer and Ron Rishagen.
The Sigs had their annual Apache dance Saturday night at the Hackney House.
Beta Theta Pi recently pledged John Gross, Dave George, and Farrell Thompson.
Kappa Sigma pledged Dave Harrington, Joe Bercquist, Jullius Fenderman, and Chris Flower for second semester.
Phi Delta Theta recently pledged Ray Mithun, Chris Wadsworth, and Lee Hunt.
Sue Phelps, Sue Hardy, Sue Gillespie, Phyllis Nolting, Claudia Elkins, Mary Collier, Shirley McCullough, and Jane Hilton.
Tonight the Thetas will have their ""Theta Man Dance"" at the Alamo Hotel.
Other officers elected were Julie Bohlke, Piegi Benham and Bobbie Tolley.
Alpha Phi pledged Lynn Sipple, Mary Ann Bishop, Nancy Stauffer, J.'inet Okamura, Marilyn Maier, and Carla Nelson.
Tonight the Alpha Phi's are having a costume party with the Gamma Phi's.
Kappa Kappa Gamma has pledged Chris Archangeli, Gloria Borowski, and Norma Parker.
Lucia Bates, Barbara Couey, Lucy Cristy, Linda Dunkin, Glennie Eisele, Sue Bea Fertig, Sara Harrell, Marsha Holden, Mary Ann Hubbell, Pam Meredith.
Madlyn Millimet, Chrissie Moon, Leslie Pearce, Sharon Shackleford, Nancy Shoup, Flint Smith, Judy Stampfli, and Jill Thomas.
Kappa's new officers, installed March 5th, include President — Kay Matthews, Vice President — Kay Anderson, Pledge trainer — Jan Sartor, Scholarship — Suky Arentz, Efficiency — Linda Pierce, Rush — Jann Rowley, Public Relations—Linda Dunkin, and Secretary — Laura Dearborn.
The Miami Triad Dance for Beta Theta Pi, Phi Delta Theta, and Sigma Chi will be held March 16.
Tentative entertainment plans for Saturday night call for 1) Dixieland combo and 2) a banjo or guitarpicker to liven up the proceedings, so we are hopeful of being able to provide good, informal entertainment for those who can spend Saturday night at the Camp.
Information on these topics can be had by reading the information sheets which are with the registration sheets at Rastall Desk; in addition, topic guide sheets will be sent to those who register by March 15, the deadline date for registration, except for discussion groups.
Saturday, March 17, 1962 12:30-1:00 Suggested time of departure from campus for La Foret.
Sunday, March 18, 1962 8:30 Breakfast 10:00 Chapel Service at La Foret Dr.
Bailey , 10:45 Check in and registration at La Foret 11:00 Discussion group — Topic 3 1:00 Lunch 2:00 Check in and registration at La Foret 2:15 Discussion group — Topic 4 3:45 Closing address by the President There will be a coffee-hour in Rastall Center, next Thursday, March 15, at 4:00m.
First place went to O lorado Mines, white WSC and jp joined the Tigers in second.
In the first game played last riday night, Barry Anthony led e Tigers with 18 points, followed Dave Harrington with 16 and ,e Krell with 11.
The Tigers' shooting percentage , r (he first half was 18. and alugli this percentage was incfeato 51 percent with the addiof 45 points in the second [If, this was not enough to close j gap on the Bears, who showed ,me very impressive shooting.
In this final game for Colorado ollege, Farrell Thompson and ave Krell did outstanding jobs, (lompson and Krell both scored points each.
The team has put out a Mil effort even with the loss of uf its members due to eligibility. .of Team Will Hold ntra-squad Tourney bers of the varsity golf .vill play in a 36-hole intrajuad tournament over the weekid at Patty Jewett Golf Club, ighteen holes are scheduled for »th Saturday and Sunday afterand the results will count d the determination of team ■iitions on the squad.
Heading the squad will be vetfans Gordon Aamoth, captain and iree year letterman, and letterian Don Stouffer, who smacks the M ball with the same finesse as shoots the hockey puck.
Although several transfers are Hong the golf squad candidates, freshman class is expected to roduee the best prospects.
Hunt gdahy and Bob Magie, two fresh ho finished one-two in the ural golf tournament last all, head the list of men. golf team plays its first latch against the Colorado School "" Mines team at the Broadmoor f Club on Friday, April 13th.
ROTC Ball Plans Told Plans are well under way for the Tenth Annual Military Ball, which will be held March 24th at the Broadmoor International Center.
The Military Ball, under the general chairmanship of Cadet Major Tim Moe, is being organized bv the Cadet Legion.
Again this year the 179th Army Band from Fort Carson will provide the music for the affair.
The Military Ball is the one very formal dance of the year at Colorado College.
Dress for the event will be long formal gowns for the girls and the ROTC uniform with a white shirt and block bow tie for the Cadets.
Earlier in the week all Cadets voted for Honorary Cadet Lieutenant Colonel.
Candidates are Misses Norma Parker, Sharon Shackleford, Isabel Williams, Bobbie Tolley and Myrle Miller.
Besides the Honorary Cadet Lieutenant, there will be a sponsor for each Company.
Slocum Intramural After the last basketball games, there were still two undefeated teams, the faculty and 2nd North.
Several of the CC tankers picked up 5th places in their respective events.
Since all the swimmers are either freshmen or sophomores it is hoped that next year and especially the year after (when CC gets it own pool) that CC will give Mines and CSC a real race for that top spot.
Also next year it is hoped that the swim team will have a little longer training period than the two weeks of practice before the meet this year.
MEIrose 3-1219 a * Cache La Poudre CC Track Team Hopes Elevated The track team this year seems to have a nucleus of a winning team.
Added to 'them is Bryan Bleakney who ran 9. three years ago in conference competition.
Mike Durphee didn't win the conference championship last year, but he beat all the best runners in it in individual meets in the SS0.
In the mile Tony McGinnis and Dave Smith have been pleasing Coach Flood with their early workouts.
In the field events we've shown good strength in the pole vault and broad jump.
Jim Blair, last year's conference champ in the pole vault, and Jack Schwella both broke Colorado Mines Field House record at 12. in a meet last week.
Abiodun Afonja made a surprisingly good early season broad jump of 21. in the same meet.
Dave Krell should also score strongly for the Tigers as he was champion in the discus in conference competition last year.
March 17 — CU indoor Meet at Boulder March 24 — Rocky Mountain Indoor Conference Meet at Golden March 31 — Outdoor Meet at Pueblo April 14 — Triangle Meet with Western State & Adams State, at home at 1:30 April 21 — Dual Meet here between CSC and CC at 1:30 April 24 — Triangle Meet at Denver against Denver and Colorado Mines April 28 — Rocky Mountain Relays at Golden May 4— Triangle Meet vs CSU and CSC at Greeley at 3:30 May 11 and 12 — Conference meet at Colorado Mines Dual meet with Mines after season, still unscheduled.
CC Cadet Denny Awarded Citation Cadet Clark Denny has been awarded a citation by the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice for his participation in rifle competition at the National Matches, Camp Perry, Ohio.
This rifle team was sponsored and coached by the Fifth Army Advanced Marksman Unit.
Selection of the members for the team came from 3500 ROTC cadets attending a six-week summer camp at Fort Riley, Kansas, and Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri.
This was also the first time a student from CC has represented Colorado College at the National Matches.
Cadet Denny placed in awards at Camp Perry, in the Marine Corps Cup Match, and in the 1961 National Service Rifle Championship, an aggregate of total score from the President's Match, the Marine Corps Cup Match, the Air Force Cup Match, the Coast Guard Trophy Match, the Crowell Trophy Match and the Navy Cup Match.
Hockey Team Loses Canadian Game 11-1 CC's Tigers finished off a rather disappointing season with a respectable performance against Canada's National Team.
But even though they were at the short end of an 1 1-1 decision, the Tigers played one of their most solid games of the year.
Art Warwick had a good game and without a few of his great saves, the score gap could have been much wider.
Tin' defense played as well as ever, and the forwards hustled all the way.
There was a point midway through the first period when the game looked as if it could go either way.
Sales and Sales Management Training Program This Program is designed to develop young men for careers in life insurance sales and sales management.
It provides an initial training period of 3 months before the men move into full sales work.
Those trainees who are interested in and who are found qualified for management responsibility are assured of ample opportunity to move on to such work in either our field offices or in the Home Office after an initial period in sales.
Aggressive expansion plans provide unusual opportunities for the limited number of men accepted each year.
General Agent March 15, 1902 Connecticut Mutual Life INSURANCE COMPANY • HARTFORD t s 3 March 9, 1962 » Colorado College Tiger 'Hopper and Sherman surrounded Lafayette Park, an area equal to a city block, and another group formed a line stretching from one end of the White House to the end of the Executive Department buildings.
On Monday and Tuesday, Myles and Harris continued with their Congressional and Administrative visits.
Representative Chenoweth ""received us heartily and then proceeded to explain the dangers of such activities as TTP and Commitment.
Chenoweth admitted, however, that he hadn't read the TTP platform and wasn't sure whether Communists were involved or not.
Myles felt that the most productive visit was the one made to the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
Here they spoke to a Mr Fisher who stated that the agency has no common policy, but instead, discussed individual ideas and proposals.
It was strongly advised that disarmament be discussed on campus, and that letters be written to Congressmen and to his agency.
Following their re-cap of the Washington trip, Myles and Harris stated their impressions of the leaders, students and various visits.
While the other students who visited agencies and officials had an intelligent view of the platform ""they could not have called experts on such questions as Civil Defense and nuclear testing,"" stated Hams.
Congressman Rodgers (D-Colorado) called the TTP movement a Jay's Bicycle Shop 19 E DOWA ME 4-4733 SCHWINN BICYCLES Rep*ir.
Concerning student involvement in the problems of nuclear war, Senator Carroll stated that they should take a firm stand with the government, write letters to Congressmen and maintain open minds when considering someone alse's opinion.
Myles stated that it reminded him of a statement made by one student which he felt applied to the delegation in general.
Considering its accomplishments, Harris mentioned that the demonstration accomplished its main purpose — it received very good publicity, both here and abroad.
TWO OF THE LEADS rehearse their parts in ""Guys and Dolls."" being presented at the Fine Arts Center this weekend.
Says Boom-Boom, ""Tareyton is one filter cigarette that really delivers de gustibus.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER tHjiul 4 Ji&j/m DUAL FILTER Tareyton Colorado College Tiger • March 9, 1962 All-College Conference Schedule Registration Registration for the All-College Conference topics will be possible j 3 y and at La Poret Camp tomorrow and Sunday.
Saturday and at 10 a,m. jpday; return trips will be made after the discussions for those who j S h to return to campus.
Saturday night's entertainment features a Dixieland jazz band and vera I banjos and guitars for group folk-singing; refreshments will be ■ovided, and we hope you'll stay for all the fun.
Colorado College is one of eight colleges and universities a six-state Rocky Mountain area having fellowship winners. l total of nine students at four Colorado colleges were honth the grants which proPenrose Pathologist To Speak Here Tues.
On March 20 the faculty PreMedical Advisory Committee is sponsoring a meeting for all students interested in medicine as a profession.
The meeting will take place at 7:30m. in the WES Lounge of Rastall Centei\ Dr.
Morgan Berthrong, pathologist at Penrose Hospital, will speak on studying for a medical profession.
The meeting is open to all, and refreshments will follow a question and answer period.
Brooks, Markisen Will Head AWS Elections for the new officers of the Associated Women Students of Colorado College were held for three days last week.
The girls who were elected will take over from the old officers in two weeks, after a brief training period.
President Alice Brooks Vice President Leilani Markisen Treasurer Joan Schmitz Social Chairman Jean Torcom Corresponding Sec.
Senior Karen Bessesen Junior Glennie Eisele Sophomore Flint Smith full year's tuition and fees, lus a $1,500 cost of living alwance.
Colorado College has had eight footlrow Wilson Fellowship wines — five men and three women— the past three years.
They are Dennis C r, an economics major, and A Williamson, an English iajor.
President Benezet suggested that ""today's students may be withdrawing from the college community partly because they feel the academic work has grown too tough to take the time to do anything else; and partly because they do not see what the experiences of community can contribute to a world apparently being slowly torn apart, as international community remains an unreachable ideal.
Most students for social or personal reasons came with real blocks between themselves and a genuine absorption into ideas.
Great teachers have always managed to be in love with both; and as evidence continues to come in from analytical studies of college education, more faculty should be persuaded to join them.
This is not the sole job of the deans, or the president, or the student union director.
President Benezet suggested that if the community part of the college has declined it is because its opportunities for education have been missed.
Noting a current hostility in the world to the precepts of the intellectual life, he said this may change only if while students are in college teachers can do a genuine job of conversion to the reasons for a life of reason.
But, President Benezet said, ""it appears to me that the very difficulty of our task makes it less certain it can be accomplished through speed-up methods, teaching gadgets, growing impersonality, and the efficiency of handling a large number of students with fewer teachers in less time.
However, this pattern we still think of as the American college is ""now being frayed at the edges, if not threatened with being cut to shreds,"" President Benezet told the audience.
Thomas O Brandt, chairman of the German department at Colorado College, has been named managing editor of The German Quarterly, the official publication of the American Association of Teachers of German.
The lfiO-page quarterly contains articles in English for college and university and high school teachers of German.
The articles deal with problems of concern to teachers in the field, and the broad sphere of German literature, While continuing his teaching assignments at Colorado College, Professor Brandt will nssnme his new duties following the resignation of Prof.
The Colorado College German professor was notified of his appointment by Prof.
Werner Neuse, editor-in-chief of the quarterly and director of the Deutsche Soniincrschule at Middlebury College, where he will teach during the 19G2 summer session.
Professor Brandt, who is the author of the novel Dor Frohllche Gnsthof or The Ga y [mi, writes on the American scene, literature and art for numerous German cultural and literary inagaiznes.
As a result of the appointment, Professor Brandt automatically becomes a member of the executive council of the American Association of Teachers of German.
Prior to his assignment at Colorado College, professor Brandt was senior master at the Lakeside Preparatory School in Seattle, Wash., an instructor at Oregon State College, research assistant in German literature at the College of William and Mary.
Rastall Center Board Chooses New Members On Sunday, March 11th, the Rbbtall Center Board chose 7 new members from 2'J candidates for offices.
All the applicants filled out an application and were interviewed by the present Board on the basis of their interest, ability, and enthusiasm.
These people will serve for a year on the Board and will have two faculty advisors, the Student Activities Advisor, and the Director of Rastall Center to assist them.
I olorado SnrmrF. ' olorado ASCC appropriations policy for various campus activities faces the possibility of major change in the very near future.
At the present time, the primary consideration of the ASCC Finance Committee in its budget hearings is the number of students to be benefited, both directly and indirectly, by an appropriation from the ASCC fund.
This is considered primary since the ASCC allotment comes directly from fees paid by each individual CC student.
After this major portion is budgeted, the Finance Committee considers the request of other campus organizations, the uses for these proposed appropriations, and their utility to the student body in general.
The only position clarified is the precedent resulting from a recent refusal of the ""Turn Toward Peace"" delegation.
Three persons (Bill Stafford, Susan Caudill, and Betsy Gaskill) will attempt to clarify the situation and propose some specific changes.
The way in which allotments arise leads to a value judgment which is very hard to make.
One suggestion that deserves attention is a direct appropriation only to certain key organizations (Nugget, Kinnikinnik, Tiger, Foreign Student Committee, Enthusiasm Committee) and a program fund for all the rest which make requests.
This fund would be under direct ASCC supervision and would be used to support activities currently under Citizenship Club, International Relations Club (and others currently in the ASCC budget), plus some additional activities not already included in ASCC jurisdiction.
This proposal would have the merit of including activities currently omitted, although value judgments would still have to be made.
It would also alleviate the practice by organizations currently receiving funds from ASCC, of requesting too much, thereby freezing ASCC resources till the school term ends, then returning the surplus to the Reserve Fund.
If your suit, slacks or jacket needs a bit of expert repairs or remodeling, now is the time to do it — the in-between season when our custom tailors have some time lo spare.
We want Glaser!!""). 1 also feel it a necessity to point out that I bear no grudges for the pittance, equivalent to 73c an hour, which I received as a member of that hardy, courageous group of white-coated financial martyrs, known simply as hashers.
I consider even that paltry recompense more than adequate for the amount of labor extracted from me.
I now have a few suggestions :o offer in an attempt to quell or forestall a planned lynching which will only cause the college a lot uf unneeded bad publicity.
Now surely this is one of those costbalancer meals served after a culinary extravaganza such as Sweet and Sour Pork or Potatoes and Ham au Gratin — we all realize this and we appreciate the necessity of operating within the specified budget (I got a look at one of their cookbooks, ""Institutional Cooking on a Shoestring"" ,by L Borgia); however, the mental picture of that anemic weeny, quietly resting on a bun twice its size, is more than one can bear.
Resembling a withered octogenarian fading fast in his immaculate hospital bed, and tasting like half steamed sections of old hoe handles from an overworked cotton plantation in Alabama, the CC hot-dog is in dire need of immediate revamping.
Now I'll go along with a tough fillet mignon, a shrunken chateau briand, or a dry prime rib of beef, but these anomalies, when applied to a defenseless hot-dog, rub my palate the wrong way.
Since all else has obviously failed, and no matter how implausible this scheme may sound, cooking of the hot-dogs must, I repeat, must be attempted.
If this, too, fails, hot-dogs must then be purchased from an accredited meat wholesaler — somehow, the idea of dealing with nomad butchers instills in me little cause for an appetite.
Hashers must be given more protective covering than starched white jackets.
Fencing masks, bullet proof vests, and Thompson sub-machine guns are definitely called for, if order is to be maintained in the dining halls.
Mr William Powell Continuing this series of sermons on the lenten theme the preacher this .week will address himself to the concept of sin and evil in the life of the individual man.
This concept of sin is one that greatly troubles and also repulses the modem man.
This is due to a lurid false presentation on the part of certain versions of the Christian faith and also to a misunderstanding of this concept by our censorship contemporaries.
It may be true, as one thinker has put it, that modern man is no longer troubled by his sins.
However, judging by the statistics on mental health and also from reading much modem literature, it would seem seem that man is troubled by something.
This vague sense of guilt, and the guilt complex which pervades much of our social life and underlies much of man's attitude towards the world would seem to be much less healthy than the Christian attitude towards sin.
The theme of this sermon deals with this morbid quality which seems to possess many people and much literature and ""looks at it in the light of the Christian revelation of the love of God toward man as a sinful being and opens up a way for the dominant Christian not of forgiveness and job in being a child of God.
Misses Jan Afton, Linda Dunkin, O n i c a Friend, Catherine Grant, Judy Jaccard, Frieda Raster, Janet Nyquist, Norma Parker, Sue Phillips, Hilary Todd, Genevieve Vaughn.
Alpha Lambda Delta is still offering the Tutoring System; interested students may contact Judy Clark for a list of available courses.
This can easily be done by having the upper echelon of the food service appear every Saturday afternoon, publicly eating their own stuff.
Sadistic as this may be, if it is carried out, I will personally guarantee a virtual elimination of all student rioting.
I particularly enjoyed the immense profoundness expressed by the eminent Dr.
Skirts and Tops $3.50 up Friday Evenings Southgate Phone ME 2-9556 RASTALL CENTER ACTIVITIES In the next month, Rastall Center will hold four events which will be of interest to the student body.
March 23 — Ladies night in the games March 24 — Leathercraft workshop April 17 — Poster workshop April 24 — Photo workshop Applications for NUGGET editor, NUGGET business manager, and STUDENT HANDBOOK editor close March 17.
Applications available at Rastall Center desk, and all questions may be referred t Dave Fuigason, chairman of Publi cations Board.
Only two undefeated teams sur vived the four round, power matched debate division where Colorado College's lone entry of Susan Caudill and Charles Puckett trailed the winning Colorado State College team by a sin| "" point.
Direction of the tournament wa; under the supervision of the Colorado College Debate Club.
Mai Power was in charge of scheduling the impromptu speaking ami original oratory competitions while Christopher Griffiths and Nancy Dehlin scheduled and directed the debate division.
Colorado College faculty mem bers assisting in the judging fa eluded professors James A Johrr son, Robin Rudoff, William Barton, and Captain Louis Pistone.
Fill out the form Below and Join with SeniW Barry Goldwater, Senaloi Strom Tnurm.
Colorado College Tiger • March 16, 1962 $ Cornick, McMillen, Jenkins Loesser Score Releases Score With 'Guys and Dolls' Taste, Energy, Nostalgia By Caroline Creyke Perhaps the best way to evaluate the success or failure ,f a performance is to watch the audience as they view the ;liow, leave the show, and treat the show in their conversations the followingdays.
If so, then I can safely say that the Colorado College Player's production of ""Guys and Dolls"" was p smashing success.
Messrs. taMillen, Jenkins, and Cornick jr e to be congratulated for coning their abilities to produce t most of the student body confers the best show ever put on | the CC Players.
The off-type casting afforded :ome of the best laughs of the j 10 w; Bill Stafford as the sightgfers guide, Don Oden as the punch-drunk prizefighter, Chris ■friths as gangster Harry the Horse, Peigi Benham as a floosy, jiid many others.
Such a ""tough"" looking bunch of gangsters has never before been ■een by the students in, and residents of Colorado Springs.
As ie sang, the audience remained lerfectly still — I didn't hear a cough.
The only word that I use to describe the dancers themselves, and especially Mr Cornick and his Cynthia Lamb, is supple.
These two pushed and fulled themselves in directions in rfrieh I'm sure the human body not be pushed or pulled.
Iiss Genevieve Vaughn's beauliuil soprano voice rang out as as that bell she sang about. i mission doll,"" she said, and lie was an excellent one.
During the scene in which she slipped became slightly tipsy was convincing due to Miss Vaughn's acting. the role of Sky Masterson, )ir.
Whenhe sang, the audience sat almost transfixed, as that mellow tenor filled the Fine Arts Center Theatre.
He looked and acted the art of a not-really-so-tough guy. s Lynn Bradley was just Plain wonderful in the part of Adelaide, the girl who had been ed for 14 years.
The audience just couldn't ough of her singing, on the whole, ""Guys and Wis"" was terrific.
The first act *as fast moving, and I have noth*ff but compliments for it.
But the jKond act, while still good, seemed little bit slower at first; howBr, it picked up during the ""Rock 2 Boat"" number.
Special rates for students and teachers for the six week > Summer Session Tour program begin as low as $555.00.
This price includes round-trip jet air travel from West Coast; accommodations in deluxe Waikiki Beach hotels; a full schedule of 22 planned activities, including Island sightseeing trips and tours, cruises, dinner dances, beach parties; and free bus transportation between campus and residences.
Air and steamship accomodations to handle the hundreds of Mainland students and teachers matriculating to the Islands for summer study and fun have been set on all major, steamships and airlines.
Ownoi By James H Fox At the Fine Arts Center last weekend, eighty-three ""guys and dolls"" provided a refreshing break from increasing academic pressure.
Under the creative direction of Donald Jenkins, the musical end of the production was a solid, first rate job.
Some of the comic writing clicked, and some was of the ""something funny happened to me on the way to the studio"" type.
However, Frank Loesser's score, varying from the sentimental More 1 Can Not Wish You to the spirited, slightly nostalgic title song, is never dull, dusty, or unpleasant listening.
An example of Loesser's imagination is his Fuge for Tinhorns. performed competently by a trio of ""guys,"" which made the libretto of Belmont jargon subordinate to its complex melodic structure, The evening's most delightful performance was enjoyed in Lynn Bradley's ""well-known fyancee,"" Adelaide.
She was at once vulgar and naive, dumb and shrewd, selfpitying and noble in her devotion for good, old, unreliable, fourteen year-old engagement Nathan.
Miss Bradley's characterization of Runyonese hoofer was aided by Jean McMilten's extravagant garb.
Sky Masterson, the fly-by-night gambler and professional ""doll catcher"" was sung with precision ' and maturity by Ben Lyons.
The leading man's roundness of tone and resonant projection complemented the sharp, sincere expression of Genevieve Vaughn as ""Sister Sahruh"" in their two balladlike duets I'll Know and I've Never Been in Love Before.
Although the voice of Dale Spall, as Sarah's grandfather, lacked Mr Lyon's training, his More I Can Not Wish You was tenderly expressed, and he seemed an appealing old soul saver.
Norman Cornick's sensual and disciplined choreography was a wild spectacle.
His Cubans performed with Latin lust, his Hotbox girls were vivacious, and his crapshooters moved like acrobats.
The boyish, hut rather thinly performed Nicely-Nicely Johnson led most of the cast in a mocking, high pitched harmonic rendition of Sit Down You're Rockin' the Boat.
Under the enormous pressure of our episodic American musical, David Hand's simple, flexible sets were moved swiftly with coordination by Roger McKee's stage hands, but the ""lighting was occasionally sloppy in execution.
Senior; Tuesda> SENIORS ere not at the eeting can be measured for caps and gowfl by Mrs.
Beidleman, Hitchcock Serve on NSF Panel Two Colorado College professors have been invited to serve on the National Science Foundation's proposal evaluation panel in San Francisco yesterday and today.
Tile two Colorado College scientists will help evaluate proposals to the NSF for grants for undergraduate science education equipment.
Special Language Courses Offered At Summer Session Students attending Colorado College's 1962 summer session will have an opportunity to acquire a full year's credit in a foreign lansion which gets under way next guage during the eight-week sesJune 18.
This is just one of several special being offered during the ir session.
The special courses will be offered in three areas of general studies and in French, German, Russian, and Spanish.
A special brochure has been prepared and mailed directly to 7,500 students now attending liberal arts colleges not having summer sessions.
J Victor Hopper, director of the summer session,, the bulletin was prepared to answer a number of questions regarding special classes and basic courses in the liberal arts curriculum.
In the foreign language program, ii student may take a full year's work in first year French, German, Russian, and Spanish, and :i full year in intermediate French, German, and Spanish.
Wallace C Royce, professor of French and chairman of the romance language department; Hervtng Mudruga, assistant professor of French; Alexey N Malyshev, assistant professor of Russian; and Mrs, Hertha T Feyock, instructor in German.
Coblirn Library has received various directories and announcements of summer jobs for 19U2 across the nation and around the world.
Although most of the group had never participated in a work camp, it proved to be a most interesting and profitable experience for everyone involved.
The group spent three days working on a reservation Chapter House and school, putNew Course Offered At CC Summer Session ting in a lawn and laying flagstone walks with an opportunity to play with the Navajo children during their lunch breaks.
One day was also spent at the Gallup Indian Community Center, where the group was staying, painting, washing, gardening, and generally cleaning up the whole place.
The work accomplished was certainly not of earth shaking significance, but the experience with the Navajos and their children was most rewarding.
The nights were spent in talking with Navajo leaders and learning about some of the many problems that the Indians face in trying to acculturate with the nonIndian societies, as well as in learning something of their native crafts, culture and tribal organization.
During the other days the group visited Window Rock to see what the United States government is doing for the Indians, and took a side trip to Canyon de Chetley.
One special adventure was watching the spring fertility dances of the Zuni Indians.
Of course, all of the experiences cannot be related here, but there was a general impression of having begun to understand the Navajos and their often misunderstood and expedited culture.
This spring vacation, another work camp for ten students has been arranged through the efforts of John Stickney and Dr.
Paul Kutsche, professor of Anthropology and Sociology here at Colorado College, with the Navajo Indians.
This year, it will be in the Navajo community of Sawmill, which is not far north of Gallup on the Navajo Indian Reservation.
The proposed projects are improving a rodeo ground, landscaping a reservation Chapter House, and planning and helping to prepare a meal for Navajo dignitaries and guests at the traditional dedication ceremony for the Chapter House.
The itinerary will be similar to that of last year, with opportunities to talk with government and Navajo leaders and to visit points of interest in the neighboring region while not participating on the actual work projects.
Paul Kutsche and his wife have offered to chaperone, and will be of considerable help because of their knowledge and experience with other Indian tribes.
The students will be asked to pay for part of their travel and board expenses as was done last year.
Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 A new course on the ""Teaching of Earth Science"" will be introduced this summer at Colorado College.
It is designed primarily for elementary school and secondary general science teachers.
Combining material formerly covered in a rocks and mineral course, the new study will aid in the effective teaching of earth science and will emphasize a survey of rocks, crystals, gems and Prof.
William A Fischer, chairman of the college geology department, will teach the course, which will meet Monday through Friday, June 18 through July 13.
Another summer course which has proved popular in the past takes advantage of the geologic wealth of the region.
That is ""Geology of the Pikes Peak Region"" which will be repeated this summer with Professor Fischer as the instructor.
Students will take field trips to augment their classroom study of the structual features, topography, rocks, minerals, and fossils of the southern part of the Front Range.
The new four-week course answers the needs of teachers eligible for graduate-level work in education, while the Pikes Peak region course is designed for undergraduate study.
Carlton Mineral Exhibit Given 'Special' Award Colorado College's Carlton Collection of some GO specimens of Cripple Creek gold ore won a ""special"" award at the 14th annual Gem and Mineral Show in Phoenix, Arizona.
Colorado College Appoints Trustee March 3rd, Colorado College appointed John Wolcott Stewart of Santa Barbara, California, as a member of the board of trustees.
Mr Stewart is the son of the late Philip B Stewart, a member of the college's board of trustees from 1900 to 1954.
Philip B Stewart, one of Colorado Springs' leading citizens, contributed to the development of Washburn Field and coached basketball at the college.
His library, containing many rare editions, was given to the college after his death.
A native of Boston, John Stewart moved to Colorado with his family as a youth and attended school in Colorado Springs.
He was a student for two years at Cutler Academy, a preparatory school operated by Colorado College until 1914.
The new Colorado College trustee was graduated from Yale in 1919 following two years in the army.
A pilot, he enlisted as a private and rose through the ranks to captain Following college, he became a newspaper reporter for what now ;s the Spokane Spokesman Review.
During his seven years as a newspaperman, lie served as a reporter, rewriteman, sports writer and finally night news editor.
In the midnineteen twenties Stewart moved to Santa Barbara, California, where he has been a rancher.
For the past few years he has been in commercial real estate investments.
The new college trustee has two sons, Philip B in Chicago and Robert F in San Francisco, both stock brokers, and two daughters, Mrs.
Special program emphasis may he put on Germany, Russia, and American labor this year, and the study of general systems development, a highly specialized subject which drew a regular audience of scientists last year, will be continued.
Tacos & Pizza COLEMAN ROBINSON ACTS AS AUCTIONEER for ""Slave"" Hooker in last week's Freshman Slave Day Auction.
SI Greek News Serenades and World Championjip hockey teams dominated the ;re ek scene this week.
Monday jpjit, the Delta Gamma's and Sig]S Chi's honored Ginny Metcalf n d Russ Veach at the DG house, jso Monday, Lynne O'Malley and jiuck Lawrence were serenaded , the Kappa house by the Kappa's „d the Phi Delt's.
The Sigs n d Kappas will honor Chuck Corand Kristin Wallace. .vice this week the Beta Theta played host to hockey teams for the World Championships. [uesday night they honored the iustrailians.
The Delta Gamma's ■ted as hostesses for the affair, 'ednesday night the Betas again ,layed hosts, this time for the Vest Germans.
The CC chapter of ligma Chi was well represented at All-Sig Day in Denver last liturday.
Alpha Phi's scholarlip dinner will be held Sunday ight at the Swiss Chalet.
The Kappa's ill be hosted by the Betas at a reakfast on the 25th; One of the big social events, the nnual Miami Triad Beer Bust and , given by the Phi Delts, jetas, and Sigma Chis, will be eld today.
In addition, each degree candidate will complete his thesis research ""in the field"" on a three-month academic tour of Asia.
Plans for next September are for students from many countries and areas in Asia and the Pacific to participate.
Candidate eligibility is based on high academic achievement, excellent health, ability to relate to Asians, and demonstrated interest in contributing to the objectives of the Center.
The Center for Cultural Interchange Between East and West was established by the United States Congress and the State of Hawaii in 1960, in an effort to promote mutual understanding by bringing students together for study, interchange of ideas, and cultural exchange.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES EXPERT SERVICE ALL MAKES ""ISO ""ST PIKES /3V PEAK AVENUE service with international organizations, agencies of the government, or private institutions and industries.
Central Airlines Central Airlines will extend the special Youth Fare Program half fares offer to young people between 1 2 and 22 years of age.
Under the Youth Fare Program anyone between 12 and 22 may purchase a ticket in advance, but must make reservations at a ticket office in person no sooner than three hours before flight departure.
Central's special fares are in effect seven days u week and are suited for students who want to fly home for the weekend and servicemen on leave.
The Kinnikinnik is apt to fall If yon do not get on the ballIn fact it may be rather small.
We think the lit set mainly parties, And depended on the Spring to grow wit.
It seems that now that March has come All Muses' voices are struck dumb.
No Eliotic benediction Will grace this fast-declining Action, Between (he potential And the Reality Falls the Shadow.
BILL PIGOTT Six years ago Bill Pigott graduated from college with an engineering degree.
Bill Pigott of Pacific Northwest Bell Telephone Company, and the other young engineers like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country, help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America.
Li bell telephone companies 5] March 16, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger IntramuralS After the last games there were three teams with three wins and no losses.
They will be joined in a tournament by one of the three teams with a two and one record.
This added team will be picked either by a flip of a coin or in an elimination game.
Miesmer 18. 2nd North Thompson 2, Croodbody 23, Cooper 7, Grant 5, Howe 2, Sauve 14. 1st North Weymouth 2, Edmiston 1, Kranich 20, Mansfield 1, Faulk 3. 3rd North Howland 22, Gustafson 13, Gress 16, Bitters 1. 4th North LeMelle 2, Hannestad 2, Evans 10, Haatala 19.
Farrell Thompson Elected To RMC All-League Team Senior Farrell Thompson was elected this week to the Rocky Mountain Conference All League Team.
When asked how he felt about this honor, Farrell said he wasn't anticipating it but was naturally pleased.
FarrelPs only regret from the season was that CC was unable to capture the Rocky Mountain Conference crown for the second year, but after the loss of six men because of ineligibility, it was hard to regroup a cohesive team unit.
The other members of the All League Team are Phil Coulter, Western State; Alonzo Porter, Adams State; Bob Ruffin, Colorado State College; Steve Harvey, Colorado School of Mines; and Charles Hastings, Colorado State College.
Thorn Verhave, a reasearch psychologist at the Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco, will give two talks at Colorado College on March 20.
Verhave, the American Psychological Association's visiting scientist to Colorado College this year, will discuss ""Values and Preferences"" at 11m. in Perkins Hall.
At 4m. he will talk about ""Psycho-Pharmachology"" in Rastall Center to members of the local chapter of Delta Epsilon, the honorary science society.
He recently joined the staff of the Eye Research Institute at the Institute of Medical Sciences of the Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco, but previously was with the Eli Lilly Research Laboratories in Indianapolis.
Club to Attempt Climb of LaPlata Peak The CC Mountain Club will attempt a first winter ascent of the Elfingwood Ridge of La Plata Peak.
It is the fourth highest mountain in our state and the sixth highest in the Continental United States, excluding Alaska.
Most of the climbing routes on La Plata are not difficult, but one route, the Ellington Ridge, offers interesting climbing throughout the year.
When encrusted with snow, however, the climbing difficulties are increased; winter also brings low temperatures, high winds and the ever present avalanche danger.
There have been frequent attempts to make a winter ascent of La Plata via this ridge; and all of them have met with failure because of storms, avalanches, equipment failures and logistical problems.
Because this weekend is the last one of the winter, Dale Spall, John Kuglin and CCMC faculty advisor Ron Bierstedt will try a late-season attempt.
They plan to leave Colorado Springs very early Friday morning, and by the time you are reading this article they should be ascending the first section of the ridge.
The early start is prompted by the avalance danger which is always present during the first section of the climb.
Once past the avalance basin, they will proceed to the low point on the ridge where they will erect camp.
After fidgiting under and inch or so of goose down during the night, they will leave the support party headed by Dan Bemstien and will attempt the final section of the climb which involves extensive rock climbing.
They hope to start back from the summit Saturday afternoon, and may return to the Springs in time for Monday classes.
Coach Frasca Named Tc NCAA Committee Tony Frasca, hockey coach of the Colorado College Tigers, has been named a member of this year's three man NCAA hockey selection committee.
Daily THE FIVE QUEEN CANDIDATES and their Milita remind CC students of the March 24 event.
Civil Liberties Union To Hold Meeting The Colorado Springs chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union will hold its regular winter membership meeting on Monday, March 19, at 8m. in the WES Room at Eastall Center.
Ellsworth is co-author of right-wing writings, The American Right-Wing, published in 1962 by the Public Affairs Press.
This work was the result of more than ten year's research, which has included considerable correspondence with right-wing organizations since World War II, during a period when many right-wing groups were being formed in this country.
CURRENT EVENTS DISCUSSION The next meeting of the Current Events Discussion group will take place Tuesday, March 20, from 4 to 5 in WES lounge, Rastall Center.
ME 2-0887 ££» \ \STH£ LAST WORD ID FASHION ZECHA& ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MElrose 3-1219 Nevada Ave. at Cache La Poudre Carle's Hardballers Begin Practice Mon.
Baseball practice for the CC Tigers starts in earnest on Monday — come snow, shine or storm — ■ according to Athletic director, Jerry Carle.
Carle, who will be the coach of the CC hardballers, has been gathering his forces during the past month, and expects to have almost 30 prospects on hand for Monday's initial turnout.
This will be cut to a travelling squad for the tightly-scheduled CC baseball season after the first week or so.
The CC baseball season opens with a clash with the Air Force Academy at Colorado College on April 18.
The remainder of the schedule is packed into the following five weeks which see the Tigers often playing two and three games per week.
FRENCH CLUB The French hockey team which has been playing in the World Championships at the Broadmoor, will be welcomed at a reception given by the F r e 11 c h Club on Saturday, March 17, at 10 in the Gamma Phi Beta sorority house.
I However, in these weeks when I frantic sport activity is in abev-1 ance, I think it would be fitting I to make a short recap of the past I season and the questions that have I This year has been epitomized by good beginnings in sports that have proved abortive.
After a first game loss in football, the Tigers jelled and seemed to be heading for a league championship; onh to be crushed by Adams State ij a decisive game.
Can a suit liberal arts college afford the fi ancial burden of big time footbal 1 will try to answer this questii in my editorial next week.
Basketball and hockey, the oth two sports this year, both turned out worse than had been predicted.
Easketball was a dissappointnient because inelligibility climaxed six of our players.
The disturbing thing about hockey was that we were not completely ineffective, and in short spurts seemed to have the nucleus of a good team.
Why we were unable to use onr potential effectively is another question that should be answered before this past season is considered merely history.
Another seemingly endemic problem of this school is the lack of school support, especially of the spring sports.
I feel this is anfortunate, for both track and baseball are good spectator sports and we should have pretty good teams this year.
Inter-Frar Bowling TournamentBegins Not since Rip Van Winkle's t i me had the sound of ten pins falling sounded so loudly now announcing that the Interfraternity Bowling Tournament had begun At the end of the day, the Zeta team of Bill Evans, Dale Shaw, Jim Heiberger, Bill Kranich, and Jim Talman had won with a total pin score of 2495.
Phi Gamma Delta 2432 Beta Theta Pi 2295 Kappa Sigma 2230 Phi Delta Thetha 2117 Sigma Chi 2113 Red Top Drive In 1520 So.
Glenn Brooks, Buft'e Buffam, Tom Rivers, Lani Markisen, and Chris Griffiths.
Williams started with a read statement delineating ""legise"" and ""administrative"" positions of campus leadership.
Brooks followed, pointing out particularly that leadership is not id in itself, and that it must te judged on the basis of goals to ecomplished.
Brooks also :ommented that there are various linds of leadership which must be sessed differently.
At this point in the discussion, Buffe Buffum, the panel moderator, asked the group of approxily 90 students and faculty members what should .be done to achieve more desirable leadership.
There is a lack of communicant between student government ami the students.
The lack of communication is Jue largely to a lack of student interest in student government.
The lack ' of student interest in student government is due to the fact that most issues with which it deals are not important to the students.
Any interested person can take irt in the committee meetings of ASCC and in its regular meetings.
The administration stifles student interest by limiting the area which students may influence policy.
ASCC is currently more representative than most special-group Student government systems.
The College, by centralizing certain management functions in fraternities, has reduced Leadership training.
Greek organizations should exercise leadership by sponsoring ■ams dealing with topics of comm unity interest.
These are condensations of some >f the main ideas which were expressed in a lengthy, discontinuous ■nd sometimes circular discussion. ^e hope that the most important I these ideas are included here.
In addition, the class is planning a rummage sale to help finance their final activities at the college.
These activities include a senior sneak picnic for the faculty, a senior class dance, a swim party and the senior class dinner.
The senior class gift to the college will be announced at the dinner on June 2, where President Louis T Benezet will speak.
Eighf Profs Promoted, Three Given Tenures Eight Colorado College professors have been awarded promotions and three granted tenure by the board of trustees.
The trustees' action was taken on recommendations by Dean Lloyd E Worner.
Faculty members receiving tenure or promotions were notified by President Louis T Benezet.
Tenure was granted to Miss Margaret Saunders, assistant professor of education; Eldon T Hitchcock, assistant profesor of chemistry; and Milton K Snyder, assistant professor of chemistry.
Professor Pearl who joined the faculty at Colorado College in 1946, is the author of IS books in the field of geology.
Those promoted from assistant professor to associate professor were Paul Bernard of the history department, Douglas Freed of the psychology department, Milton K Snyder of the chemistry department, and Wilson Gately of the mathematics depai'tment.
Promoted from instructor to assistant professor were William E Barton of the economics department, John Lewis of the geology department, and Miss Martha Jane Cauvel of the philosophy department.
In other action, the trustees approved the first increase in board and room rates at the college in six years.
The increase, effective next September, is for $50 for the academic year.
This will bring the total cost of room and board from $800 to $850 for the nine-month year.
Students buying books for second semester courses should do so before or immediately after spring break.
Next Year CC Adopts New Calendar Colorado College has put the capstone on a major, longrange overhaul of its academic program by adopting a new calendar which will create a midyear Symposium Week and enable students to take fall semester final examinations before Christmas vacations.
The action was taken by the faculty Monday in an overwhelming vote to adopt the calendar, scheduled to go into effect next September.
Other major academic changes taken by the college during the past year include adoption of a four-course curriculum and the addition of a new honors program for selected freshmen and sophomores to the existing honors program for upperclassmen.
Under the traditional academic calendar students go home for Christmas vacation and return to the campus for what has been termed a two-week ""lame duck"" session before semester final examinations.
This is followed by another week of vacation before the opening of the second semester.
President Louis T, Benezet told the faculty ""independent colleges are changing their calendars because they must change to keep their place.
We have set ourselves a course of getting extra results in education from better-than-average prospects.
These are external though important reasons for considering a new approach to presenting our instructional program.
Intrinsically, the program not only accomplishes at last the concentration of firstterm studies into one unbroken period; it has a feature which offers many new possibilities, a Symposium one week long to begin the second semester.
The prospects of such a symposium to rally the academic community can stimulate us each year, producing an intellectual challenge of relevance and importance,"" President Benezet said.
Symposium Week will be designed to serve as an additional focus on college intellectual life.
Designed to cover a key issue, it will feature a number of authorities who will spend the week on the campus lecturing and holding discussions with students and faculty.
The faculty felt that by elimination certain tests, duplicated by the College Board examinations it would be possible to shorten new student week and to bring the students into the classroom on Friday and Saturday of the first week.
This would be a more meaningful introduction to CC than the social events which have been traditional during the first week.
With such a schedule it is likely that few students would have more than one examination on one particular day.
Faculty would also have more leisure to grado their final examinations than under the present calendar.
The reading periods in both semesters would permit review of the semester's work, or perhaps review of the work of the entire year, depending upon the nature of the course.
In addition the second semester reading period would provide time for the faculty members to make greater use of oral examinations as part of the departmental comprehensive.
Tn the paBt too many faculty members have had to administer departmental comprehensives, grade them, carry out oral examinations, while teaching their regular course load.
Dennis Faulk Chosen To Study in Holland Mr Dennis E Faulk lias been chosen as the Holland Fxchunge Student for next year.
He was selected by the Colorado Colege foreign student committee from nine applicants.
The final choice was made on the basis of an autobiography, letters of recommendation, and a personal interview with the committee.
He transferred to CC this semester, after attending Pueblo College and Colorado State College.
The future foreign student will attend the Netherlands School for Representation Abroad in Haarlem.
Mr Faulk's first objective will be getting to know Holland, its people, its culture, and its language.
CC's exchange program with this particular school in Holland is financed by the administration and contributors from various campus organizations.62-63 will be the 7th year that CC has sent an exchange student to Holland.
BARBARA JUST1S Deak Printed Friday, by PEERLESS PRINTING »rado Tlie Colorado College academic calendar has seen several major changes in the last year or so; a freshman knows program, deferred rush, addition of four-hour courses to the curriculum, no midsemester grades other than failures (beginning next year), and the latest — a complete overhaul of the traditional CC calendar.
But, the new schedule (going into effect next September) will not be all a bed of roses.
True, the current two week lag after Christmas vacation will be abolished, and the final examination period will be finished before Christmas vacation begins.
By early November many students will be ready for some respite— and Christmas vacation will still be more than a month and a half away.
Perhaps this is as it should be; I have long maintained that vacations should not be cluttered with formal assignments.
Nevertheless, a one month layoff from disciplined study — particularly in language courses, art and music — may have a retarding effect on work in the early weeks of the second semester.
For, unless great effort is spent funding excellent speakers and an extremely vital or interesting subject, many CC students will be found on the ski slopes at symposium time.
On the bright side of the change are the reading periods preceding final examinations and the extended final examination periods.
At the recent All-College Conference I suggested making ""Dead Week"" really dead — no classes at all.
The reading periods should prove quite advantageous — in the first semester as both a breathing period and a review period, and as a much-needed time for retrospection and summary before second semester finals.
The long exam period will alleviate common problem of two critical exams falling on the same day, allowing little time to sufficiently prepare for either.
Another advantage will be the early completion of the school term — giving CC students a jump on other summer job applicants.
Perhaps other advantages will crop up as we become familiar with the new system. — CEP Social Coordinating Committee Constitution 1.
In addition there shall be one upperclass man and one upperclass woman acting as freshman coordinators; they will be selected from the applicants by the Social Coordinating Committee and may be aproved by the Executive Council.
Each member of the committee shall have one vote with the exception of the advisor.
To call a meeting of the social chairmen of each social organization on campus, including clubs and governing bodies, and the Director of Rastall Center, at least once each year.
To recommend to the Executive Council chairmen for ASCC sponsored events, and to be responsible for the effective execution of these events.
To discuss the social activities on campus and the improvement of these activities.
The chairman shall be responsible for the execution of the duties of this committee.
Parents' Weekend peaks Events Scheduled By Rosenfeld Ireland would have been proud of the antics displayd by her CC transplants this past weekend.
In fact I will be mystified, yea even dumbfounded, if the Lord Mayor doesn't issue a campus citation for meritorious effort in surpassing all the requirements of Irish devilry.
The good Dean of Men was aroused from peaceful slumber no less than three times, at the urgent request of the gendarmes — it seems that quite a few of our academic contemporaries wei'e under the mistaken notion that Slocum had set up shop down at City Hall.
An entire squadron of propellor-smellers was nearly eliminated from active participation in the cold war when they invaded the sanctity of the ""K"" sans blue zoot-suits — however, after due consideration of their sizes and numbers, the CC honor guard allowed them to taxi off in peace.
And back at Slocum, an angry young man, apparently disgusted with television (and can we really blame him?), began venting his anger by methodically breaking Coke bottles dangerously near the oneeyed monster.
Upon being reprimanded for this, he further exhibited his distaste by vainly attempting to hurl himself through a large plate glass window — luckily his projectile path was a good 20 degrees off and he landed on a solid mahogany guard bar, inflicting negligible damage upon said bar.
All in all, the ""drinkin' o' the brew"" produced a weekend overflowing with highly creative destruction.
Blood donors are requested for Michael Mingus, CC student currently in Penrose Hospital.
American Student Information Service, 22, Avenue de [a Liberie, Luxembourg.
Cily, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg SKI BRECK Barney's Hotelary, Main Street, Breckenridge.
Don't forget to remind your parents of this annual event while you are home for Spring Vacation.
Highlights of the Weekend are Song Fest, the Chuckwagon breakfast in the Garden of the Gods, and the two days of open classes.
Two letters have been sent to the parents notifying them of this event, and in one there was enclosed a reply card which they are encouraged to use.
These cards should be returned by March 31, if it is possible, but will be accepted after this date.
The entire campus has arranged activities for these four days of the Weekend around the parents' visit.
Remind your folks and urge them to come for a weekend of wonderful fun.
March 25, 1962 We hear a lot these days about man in terms of the average man, the typical man, the man-in-thestreet; behaviorists tell us how he develops, and advertisers are interested in him for obvious reasons.
We also hear a lot about what it takes to be a real man, in terms of physical fitness, or response to women, or military prowess.
Yet the Bible, and the Church, in talking of real humanity and true manhood turn in quite a different direction and point to Jesus.
Bailey will preach a sermon on Jesus as the real man, who shows us, in a fashion almost diametrically opposed to that of the behaviorists, what is — and what is not — true humanity — and thereby shows us how we should lead our lives.
Center Activity* Ta The Rastall Center Board of thj year and last met last Tuesrja evening at the Hackney House ■ the annual Rastall Center Boar, recognition dinner.
The group was privileged to hear an address from Mr Quigley, ^ Union Director of the Colom^ Memorial Center at Colorado Uni versity in Boulder.
He spoke about phases of Union philosophy presented a very interesting talk to both students and guests.
Instruction will be given ti all interested in cutting pre< stones for bracelets, medall and other jewelry.
As an added attraction free refreshments will be ser as well as several free games, This is a real opportunity f or the gals to make use of the game; Due to scheduling difficulties, All College Conference topic two was not presented at the proper time.
Entries will not be eccepted packages must be submitted ii your 5 and 10 point packages closing time.
As a quite-recent alumnus of Colorado College, I cannot leave unchallenged the undocumented aspersions cast at the College by student contributors in the TIGER Letters Section on March 3.
Contributor Brigham, in particular, inferred that CC students were permanently beyond censure, but that ""the institution"" as such deserves no praise whatever.
He did not, however, make clear just what faults were present,g., bad food, insufficient academic challenge, inept professors, shabby buildings, or what.
I should imagine that anyone as urbane and glib as Mr Brigham knows that unsupported innuendo is intellectually dishonest.
His sort of smug, unbased, 3 nd rlleeting insinuations seem to reflect more upon him as an observer than upon the object observed.
A Mr Cowles followed with an opinion that the College's goals and ideals have been seriously tarnished because an experimental theatre troupe could find no place to rehearse, since all available space normally used for this sort of thing was full.
I find this state of affairs (i.e., so much cultural activity that it cannot be properly housed) singularly encouraging, but Contributor Cowles seems irretrievably submerged in his disillusionment with College brochures.
In spite of this, Miss MeConnell seems to resent going into debt to subsidize a portion of her education, thinking that it should come free.
O00 above what she could have earned in a lifetime without it, and the worth of a Colorado College degree is substantially greater than the average.
More importantly, there are rewards from it which cannot be measured in dollars.
Miss MeConnell thinks that the College is fast becoming a ""Country Club,"" but it is a strange Country Club which has so many of its members waiting on tables, mopping floors at night, oitending the lawns.
I would invite the critics to match the alumni of CC with those of any other college or university in the country in wits, income, position, and most importantly, in major contribution to society on all levels.
I would also invite the critics to match CC itself with any other in the country in terms of academic challenge, diversity of student body, close relationships between faculty and student, brilliance and dedication of the faculty, together with a nottoo-austere social opportunity.
It would be novel to see the critics support their views, in this comparison, with some verifiable evidence.
If it has become stickily sentimental or unfashionable to express pride in one's college, then I prefer to remain in the ranks of the obsolete.
Nothing is more helpful than a blazing, documented attack with concrete proposals for innovation, but vague castigation has always seemed unworthy of any serious consideration.
Found at Bob Waymire's «^ UNIVERSITY SHOP SOUTHGATE one of our students asked Dr.
Morganthau to comment on a quotation which was read from a sheet of excerpts from the writings of Messrs.
Brodie, Millis, and Morganthau, which had been distributed prior to the Symposium, This sheet had been compiled on the basis of the reading of some of my students, and did not contain identification of sources.
Morganthau disclaimed having written the sentences in question; he felt they represented neither his style nor his thought.
I had been concerned about this matter ever since, but just recently found the time to check into it.
I think it is perfectly understandable that a person who does as much writing as Dr.
Morganthau does may very well forget this or that specific sentence or paragraph, particularly when confronted with it for the first time in over two years.
Jacques Rivard Chris Bntley Larry Gilbertson Paul Kilbreath Bill Dixon Ken Hanson Garry Martin Wayne McAlpine Dave Lewis Marv Parliament Mike Min.lli Dan McGill Reno Van Puttcn Totals 0|>|i.
And it is a way of life that holds the unsurpassed satisfactions that come with service to country.
If you have not completed Air Force ROTC, Officer Training School provides an opportunity to qualify for a variety of vitally needed jobs in the Aerospace Age.
A graduate of this three month course earns a commission as a second lieutenant.
For full information— including the chance to obtain graduate degrees at Air Force expense—see the Air Force Selection Team when it visits your college.
Burton headed the program with comments on his impressions of Colortdo College.
His remarks were straightforward, and many of his observations demonstrated his acute awareness of the conditions which do exist on the campus.
He was followed by a combo which played a variety of selecc if m „ state laws and local ordintions.
The spinet was then quickly .^ converted into a honky-tonk piano, »««»> and Al Peterson presented a numon ber of arrangements.
The program th« was concluded by a Sing Along thi with the Admissions Office.
He stated that the college should prepare intellectual and social leaders and that it should attempt to establish a social climate.
He felt that perhaps CC goes overboard in the number of carefully planned social events which exist.
An attempt is made to publicize events, but no number of signs can take the place of some discussion of events prior to their happening.
Perhaps of events could be organized on a more informal basis some of the difficulties which exist could be alleviated.
He found a definite gap according to his definition of the purpose of a social life.
The students have bred a complacency by simply pointing to the social calendar which is packed with events.
Mr Blackburn feels that we need to create an atmosphere for social mixing in an informal situation.
Major reasons for this are the small college atmosphere, shyness or lack of opportunity on the part of both men and women students, and the attitude of men students that the women want to get too serious.
Social functions which can include freshmen students will have to .be held on the all-college level.
Perhaps this would keep more of the girls on campus, instead of attempting to fill their social gap at the institution not far to the north.
This decision was made by the administration, and the number of cars among freshmen students would probably be quite low if they were allowed.
A statement that the boys are to possessive was countered by a comment that the girls hang on to tightly.
Perhaps the most concrete step taken during this time was a suggestion from the floor, to form a committee to look into the possibility of finding a setting not far from compus where informal gatherings could be held.
This location should be able to attain a dance license and a 3. license.
The members are Eric Herder, chairman, Mr Blackburn, Jo Heller, Bill Hybl, Mr Lewis, Karen Mcllvaine, Skip Meis, and Clay Sorrick.
The discussion concluded with a realization that social life is secondary to academics, but that it plays an important part in our education.
Mr Oden, as moderator informed the group that this discussion was to be a spontaneous brainstorming session.
Mr Brossman handled two topics, new men's housing and a new health center.
Some of the ideas presented were to have suites, to separate study facilities from the sleeping area, to increase storage space, to have better soundproofing, to restrict hours for students under a '2.0, and to have co-educational dorms.
Mr Brossman then proceeded to his second area of concern, a new health center.
This new structure should have a full time staff, a TV lounge area, a study area, flexible space which could be converted to meet the needs, and a pharmaceutical supply.
Other suggestions included a student liaison between the students and the classroom, a need for emergency facilities, and an opportunity for pre-med expei'ience.
This proposal contains the idea that classes should begin earlier, so that finals could be concluded before Christmas.
There would be a period devoted to reading for finals and an increased period for exams so that a student would not have more than one exam per day.
This proposal would allow classes to get out a week earlier in the summer also.
Many felt that the above proposal was good, but there were some additional ideas brought forth.
Perhaps we could consider a trimester system, coordinate vacations with other schools, attempt to find a method whereby the faculty could plan the scheduling of tests and exams to avoid the many conflicts which arise, and take an emphasis off the cut policy before and after vacation if not creating nn unlimited cut policy.
Benezet in the closing address stated that the students should become a more effective body in perpetuating action in these areas.
New we have the responsibility and privilege of attempting to solve them.
This is a challenge which can and must be met by the student body as a whole.
This was not, however, the final challenge which faced some of the participants at the conference.
This challenge was met and solved by connecting the spark plugs which had been disconnected during the conference.
The symptoms were clear, and the problem was met without much difficulty.
It is the hope of those who attended the conference that the problems which were brought forth can be dealt with in this manner.
Berlin in the short run and the cessation of atomic tests in the long run are the most urgent issues.
By virtue of their urgency, they ought to be settled now, and by virtue of their intrinsic natinp they can be settled now.
The cold war threatens to become hot because the unsolved political issues serve as a tangible focus upon which the fears and suspicions of the cold war can concentrate, seeking release in armed conflict.
Remove that focus by settling the political issues and the cold war is deprived of its tangible object, and there is no longer anything to fight about, ""Fear and suspicion there would still be, but of a different sort.
There would be fear and suspicion of ourselves, rather than of the other fellow.
We would fear lest our vision and ingenuity are not equal to the task upon whose achievement the fate of the world depends.
We would suspect that we might not possess the determination and courage the task required.
For the cold war would then have become completely what it has always been primarily; a contest between two conceptions of man, two principles of social and political organization, two visions of mankind's future.
It will be settled, after negotiations have done their work on the political plane, by the nobler and weightier act of performance.
The choir members have been preparing the music to be presented since last fall.
Mr Jenkins thus feels the group has a greater potential to present an enjoyable musical experience at each performance the tour.
Some of the finest choral works appropriate for the Lenten season have been selected.
The principal work is Handel's Utrecht Jubilate, written in celebration of the Peace of Utrecht which marked the end f the War of Spanish Succession.
This work includes an alto solo, sung by Cheryl Betts, a duet for 3 lto and baritone, sung by Cheryl Betts and John Giannis, a trio, sung by Cheryl Betts, John Giannis and Vera Olivier, a tenor, and several choruses.
An organist, Mr Ben Gayhart, from Colorado Springs, will travel with the choir as a special accompanist for this ffork.
Gibbons; Agnus Dei by Morley; (he traditional Easter Hymn, Christ the Lord Is Risen Today; a 17th Century German work, Ehre Sei Dir, Christe by Heinrich Schutz; a Welsh Carol, Now April Come; the traditional hymn, ;in My Soul; and an exciting Spiritual, Ezekiel Saw the Wheel.
One of the highlights of the ur will come when the choir presents a concert at Pomona College in Claremont, California.
Pomona, a small liberal arts school much like Colorado College extendthe invitation to Mr Jenkins last year when the tour choir was California.
The choir members will stay with the Pomona students in the dormitories.
Free :iiiie in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Salt Lake will afford a' welcome relief from the otherwise rigorous schedule.
Albuquerque, New Mexico MARCH 29— The Chandler Community Methodist Church.
Chandler, Arizona MARCH 30— The Pariah of Saint Augustine by the K ° ° m ol ° — v; •< P 7f O ad a o a b » g h CA, QSantt MARCH rational Church, APRIL ] Fin Congi ul Chu, I'liliful'I APRIL 2— The New Pilgrim Congregational Church, Oakland, California APRIL 3 — The First Methodist Church of Burlingome, Burlingarne.
PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER fredua oj J&Jfin* DUAL FILTER Tareyton 4] IS] March 23, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Phi Gams, Zetas Cop Opening Bouts Last Thursday on the 13th of March, the preliminary elimination bouts for intramural wrestling opened at Cossitt Hall with an assortment of matches and mismatches, which surprisingly saw the Phi Gams and Zetas dominate the field.
RUSS SPERRY foot-faults as he practices for the coming tennis Tennis Team Gets in Shape Under the competent coaching of Robert E Peterson the tennis team is slowly shaping into a cohesive unit.
What makes the tennis team's prospects particularly bright is the return of a number of good players from last year.
Among these are Russ Sperry, Rusty Bastedo, David Whiting, Jim Heiberger, Dale Shaw.
Notable among these are Alan Anisgard, who ,was all-state in tennis in Montana, and Tom Etheridge.
Coach Peterson ,is also hoping to have some mixed doubles this year utilizing the better female tennis players on campus.
In the five periods Dorsey seemed to show a superior comand of holds but Knapp's persistance and physical stamina were the deciding factors.
Ron Taylor in a series of unorthodox holds, notable of which were the ""body slam"" and ""the Arkansas hog flip,"" careened his way to a decisive victory over the game, but inexperienced, C o n a n Cantrwell . ,^57 lbs.
Dan Martin , in a 'closely contested match with Dbn' Kintz illustrated the illMffects of poor stamina and inexperience, when the latter eom^Jijjing irom behind pushed '"""" to a final period f)h""i. i 167\lbs.
Second West and Third West won through forfiets from First West and Fourth North.
Playoffs start this Saturday and will be completed before Spring vacation.
CC Skiers, WAA Sponsor Ski Races The CC Skiers and the Women's Athletic Association are co-sponsoring ski races, open to all CC students, this Sunday, March 25.
Classification will be held at 11:00m. and the races will begin at 2:00m.
The winners of the Women's division will contribute toward intermural standings.
For rides or riders, use the ride board on the Skiers Bulletin Board located in Rastall Center at the East end of the second floor hall.
The fine for dri wrong way on campus streets has been incr $5.00. ing the one-way eased to this maining periods. first brash spasm cost him the contest. v Unlimited.
The victorious Dan r ^ Kaltenbach in his oppon£ ent's words, , had everything in his favor but a) knowledge of wrestling holds.
I iplex there will be room for one of , the highl Y ght , bouts of ' the , UnlimiM , Jeff wiley (Ph i Gam indoor court, and tennis players Pvening . made j se i f /the -four ' l will be able to practice all year 'round, which has been a major problem before.
The club's hospitality will be extended to the 8 men who survive the cut.
V Pauls Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MEIrose 2-0164 Tonite Is Ladies Night At Rastall Games Area No men will be allowed in the Games Area in Rastall Center tonight from 7:30 to 9:30m.
Only the female population of the cam. pus will be admitted to bowl, p] av billiards, bridge, and ping-pong.
Tli er will also be Billiards instructed for interested in learning the basj principles of hhe game.
Schmitz, treasurer; Jean Torcum, social chairman; Alice Brooks, president; Glennie Eisele, junior representative; Carol Wright, corresponding secretary; and Mary Ellen Collier, recording secretary and Lani Maukisen, vice-president.
William E McMillen's voluntary directing class has chosen this poetic drama of the Nineties as its semester project.
Theodora Brodin, Joan Carter, and James Fox feel that to successfully express the dark, lent, twisted beauty of Allemonde and create the ""Belgian Shakespeare's"" earthly, personable characters will be an exciting challenge.
In Maeterlinck's fairy tale country, the bottom of the park's marble fountain ""is as deep as the sea,"" the grotto, ""full of blue darks,"" is formed ""with stalactites that look like plants and men,"" and the corridors, vaults, and towers of King Arkel's ancient, somber castle are very cold and without light.
Joan Carter's settings will be constructed by the stage hands of David Hale Hand.
All students are warmly invited to the 2:30 tryout this Saturday at Perkins Hall.
Several timorous maids, sharing an important scene in the last act, Golaud's son, a spoilt, perceptive weakling, and Arkel, the ten-year-old's blind, gloomy great grandfather are interesting minor parts.
Goluaud, the warrior and hunter, is an honest savage, ""made of iron and blood,"" and insensitive to the romantic excursions of his younger half-brother, Pelleas, a selfish, and eternally sad young prince.
Melisande, the tiny nymph who is the hypotenuse of the triangle cannot control her passion for the child-like brother of her bear-like husband.
The doomed lovers perish in their obsession, Genevieve, the rival's mother, sees life as an undistinguishing gray, resulting in a garrulous prattle, which continually verges on the mystical, quickly undercut by insipid, parenthetical remarks.
During this period all students are to meet with their faculty advisors to plan a schedule for the first semester of the 1962-63 academic year.
Students are advised to obtain their mid-semester grades from their faculty advisors during the week of April 9 and, at the same time, make appointments for pre-registration conferences.
The p're-registration card when completed should be promptly, returned to the Registrar's Office by the student.
Students may pre-register during the period, Monday, April 16, through Tuesday, May 1, without payment of a fee.
Students pre-registering during the last three days of the pre-registration period, Wednesday, May 2, Thursday, May 3, or Friday, May 4, will be required topay a fee of $3.00.
Students who do not preregister before May 4 will be required to pay a fee of $10.00.
Any students needing texthooks from the bookstore should purchase them by Monday, April 16.
Luck Will Be a Lady At 'Las Vegas Night' Crown and Lance is holding its sixth annual ""Vegas Nite"" in Install Center at S o'clock tomorrow night.
Candidates for Miss Lady Luck are Miss Susie Patterson, Alpha Phi; Miss Linda Hamilton, Gamma Phi Beta; Miss Nancy Schorling, Delta Gamma; Miss Molly Mac Namara, Kappa Alpha Theta; and Miss Glenne Eisele, Kappa Kappa Gamma.
A cultured pearl necklace will be given to the candidate who wins the title of Miss Lady Luck.
Among prizes for which Vegas Nite winners will bid at the end of the evening are sport shirts from Gano-Downs, a tennis racket from Elick's, a $10 gift certificate from the ""K"", and free dinners from various resturants around town.
All told, there are over $450 worth of prizes, many of which could not fit in the show cases in Rastall Center.
Thursday evening, April 12, the German Club held its fifth meeting of the year in the WES lounge.
The highlight of the program wias a film, ""Berlin, The City Which Everybody Loves,"" which described present-day life in Berlin.
Also shown was a short film entitled, ""Sports Events,"" after which refreshments were served.
The next and final meeting of the German Club for this school year will be the annual spring picnic, scheduled for May 6.
The Freshman Class is sponsoring a PIZZA SALE on Sundays April 15, 29 and May 13, from 4:30 to 9:00m.
Second in a series of three, the lecture will be presented free of charge in Shove Memorial Chapel.
Ellsworth Mason, librarian; Ann D Armstrong, student member of the faculty library committee; and Bradford Chase, vice pesident of the junior class.
Depending on the availability of steel racks for the four-level library, the tentative move is scheduled for May 16.
The move, to be carried out by the student body, is expected to take half a day with each student taking about 15 trips.
Glennie Eisele, Kappa Kappa Gamma; Lynn Hamilton, Gamma Phi Beta; Suiie Patterson, Alpha Phi; Nancy Schorling, Delta Gamma; and Molly MacNamara, Kappa Alpha Theta.
CC Professors Receive Grants Research grants have been awarded to twelve Colorado College professors in the past two weeks.
These were announced by Professor Carl Roberts, chairman of the psychology department and the Faculty Research Committee.
Professor Paul Bernard plans to go to Vienna to undertake a preliminary study of the reign of the Austrian Emperor Joseph I He expects this to be the first step in a major long-range research project.
Professor Brown has been invesResearch on a 14th century tigating the nature of the ndreno Middle English poem will take Professor Ross to London, Oxford, and Edinburgh.
Entitled ""On the Evil Times of Edward II,"" the poem exists in three manuscripts in the British Museum, the Bod* leian Library, and the National Library of Scotland.
Professor Snyder will undertake a study of programmed instruction for college general chemistry.
He is also studying the complex compounds formed between ions and tluoglycerol, a new compound which appears to bond strongly to metal ions to form color compounds.
He is being assisted in the project, which got under way last September, by Max Taylor, a junior.
Professor Kutsche plans to spend the summer checking over a bibliography of sources on the Eastern Cherokee, amassed by himself and several colleagues.
For more than a year, Professor Beidleman has been taking motion pictures in the held to analyze the social behavior of birds.
He hopes to colorband members of several species association groups to enable him -to analyze the position of each individual bird in the group and to see if the groups remain together ;is groups year after year.
English Professor Van Becker is planning to visit the Huntington Library at San Marino, California, to consult the Larpent Collection of Manuscripts of 18th Century Drama.
Professor Ornies is studying and mapping the locations of railroad grades in Colorado, eastern Utah and part of New Mexico as a follow-up to a book on other aspects of the railroad history of Colorado, scheduled for publication in June.
Professor William A FlBcher of the geology department, who will investigate the underground resources of tinPikes Peal< urea; Professor Louis G Geigur, chairman of the history department, who will conduct a historical study of liigher education in the Plains and Rocky Mountain stales; and Professor Glenn E Brooks of the political science department, who will study the way national civil defense policy is carried out on the Tuesday Lecture Features The Rev.
George Benigsen The lie M Benigsen, pastor of the Transfiguration of Christ Kasteru Orthodox Church in Denver, will discuss the ""Russian Icon, Us History and Meaning"" before a Colorado College student-faculty assembly in Perkins Hall at 11:00m.
He subsequently was ordained a priest in the Eastern Church, and came to the United States in 1950.
It should be de-emphasized because it has failed to show itself to be a meaningful aspect on campus, and it is becoming an economic drag.
Dean Juan Reid in an article ""That 'Big Game' Costs Big Money,"" showed that football in a business sense is pricing itself out of its market.
This situation has been created by ever-increasing costs, which keep coaches away from their other coaching assignments, and ""big time"" standards with only ""small time"" gate receipts.
Unfortunately Colorado College's geopraphic location isolates it from other colleges of its type, and the College has been forced to seek most of its competition with the state-supported schools in the same area, There seems to be no ready-made solution for Colorado College, except to continue to exert its influence on the other members of the Rocky Mountain Conference to adopt its own ""sanity code,"" and to seek non-conference competition with colleges of its own type and standards.
I feel that Dean Reid's stopgap solution is, however, only tenable if varsity football is an important factor of campus life that must be saved.
Here people might be thinking that I am trying to elevate the intellectual or the grind to pre-eminence on campus.
Quite to the contrary, I am interested in the well-rounded student, but the football player on this campus just doesn't lit this image.
In place of varsity football, we should have a strong emphasis on physical education, which will keep people from molding in the dorms.
That exercise through the vehicle of physical education is important enough to merit compulsory participation, is evident in that people in good physical condition work better.
Varsity sports on a liberal arts campus should only be as important as the students want it.
That this can be implemented is seen by the successful soccer team which was created and run by student interest alone. — Jaffe ASCC Constifuion Amendment Ed.
The Student Policy Commitee shall be composed of the Dean of Men and the Dean of Women acting as advisors, one member from the executive council acting as chairman, the presidents of the Associated Women Students, Honor Council, Interfraternity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, and Chairman of the Student Conduct Committee.
To formulate the non-academic policies and regulations of Colorado College. to review the policies and regulations of the Associated Women Students Judicial Board, Interfraternity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, and the Student Conduct Committee, or any related policy making group with the exception of Honor Council.
All non-academic policies and regulations of Colorado College pertaining to the student.
A list of the judicial bodies, the general areas of their jurisdiction, and a complete list of their members.
To meet at least once each month and consider, in addition to the above, effective means by which student social behavior could be improved.
The Executive Council shall have the power to veto any general non-academic policy or regulation, but not a regulation of the Associated Women Students Judicial Board, Interfrater> nity Council, Intrahall Council, Panhellenic Council, Honor Council, or any related policy-making group.
The President or Deans ot the College shall have veto power over any regulation of policy.
However, this particular Monday took second only to Eraser, Colo., as far as icy bitterness goes.
My eyes fell upon an ominous pile of textbooks, and immediately a wave of nausea covered me like a bag of dirty laundry.
To say that I was not eargerly anticipating the day's classes is to say that Attila the Hun was not primarily known for his Christian idealism.
I stood up (a Herculean feat in itself), and momentarily felt like six feet of lumpy oatmeal— not a pretty feeling, to be sure.
I plodded to the John, barefooted, in the hopes of stepping on broken glass but, regretably, the treacherous journey was completed in relative safety.
I brushed my teeth with Bay Rum, making my gums bleed in the process, washed my face with Ajax, dried myself with a heavily starched towel, and swallowed three asprin for the headache 1 had planned for 9:30.
I neglected to shave, figuring a large nose was better than none at all. 1 limped back to the bedroom, having left three quarters of an inch"" big toe on the lower left hand corner of the John door.
After downing two glasses of concentrated grapefruit juice, just to make me mean, I went forth to do battle with the rest of humanity.
This is simply to remind all seniors that the job information is still rolling in and that representatives are still asking to visit our campus.
Tuesday, April 17th ARMCO STEEL CORPORATION Interested in Engineering and Business Majors.
Specific questions should be directed to Mr Don Oden, acting on Placement.
The Religious Affairs Committee of the college wou like to point out to interested students and faculty the a rangements that are being made for this Easter time.
Although Friday, April 20, is Good Friday, there is of course no holiday on the campus.
However, as this is one of the most solemn, sacred days of the Christian year, there w{\ be a short period of quiet meditation and worship in the Pi] grim Chapel (the side chapel of Shove) on Friday at twelve noon.
This will be led by the minister of Shove Memorial Chapel, the Reverend Kenneth Burton.
On Easter Sunday, the Religous Affairs Committee is pleased to announce, there will be a corporate campus celebration of Holy Communion in the Chapel at f) So far as we know, this is the first time that a college celebration of Holy Communion will have been held in recent years in the college Chapel.
Bailey, an Episcopalian, and Mr Burton, a Congregational ist, will share in the conduct of this service.
For this occasion, it is hoped that the Liturgy for Holy Communion for the Church of South India will be used.
The Church of South India is the first Union in Protestant Church history of the Episcopalian and non-Episcopalian section of the Church.
This Liturgy is a very moving and wonderful one and combines many different church traditions, including that of the Mar Thoma Church which was traditionally founded by the Apostle Thomas.
It has also within it Episcopalian emphasis and reformed emphasis and some customs peculiar to the Church of India.
This ought to be a very significant ecumenial occasion for the Christian students on the Colorado College campus.
It is also hoped that this service will be enriched by some choral music and instrumental music.
The preacher will be the minister of the College Chapel, and the College Choir will help lead the Easter worship as they sing some great music of Easter praise.
It is hoped that many of the Colorado College students will avail themselves of this opportunity to worship at this, the greatest of Christian festivals.
Burton Sunday, April 15, is the Last Sunday of the Lenten season before the festival of Easter, and it is known in the Christian year as Palm Sunday.
This Sunday particularly commemorates the entry of Jesus with his disciples into Jerusalem for the week of his betrayal and death, culminating in the joy of the resurrection.
This sermon wishes to tell simply the story of Jesus coming into Jerusalem for the last time during his earthly life and to attempt to look at the significance of this event.
The sermon will look at the meaning of the original prophecy, Jesus' intention in using it, anil its meaning and significance for the crowd who killed him and for us who worship and inquire about him in the twentieth century.
As a ""nearby resident, and as an alumnus of Colorado College, I am dismayed to see the litter which abounds on the campus.
In the vicinity of Rastall Center there are bottles, cans, papers and cigarette butts ,by the thouands.
The authorities are not to blame for this situation, but only the students who should have, one would think, more pride in their college and its environment.
We try to do some education at the Junior and High School levels about beautification, but it hardly seems that is should be at the college level.
Aidan M Mullett The Friday Afternooi Club fill reconvene this afternoon n In Hub. rhe usual music Ml be on hand. but be pi epared for a surpr zes.
Rastall Cente Movii the Movie Co mpulsio ill br shown in Perki is Hal a 7 30 m. ( n April 15.
Miss Ellen Claydon of the Colorado College Spanish Department came up this week with some interestingthoughts on theories of literary criticism and literature of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
This approach has been applied chiefly to the Renaissance and que periods in literary hisperiods which formerly were not clearly differentiated.
In Spain, the span of time from 1516 to 1680 was simply called The Golden Age.
We now see two very different cultural atmospheres iluring the 10th and 17th centuries.
We have now ■ to realize that a high degree of ornamentation, lack of clarity, intense contrast and desequilibriconstituted an artistic theory which reflected the taste and feelings of the times.
We in the 20th century are much more capable uf accepting the desirability of this aesthetic as we we have de■eloped tastes similar to those of the 17th century.
Critics have been arguing it for centuries — as far back as the Middle Ages and certainly in the k and Roman cultures, although popularly the classic aesthetic is considered the onl y aesthetic of the Greco-Roman cultures.
Let us examine briefly and :ontrast of these two aesthetics on i very schematic level.
It proposes that man is perfect, or at least is apable of reachingperfection.
He s, after all, created after the image of God; he has a divine soul i approximates God's divinity; and he has been given intelliEven man's body is potentially a perfect, beautiful structure.
This attitude of acceptance and even ennoblement of man produces a serenity and an optimism We have only to look at a Renaissance painting to see this dearly.
There is a sense of balance, equilibrium, and serenity in ■ h a painting.
The human figure nearly perfect and so is the world in which he is pictured.
The artistic technique itself is conceived in the light of perfection, as formulas and theories are developed and written down which pretend to have worked out the perfect art form.
Weste m man rebels against a rational concept of himself and a restricof his creativity into rigid forms.
In the BatQ quo period, the principal conflict, due to the great religious druggies of the day, became sensuality versus spirituality.
It was ^ accepted fact that the only real id important thing in the life of man was the salvation of his ■soul, yet irrationaly, man could not avoid being a sensual being and thus enjoying the world and all its pleasures.
There was an intense concern with moral conduct, for while there was an accepted standard, one had only to look around to see that no one adhered to it.
The world was falling apart, for this was the period of the Thirty Years War in Germany in which nearly every European nation was participating and ill which situations of the most dreadful suffer-ing were visited upon mankind in the name of religion.
Kings and their courtiers lived in extreme luxury and selfindulgence while the populace was dying of starvation.
Man struggled to avoid viewing himself as an animal or a base being in spite of the reality which would convince him otherwise.
Sometimes he succeeded, other times he sank into a bitter cynicism which at least afforded him some defense against despair.
They manifest themselves in great contrasts among characters — the noble lord and the materialistic, sensula servant — in contrasts of ideals within the character — love versus loyalty and many others — in contrasts between tragedy and comedy within the same work.
They appear in the form of a multiple plot which produces confusion in the reader or the audience — the same confusion which life produced on those who live in the 17th century.
The artist may even take refuge from a depressing reality in an attitude of 'art for art's sake' where the content of his art is of no significance, but the art feeds on itself and becomes highly decorative.
CC's Russian Program To Expand Next Year Colorado College will broaden its Russian program in September by adding a course in intermediate Russian language and by extending the Russian history course to two semesters.
The two courses are not combined into an area study program; the history course will be offered by the history department, the language by the department of German and Russian.
Alexy N Malyshev, formerly a United States State Department and United Nations interpreter.
As the first full time instructor of Russian, Malyshev, who joined the faculty last fall, took the first step toward launching its first regular cirriculum in Russian literature and language.
Thomas Brandt, chairman of the German and Russian department, says that the college plans to offer a major in Russian within the next few years.
The first semester of the history course will trace the development of Russia from its beginnings to World War I The second semester will deal with prerevolutionary life, the revolution and the establishment of the Soviet regime.
Kahn, AID Robert Zimmerman, NSID If it does... you can win 4 four -piece place settings of your favorite sterling design by Gorham It's easy.
All you have to do is tell us in what order these ten lovely Gorham patterns appeal to you.
Then tear out this ad and mail it to us, with a short (25 words or less) statement about why your first choice is your favorite Gorham design.
If your taste matches that of the decorators, you may win a head start on a gracious home.
Conto st is open only o fomaio students attending the which ih s newspaper is published.
Entrl swill bo|udgod pr late no s, clarity and in agination of staten ont. fudges' doc Won will properly ol The Gorham Company, Providence, R |„ and no Duplicate prize awarded )t ties.
Mall ad and your statement to THE GORHAM COMPANY PROVIDENCE 7, RHODE ISLAND 6] April 13, 1962 ■ Colorado College Tiger SENIORS JERRY ROSENFELD AND ARCHIE PRESTAYKO around"" during Operation Ferdinand. spread it Automatic Retailers Grant Scholarships and Fellowships A broad educational program aimed at encouraging academic research at many levels in a rapidly growing segment of the American economy has been inaugurated by the Automatic Retailers of America Educational Foundation.
Foundation will grant to institutions of higher learning the privilege of publicly displaying rare historic American documents, being made available to the Foundation through the efforts of one of its trustees.
Six awards will be given for the best papers pertaining to the general topic of automatic mei chandising.
Any student, either graduate or undergraduate, in any college or university may participate.
First award will be of §1,000 and five Excellence awards of §200 each will be given for the next five best papers.
Deadline for entries is June 20, 1962, and winners will be announced prior to September 15, 1962.
These grants will be used for Automatic Retailers of America Education Foundation Scholarship Awards which will be given out at the discretion of recipient institutions.
The Foundation plans to award a limited number of fellowships up to $4,000 each per academic year for doctoral candidates.
Awards will be made to graduate students conducting research projects in* the field of automatic merchandising.
Research proposals may be submitted by any graduate student of a domestic or foreign university.
Applications for the academic year commencing September 1962 must be received by April 1, 1962, and announcements of grants will be made prior to May 15, 1962.
Details concerning this program may be obtained by writing to the Foundation, Suite 223, 1741 North Ivar Avenue, I.os Angeles 28, California.
Colleges or universities desiring information concerning the outstanding collection of American documents and artifacts available for display may also write to the Foundation for a synopsis of individual exhibits.
Among these exhibits are such prized items as personaL and official letters of American Presidents, as well as historic documents such as an Emancipation Proclamation signed by Abraham Lincoln.
CC Phi Delts Will Work At Child Day Care Center Sunday has been set aside by the Phi Delts as Community Service Day.
This is a specified day in which all chapters of Phi Delta Theta engage in a civic service on the local level.
In all, there are one hundred and eighteen other Phi Delt chapters participating in the Seventh Annual Community Service Day, working on behalf of some worthy and needy group in each chapter's borne city.
This year, the Phi Delts of Colorado Cnllege will work at the Colorado Springs Child Day Care Center.
The work will involve washing windows, repairing and painting toys, painting furniture, cabinets, window frames, and doors.
This also entails reconditioning and enlarging the parking lot by spreading sand.
This work was arranged "" for by co-chairmen Alex Johnson and Ed Lorson.
They will be on hand at eight-thrity Sunday morning to supervise the day's activities.
The Colorado Springs Child Day Care Center is a non-profit organization.
Its purpose is to care for children whose parents must work during the day.
Snyder Addresses IRG and Commitment By Dennis Faulk On Thursday, March 15th, in a joint meeting ""of the CC International Relations Club and Commitment, DU's Dr.
A Theoretical Study of ILS National Security Policy, and this spring, he will publish a second book, Stralcgy, Politics, and Defense Budgets.
Snyder began his remarks with the statement that there is little danger of immediate total war ... it is most likely to result from the escalation of a limited war.
He then went on to outline the ""Sword and Shield"" concept, the present NATO strategy.
The ""Shield"" acts as a trip-wire, triggering the ""Sword,"" which is the in ost effective deterrent-defense system we have.
He then proceeded to discuss in some detail the relative merits of the various alternative strategies which are under study.
The Florsheim Shoe Shop is pleased to announce that Mr Dave Lewis has been added to our sales staff.
Lincoln Bloomfield of M.I.T., Thomas Schilling and Morton Halperin of Harvard, Harold Stassen, William R Frye of the Christian Science Monitor, Walter Millis, Andrew Marshall of Rand Corp. tion, and others.
The Assembly's goal was a final report representing a consensus of student opinion on possible methods of implementing United States disarmament and arms control program.
Although this task filled twelve hours of small group discussions, formal addresses were given by Harold Stassen, Ernest Lefever of the Institute of Defense Analysis, and a panel of authorities.
The keynote address was delivered by Harold Stassen, former Governor of Minnesota, who served from 1055-58 with cabinet rank as special assistant on disarmament to President Eisenhower.
Looking at the objectives of United States policy, Mr Stassen maintained that pursuit of ""narrow nationalism"" or any goal short of concern for the future of all mankind's well being and freedom would fall short of America's basic ideological commitment toward man's fullest development.
In this context he examined various proposals for dealing with Russia in the nuclear age.
Forseeing the possibility of carefully controlled partial disarmament, Stassen advocated the establishment of two arms control zones, the realization of the second dependent upon success in the first.
United Nations inspection-detection stations would be installed and manned bv both the United States and U.S.S.R. and members of the United Nations No nuclear weapons and a reduction of armed forces and their armaments would be agreed upon.
Backing these controls, said Stassen, air inspection with open skies, aerial photography and ""efficient unfailing communications methods with inspection posts"" would l lc> established.
To be sure, this would be only a ""beginning of"" the begin, niilg"" in arms agreements, but for each nation it would be an important first step.
The geographic area would include a portion of the Ukraine, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Eastern Germany, portions of Denmark, West Germany and France, and all of Berlin.
With these two areas established, other zones, both geographic and substantive, could be established.
In short, Stassen, similar to other Assembly speakers, argued that small, seemingly immaterial gains must be realized before other more encompassing agreements are possible.
Supporting the possibility of these limited zoned agreements, he saw the 1957 disarmament talks plus his own personal experience with the Russians as good evidence of possible acceptance.
Such as agreement would not limit national security because of the possibility of continuing military activity in outside zones.
OUR TAILORED BATIK In a Batik jacket tailoring makes the difference, and ours are tailored with the sam workmanship you find in your better sportcoats.
Examinations for classes not included in this schedule should be arranged to suit convenience of students and instructors.
All Senior Grades Due at Noon June 2 — Saturday Final Examinations end June 3 — Sunday Baccalaureate June 4 — Monday Commencement Jtine 7 — Thursday All grades due in Registrar's Office by noon June 18 — Monday Registration for Summer SesPhi Beta Kappa h Initiate Apr.
The 18 seniors and two juniors who were recently elected to Phi Beta Kappa will receive their keys and membership certificates at the initiation ceremony being held at the Broadmoor on April 19.
Invitations for a dinner and the ceremony are being mailed to all Phi Beta Kappa members in this area.
Those who wish to attend mit have not received invitations are urged to contact Miss Amanda Ellis, chairman of the dinner, through the English department at Colorado College.
Officers of the Colorado College chapter of Phi Beta Kappa for 1961-62 are professor Glenn E Brooks of the political science department, president; Professor Thomas W Ross of the English department , vice-president; and Lorena Berger, secretary for the college, secretary-treasurer.
Other '""embers of the executive committee are Professor Kenneth J CurJan, chairman of the economics department, and Professor Frank A Krutzke, chairman of the English department.
Thorn Verhave, scientist at the Presbyterian Institute of Medical Sciences in San Francisco and formerly at Lilly Research Laboratories in Indianapolis, Indiana gave a series of talks recently at Colorado College.
Verhave has made significant contributions to psychology in the area of avoidance conditioning, but is more popularly known for his success with using pigeons as instruments for detecting defective capsules at Lilly.
Verhave's lecture at Perkins Hall on March 20th was his more recent work with ""values and preferences"" of pigeons.
In spite of his future plans to use human babies in experimentation, many students appeared to be skeptical of the application of information derived from ""pigeon"" experiments to human beings.
Verhave avoided making philosophical interpretations of ""dynamic equilibrium"" in human behavior.
Such statements would have been far removed from research psychology, but more important, such statements could never accurately describe the problems with which Dr.
Snyder presented the facts on each of these concepts, and noted the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Snyder maintained his personal view of favoring the ""limited retaliation"" strategy.
Essentially this calls for nuclear retaliation which is equal to the destructive yield of the first-strike.
It is felt that this slow motion total war would bring great pressure on the antagonistic powers to stop and negotiate the differences.
Snyder explained that this is by far the most feasible idea, especially in consideration of what he described as ""the declining credibility of United States taliation."" — DEF to assume that there are parallels between philosophical questions which have been asked for centuries about the ""nature of man"" and experimental questions asked in modern psychology.
Student applicants must submit a manuscript and recommendations from writing teachers to the Conference Committee.
High school teachers may apply on the recommendations of their principals.
The deadline is May 1, The Conference will take place in Boulder July 22 to August 10.
Six YRs Attend League Convention Six CC Young Republicans will attend the annual convention of the College Young Republican League of Colorado in Ft.
The CC delegation, led by CC YR Chairman, Jean Torcom, will nominate Charles White, CC freshman, for League office.
Among the events which will highlight the convention are an address by United States Rep.
Peter Domiriick. who has announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination for Senator from Colorado, discussions with candidates for most major office in Colorado, and the election of League officers.
Ol her CC delegates are Martn Phipp's, Bill Hunter, Kay Anderson, and Charles White.
This weekend a questionaire will he distributed to the students of Colorado College concerning the proposed ;S,2 beer parlor near the CC campus.
In order for the committee organized at the All College Conference to make a definite proposal to the administration and to obtain the necessary funds from private individuals, it in necessary that we Know the opinion of a representative group of students Therefore, regardless of your opinion, please fill out this tiuestiouniie and return it as directed.
Enthusiasm on the part of the student body is the major factor in promoting an affirmative response from ilte administration, and, therefore, the participation or every student at Colorado College is requested.
This is coupled with the fact that a nation's complex of weapons can no longer be fully disclosed through inspection.
Thus limited disarmament in Stassen's mind is more feasible in increasing the stability and security of nations.
However, he did not deny that even in a limited program risks are not involved.
The point which demands consideration here, however, is what will happen if, in fact, no agreement is reached.
Toward other proposed programs, Governor Stassen was articulate in his criticisms.
To those who argue ""no agreements with Russia are possible because of past history and ideological bipolarity,"" Stassen noted that in 1817 an arms control agreement was reached between America and England in an atmosphere of distrust.
Under the agreement, cancelation could come in six months; it never did.
To those who maintain Russia breaks agreements at will, Stassen recalled the Austrian and Finnish peaces, settlements in Iran, and acceptance of the United Nations charter.
Some theorize that internal explosions in Russian rule would result if exploited by external pressures.
To this analysis, Governor Stassen noted there is little historical evidence that Russia would yield under external pressure.
More serious, however, is the possibility that internal explosions might, in the end, involve the whole world.
Neither does he have any regard for the unilateral disarmament advocate.
To those who suggest Ghandi's approach, Stassen would only remind them of Tibet and Hungary.
Essentially, four approaches to arms control were suggested in the Assembly's panel addresses.
Addison Lanier, consultant to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Security Affairs; Walter Millis of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions; Thomas Schelling of the Center for Intcrnational Affairs at Harvard; and William It.
Mr Lanier criticized United States past proposals as but reshuffled rearrangements of prejudices.
Not only do we lack originality anil sincerity but today little effective governmental machinery is operational with all disarmament efforts being carried on outside the Departments of State and Defense.
Mr Lanier also suggested we would do well to look at arms control approaches as a national policy instead of approaching the question through a number of divergent, specific measures.
As presupposed, Mr Millis, approach to disarmament had not changed since his appearance at Colorado College, only his phrasing was different.
Maintaining that disarmament is not a practical goal, Mr Millis felt any conference, no matter how conclusive, will attain no desired objectives.
To be sure, however, disarmament is not ultimately impossible, but at present only a stabilization of forces is possible, and desirable.
For, before complete disarmament can be attained, ""demilitarization"" must accompany such a procedure.
He defined demilitarization as concerned with policy, power, and governmental relations.
Thus the danger in Millis' mind is the possibility of attaining control of weapons without demilitarization.
As we know, he regards waras obsolete and unrelated to the interest of today's states.
Thus he concluded that realistic proposals must be drawn in the contest of the cold war.
Schelling believed that a diplomacy in arms can be attained under which each nation stabilizes deterrent forces.
Call ME 3-0075 Radiator, Body & Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop E Bijou St.
Schelling's analysis was his assertion that even complete disarmament would not erase future redevelopment of weapons; knowledge cannot he destroyed short of universal brain surgery.
He also noted that, when a situation arises making negotiation possible, a dilemma also arises, that of whether to be accommodating or tough.
Schelling reached no conclusion on this point other than that one should be accommodating when the Russians are and likewise tough when they are.
It was left to the next speaker to analyze past approaches to agreement.
William R Frye has covered the United Nations for a decade; he has grown to know Soviet maneuvers as well as our own.
For example, he is critical of past United States maneuvers of making disarmament proposals with ""built-in jokers"" which make Russians agreement impossible.
Subsequent Russian denial of the proposal has meant they take the ""blame"" for the Cold War.
Frye also criticized not only our insincerity in negotiation, but also our lack of knowledge as to the implication of some United States policies.
If the Russians would have accepted we would have been deprived of any deterrent force in Europe against the Soviet Army.
Teach in Africa The Reverend John A Bailey is resigning his post as assistant professor of religion at Colorado College to accept a position on the faculty of St.
Bailey, an ordained Episcopal priest, is being sent to the interdenominational seminary by the American Episcopal Church.
Bailey, who will he one of two Americans on the faculty, says he is looking forward to the challenge in the three-year assignment.
WAGER, Own, Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 HIGHLIGHTING THE MILITARY BALL was the crowning of Miss Sharon Shacldeford as Honorary Lieutenant Colonel.
Jerry Northern crowns her as candidates Norma Parker, Bobbio Tolley, and Myrle Miller, and Colorado College President, Louis T, Beneiet, look onApplications Available for European Study Programs The application period for three 19H2-G3 European study programs offered by the Institute of European Studies will open April 2.
The programs, located in Vienna, Austria, Paris, France, an r d Freiburg, West Germany, are limited to undergraduates.
Classes are taught in German, and in English for those without facility in that language.
Three study trips, covering England, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, Italy, and Spain are included.
The program in Paris is an ""honors program"" limited to sophomores and juniors with some ability in French.
To sharpen this ability, intensive language sessions are conducted in Paris before classes open, Two study trips take students throughout the Low Countries, France and Italy.
German fluency is required for ""das Deutsche Jahr,"" the Institute's program in Freilburg, West Germany.
Students visit various cities and historical landmarks in West Germany, on an introductory ""field-study"" trip.
They are timed to occur during the normal vacation periods of European universities.
While in Europe, students live in private homes and dine either in Institute dining rooms or in student restaurants.
Costs including round-trip ocean transportation, tuition, room, board and study trips, range from about .$$2,000 to about $2,5500.
The Institute selects applicants for enrollment on the basis of their academic achievement, intellectual and emotional maturity, and recommendations by faculty members of the American college or university.
The Institute is a non-profit educational organization which had been conducting overseas study programs since 15*50.
Additional information can be obtained from the Institute of European Studies, 35 East Wacker Drive, Chicago 1, The choir was the guest of the Pomona College Glee Clubs whose director extended the invitation last year.
Mr Donald Jenkins, director of the Colorado College Chior, thanked the Pomona audience for their warm reception and invited their choir to sing here next year.
The program includes Renaissance motets, Easter carols, Spirituals, and works by Georg Schumann and Darius Milhaud.
The principal work is Handel's ""Utrecht Jubilate,"" a 20-minute cantata written in celebration of the ending of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1818.
The group went with the purpose of becoming better acquainted with the indigeious segment of America— the people and their way of life.
After packing an odd assortment of sleepingbags, cameras, lumpy laundry bags, groceries, and ten people into two cars and a Volkswagen, we left CC at 6:40 m, on Tuesday morning, March 2!), Members of the group were Or.
Paul Kutsche, Associate Professor of Sociology/Anthropology, Abiodun Afonja, Ann Armstrong, Jane Grothaus, Barbara Morgan, Phillips, Vijay Sampat, John Stickney, Joe Wilcox, and gurachit Wang-Lee.
Friday was spent in orientation sessions acquainting us with Navajo ■ustoms and tribal organizations.
Since we were unable to begin ■k until Monday, the weekend was spent in trips to surrounding places of interest, such as the Navajo Arts and Crafts Guild, Cross Canyon ruins, Canyon de Chelly (in the middle of whose river was celebrated Joe's bii-thday) the White House ruins, and Hubbell's Trading Post and Natural Bridge.
The major work project of the following week was going to individual homes and installing water storage units.
This consisted of building a stand for the water tank and sink and digging a ditch and large pit for the drainage pipe and barrel.
Tile trip was made especially interesting by coinciding with certain events and people.
We were lucky enough to be able to witness a Fire Dance and an all-night ceremonial held in order to cure a sick person.
We were also invited to a chapter meeting, a community meeting which is open to every member.
This particular meeting proved to be very exciting because of heated debate between the sawmille laborers and its Anglo manager.
The girls of the group had the opportunity to enrich their domestic skills by spending the afternoon in an Indian woman's home learning to grind corn and how to took traditional Navajo foods such as mush, mutton stew and fry bread.
All of the people that came into contact with the group were very interested in who we were and what we had come for.
A Navajo Ranger, Sam Begay, was also indispensable for sacrificing his precious time in order to show us around.
Half of the value of the work camp was the satisfaction derived from working as a group together, whether this was digging, cooking, or changing a flat tire.
Although Anne and Barbara were the unofficial head cooks, everyone took his part in cooking and cleaning UP. even Dr.
The meals were all very good — well planned and well prepared, even if put together in the back seat of a car.
We would never have been able to make lunches if it hadn't been for that five pound jar of peanut butter.
Group endeavor was always accompanied by singing; and due to our foreign student representation, one would be as likely to hear an African chant or an East Tndian song as anything else.
We realized what a different culture the Navajo have and therefore can more easily see the difficulties that will have to be overcome in order for them to gain a place for themselves in American life.
One of the most important things that we brought back with us is the knowledge that the Navajo are not an isolated and stagnant group of sudbued people, but are growing and developing constantly.
It is not as easy to determine what we took with us and left at the reservation.
This is due largely to the present trend towards education and consequent respect on the reservation for college students.
It is hoped that we left with the Indians a recognition of the fact that many young people in America are interested in them and in their welfare, and that we have contributed in some way, small as it may be, to establishing better relations and understanding between their culture and ours.
Jar Ave Joyc prominent British author and speaker, will address the International Relations Club at Colorado College on the subject, The United Nations in the 1%0's.
All interested persons on campus and in the community are cordially invited to attend.
Joyce is. a well-known educator, who has made many visits to the United States to lecture on world problems, British affairs, and legal and educational topics.
Final Session Held The tlii fol session to the 19(12 Symposium on ""War and Peace in the GO's"" was held on March 22nd in the WES Lounge.
The value and purpose of the Symposium was considered in light of what good it did for students beyond an attainment of personal knowledge on the problems and implications of the arms race.
The discussion was led by a four member panel comprised of Rusty Bastedo, John Levis, Stephanie Row, and Harris Sherman, moderator.
The concensus of the meeting seemed to be that students at Colorado College should make an effort to express their serious concern over crucial world problems.
But there was not a unanimous opinion of how this goal was to be achieved.
Generally, those in attendance felt one should first familiarize himself with the problem and then be prepared to support one view or another.
There seemed to be a call for more student participation in events such as debates, lectures, and demonstrations in which Colorado College lags far behind such schools as Antioch, Carleton, Grinnel, Harvard, Yale, and many others.
Some students pointed to campus issues that need to be accentuated, such as the validity of the KOTC program, the differences of opinion between the Young Democrats and Young Republicans, and others.
In conclusion, most students felt there was a great need to initiate student group which would solely tackle tlie problem of stirring up interest at the College not only on questions concerning nuclear war, but also underlying campus issues which need greater expression.
Area College Students Are Given Opportunity To Work in Election Six Rocky Mountain area college and university students will . have a chance to work side by side with the political pros in the coming Colorado election campaign.
The Rocky Mountain Center for Education in Politics is offering six internships worth $500 each, three for each major political party.
They are for students to spend 10 weeks working in state party headquarters or on the campaign trail with candidates.
In addition, two $4,000 fellowships are evailablc to law students, young instructors, nnd political science graduate students for an eight-month period beginning June 14.
The Center, formerly known as the Rocky Mountain Citizenship Clearing House, is supported by the Ford and Faulk Foundations.
The Citizenship Clearing House was organized nationally in 1947 and in this region in 1954.
Formed strictly on a bi-partisan basis, its goals are to improve understanding 1 of the American political process, encourage participation in political affairs, and raise the level of political education on American campuses.
Culni city, Ciiil. u 5 A April 13, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Phi Delts to Hold Turtle Race Sat.
Lynn Miller, Alpha Phi; Natalie Gee, Delta Gamma; Dee Dee Jones, Gamma Phi Beta; Nancy Petit, Kappa Alpha Theta; and Lynn O'Malley, Kappa Kappa On Wednesday night, the queens were invited to dinner at the Phi Delt House.
Tomorrow, the sororities, their queens, and their turtles will assemble at the Phi Delt House.
The sorority possessing the winning turtle is invited to attend a picnic with the Phi Delts following the race.
There will be dancing, an open house, and refreshments preceeding the race.
The Turtle Race is an annual event at the Phi Delt Chapters throughout the country.
More than 3,000 books were contributed to the sale, held in Bemis Hall on the college campus.
Louis T Benezet, president of the organization, said the bulk of the books were contributed by members.
All books not sold were to be given to the Veteran's Administration Hospital at Fort Lyons, Colo.
Mason talked about the college's new $1,250,000 Charles Learning Tutt Library, scheduled to open soon.
The tea and sale were organized jointly by the Project and Tea Committees of the WES, which has made many contributions to the college over the years.
ASGG Petitions Due Petitions for 1962-68 ASCC President are due Monday, April 16.
Candidates for president must be members of the junior class, have completed at least 80 semester hours, and have maintained a 2.00 average for the semester preceding the election.
Petitions for vice president, secretary, and treasurer are due April 20, and the election will be May 11 and 12.
Petitions for commissioners are due April 26 and the election will be May 17 and 18.
School of Mines, Golden 7^ PORTS Tournament of Cycles To Be Held April 28 This year's Tournament of Cycles, to be held on a p'aved course winding two and one half miles through the Garden of the Gods, is scheduled for April 28 as a part of the Parents' Weekend.
The event will consist of three races, the first of which is the Junkie Classic, open to all single speed bicycles including tandems and unicycles.
Following the classic will be a one lap race for bicycles with three speeds or less.
Highlighting the afternoon of racing will be a three lap, seven and one-half mile event, open 'to all cyclists.
The Tournament of Cycles has been sanctioned by the Colorado Springs Park and Recreation Department.
Results will be placed in the hands of the Bicycle Institute of America— the organization endorsing such contests.
There will be a meeting of all competitors in the WES lounge at 7:30m. on Tuesday, April 24.
The performance, sponsored by the CC French Club, is open to the public free of charge.
State College, Greeley April 16—3 Air Force Academy, AFA |— Doubleheaders '—Conference games t5 YPEWMTER IWMIV& > ZECHA & ADAMS CONOCO SERVICE STATION MEIroie 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre CC Tiger Trackmen Off to Fast Start The Tiger trackmen got off to a fast start in Rocky Mountain Conference track competition Saturday, March 24, by walloping all comers during the First Annual Invitational Meet in Steinhauer Fieldhouse at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden.
Colorado College nailed down 43% points for the meet, three points above the second-place contender, Colorado State College, with 40% points.
Also running were Adams State College with a final count of 29 and Colorado School of Mines with a 27-point tally.
In tagging the top spot at the meet, CC's trackmen placed first in five events and broke two Steinhauer Fieldhouse records and one Colorado College record in the process.
Vaulting Jim Blair of the Tigers sailed 13 feet, one-half inch to take first place in the pole vault, breaking the previous fieldhouse record of 12 feet, 8 and one-half inches set by himself and Jack Schwella of Colorado College.
Track Coach Frank Flood's crack athlete, Abiodun Afonja, nailed down the first place in the broad jump with a 20 foot, 10 and onehalf inch leap.
Bruce Boyd placed first in the shot put, slinging the iron 45 feet, SVj inches to break the old Colorado College record of 45 feet, S inches.
Another first place for the Tigers went to the eight-lap relay team of Bob Broyles, Dave Krell, Norm Liden and Dale Me Neal who made the run in 3 minutes, 45. seconds.
Contributing to the Tigers' total pointage were trackmen who placed in all but one event of Saturday's meet.
Ed Loosli tied with Colorado State College's Plummer for second in the high jump.
Taking second, third and fourth respectively in the two-mile run were CC's Tony McGinnis, Don Kintz, and Dave Smith.
DU here at Monday, AFA there at 3 Wedn day, and a doubleheader here Saturday against New Mex Highlanders in the morning a CSC in the afternoon.
On the weekr of March 24 and 25, they w, trampled by a local team wh included former national jun runner-up Doug Corley, a 1S„ CC grad, and Joe Moll, nunibej one in Sr.
Heiberger took a set fro Joe Moll, and Sperry went to 6-3, 6-2 loss to Corley.
After squeeking past lunct ' 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 in the first round, Sperry was thoroughly tromped by Gordon Davis, former ly no. behind Alex Olmedo at USC, 6-3, 6-2.
Bastedo and Sper then lost a close doubles, 6-3, 7-,, C-4, which put them out of tlip imnnament.
There are also plans for a mixed doubles exhibitioi match, to be followed by an allschool mixed doubles tournament in which everyone is urged to participate.
Any girls interested in the exhibition matches are urged to contact Mr Peterson at his office in Hayes House to arrange for partners and practice.
Club a short series of slides which he took last summer while he climbing in the Alps.
I Ettiel •fill ■lille lake <llg ; lorado College ado Springs, Colorado, April 20, 1962 Vol.
Conduct Committee Nominates Candidates The Student Conduct Committee will hold its election for the coming year this month.
Suzanne Armstrong, Nan Burroughs, Buffie Buffam, John Collins, Mike Diirfee, Steve Frink, Walter Hecox, John Levis, Matt Rilev, Stephanie Row, Jean Torcom, and Carol Wright.
The fhree CC Seniors given Fellowships Three of Colorado College's sen■ history majors have been rarded fellowships and scholarhips for graduate work in the ,j flcial sciences.
Recently ilected to Phi Beta Kappa, Beemer candidate for ""distinction in ilstory"" at Colorado College.
He member of Phi Delta Theta U|i raternity and has been on the lean's list several times.
Last sealie on, he won the Rocky Mountain jolf Championship for the college.
During her career at Colorado Allege, Miss Martin has been sectary of the Foreign Students jommittee and a member of the Jappa Kappa Gamma sorority, iheplans to enter the Master of (rts in Teaching History program o prepare to teach history on the school and junior college evels.
Hanks has received a fellowship Community Activities for ad;anced work in social science at lolorado State College.
Hanks is a member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity and the Blue Key rational honor fraternity at Colorado College where he was voted 'most valuablep layer"" on both she baseball and basketball teams eason.
Anthropologist Delivers Lecture 'Many modern anthropologists ieel that man is at a point in time shere it is possible for him to Wide hi s own future evolution, possible advantages to selec..human breeding are intriguing, but the inherent disadvantages are chilling and deserving of r keen awareness.
At 11:00, Tuesday, April 4, Professor Paul Kutsche of the department of sociology and _ an"" I'opology, will present his views this timely subject in an illustrated lecture entitled ""Man Himself,"" or ""Man's Hand Own Evolution."" ..iany interested people in the Allege community will remember Or.
Kutsche give his own answers to Dr. ;r*s views and will, in part, strong issue with them.
As a freshman at Colorado College, he was initiated into the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity, and ran for the Sophomore Class Commissioner.
As a sophomore, he served on the Winter Carnival steering committee, was social chairman of his fraterity, served on the ASCC social committee, participated in the Student Guide Service, and was on the Sophomore Nucleus Committee.
This year, Brad is vice-president of the Junior Class, and thus a member of ASCC, participates in the Student Guide Service, is chairman of the All-School Picnic, was co-chairman of the ""We Ain't Down Yet"" Hockey Rally, serves on the Constitution Committee, is co-chairman of the ASCC Social Committee, and chairman of the Election Committee.
ASCC Election Format The following is the format set up by the Eelection Committee for the forthcoming ASCC presidential election.
An assembly will be held on May 1, at which time the candidates will be introduced.
Each candidate .11 then speak for 10 or 15 minutes, followed by a speech by the present ASCC president, Chris Griffiths.
After their speeches, the candidates will stay in the halls to answer questions from interested parties.
From 4:00 to 5:30 on May 3, a coffee hour, sponsored by the Cultural Affairs Committee, will feature a moderated panel discussion.
The person asking a question will direct it to the individual candidate.
The campaign managers of the two presidential candidates, Bradford Chase and Max Power, are arranging meetings in the women's dorms, and scheduling one other event in which both candidates will participate.
SPANISH CLUB PARTY ANNOUNCEMENT On Sunday evening, April 22 in the Rastall Center dining room at 7:30 the Spanish Club of CC is giving a dinner-dance for all past and present Spanish students.
Spanish and Mexican speciality dishes will be served and a floor show of Spanish dances and songs will be given.
As a freshman at Colorado College, he served as the chairman of the CC Young Republicans, participated in the International Relations Club, and served on the Debate Team.
As a sophomore, Max served as chairman of the CC Young Republicans, was on the Debate Team, participated in Westminister Club, and was elected State Chairman of the College Young Republicans.
This year, he served as editor of the TIGER during the first semester, headed the Debate Team, participated in the Student Guide Service, served on the Symposium Committee, and on the Senior Council.
Mueller Receives NSF Fellowship Dennis C Mueller, a senior at Colorado College, has been awarded a National Science Foundation graduate fellowship for the 196263 academic year.
An economics major, Mueller plans to work toward a Ph.D and teach economics in a liberal arts college.
For two consecutive years, Mueller has been awarded the college's Perkins Prize for autstanding academic achievement.
A Barnes Chemistry Scholarship student throughout his career at liberal arts college, Mueller studied engineering and mathmatics before settling on economics.
Ronald Biondini, who plans to work toward a Ph.D in theoretical physics; Janet Fraser, who hopes to work toward a Ph.D to teach mathematics in college; and Karen Minn, who plans to undertake graduate work for teaching mathmatics in college.
All four of the CC seniors have been elected to Phi Beta Kappa, the honorary scholastic society, and all four plan to teach on the college level when they graduate.
The NSF graduate fellowships, recognized as one of the three major national fellowships in the country, were awarded to 1,760 students in America.
Miss Christine Mr Juan four seniors are Gordie Aamoth, President; Mariana Cogswell; Sue Holt; Tom Rivers; the four juniors are Anne Armstrong, Erv Hinds, Steve Lamb, and Leigh Rainey.
The faculty members on the committee Moon, dean Reid, dean Juhas, assistant Professor of Music, and Dr.
Briefly, the purpose of this committee is to handle any case of misconduct which occurs during the school year which brings discredit on the individual and/or the college.
What gives value to this committee is the fact that students have an opportunity to present their case and then be judged by a combination of students and faculty members.
The potential scope of this Committee makes it one of the most important student governing organizations on our campus.
Based on the fine work done this year, a great deal can be done to improve its functioning even more, as concerning student attitude and conduct. — Carol Wright.
The effectiveness of the Student Conduct Committee ' has been questioned because it deals with offenses only after they have occurred.
I believe the committee can and should serve a useful purpose; I would like to see it become a more preventive and more positive force. — Suzanne Armstrong.
The Student Conduct Committee can play an important part in providing a forum for student leadership and responsibility.
If elected, I would try always to consider the interests of the individual student without losing sight of the welfare of the whole college community. — Jean Torcum.
The changes on the CC campus' social life are destined to bring before the Student Conduct Committee a variety of cases that have been previously non-existent on the CC campus.
I believe that the Committee members' decision in these new cases must be firm, an accurate appraisal of both sides of the case, unswayed by the Administration's monotonous red tape, or influenced by the personalities of the individuals involved.
I should be pleased to serve the campus and work on the non-academic judicial body of our student government. — Steve Frink.
Since the Student Conduct Committe must set certain standards of conduct by which it can judge student behavior, it seems reasonable to me that the student body should consider the personal conduct of the candidates in choosing members of the committee because the candidate's personal stndards should be a good indication of what they consider proper and improper behavior.
I would Like to be considered for a position on this committee in this light and, if elected, will do my best to perform well. — Matt Railey.
Student conduct committee has a most difficult task — it must judge the behavior of students who have tremendously varying basis for their actions.
I recognize this problem, and would do my best to understand each student's action and reason for action. — Mike Durfee.
It is an honor and a privilege to be nominated to the Student Conduct Committee.
I realize the Easter Program CC Choir Shows Depth and Insight By Michael Grace Under the extremely talented and sensitive direction of Mr Jenkins, the CC Tour Choir, last Sunday in Shove, presented a concert of ""Sacred Music for the Easter Season,"" which truly showed depth and insight; into the material being performed.
Emphasis was placed where it ought to be — on the thoughtful interpretation of the music rather than on having a polished professional-like performance.
Yet I am by no means suggesting that there was anything sloppy about the presentation.
It is a precise alert choir, able to produce a good choral sound which is always fitting to the stylo of tlie music being sung.
For example, the slow tempo of Thomas Morley's ""Agnus Dei,"" , did not drag due to the rich choral sound and the effective use of dynamics.
Mr Jenkins managed to manipulate these dynamics and sounds to fit in with every element of the piece as they came, resulting in a beautiful performance which was over all too quickly.
Another high spot was ""Babylon,"" by Darius Milhaud, whose difficult and almost encophonus harmonies were ably handeled by Mr Jenkins and the choir.
The words, telling of the fall of the majestic city of Babylon, are well suited to the musical style, and the choir showed that it was well aware of this relationship in its majestice and convicted approach to the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic elements of the music.
Again, this pice showed the depth and sensitivity of Mr Jenkins' approach and the responsiveness of the choir to understand their conductor.
The only unfortunate part of the concert was that the largest and most ambitous effort of the choir ""The Utrecb Jubilate,"" by George Hande], (accompanied by Mr Ben Gehart on the organ), had to be sung from the choir loft for technical reasons, and some of the magnificense of the work was lost.
Generally, it did not demonstrate the strong conviction of the choir as did the rest of the program, probably due to the dificulty of projecting focused and delicate choral sound from the loft.
There is no more satisfying artistic experience than hearing a group of musicians dedicated to expressing the meaningful essence of the music being performed rather than appearing polished.
The latter often leads to brash impersonal results, while the CC Tour Choir projected sensitively a very meaningful program.
Honor Violation — On March 6, a first warning was issued for a violation of the Honor System, which occurred on March 1 in the Division of the Social Sciences. ttA* Official Colorado College Student Publication Blnnl Parry, Jim Fox.
Elsewhere in this week's TIGER is a formidable group of proposed changes in the ASCC Constitution.
These, coupled with the Student Policy Committee amendment and Social Coordinating Committee amendment of past weeks, and several additional changes to come, should effectively clear up the existing constitution.
Beyond this initial problem are others, including ambiguous wording in several sections, faulty or unrealistic delegation of responsibility, and lack of responsibility in certain areas.
The changes to be voted on next Monday (those found in the TIGER this week) have been drafted by Bill Greeley's Constitution Committee with these areas in mind.
Among the changes are shifts in responsibility among members of the Executive Council and the introduction of a budgeting clause.
It's housecleaning time on ASCC Executive Council too.— CEP HONOR COUNCIL ELECTEKS Max Power, ""63, and Ed DeGeorge, '64, were recently elected members of the Honor Council to fill vacancies occurring at (he start of the second semester.
The Honor Council is currently at work on its program of re-orientation of the student body.
PHOTOGRAPHIC EDITOR Applications are due May 2 for photographic editor of the campus publications.
NUGGEr There will be a meeting this afternoon at fivem. in the Nugget office for those students interested in working on the IWA Nugget.
Ed Note— The following changes in the ASCC Constitution will be voted on Monday.
Serve as the official representative of the student body and assume the broad responsibility of maintaining good public relations between the Executive Council and the student body, the administration, the faculty, and the community.
No change No change Omit from Section 3 and move to Section 4 Omit from Section 3 and move to Section 2 No change Be chairman of the Social Coordinating Committee of the Executive Council.
Be responsible for all ll|Hls cations concerning the Ilk When It's Muric It's Millers Miller Music Co.
Be responsible to present to the official campus newspaper at least once a month, or more often if necessary, a summary report of issues and decisions pertinent to the college community.
The Executive Council shall not budget funds to any organization which it does not officially recognize.
In order to be ■ccognized an organization shall submit its constitution and by-laws to its approval and the subsequent aprhe appropriation of funds shall be littec with approval of the Executive the Constitutional Com proval of the Executive Counci imistered by the Finance Coi Coi :il.
Amendments to this Constitution may be introduced by cil recommendations of the ASCC petition signed by twenty-five and action of the Executive Co 1 Constitutional Committee, members of each class.
Each member of the Executive Council shall serve on at least one committee and no member of the Executive Council shall concurrently serve on more than three committees.
All committee chairmen shall be appointed no later than the second meeting of the new Executive Council by the President of Ihe Executive Council.
If a member of the Executive Council misses more than three unexcused meetings duringhis term, his position shall be declared vacant by the Executive Council, and the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Article 1, Section 5, of the By-Laws.
A complete record of proposed amendments to the ASCC Constitution and By-Laws shall be kept in a permanent book in the ASCC file.
These amendments shall be accompanied by a record of the results of the voting for each proposed amendment and signed by the President and the Chairman of the Constitution Committee.
All proposed amendments to the ASCC Constitution and By-Laws shall be filed with the Secretary of the Executive Council.
A proposed amendment shall be presented before the Executive Council for first reading and shall be printed in the Tiger the Friday succeeding this reading.
The poem exists in three m scripts located in Cambridge, tbd Bodleian Library, and the National Library of Scotland.
The poem should throw soma light on the reign of Edward ]| and provide a better understanding of Middle English.
Shove Chapel Good Friday, April 20 — To provide a short period of quiet and devotion on this significant day, there will be a short service of meditation upon the Cross in the Pilgrim Chapel in Shove Chapel, This will be held at twelve noon and will be conducted by the minister of Shove Chapel.
Easter Sunday, April 22, 9 m . — An Easter celebration of Holy Communion will be held in the Pilgrim Chapel.
The Liturgy to be used is that of the Church of South India, incorporating many traditions of the Church Order.
Bailey and Mr Burton will share in the conduct of this service; and a special quartet of singers from the College Choir, directed by Mr Jenkins, will help lead this festival worship.
Bur Thi£ event of the resurrection is the cornerstone of the whole story of man's redemption by God through the person of His son Jesus Christ.
It is pivotal in that it tells us whether Christ's death and passion has meaning and significance or is nonsense being ""sound and fury"" signifying nothing.
This sermon expounds something of the significance of this great and good news which speaks of the triumph of lover over sin and hate, and life over death.
It will try to say that amidst the perplexities of life and the threat of meaninglessness there is meaning and significant direction for human life.
At this service of praise the College Choir will sing, directed by Mr Jenkins.
PICTURES The Nugget office will be open all day tomorrow for picture sale.
About two thousand pictures from the last few years of the yearbook will be sold for ten cents each.
SINCE 1 B7 2 SCHOOL AND OFFICE SUPPLIES out west rRIHTtHG & STATIONERY «0.
Directions; — The following exam is a comprehensive evaluation of your accumulated knowledge throughout four years of extensive, rigorous studying.
Preferably, it is to be taken in the presence of jovial, congenial company, one or more iced six-packs, and warm, soothing sunshine.
CU French Department Presents Rhinoceros By Jay Hemingway Inesco's RHINOCEROS is a difficult play to perform.
For that reason I am sympathetic with C.U.'s attempt at the production; a sympathy one hands out hesitantly (since it is maddening) to an infant making an effort to articulate.
C.U.'s Berenger, though occasionally in admirable company, fostered an inflexible pathetic' drone; that even in the final act when relief from his overbearing timidity is planned, he remained encrusted in effeminCol.
Perhaps he confused timidity with naivety (""authenticite"") the factor above all others that could have distinguished him from those who succumbed, and redeemed him from their fate.
Despite all of Berenger's (Ionesco) pathetic qualities and the absurdity of the setting, one does, as does Ionesco, sympathize with his agony, his awareness of bis incompatibility with the environment, and with the incontrolability of his definance of the evolutionary trend.
Mr Neely barely suggested the tragic authenticity; let Berenger ride as monotonous and ridiculous pathos.
Jean, Daisy, Le Vieux, Le Logician, and M Papillon should likewise be complimented.
Le Logicien dominated the scene through little if any fault of his own, since the part asks to be overplayed.
Instead of balancing his majestic hamuiiness with rapid conversation, Jean and Berenger, when noticed, seemed to be hesitantly awaiting their cues, as if unsure of what was to come.
Richard M Pearl of the Colorado College geology department has had his latest book.
The distinctive fea'ture of this book is that, in addition to telling about various rocks and minerals, it is the only book that describes three incidents of children making important discoveries in this field.
Thirteen of these books fall under the heading of tradebooks written for the general public.
He did his graduate work at Harvard and has been teaching here for 16 years.
CURRENT EVENTS The Current Events Disi group will deal with the topic of President Kennedy's program for medical care for the aged at its next meeting Tuesday, April 24th, at 4m. in Rastall Center.
This issue, which is now before Congress, envisages a program to help defray medical expenses, which will be handled through the present Social Security program, by raising the Social Security rates somewhat.
It is a very controversial program, and in particular, the American Medical Association is vigorously opposed to it.
It is hoped that at next Tuesday's discussion, both the pro and con points of view will be represented, and all interested students and faculty members are cordially invited to attend.
Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Crown § Lance the Independent Mens Association of Colorado College, wishes to thank the following Colorado Springs merchants for their generous help in making our annual Las Vegas Night a complete success.
Colorado Springs Symphony I mJ # I * * Conduct Committee Nominates Candidates during the metomorphic scene his ""barrissiments"" sounded more like ""gemissiments"" as though he really were ill.
Were it not for his high pitched scratchy voice Le Vieux Monsieur would have been more successful.
Besides Berenger's ineptness, this unnaturalness inhibited and slowed down the play.
Though avoided by the laudable efforts of M Papillon, Daisy, and Duard C.U.'s RHINOCEROS is spottily successful; that in itself being erroneous.
The quilted setting for Act I was refreshing in a quaint, unpressed Chagalian way.
Though as with a sigh of accomplishment the set designer's efforts ended there, and the sets for Acts II and III were, if anything, simple and functional.
The costumes were neither spectacular nor inoffensive, and properly so.
The only exception was the Logicien who may have appeared more absurd had his dress conformed with that of Le Vieux Monsieur.
The make-up on the other hand, of Le Vieux Monsieur and Jean was either crude or too damn casual.
Jean's metamorphosis while it could have been visually hysterical, seemed unnecessarily reserved and awkwardly allusive.
Poor timing between the two pianos hampered the somewhat romanticized second movement, and it was not until Babin rallied with some exceptionally clean-cut counterpoint in the third movement fugue that the evening began to seem worthwhile.
The strings performed their simple tasks adequately throughout the concerto.
The first of the four movements spent most of its time passing out solos all around the orchestra to a simple string accompaniment.
The whole effect was somewhat disjointed and monotonous due to the many repetitions of the melodic material.
The second movement held together a little better because of the persistent beat in the background, but it ran into troubles with the orchestra stumbling over itself in a gallant attempt to hang onto the tortuous rhythm.
The short nocturnal third movement attempted to relv on orchestral color for its appeal and would have become tedious if it had been any longer.
The fourth movement began with some busy-sounding but fairly obvious counterpoint.
An attempt toward the end to blend in some material from the third movement was rough and flared rather badly.
Throughout the concerto the writing for the two pianos was somewhat more interesting than most of the rest.
Unlvuaitr CLIP AND MAIL TO: UNITED AIR LINES EMPLOYMENT OFFICE, DENVER 7, COLORADO played a Brazilian Dance by Milhaud and an Italian Polka by Rachmaninoff.
The former is a stupid little piece with Latin rhythms and a melody, of sorts, in octaves.
The Rachmaninoff sounded like bad ragtime, with an oom-pah bass and melody in thirds.
The orchestra alone then played New Dance by Wallingford Riegger and Vienna Life by Johann Strauss.
The usual sore of concert humdrum was well performed except for some ragged entrances in the strings.
This performance was remarkably good on the whole, but suffered from occasional slippiness in the woodwind ensemble, unevenness in some of the string dynamics, substitution of a piano for the harp part, and too fast a tempo in the Finale.
The Committee arranges for all Tuesday morning assemblies during the year, plus additional programs; it takes care of publicity for these, and also introductions if necessary.
Person interested in doing publicity should apply; standard rates are paid for publicity work done.
The Committee will notify new members of their decision. job is an important one and that it necessitates an unbiased attitude and fair judgment.
If I am elected I shall fulfill these qualifications to the very best of my ability, and I have the time and the desire to serve in this office and see that decisions are made and carried out judiciously. — John Collins.
Although I have been at Colorado College for nearly two years and have had experience with student government, it is only recently that I have begun to be aware of the worth of self-governing bodies such as the Student Conduct Committee.
I feel the Committee to be a mark of maturity in its serious handling of student discipline.
Its power and responsibility draw much respect from the student body, and I am quite interested in keeping the Committee an alive and meaningful function of student government.
A mockery can easily be made of discipline, and I strongly warn myself against the danger of letting a body like the Committee de-energize and fall into misuse,— Stephanie Row.
As a member of the Committee on Undergraduate Life, I had the opportunity to discuss the importance and value of the Student Conduct Committee and to participate in the decision about its areas of jurisdiction.
The present members have made a good start in clarifying and defining the jurisdiction of the group and in publicizing the activities and decisions of the committee; I am interested in continuing their efforts.
The discipline of student conduct must be handled with maturity and fairness by fellow students.
The Student Conduct Committee is an integral and necessary part of our campus life, and it is, I feel, a special honor to be nominated for it.
The Committee is responsible for making broadminded and just decisions in the best interests of the student body.
If I am placed on this Committee, I shall strive to my utmost ability to be fair, thoughtful, and objective, and always to maintain the highest standards of which I am capable. — BurTie Buffum.
It jg the function of this organization to try, and, if necessary, mete-out punishment to fellow students accused of misconduct in the college community.
The member must be representative of the student body and must rise above personal fee]', ings if he is to function effectively.
The Student Conduct Committee has exhibited effective handling of various matters on our campus and must continue to be a responsible body.
The Student Conduct Committee must continue to exhibit effective handling f student conduct questions on out campus.
It is the intelligence and objectivity of decisions of tlie members of this committee that will determine the effectiveness of this group at CC. — John Levis.
The Student Conduct Committee is one of the best chances for students to show their responsibility and integrity.
Faced with the task of judging a fellow student, each member of the committee must lay aside any personal prejudices and base his decision on rational and impartial consideration of the facts.
Only when the committee makes this type of decisionwill its judgments be accepted by students, administration, and community alike as the work of a group of adults interested in the welfare of the college community. — Walt Hecox.
Parents' Weekend Committee Members of the student committee for Colorado College's fifth annual Parents' Weekend were announced Saturday.
Norman Whitney, a well known Quaker thinker and speaker, will give an informal talk on the Society of Friends at Rastall Center on Friday, April 20th at 8:00m.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE Colorado College Tiger • April 20, 1962 College Young Republican Convention Held at CSU By Marta Phipps At 1:00 on Friday afternoon, Colorado College's small ^legation to the convention of the League of College Young Republicans of Colorado piled in a car.
The delegates were jlax Power, who has acted as chairman of the League for the past year; Bill Hunter, chairman of the delegation and campaign manager; Kay Anderson; and Marta Phipps, candidate [or secretary of the League.
After a short intermission, the delegations headed for a dinin one of CSU's tremendous banquet halls.
We were very privileged to have as speaker Mr Peter Dominick, Republican hopeful for United States Senate.
After brief discussions with the many candidates for State and National offices who were present, the delegations returned to the motel, where they began holding caucuses.
It was a late night, and most of us didn't get to bed until 4:00 or later, but the caucuses seemed very successful , so none of us really minded the late hour.
Feeling little worse for the wear, began bright and early the following morning with coffee, centrated campaigning, and re coffee.
Committee reports were passed, the convention began work on ;ries of resolutions.
After a few well fought battles, it was lime for the meeting to recess for neon.
Mr Howard Probst, State RepresentaDavie Hammill, gubernatorial hopeful; and Mr Norman Enfield, candidate for State Treasnative of El Paso County.
Following a delicious meal and fascinating speeches, we resumed the meeting.
The resolution which had been on the floor when recessed was finally passed er a long drawn out fight.
Next the agenda was the selection of the outstanding College Young Republican and Outstanding College the League.
Percy Cambell of Western State College, and ViceChairman for the year was elected outstanding individual, and Colo"" State College was elected jnost outstanding College. ""or what everyone had been waiting for since we ived in Fort Collins— the election of officers.
Mr Keith Freeman from A.S.C., and past treasurer was elected vice chairman.
The first .ballot 'as almost an even split, with the Nominee having the most votes wly two ahead of the third.
On the second ballot, one of the deletions swung its vote, but the This Sunday, after the 11:00 service at Shove Chapel, Rastall Center Board cordially invites you l o come to a coffee in the study.
Riis coffee is to further unite the allege community on Easter Sunday and also to honor Dr.
Even though you may attend your **n church, we would like to entourage you to stop by for a cup B coffee.
According to convention rules, the third ballot included only the top two candidates.
In an almost uncontested election, Mr Bill Treverton of C.U. became treasurer.
After a standing ovation of thanks for the retiring officers, Ted Lupe officially closed the convention.
After promising support to the newly elected officers, and saying goodbye to many new and old friends, the Colorado College delegation headed for home.
It had been an experience which those of us who have never before attended will never forget.
And though the campaign was unsuccessful, we all felt that next year we would have tremendous support from many colleges.
All of us look forward to next year's convention with great expectation, and anticipate many opportunities to meet with and help all the members and officers of the League throughout the coming year. the Colorado Collegi ence department ha president of the Studies Association.
Wesley Posvar, chairman of the political science department at the United States Air Force Academy, president of the organization during the past year.
RASTALL CENTER BOARD Applications for committees for Rastall Center Board will be open from April 20, through April 27.
Housemother's Breakfast — Last Sunday, the Senior and Junior Panhellenic Councils joined forces to hold a breakfast for fraternity and sorority housemothers.
JOHN FARR, winner of the ""Las Vegas Night"" ca and Lynn Hamilton, Miss Lady Luck check on dealer Dr.
DUAL FILTER Tareyton rVw/urt of i/A J'fmAAijcan <JoC<ije£&-KirTwanu — rJt/Vtvax/ it TIGER CINDERMAN JACK SCHWELLA fli< CC in their victory over Western State.
Playing at third position is Jim Heiberger of Peoria, 111., a junior who is developing, after only two years of playing, into a good player.
Number four is Alan Anisgard, a freshman recently moved from Montana, where he was ranked third among the juniors.
Filling out the ladder at fifth and sixth positions are Dale Shaw, a junior from Greeley, and Harris Sherman, a junior from Denver.
All of these positions are tentative; as the season progresses the ladder is certain to change.
There are several players, notably Tom Etheridge, a freshman from El Paso, Tex., Dave Helms, a freshman from Leawood, Kans., and Bob Pittaway, a junior from Cambridge, Mass., who are pushing at the present ratings and who may move up as the season progresses.
Wednesday, CC played the Air Force Academy, and will have two matches tomorrow, Saturday; New Mexico Highlands in the morning and Colorado State College in the afternoon.
Both matches are at the Monument Park courts and spectators are welcome.
Defeats Mines The Colorado College golf team dominated by six freshmen defeated the Colorado School of Mines golf team 9% to % at the Broadmoor Golf Club last Friday.
Results of last Friday's match Schultz, Jim, tied McKennon Ciadahy and SchulU won the foursome Nichols.
Firmine, Rick, defeated Quick 2 and 1 Nichols and Firmine won the foursome J and 3.
The Tigers were only able to take three firsts— one of these was a disputed tie in the 440.
Four days later, however, Colorado College atoned for this lapse by romping over Western State.
In this effort, they were led by Ed Loosli with three first and Tony McGinnis with two.
Tony McGinnis is beginning to realize his potential as he took the one and two mile runs in 4:50 and 10:52. respectively.
He was followed closely across the wire in each of these races by Dave Smith.
CC had an impressive day in the field events as Jack Schwella took the pole vault, Dave Krell, the discuss, and Bruce Boyd, the broad jump, respectively.
Last year CC"" beat CSC by 9 points and the teams are about as evenly matched again this year; so it should certainly be worth coming out to see.
Final Plans Laid For Bike Tourney Colorado College's 1962 Tournament of Cycles, taking place at the Garden of the Gods April 28 will have several new features that should make it an even greater spectacle than last year's event.
This year an additional event has been added to include all bicycles with three-speeds or less ; this boosts the Tournament of Cycles to three races, the first intended for junkies , the second race for bicycles with three speeds or less, while the final event is open to all bicycles.
The first two events will be one-lap races over the two and one-half mile course, while the third will be a three-lap, seven and one-half mile race.
Beginning this year, the first two races will begin with special LeMans starts, in which the cyclists, lined up on the opposite side of the road from their bikes, will — at the drop of the flag — dash across the width of the road to their bicycles and begin the race.
Also added this year is an overall team prize, which will be awarded in addition to the individual winner's trophies; any campus organization or group of people may enter one or more three-man teams.
The winning team will be the team with the lowest number of points, and the points will be the sum of the numerical position in which each team member finishes.
Before each race, team members must identify themselves as such to the race registrars.
Each competitor should pay the 50 cent entry fee to the race registrar when the bicycle are lined up before an event.
The first race begins at 1:30 m, and a truck to carry competitors' bicycles to and from the Garden of the Gods will leave in front of Rastall at 12:30.
Also, some transportation will be furnished for spectators and competitors to and from the event.
The course will be described at the meeting for all competitors scheduled for 7:30 m„ April 24, in the WES room.
Those who plan to participate in the tournament are advised to register at the Rastall Center desk as soon as possible, since competitors in the first two races will be lined in the order of their registration.
STUDENT CONDUCT DECISION In the case of a girl taking s j]. verware from the dining room, ■ was decided that she will be re. quired to pay for the amount thai was taken.
These t\v boys have been placed on disciplinary probation until the end of the semester.
Disciplinary proha. tiou means that if they are in. volved in one more incident of inisconduct, they will automatically h L . suspended pending a hearing of the council.
Baseball Team Opens Schedule The Colorado College baseball team has wound up a heavy week of practice before starting the regular baseball schedule.
The Tigris opened their scheule against the Air Force Academy Falcons at Memorial Field on Wednesday April 18.
Coach Carle has been driving tho team all week because the players have had only a short week anil a half following spring vacation to prepare for the clash with the Falcons.
The Tigers will be at least two deep in every position, Carle said, and will stand five deep on the mound.
Pitchers : Barry Anthony, Jeff Sauer, Gary Sparkman, Alex Yankovitch, and Don Jorgensen.
Joe Berquist, Larry Bowman, Gus Hart, Reno Van Putten, and Farrell Thompson.
S NTRAMURAL Finally the complicated basketball situation in Slocum Hall has cleared.
Wednesday night fourth West and third South play for the championship, and the faculty and third North will play for third place.
These final matches were reached after a number of extremely close games.
Their success was largely attributable to their ability to bold Jim Hanks to 13 points.
On the issue of girls' dorm hours, Mr Power feels that ASCC should gather information from other schools that have made, or have tried to make adjustments, to see what their problems were, make certain that the girls themselves sincerely want revisions, build a sound proposition for revision, and carry it through to the Committee on Undergraduate Life and to the administration.
The problems and possibilities concerning the proposed 3. beer >r should also be investigated, the opinions of both students and ■ents should be considered, and way in which other schools have contended with this type of issue should he investigated.
To improve ASCC, Mr Power feels that a committee similar to the newly formed social coordinating committee should be created to coordinate non-social activities such as coffee hours and meetings with students who have attended of campus meetings.
Communications between ASCC and the student body could be improved by letting people know ■ho the chairmen of the various jmmittees are and how to get in touch with them and by more extensive coverage in the TIGER of ASCC meetings and important events going on in the committees.
ASCC, Mr Power feels, should take the responsibility to make the students more alive and alert — to build school spit-it.
This may be accomplished by holding pep rallies in support of the athletic teams, but more important, by making students aware of the growth of the school and the influence they have on the direction in which this growth will take.
This identifies the student body with the needs of CC — its objectives and where it is going.
On the the question of the place of athletics, Mr Power feels that they are an important part of the liberal arts atmosphere.
They are the basis for building a certain amount of school spirit, but care must be taken to see that CC'ers are not thrown into competition -with semi-professionals.
ALL STUDENTS interested in applying for Rastall Center committees should turn in applications by 5:00 today.
Marion McClaughry will be in charge of the coffee hours put on by the Cultural Affairs Committee; Dave Holdorf will be responsible for special events in the area of recreation and will also be in charge of the Rastall Center movies; Sue Moore will take charge of the craft shop and its activities.
There will be a Friday Afternoon Club this afternoon in the Hub at 4:45.
This is a special PAC for Parents' Weekend, so bring your folks and join the fun.
The constitution has been very effectively revised— now it's time to move.
Mr Chase firmly believes that the president should take stands on the various issues present now, and the ones that will come up next year.
By doing this, he feels people will either get behind him, or else get mad.
Mr Chase feels that a body similar to the Cabinet of the United States President would be a valuable addition to the workings of student government.
The people on this ""cabinet"" would have nothing other than this to do with ASCC, but would be representatives of the various factions of student thought on campus.
They would meet with Mr Chase say once a week, so that each would know what the other was doing.
In 1 this way, Mr Chase feels, communications between ASCC and the student would be greatly improved.
Also along the line of improvement of communications, Mr Chase would submit weekly reports to the TIGER, not only concerning what issues were being discussed, but also stating how he feels about these issues, and campus activity in general.
To sum up his feelings on other issues, Mr Chase feels that school and group' participation in off-campus events should be encouraged.
On the question of girls' dorm hours, Mr Chase wonders why, if they would like a senior honors dorm, the upperclasswomen in Loomis voted themselves off of the honor system.
He is definitely in favor of a 3. beer parlor, and doesn't see why it should detract from Rastall Center activities.
He feels that the activities of Rastall Center should all be coordinated under ASCC leadership.
Because of his experience, especially that in ASCC, Mr Chase feels he would be an effective leader.
Because of his experience on various committees, he knows whom he can count on to work.
Linda Rood Old Servant Lucy Smith Don't miss the Tournament of Cycles, Saturday, April 28, in the Garden of the Gods.
Two Servants Patricia Sohl, Susan Auer Physician , Henry English Above is the cast of The Experimental Theater's production of Pelleas and Melisande.
The older generation of wisdom with ""both feet on the ground,"" will be acted by Margaret Newman and Jay Heminway.
Linda Rood was cast as Yniold. the frightened little boy, full of dream and unexplainable anguish.
Lucy Smith, Patricia Sohl, and Susan Auer share a servant scene, objectively viewing the horrible events in Arkel's castle.
When Melisande has fulfilled her destiny, Henry English as the Physician announces her departure.
The Song Fest will be held tonight at 8:15 in Shove Memorial Chapel as a part of Parent's Weekend Song Fest will be held tonight at 8:15 in Shove Memorial Chapel as a part of Parent's Weekend activities.
This dance is designed to coincide with Parents' Weekend, and all parents will be welcome.
Highlights of the dance will be the tapping of 14 sophomores and juniors into Blue Key; and crowning of the queen who will reign Refreshments will be served, and dancing will be from 9 to 1.
Tickets are available from all Blue Key members and at the Rastall Center desk through Saturday afternoon.
Panhellenic The Colorado College Junior Panhellic has been reorganized for the second semester and is now composed of delegates from each of the new sorority pledge classes.
Debbie West, Delta Gamma, president; Bev Carrington, Kappa Alpha Theta, vicepresident; Jane Hilton, Gamma Phi Beta, secretary, . and Norma Parker, Kappa Kappa Gamma, treasurer.
The main purpose of Junior Panhellic is to foster cooperation among pledge classes through an exchange of ideas and suggestions.
It serves as a pledge counselling body and cooperates with Senior Panhellic in campus service.
Junior Panhellic plans an oncampus car wash for some weekend in the near future.
CC Hosts Open House For Parents Weekend By Jo Heller The student body, faculty, and administration wisli to extend a most sincere welcome to all the visitors attending the Fifth Annual Parents' Weekend.
It is our hope that these activities, supplemented by the numerous places of interest in and around Colorado Springs, will provide a most rewarding experience.
Scheduled activities will begin this afternoon with a formal open house for all from 3 to 5.
The dorms, fraternity houses and sorority houses will welcome your visit.
Parents are also cordially invited to attend the FAC at 4:46 in the Hub at Rastall Center.
If you don't know how to do the ""twist"" and the ""UT,"" or you have never seen the ""mashed potatoe,"" please come.
Friday evening, the Greek organizations on campus will participate in a songfest.
At 2:15 a hike will be led by Mr Ormes, the Slocum Hall Intramurals will begin, and the ""Tournament of Cycles and Junkie Classic"" will get underway.
The Parent, Faculty, Student Dinner will start the evening's activities at 6:15 in Rastall Center.
The best acts from the CC Variety Show will be repeated especially for our visitors in Perkins Hall at the dinner.
Everyone is also invited to attend the Blue Key Dance at 0:00 in Bemis-Taylor Dining Hall.
Perhaps the most memorable function during the weekend . will be the Sunday breakfast from 8-10 in the magnificent Garden of the Gods.
The Sunday morning service will be held at 11 in Shove Chapel as usual.
The registration desk also can provide the visitors with many suggestions of places to nee and things to do in Colorado Springs if the activities on campus don't occupy the time.
Art Students Take Honors Two art students from the Colorado College Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center Art School have been awarded prizes in the seventh annual Colorado Inter-collegiate Art Exhibit.
The ""Best of Show"" award went to Dean Byerly for his untitled steel sculpture.
This is the second successive year that a Colorado College-Fine Arts Center Art School student has won this award.
Byerly, a resident of Liberal, Kansas, has been studying at the Art Center for the past year.
It started with the intention of running a thud candidate for ASCC president, perhaps on a write-in campaign.
But this has been ruled unconstitutional, so a nucleus of the students involved is pressing for the formation of a college political party with specific proposals and candidates.
Perhaps this movement will wither from apathy, perhaps it will mushroom — it is too early to talk.
But such a political party would be a vital addition to campus government, and as such the TIGER welcomes it.
Less than five years ago CC had a party system in active student government — it died, not a violent death, but a gradual one.
The time is now ripe — during this spring's elections — for a resurrection.
The most obvious advantage would be a sounding board on campus affairs.
It is extremely difficult for members of ASCC to continuallv spawn new ideas concerning CC students.
Members of the ASCC Executive Council should be representatives of the student body.
However, in the past there have been very few interested (interested enough to voice opinions) students to turn to.
Attendance at class meetings and the regular Monday meetings of ASCC has been undeniably poor.
Only the freshmen (who have made an attempt at seeking participation in meetings) have met with acknowledgeable success — and here ... attendance is dwindling as the year progresses.
One interested party or group of students could do much to alleviate this vacuum of interest — two parties could eliminate it by providing effective presentation of differing views on vital questions to ASCC council members.
The second, and most important currently, would be the creation of interest in campus elections, and the drawing up of platforms for those elections.
They have also objected that neither Mr Power nor Mr Chase have made any specific proposals for next year.
And yet, the fault in this area lies mostly with the CC students and not with the candidates.
They were interested enough and had enough foresight to petition while the suggested candidates for writein did not.
But this sort of presentation cannot be very dynamic unless the candidates know what CC students want.
Hopefully a genuine interest in the campus rather than an underlying affinity for controversy at any cost is the basis for the recent interest.
Finance Committee The Finance Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council and the Treasurer of ASCC who hall serve as chairman.
The Finance Committee shall require itemized budgets from all student organizations that apply to the Executive Council for funds and which qualify for funds under Article IV Section 5 of the Constitution.
The primary consideration of the Finance Committee in their budget hearings shall be the number of students to be benefited by an appropriation.
The Publications Board shall be composed of . . . and the Editor and Business Manager or Co-Editors of the Kinnikinnik.
The Enthusiasm Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council; one who shall serve as chairman and the chairman of the Athletic Committee, a representative of Blue Kay. the presidents of the various Pep organizations (Black and Gold, Tiger Club, Tigerettes and Bengals) and the head cheerleader.
To act as a coordinating body for the various organizations represented on the committee.
To provide direction and incentive and the plan, as a committee, combined functions in which all or several pep organizations would participate.
To direct responsibility and encourage students to actively support any events that are designed to stimulate sudent interest, both wihin and outside the realm of athletics.
To form a Freshman Week Committee immediately after the election of the New Executive Council each Spring with the chairman of the Enthusiasm Committee presiding.
This committee will work with the Admissions Office and the Administraton of the College n setting up and varrying out the Freshman Orientation Week.
It will be the responsibility of this special committee to provide an agitation period after Orientation Week which will be under the direction of the Black & Gold and Tiger Club working in conjunction with the up per classmen and the sophomores.
To periodically re-examine the constitutions of the pep organizations under the jurisdiction of this committee as a means to see that these organizations are making a continual effort to function properly and to strive towards their desired objectives.
The Assemblies Committee shall be composed of three members from the faculty, on of which shall b a standing member from the Religion Department, six students-at-large, one member from the Rastall Center Board, and one member of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman.
Membership of the six students-at-large will be done through applications and selection will be at the discretion of the old committee.
One assembly each month shall be set aside for class meetings which will be at the discretion of the chairman.
The Communications Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman, the editor of the Tiger and one student-at-large chosen by the chairman.
To inform the student body at large about pertinent issues discussed in the Executive Council and faculty meetings.
To compile by the second week of May an annual summary report of the concerns and achievements of the various ASCC Committees and the accomplishments and direction taken by the Executive Council.
The Constitution Committee shall be composed of two members of the Executive Council, one who shall serve as chairman, the editor of the Tiger, and a member from each class.
The Student Academic Committee shall be composed of one member of the Executive Council who shall serve as chairman, one student member from each departmental division, one freshman and sophomore, and a member from the faculty curriculum committee, all of whom shall be chosen at the discretion of the chairman.
To serve as an intermediary body between the faculty and students to advise the faculty and administration about course programs which the students have constructively criticized.
No change To propject an interest to the student body on academic issues, keeping them correctly informed.
Shove Chapel Parents' Weekend Su day, April 29 'Mary — the Blessed Serm> Blessed Mother.
There will be a Parents' Weekend Service in Shove Chapel this coming Sunday morning.
The triumphant events of Easter are past, and the church has celebrated the victory over sin and death wrought by Jesus Christ.
In the figure of Mary, the mother of Jesus, we see an example of one who humbly lived by the Word of God spoken to her through her own Son.
On this Parents' Weekend, and with Mothers' Day fast approaching, it was thought appropriate to speak about the mother of Christ.
It appears to the preacher that certain serctions of the church have over-emphasized the importance of Mary, and that other sections of the church, in reaction to the former view, have not given her enough attention and importance.
She is an example to us of one who put first things first and of one who acted as an agent of the will of God in the world.
He was appointed for a one-year term at the 13th annual meeting of the conference held recently in Chicago.
He was a teacher and public school administrator in Illinois and San Francisco prior to joining the faculty at Colorado College as an assistant professor of education in 1951.
Art School and FAG Exhibit Student Work The Art School of Colorado College and the Fine Arts Center will exhibit current student works during the month of May.
May 3, 1 8:00 to 10:00 at the Fine Arts Center to which everyor invited.
In this exhibition, Colorado Coir lege has again won the best of show award in competition wit"" the 12 leading colleges and universities in the state.
CC won the top award last year when it submitted entries to the Intercoms' iate Exhibition for the first time.
This year Dean Byerly was gi ven the leading award for his sculpture, and Sally Snead won second prize in painting.
Countless others are the authors of articles in magazines, and scientific and scholarly journals.
The library has in its shelves nearly 70 books written by the 2f> members of the faculty ""and administration.
Six of these are by professors emeriti who spend a part of their time on the campus.
These will be among the 180.000 books scheduled to be moved into the college's new $1,250,000 Charles Learning Tutt Library in the near future.
Emeritus of physics Paul E Boucher, Prof Emeritus of political science Edith Brahall, Prof.
J Glenn Gray of the philosophy department, Assistant Librarian Alexander F Karoiyi, and Prof.
Emeritus of history Carroll B Malone, Librarian Ellsworth G Mason, Mr George Claremont Professor To Visit CG Campus Dr.
Robert Meyner, Associate Professor of Ethics at Claremont Men's College, California, will visit the Colorado College campus on Tuesday, May 1.
He has taken part extensively in a special study of the place of a College Church on the campus of the Pomona group of colleges, sponsored by the Danforth Foundation.
This book is a very exciting and stimulating discussion of this subject.
Room, Rastall Center; light refreshments will be served from 3:30 to 4:00m.
Body S Fender Repairing and Painting Becker's Radiator & Body Shop 16 E Bijou St.
International Bank To Be Discussed On Thursday, May 3rd, at 7:30 m., Mr Harold N Graves Jr., director of information for the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, will speak to the International Relations Club of Colorado College and all other interested students, faculty, and persons from the community.
He served on the staff of the LITERARY DIGEST and PATHFINDER Magazine, and in 1939 became director of the Princeton Listening Center, which was a project for the reception and analysis of foreign radio broadcasts.
From 1941 to 1943 he served as assistant to the director of the Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service of the Federal Communications Commission in Washington.
During the war, Mr Graves served with the United States Navy and was assigned to the Office of Strategic Services as an operational planning officer in Washington, Ceylon, and Thailand.
He joined the staff of the Bank in July 1950 and was appointed Director of Information on November 21 of that year.
The Intemational Bank, one of the^ specialized agencies of the United Nations, was organized in 1944.
Most of the nations of the world are members, and each member state subscribes to the stock of the Bank for an amount based on its wealth and trade.
The Bank loans funds for development and other projects in member states.
One example of a project using Bank funds is the Damodar Valley Corporation in India, a development similar to the TVA in this country.
This project has stimulated many kinds of private and local enterprise, and the new wealth it has created raises the living standards of large masses of people.
Last week's TIGER carried a review by Joseph Wilcox of the final symphony concert, with the well known pianists, Vronsky and Babin, as soloists.
I believe this review has limited validity, because the writer appears to be an extremist in matters of musical taste and judgment.
Secondly, Mr Wilcox gives his own, mostly negative account of the concert without reporting the very enthusiastic reaction of the audience.
Finally, I wish to emphasize that the tone of the review does not reflect the opinions and attitudes of the music faculty.
It reflects only the fact that we do believe in freedom of expression and that we welcome and encourage independent thinking.
Mr Wilcox is a junior music major with undeniable talent as a composer of experimental, ""avante garde"" tendencies.
His originality and intellectual independence are valuable assets for artistic selfexpression, but in my opinion limit his qualifications as a music critic.
He is forced to measure and evaluate by his own standards, with all his strong personal prejudices, likes and dislikes, which are rather unique; just as he is an intellectual artistic individual.
I have performed several times the Bach concerto with which the symphony program opened.
With the exception of a minor slip in the beginning (which can happen to every artist) I found the performance delightful and highly artistic.
Babin's concerto for two pianos and orchestra is, in my opinion a brilliantly written work with deep insight into this complicated medium.
It employs a moderately modern idiom, unmistakably contemporary, and very effective.
It is a composition which speaks to heart, soul and emotions rather than to the brain.
The result of the performance was a near-ovation for Mr Babin, something that does not happen often to contemporary composers.
Mr Eisenberg and the orchestra deserve much praise for staying together in the extremely difficult second movement.
During the past week a movement to run a write-in campaign for a third party in the election of ASCC president failed, not bocause enthusiasm and support were lacking, but because such a move is not sanctioned by the ASCC constitution.
This movement arose from the fnct that at Inst some students are trying to meet the problems of apathy and the lack of objective leadership on campus head on.
But ail that is spoken of above will fall by the way much like all previous talk of combating apathy and certain ""isolationist"" tendencies of various campus groups has fallen aside.
The solution lies in only one path, namely, to make ASCC the effective representative organ of the entire campus that it should and must be.
ASCC cannot do this without the support of and the recognition of its legitimate powers by all the various ""individual interest"" groups on campus.
But each group must be represented on ASCC and must therefore submit to the complete ruling of ASCC on all-campus matters.
First, there would be a total reorganization of ASCC to include more organizations on the campus.
Second, this would allow more divergent groups to meet an equal grounds to discuss common problems.
Lastly, the president of ASCC must .be recognized by the students and faculty and administration as the head of the student body.
It may be argued that certain changes in the ASCC constitution have laid the ground work for all that has been said above.
It will unfold all over campus because students are acting on what they say and feel, not just talking.
It is a complete lack of faith in democratic principles when only one man runs for the office of treasurer of the student body.
Let's get out and vote, but be sure you vote for the man of issues, the man of character, strength and leadership, not the man of face and charm.
Nothing can be done about the presidency, but be sure to follow through in the other positions.
Jim Knapp Dear Editor, This letter is to attempt to explain and clarify the happenings concerning the fact of Jim Knap'p's attempts to enter the ASCC presidential election.
The precise subject concerns the disunity and resulting limited interest In the college as a whole, and the possible solution of some of these limitations.
The term segregation may be used because of the apparent parallels of ignorance and bigotry which cause both racial and group differences.
On Sunday night a meeting was organized in order to initiate an understanding between several antagonistic individuals.
Present at the meeting were Myles Hopper, Harris Sherman, Mike Grace, John Stickney, John Simus, Wayne Deutscher, Jerry Hillhouse, and Al Church.
The meeting initially was to dispell some of the misunderstandings between the individuals and to create a common basis of communication.
As the meeting progressed and the individuals exuressed their personal opinions, it was clear that an understanding and a healthy respect for other views was reached.
The unanimity of feeling was astounding, particularly considering the preconceived ideas of the participants.
A true educational process and experience had taken place and the group began to feel that it might be to the good to have other such discussions to promote the understanding of opposing views.
The conclusion was that groups, whether loosely or tightly organized, were the main reason for segregation and restriction of communication.
The feeling was that these groups tended to think that they were more important than the college as a whole.
Thus antagonistic segregation occurs without either of the individuals attempting to understand one another.
The discussion next led to specifically how this spirit and interest in communication could be initiated.
An eventually proposed solution was to possibly run a candidate or candidates for ASCC positions.
These candidates would run on specific platforms which would cause discussion among individuals of divergent views.
Thus diverse campus factions would begin to understand one another more fully, and could begin to benefit from, rather than restrict, each other.
MHrote 3-1219 at Cache La Poudre GG Students Conduct State Political Survey Twenty Colorado College students are conducting a survey of the political history and of the attitude toward politics of elected county officials, state representatives, and county party chairmen in eight Colorado counties.
Working under the direction of political science professor, Glenn E Brooks, the CC students are interviewing officials in El Paso, Lincoln, Otero, Huerfano, Custer, Crowley, Teller, and Pueblo counties.
Colorado College is one of five colleges and universities in the state conducting the state-wide survey under the auspices of the Rocky Mountain Center for Education in Politics.
The survey is designed to provide political scientists with raw material for possible research, and to give the students experience in the field of practiced politics.
Colorado College students participating in the semester-long project are members of Professor Brooks' course in State and Local Goverment.
Results of the survey will be reported by Professor Brooks at the May 5 meeting of the Rocky Mountain Social Science Association at Ft.
The students are asking quest:ons concerning education, income, how interest in politics was developed, offices held, extent of political party activity, and future in politics.
The Colorado College students are working together in four and five-man teams.
Students in Custer and Crowley Counties are Jane Dawson, Gerald Dorsey, DeCourcey Graham, William B Greeley, II, and Traer Sulley.
In Otero and Huerfano Counties are Mary C Bardone, Nan B Burroughs, Sylvia J Buffam, and Mary E Jones.
The five students carrying out the study in Teller and Pueblo Counties are John Bluck, Rebecca Dunbar, Ann T Herlihy, William J Hybl, and John G Levity arrived at.
All the members of the discussion knew of him and therefore his name was presented as a dissenting or protest candidate.
The purpose was to create more interest in the election and thereby motivate differing individuals to discuss issues.
If his running or attempted write-in could or would not be successful in itself, at least it would arouse some interest and controversy moving towards campus unity. — Al Church.
International Settlements Through International Law By Max S Power Last Thursday night, Dr.
His talk, liberally interspersed with specific examples and even Biblical references, began by distinguishing two kinds of disputes.
Pointing out that law is the ""practical translation of the morals, customs, and experiences of human beings"" into workable principles, Dr.
He went on to say that a dispute involving both political and legal questions can be much more easily solved if the legal issues are settled first by legal means and the political issues are then solved by political means.
Larson contended that there are at least four reasons why this approach can be more effective.
The second reason is that a party certain of its legal rights in a dispute is not going to give in to political attempts to take away those rights.
The third reason is that negotiations over present rights will be more serious and productive because the parties realize that if the negotiations fail there will be an authoritative decision on the merits.
Larson went on to point out that we now have the building blocks of an international legal system.
The last of these is currently the object of much research on the part of Dr.
The second basis for international law is the machinery to apply that law.
Larson said that the International Court of Justice at the Hague presently provides that machinery.
It has 15 distinguished jurists, including many of the world's leading international lawyers.
Larson assured the audience that the influx of Communists on the court is negligible.
He contended that this is entirely possible and pointed to a number of historical examples to back up his statement.
In this area, Larson pointed out, many nations have not accepted the jurisdiction of the world court.
Larson launched on a convincing argument for the repeal of our Connally Ammendment.
Larson expressed the belief that, in addition to the acceptance of the World Court's jurisdiction, it is essential that all treaties include ""compromissory clauses""— clauses in which the parties to the treaty agree that disputes about the treaty will be referred to World Court.
Restaurant Motel de Ville 1411 South Nevada MEIrose 4-8848 Colorado Springs, Colo.
But actually, the operetta is a parody of English court life with its ridiculous etiquette, a title for everyone (""Lord High Everything Else"") and its outmoded laws.
It seems, however, that Yum-Yum is plighted to KoKo, albeit against her will.
As things begin to brighten, and it seems that Nanki-Poo and YumYum will be united, an ugly hag appears named Katisha (Edalyn Berger), who claims her ""purgeved lover,"" Nanki-Poo.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES EXPERT SERVICE ALL MAKES TOQ EAST PIKES «37 PEAK AVENUE Tigers Elect In a recent election, the members of Tiger Club chose those who will serve as officers for the coming year.
Gretchen Feroe, president; Buffie Buffum. vice-president; Kathy Berthrong, secretary; Karen Bessesen, treasurer; Nancy Bowers, publicity chairman; Nadine Chang, Tigerette liaison; Isabel Williams, Campus Chest chairman; and Matry Breternitz, order chairman.
To find out the ingenious end to this fast moving operetta, you may re-read a more complete synopsis, but we recommend attending the Fine Arts Center production, for synopses are not always to be trusted.
College Sociologist Granted $1,000 for Travel, Study Funds Professor Paul Kutsche of the Colorado College sociology and anthropology department has received a §1,000 grant from the American Philosophical Society.
The grant will be used for travel in compiling a complete annotated bibliography on the Cherokee Indians.
The American Philosophical grant supplements a faculty research grant given by Colorado College.
Previous to that he taught anthropology at Franklin and Marshall College, and was a newsman with United Press in London, England.
He earned his PhD at the Unievrsity of Pennsylvania and bachelor's and master's degrees at Harvard and Michigan.
Tournament of Cycles Saturday, April 28 Patronize TIGER Advertisers ALL TYPES ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 10% CASH AND CARRY 1171/, E..t Cell.
PURE WHITE -OUTER FILTER Product cf J&Ji/mx, DUAL FILTER Tareyton IS] April 27, 1962 • Colorado college Tiger Tiger Thinclads Travel to Golden For RMC Relays CC's trackmen make a hopeful bid for Conference honors Saturday as they travel to Golden to compete in the Rocky Mountain Relays.
Faced with strong teams from virtually every school in the Conference, Coach Frank Flood is placing his principal hopes in the Tigers' even distribution of overall strength, together with hoped-for victories in four crucial events.
In the field events, the shot-put and broad jump, he has highest hopes for victory'The shot-putter most likely to succeed will be Bruce Boyd, who has broken the school shot-put record at each of the last three meets, most recently with a cast of 46 ft, 8 in.
Abioden Afonja appears more than able to carry the day for CC in the broad jump, having already shown his mettle in previous meets, and Flood looks to Bob Bruce and senior Jim Blair for support in this event.
Blair seems likely to stand the Tigers in good stead in the high jump as well, where he will be vying with sophomore Ed Loosli and senior Farrell Thompson for top honors.
Loosli's efforts stand only 3/4 inch from the school record of 6 feet, 3/4 in.
Blair and Thompson join Jack Schwella in carrying CC's pole vault aspirations, and the discus throw sees Dave Krell, Bruce Boyd, and Dale McNeal seeking a triumph.
In the track events, the thinclads expect strongest performances in the 2-mile relay and distance medley.
In the latter freshman Tony McGinnis, whose endurance aided Tiger success in the past, will anchor the team of Peter Webster, Dave Smith, and freshman Bob Grant.
In the 2mile relay the possibilities for a CC victory are pretty good with the strong team of Mike Durfee, junior Pete Webster, Don Kintz, and Dale McNeal.
L^ l ^L To Slow Start In the championship game of the Slocum Hall basketball playoff, Third South managed a eomefrom-behind victory over Fourth West.
After trailing by as much as eight points in the third period Third South put on a fine offensive drive while at the same time virtually stopped their opponents from scoring.
In the consolation game, the faculty team had too much power for First West.
Broyles, Dave Krell, Liden, and McNeal will carry the mile relay baton.
Appearing optimistic for a good showing for his Tigers, Flood looks for particularly strong opposition from Colorado State and the Adams State Indians.
CC finished second by only 3 points last year in the Relays, and this year looks with a hopeful eye toward achieving a first place in the Golden sun.
MElrose 3-7472 Baseball has had a rather jolting beginning in CC this year.
Though playing reasonably well, the team has been unable to restrain the opposing teams from having that one big inning which has been enough to send us to defeat.
CC split a practice doubleheader with the State Penitentiary at Canon City — then in the first game of the season lost to the Air Force Academy at Memorial Field 15-4.
Barry Anthony was bombed out in the first inning when he met with a six run barrage.
Jeff Sauer replaced him and held the Air Force Academy pretty much in check until the eighth inning, when they exploded again for five more runs.
Still unable to find winning form, CC lost both ends of a double header to Colorado Mines up at Golden.
Don ojrgenson was met with what was becoming a perennial disastrous first inning as Mines scored six runs.
Barry Anthony pitched beautiful ball from there and CC began to score, but this was not enough to offset the first inning, and the final score read 8-5.
Jeff Sauer started the next game as if he wouldn't let Mines get a hit — by holding them hitless 'till the fifth inning.
But in the last two innings CC let in three unearned runs and lost again 3-2.
CC Tennis Team Sweeps Opponents The Colorado College tennis team swept a doubleheader from New Mexico Highlands and Colorado State College last Saturday for their first wins of the season.
In the morning's matches against New Mexico, CC went into the doubles on the short end of a 4-2 score.
However, the Tigers doubles teams of Sperry and Bastedo, Anisgard and Ethridge, and Heiberger and Sherman took all three doubles matches for a narrow 5-4 win.
The victory skein was added to on Monday as the Tigers defeated Fort Carson, losing only one of the matches played.
This weeks matches are against Regis on Friday and Colorado School of Mines on Saturday.
Both matches will be played on the Monument Volley courts, and spectators are welcome.
Golf Team Takes 2 of 3 Matches The Colorado College golf team, paced by captain Gordon Aamotli and his playing partner, Bruce McLaughlin, won two of three matches played over the weekend.
Gordon Aamoth led all players with a 75 as four Tigers broke 80 on the difficult mountain side course.
The win marked the first CC victory over a DU athletic team since 1959.
Tomorrow they take on the Air Force Academy and Regis College teams at the Eisenhower Golf Course in a triangular mateli on the Academy reservation, teeing off at 10:00m.
CC CYCLIST JOHN TARR blows off local competition in prepa for the ""Tournament of Cycles"" April 28.
Tacos & Pizza Colorado College Tiger • April 27, 1962 T uesday Assembly Platforms Presented During Presidential Election Assembly By Caroline Crcyke The candidates for the presidency of the Associated Students of Colorado College spoke to a meager gathering of CC itudents at an assembly Tuesday, May 1.
Chris Griffiths, current president of ASCC, outlined the duties of a president and suggested criterion to set up for determining the abilities of the candidates.
He stated that the presidency was largely an organizational position, therethe voters should consider the jlorado College Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 3, 1962 Vol.
The second duty of the president is to uphold and interpret the constitution.
This means that the president must be able to deal with the administration and be able to express his iiui ASCC's ideas aptly.
He concluded by summarizing the qualifications of Mr Power who served as Tiger editor for the first semester (which made him an K-officio member of ASCC), is presently serving' on the Honor Council, and has had extensive leadership experience in Colorado poical organizations.
In his introduction, Mr Power stated that ASCC will have a more direct influence on student life at CC because it can now function effectively as a legislative body.
A student policy committee will set up the regulations under which we will live.
In this statement he covered two areas; continued improvements inside ASCC, and activities outside ASCC proper.
A coordinating committee similar to the social one for non social activities.
Adopt a public relations outlook to make ASCC's activities and Powers better known.
This would delude making the functions and taads of the committees known ^d more comprehensive coverage the TIGER of ASCC activities M issues.
Propose that organizations such as Pan-Hel and the IFC seek ASCC endorsement support for feeir proposals.
The social coordinating committee and the problems connected with deferred rush.
The formation of a concrete proposal for liberalizing girls' dorm hours.
Better use of the pep clubs and the enthusiasm committee to help provide some of the support needed by the athletic tames.
ASCC must set objective goals so that the students will know what is expected of them.
Campaign manager, Bob Kendall, introduced Brad Chase by stating his qualification for tbe office.
Mr Chase has served on the social, constitution, and election committees of ASCC, and is presently serving as vice-president of his junior class.
As his introduction, Mr Chase proceeded to expand upon his experience and leadership qualities.
He has been connected with ASCC since his freshman year — through his experience on the various committees and as vice-president of the junior class.
He helped put together the Hockey Pep Rally and is presently involved in organizing the All School Picnic.
Through these various activities, Mr Chase feels he has established vital connections with the worker students.
CG Board of Trustees Re-Elects Officers Three Colorado businessmen have been re-elected as officers of the Colorado College Board of Trustees.
Re-elected at the board meeting here Saturday were Armin B Barney of Colorado Springs, chairman of the board; Gerald L Schlessman of Denver, vice chairman of the board; and Robert L Spurgeon of Colorado Springs, secretary of the board.
Barney, a member of the class of 1920, is president of the Colorado Springs National Bank.
He was secretary-treasurer of the Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind for 15 years.
A 1917 graduate from Colorado College, Schlessman is president of the Greeley Gas Company anil chairman of the board of the Silver State Savings and Loan Association.
Spurgeon, who earned a bachelor of arts degree in history at Colorado College in 1926, is a Colorado Springs lawyer.
German Club The German Club will hold its annual spring picnic on Sunday afternoon, May t>, at Austin Bluffs.
After an afternoon of soccer and other games, club members will elect officers for the coming year.
Brandt's house after the picnic for an evening of group singing and refreshments, RECENTLY TAPPED FOR BLUE KEY are Skip Meis, Jim Knapp, Norm Laurence, Bill Hyb, Matt Railey and Ed DeGeorge.
Max Power, Mike Durfee, Brad Chase Hank Rase, Steve Sabom, and Ben Lewis.
PICTURED ABOVE are Bill Stafford, r Nugget editor, and Bob Anton, business Blue Key Fraternity Taps 14 New Members Fourteen students at Colorado College have been initiated into the Blue Key, the men's national honorary and service fraternity.
The students, 10 juniors and four sophomores, were initiated at the annual Blue Key dance Saturday night during Parents Weekend at the independent college of arts and sciences.
Members must have a grade average above the all-men's average and must have demonstrated outstanding qualities of leadership on campus.
The new Blue Key members will help coordinate home-coming, take part in chapel, and welcome new male students at the beginning of each school year in September.
Henri A Meis, Jr., junior; Henry L Rase III, junior; Bradford Chase, junior; W Stephen Sabom, sophomore ; William Hybl, sophomore; Max Power, junior; Normand Laurence, junior; Edward J De George, sophomore ; Matt Railey, sophomore; Charles Bennet Lewis, junior; James Knapp, junior; Charles Puckett, junior; Michael Durfee, junior; and David Hite, junior.
During the dance, the queen for the forthcoming year, Miss Sarah Gruen, was crowned by last year's queen, Miss Isabel Williams.
Professor Carlton Gamer also attended the conference as a representative of the CC music faculty.
The Colorado Music History Conference is a yearly meeting at which students of music history from all over the state of Colorado read papers and have an opportunity to meet each other, as do faculty members from the various colleges and universities in the state.
Honor Council On Thursday, April 19, the Colorado College Honor Council issued a first warning for a violation occuring in the ROTC Department.
These slips will be ti"" \ 15"", and will bcur a number, such as ""U-17-5"" indicating the shelf in the new library on which this group of books will be placed when moved.
Those hooks may be checked out, hut please bring the slips to the Main Desk with the hook.
If the inn.li is used in the Library, please leave the slip in thy book while ng it. ;cently appointed 1962-63 nanagerContest Open To CC Poets A first prize of fifteen dollars and a second prize of five dollars are offered for the best poems submitted by undergraduates of Colorado College.
There are no restrictions as to the length, or tintype or the number of poems entered by each contestant.
Manuscripts must he typed, with the contestant's pen name appearing on each poem, and on the outside of the sealed envelope containing his or her poems.
Each contestant must ulso hand in n separate sealed envelope with his or her pen name on the outside and his or her identification on the inside.
These prizes were endowed by the late Reverend Albert P Bridges in memory of his wife.
Crown and Lance Extends Invitation Crown and Lance, the Independent Men's social organization on campus, extends an invitation to all unaffiliated men to attend their meeting on Monday night May 7, at 7:30m.
At this time, goals and activities for the coming year will be discussed.
Also final arrangements will be made for the low cost housing available to members.
The meeting will be held at the Crown and Lance House, 15 E Cache LaPoudre, across the street from Perkins Hall.
It seems that the hoped-for interest in CC's coming presidential election is virtually non-existant.
Power and Chase spent an hour in Perkins speaking about their qualifications and proposals, ending by asking that students with questions be at a meeting Tuesday evening.
Very few persons have told the candidates what they want — yet the interested students are making these statements.
Any CC student who neglects to vote because of this reason is merely showing his own lack of interest and energy.
There is still plenty of time to make a decision between Mr Power and Mr Chase.
Therefore we urge you to make a decision and vote — then, follow up by making your wishes known.
CEP Greek News Last Monday the Kappa Sigma Fraternity elected officers for the first semester next year.
Brad stated that through his experience, especially on the Hockey Rally, the social committee, and the All-School-Picnic, he has established connections with the administration.
Get the committees moving, with special emphasis towards the enthusiasm committee in order to get student interest up to where it should be.
Mr Chase feels that ASCC should stay out of the affairs of such organizations as IFC and Pan-Hel unless the support of ASCC is asked for.
Pressure should not be exerted upon these groups, but their policies should be supported.
Following the platform presentations was a brief question and answer period.
Seconding Mr Power's statement, Mr Chase added that next year the fraternities and sororities, because of deferred rush, are going to have to take a more active part in campus leadership next year.
The question of if and how the candidates intended to rectify the inconsistencies in the Honor Code, such as the class absence policy and late papers.
Mr Power answered by stating that you can carry the honor code to its logical extreme and maybe that is carrying it too far.
Mr Chase stated that he doesn't believe that there are that many inconsistencies and doesn't believe that the honor system should be carried to the extreme that the professors be expected to accept any and all excuses in these two areas.
He will preach in Shove Chapel on Sunday morning, address the All-College Assembly on Tuesday, and speak at various meetings.
He is well known as an ecumenical thinker to theologians throughout the world.
He is the author of several theological works and many artcles on social and intellectual issues, including a small book entitled ""The Doctor's Profession"", which is an examination of various ethical and intellectual problems confronting the Doctor in his professional life.
This was written after several years of discussion with groups of doctors in England, and it produced more discussion and controversy in certain medical journals than any other book that had been reviewed.
As secretary of the Christian Frontier Council, he is responsible for gathering together in London lay leaders from all varieties of religious faiths to discuss urgent contemporary issues.
This group Warder year; varsity basketball Phi Delta Thela Froternity ASCC Traffic Com Director, sophomoi Black and Gold 3.03 oge. -Nan Burroughs Candidate for ASCC secretory Home — Portoles, New Mex.
The following are a few quotations from a review by the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Phillip Noel Baker.
Though he writes as a Christian, Professor Jenkins can be profitably read— and should be — by any radically minded person with pretensions to an interesting contemporary society and politics.
The central theme, that ""Equality demands the pursuit of excellence for its full realization"" and that real equality means ""Equality in uniqueness' is argued with earnestness and depth, but also with clarity and humor.
It is discussed in relation to such eminently practical matters as rewards and re sibility in industry, incomes, ferentials, education, and class.
Not a book for the af fluent citizen who wants ""To en joy a quiet life when times an quiet"" but an important and ver; necessary book because, as Pro fessor Jenkins typically first as serts and then discusses, ""Our are not quiet times, Th the 1 threi fessc or r test enjo; His schedule follow > • — Terry Kidner Candidate for ASCC secretary Home— Alexandria, Va.
Alpha Lombdo Delia Sophomore: General Electric College Be Treasurer, Loomis Hall Copy Editor, ""Kinnikinnik' Sunday, May 6, 11:00m. worship Service, Shove Chapel 7:30m.
Jenkins will address himself to the question of the ture and meaning of highei education from a Christian point of view.
This is to be the theme of a responsible study carried out in Britian by the Christian Frontier Council under the auspices of the Nuffield Foundation.
Rumor has it that there will te yellow ribbons all over campus sometime today.
Don't be alarmed — congratulate the wearers — the)' are brand new Tiger Club mem bers.
I was not about to argue such emphatic and straightforward logic— you know, the better part of valor and all that.
Anyway, as a result of this layoff, my vending machine mind (obusly in need of repair) is ready to spew forth many gaily wrapped, ■hocolate covered ideas.
The spring heat may well have made some of them mushy but I really don't nd getting my fingers dirty, as they fit in so well with the decor y mind.
The recent campus political upheaval, wherein an unusually {urge group of liberals made exacttwo enemies and no friends; which only goes to show how much it is to upset the applecart of the status quo.
Maybe next 'ear some of the stray apples can be harvested earlier and put on market — they looked very tasty.
This question is only brought up in the wake of a slight trend in public on which indicates that a couple of campus social organizations might well have ""taken it in the ear"" during last week's musi1 judgment.
If you can answer this question and come up a suitable remedy for its disastrous results, please turn it into the class of '62 as soon before May 18 as possible.
If this time-honored procedure is actually protecting these ""Innocent, easily deluded, morally indiscriminate"" females, please let them know — some doubt has been cast upon their minds.
In regard to Professor Kutche's talk on human evolution on the 24th of last month: Professor Kutsche stressed the importance of cultural evolution, an important factor in man's evolution, although his example of cultural selection, though it started out as plausible, became rather far fetched in the end.
Any detrimental genes, such as those causing poor eyesight and hearing, are neutralized by therapy, such as glasses and hearing aids.
We don't know which way we want to move, for we don't know what constitutes genetic progress.
As one example of current natural selection, Kutsche mentioned that there were data indicating that arteriosclerosis and some kinds of heart disease were being selected against,, the reproductive rate of these individuals, on the average, was lower than that of the rest of the population.
But, Kutsche himself admitted that the theories drawn from these data were largely speculative, and that the data were inadequate.
Much more must be learned about the genetic and environmental sources of these diseases, Kutsche admitted, to bring the theories out of the realm of speculation.
Contrary to Kutsche, natural selection is NOT still going on in exactly the same way that it always has been.
Hereditary diseases, such as diabetes and phenylketonuria, a disease causing mental retardation, are on the increase.
Although cultural evolution, as Kutsche said, is extremely important, because of it, through the preservation of lives by modchampion of every 21 year old girl on this campus — may God have mercy on my soul.
I'm afraid that after the absorption of two or three pitchers, Harry High School and Joe College might not see eye to eye on various socially discussed topics.
But then again, a weekly all city gang fight might provide just the desired physical impetus that we need to eliminate the mandatory ROTC course.
I'll see you later ern medicine and welfare, many detrimental genes are being perpetuated and are building up in the population.
Ascording to Muller, data from studies on mice, Drisophila (fruit flies), and human inbreeding indicate that 20% of mankind carry a detrimental gene obtained from the previous generation.
Over successive generations, the buildup of these genes would be fantastic.
Any attempt to neutralize these detrimental genes by therapy, as Kutsche suggests, would be ultimately self-defeating, for the civilization would finally have to devote so much time and energy to the therapy of its genetically degenerate populace, that no time would be left for anything else.
Although the above data is much more adequate than that given by Kutsche, much more work needs to be done.
Our knowledge of this field is inadequate, but the statement that eugenists almost never admit this publicly is false.
As I read the literature on the subject, I came across many passages like the one below, by Muller.
This passage should also help to answer reasons 2 and 3 of Kutche's, given at the beginning of the article.
Granted that the social and biological dangers of genetic manipulation are great, and that our knowledge in the fields of genetic and supra-genetic evolution is presently inadequate.
But the dangers of no genetic manipISABEL WILLIAMS AND DON ODEN are pictured here slaves for the forthcoming Campus Chest Aucfions to bo Tuesday, May 8. training held on ulatiou are even greater, resulting in such things as genetic deterioration.
We know that genetically determined poor health, diabetes, and phenylketonuria are not genetic progress, and that genetically determined healthy bodies and intelligence, combined with virtue and social compatibility, is geneticprogress.
Morgenthau remarked during the recent symposium that most of the issues of today, political and otherwise, were far too technical and beyond the grasp of the man on the street.
Max CAMPUS CLASSICS SCENE II GENUINE BASS WEEJTJN Made the Indian way— soft leather extends across and under the foot.
Black or brown. ffinthrop styles from $8.95 / Fhrsheim Shoes Start at $19.95 ^□gxtsCqod 1 SOUTH TEION CORNER PIKES PEAK AVE. aside for the annual Campus Chest Auction to be held in Perkins Hall.
Each year the Tiger Club .sponsors this event at which time many of the administrative offices are sold to the highest bidders.
The money reeoived f nm i the auction is turned over to the ASCC, which in turn distributes it to various charities, Last year the proceeds went to such organizations as the American Red Cross, Cerebral Palsy, March of Dimes, Muscular Distrophy, Penrose Hospital, and Hope House.
Several p i o m i n e n ( figures around campus, as well ;is various queens who have reigned during the year, will he auctioned off as hashers.
New Tiger Club members will be on hand to usher at this fun and charitable occasiun.
Then' will be something for everyone, and all students, members of the faculty, and administration are invited to attend.
Two t e a c h e r h are urgently needed to teuch biology and French in the Oyo Baptist lioy'n High School, Oyo, Western Nigeria.
Applicants will he expected to sign a three-year contract with the school's mana«t>ment.
The contract could be extended at the end of the third year if the teacher deHires.
The Principal Oyo Baptist Boys' High School Olivet Heights, Oyo, Nigeria.
Sherbet ME 5-2740 College Tiger Expert on Latin America To Teach Summer Session Neither Castroism nor Communism explain all of Cuba's troubles according to Dr.
Lawrence Hill, an authority on Latin American affairs who will teach here during the 1962 summer session.
Hill suggested that Castro may even be ousted before the eight-week course begins June 18.
He traces Cuba's troubles back to her emergence Shorthand The Gregg Notehand course is listed in the schedule as Gregg Shorthand Simplified.
Gregg Notehand is not a course in vocational shorthand, but rather a course in notemaking, implemented by a short writing system based on the Gregg alphabet.
There are no dictation or words-a-minute objectives, and the course is not designed to train stenographers.
Its aim is to assist students to read and listen more intelligently and to make notes discriminate^ for furtnre study and other uses. as a nation.
Of the Kennedy program for economic cooperation with Latin America, Dr.
Hill said, ""The Alliance for Progress is a short step in the right direction.
Hill added that such leaders as former President Quadros of Brazil have advocated sensible tax and land reform programs which will be necessary for significant economic advances in any Latin American country.
Characterizations and Voices Highlight Opera Presentation By John Glannes Most outstanding in this weekend's Colorado Springs Opera Association production of Gilbert and Sullivan's THE MIKADO were the characterizations given by some of the singers.
Exceptional among these was Charles Johnson as Ko-Ko, who combined his fine voice and acrobatic talent to produce a very versatile and animated Lord High Executioner.
Edalyn Burger used her big voice and ease on the stage to give an entertainingly bloodthristy CC Receives NSF Grant REPRESENTING THE SONG FEST WINNERS are from left to right Horace Work, Madrigal Group — winner of the men's small group; Stephanie Row, Kappa Kappa Gamma — winner of the girl's large group; Song Fest Chairman Jerry Northern; Lynda Rood, Delta Gamma — winner of the girl's small group; and Don Lavers, Phi Delta Theta — winner of the men's large group.
Your parents have received letters and order blanks for these kits, which cost only two dollars.
Upon receiving their order, a survival kit will be delivered to you on May 27.
And, it's not too soon to be thinking of flowers for Mothei on Mother's Day — we will wire them to her.
Elstun's Flowers Colorado College has announced receipt of a $5,080 grant from the National Science Foundation for a general science In-Service Institute for Elementary School Teachers to be conducted here during the 1962-63 academic year, The institute will be one of three such programs under NSF sponsorship offered in the United States.
Some GO teachers from regional elementary schools are expected to be enrolled in the program which is expected to get underway next September 22.
This will be the third year that CC has offered an in-service institute to school teachers.
The teachers will be able to earn the credit hours in general science for one semester.
The course will be repeated during the second semester, but may not be taken for two semesters.
The elementary teachers will attend classroom lectures and discussions on Saturday mornings and participate in laboratory and field work in the afternoons.
The 14-week course will cover biology, meterology, astronomy, chemistry, and physics.
At the first session in each of the six fields of science, participants will receive a list of pertinent references, and they will be expected to do outside book and periodicial reading.
Elementary teachers in the area who are interested in enrolling in the course next fall may obtain further information by writing Professor Richard G, Beidleman at Colorado College, Colorado Springs.
When Ko-Ko and Katisha combined their talents on the son^ ""There is Beauty in the Bellow of the Blast"", they received a rousing personal ovation from the audience.
Characterizations rather less noteworthy were turned in by Eugene Me Cleary as an entertaining but stiff Mikado, and by Patricia Washburn as an overly cute Pitti-Sing.
CC was well represented by Ben Lyon as Pooh-Bah and Wallace Boyce as Pish-Tush.
Lyon seemed to be more in his element in this production than he was in GUYS AND DOLLS and his characterization improved 100% over his Sky Masterson.
Except for PoohBah's song ""Young Man Despair,"" there was little chance for Bar to show the audience his fine voice on the fast Gilbert and Sullivan pieces.
Although not the possessor of a fine singing voice Doctor Wallace Boyce of the French Department made Pish-Tush one of the most personable and believeable characters of the cast because of his facial expressions and relaxed stage presence.
The chorus and orchestra left somewhat more to be desired then did the main characters.
The chorus held a consistent tempo and had good pitch but could have sung louder in places.
Generally the chorus was convincing as ""Gentlemen of Japan"" in spite of some atrocious make-up and bungled movements.
The orchestra seemed at times, to be totally unaware of J Julius Baird's presence as theix conductor.
Sometimes this resulted in a syncopated rythm between instruments and singers, and sometimes in a syncopated orchestra.
This was a bit disturbing especially in the unison passages of the winds and strings, who were seldom together.
In spite of mistakes in the orchestra and some rather unusual tempi taken .by singers in the early stages of the performance, Dr.
Baird held the show together and should be complimented for his fine work, not only in this opera but also in the operas given earlier in the season.
It may be said for the technical production itself that the work was imaginative, yet practical.
The set, designed by Joe Deaderich, was easy to work with and captured the bright luminescence of color typical of a fine Japanese print.
Although all the costumes were good, two stood out as being exceptional.
The one for PoohBah, the most corrupt of all corruptable officials, and the one for Katisha, the ugly lady with the beautiful right elbow.
Edalyn Burger's staging was intricate and required a concentrated tuning from the performers, but they generally handled it well and it proved to be most effective and entertainingAs a whole, THE MIKADO will be listed as a success by this reviewer and gives a great deal of hope for the opera of the coming season, among which are CARMEN and MARTHA. . iorec ipon Brovi nam nen. struct fe' rde there rroup ind < there but t jre P Thf rith rhat [uncti bring ivould tress ften [rour. there 18 hi Crown and Lance wishes to thank the Kachina Lounge for their Las Vegas Night gift.
Colorado College Tiger • May 3, 1962 15] While working on a National Science Foundation-sponged project studying the effects of various social conditions upon the distribution of energy in the mouse, Dr.
Robert Z grown of the Colorado College zoology department observed many parallels between the social organization of mice and [lien. ■s,"" Brown said, ""and they are These include eating, sleeping, fighting (or raising families for females), building shelters, grooming, and snooping.
They solve iheir social problems .by fighting see who dominates the group.
Mice have a pyramidal social [fracture with one boss as the top, few middle-class straw-bosses jelow him, and below them a vast rde of common mice.
The males have nothing to do nth the rearing of the young. [hat is a completely feminine [unction.
Brown observed that when new groups are formed in his pens ■e is continual strife for about hours as they decide who is And aggressiveness, rather than size, usually is the most important factor in determining who becomes the leader.
Those who lose the fight, but ■scape with their lives become 'straw-bosses"" or peasants.
The 'straw-bosses"" like middle class aecutives, live in constant tur""Most of them are either on ;heir way up or on their way town,"" Brown said.
Their diet consists of a specially-prepared, nutritionally balanced pellet made expressly for He feeds them well with a purpose, for he is trying to determine how they spend the energy they take into their bodies in the form of food.
Basically the energy is used for producing work, gaining weight, or is passed off as waste.
Brown noted that the mouse who is destined to become the chief of his clan may have a lower metabolism than other mice.
He thinks this is because the potentially superior mouse has a more efficient body.
He hopes to find out how much energy each mouse burns under various kinds of conditions.
To do this, he measures the oxygen consumed by placing a mouse in a sealed chamber into which ordinary air is pumped at normal pressure.
He measures the air passing out of the chamber to see how much oxygen has been burned up by the mouse.
These joint awards are available for study in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Poland, Rumania, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela.
Travel-Only awards are available for study in Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, and The Netherlands.
A good academic record and a demonstrated capacity for independent study are also necessary.
Love is only one of the multitu'de of mysteries that decorate life, but it is one with far-reaching implications.
Even the greatest power of mind is not sufficient to sidestep the forceful drive of fate, and if it stings, an eternity of lifetime is necessary to cleanse the impression.
Robert Stabler, president of the Academy and chairman of the CC zoology department, scientists and science students from colleges, universities, and research laboratories throughout the two-state area will attend the meeting.
Students and faculty members from CC will present scientific papers before the anthropology, chemistry, plant science, and zoology sections.
Four papers by CC scientists will be read before the ehemismay write to the Information and try section.
Milton K Snyder, Division, Institute of associate professor of chemistry, Counseling International Educatio ond Avenue, New Yoi York.
Fare for the fiv hour trip will be $4.50, and will include some features not available to non-ticket-holding mo toreadors.
Any interested persons please contact Russ Sperry of the College Railroad Club before 6:00 m.
Sunday at the latest. the club's own open-end observaate professor of zoology, and Joan Jilka, a senior zoology major, will read a paper on ""Vegetable Studies on the 1969 Girl Scout Jamboree Site"" to the plant science section.
GANO DOWNS I'fl CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL iwiinniiiiiiiiiiiiuinwiiininniiiniiiii When It's Music It's Millers Miller Music Co.
This dofcat is not pleasant, regardless of the cause, and only a fool would commit adultery and invite the inevitable.
But, perhaps the individual that defies the social law is no more a fool than his conforming counterpart.
Passion and fate cannot be outwitted, for it is under the stress of love that ""reason"" flounders, loses its validity, and becomes an incomprehensible phenomena.
With the above elements in mind Maurice Maeterlinck wrote the play, Pelleas and Melisande.
He imposed a web of symbolism on a romantic theme, but rose above Romanticism, a literary movement which often swoons in its own delight.
Maeterlinck's tone and the mood it creates alienate the action from time, and external events need not be relevant to appreciate the universality of the play.
However, this other-world atmosphere offers a stubborn challenge to a prospective producer.
Influenced by Dante, Maeterlinck utiliz ed the famous Paolo-Francesca narrative from The Divine Comedy, and if the spectator devotes close attention to the play, explicit parallels are visible.
As Pelleas and Melisande opens the possibility of a disastrous love takes birth, and continually deepens until the final climax ia reached.
Pelleas and his siBter-in-law, Melisande, are driven towards each other, and all consideration for Pelleas' brother, Golaud, is ignored.
Their common source of love and light is symbolized by the sea, but already the water is gloomy.
Presently the sea is calm, but Pelleas envisons their destiny when he speaks of the storm that comes in at the end of each day.
And the play comes to its climax at ""Blind Man's Springs,"" where ""reason"" is shattered, clouds drift over the path of life, and living becomes a blind proposition.
Motivated by whimsical impulses, and a lack of seriousness in his attitude towards the journey of life, the defeat of Pelleas is final but not tragic.
However, as the dramatic narrative concludes, Golaud, an iron man of great physical stature, and Melisande, a young girl that might ""give God lessons in innocence,"" are both unable to save themselves from tragedy.
In Baseball By Jim Heckman Last week students had the unusual opportunity ot watching gangs of Slocum Hall men punching, tackling, and o-ouging each other while trying to move a pregnant-looking white canvas ball across manure-laden fields.
The technical name of this new, unruly sport is ""pushball,"" latest attempt by intramural manager Jim Hanks to revive the moribund Slocum Hall athletic competition.
The wild game, played by six men representing their respective wings, consists of moving the paunchy white ball toward the opponent's goal in an attempt to actually enter his goal, thus winning five points, or cross his goal line and score two points.
Theoretically, the sport has rules and referees; in actual practice, however, the law of the jungle prevails, especially in the immediate vicinity of the ball, where normally docile associates are suddenly transformed into rough-housing gorillas.
Successful teams have won by keeping the ball in the air, and on the ground the most successful maneuver has been to deploy half of the team in pushing the ball toward the goal while the other halfs pulls opponents from the ball.
All strategy, however, must be reinforced by a hustling group that is willing to lose.
The demanding game enervates even the best athletes — and these are few and far between in Slocum's intramural competition.
The semi-final upset to which I have previously referred came when a hustling First West team, playing without reserves, smashed a numerous and equally eager, if somewhat ruthless, squad from Fourth North.
First West, clearly not so confident as their opponents, managed to smash Fourth North's dreams of push-ball glory in a good exhibition of great-ape over rhinoceros.
Clearly I mean a combination of quick thinking and brute strength over brute strength alone.
Aamoth, four down after four holes, fired a two under par 34 on the back nine for a 1 up win over CU's number one man Bob Hammer and also gave him and his partner, Bruce McLaughlin, who won his individual match, a win in the foursome match.
Bob Magie, freshman from Duluth, Minnesota, playing in the sixth position, shot a 79 to defeat Mielenz of CU; while Rich Nichols' 77 gave them a halve in their foursome match.
On Saturday, the golf team played a triangular match against the Air Force Academy and Regis College at the Eisenhower golf course beating Regis 14% to ZVz and dropping a close IOV2 to IV2 decision to the AFA team.
Despite the fact it was the first time on the course for six freshmen members of our squad, the team shot consistent golf.
Magie finished with a perfect weekend by winning both of his individual matches from his AFA and Regis opponents.
Student Guide Service Opens Applications The Student Guide Service, a recent addition to Colorado College, announces that all people who are interested in joining submit applications which are available at the Rastall desk beginning today.
All applications will be considered and members selected from them by the Student Guide Service.
The purposes of the Student Guide is to act as official guide for the college and to assist the Administrations Office in showing prospective students around the campus.
The Guide Service plans to expand its activities into such areas as guiding for conventions, debates, and similiar events and hosting teams and receptions.
The hosts and hostesses for the President's Reception after Song Fest were student guides.
CC's on-again, off-again baseball team sandwiched two weekend wins into an otherwise gloomy week of play.
Tuesday the erratic nine alternated by dropping two to extremely strong Adams State.
Friday's Mines game fell apart almost before it got started, both teams indulging themselves generously in errors.
Mines accumulated 7 errors during the course of the game, but even here CC came in a close second.
It soon became a question of who could take the most advantage of naturally weak fielding.
The one bright spot in the CC effort was Don Jorgenson's brilliant pitching, as he held the admittedly somewhat inept Regis Raiders to one hit in the first game of a double bill, after relieving starter Gary Sparkman in the second inning.
Given this bulwark, it was relatively easy for the Tigers to take it, 4-0.
In the second game, junior Alex Yankovitch began for CC, but Coach Jerry Carle had to summon freshman Jeff Sauer when Yankovitch became erratic and the Raiders threatened to close a sixrun gap.
Strong pitching by reliever Sauer, combined with unusually good late-inning CC fielding, stemmed the tide of Regis' rally, and the Tigers went on to triumph, 8-5.
Tuesday proved to be less cheerful, as Adams State battered a sloppy CC team mercilessly, exploiting a glaring pitching and fielding weakness.
After sweeping through starter Don Jorgenson and reliever Alex Yankovitch in the disastrous fourth inning, the Indians' ten-run drive was finally smothered as Carle again called on freshman Sauer.
But the Indians went on to suffocate CC, 120, holding Carle's nine to two hits.
Chris Batley started what was to be an equally lopsided second game for the Tigers and fell prey to an eight-run Indian massacre in the second inning.
Once again it was Tiger fielding which tipped the balance in Adams State's favor, with a decisive helping hand from exceptionally able Indian flysnatching.
After a fifth inning rally, CC finally succumbed to the Redskin horde, 16-7.
As the season has progressed, it has become painfully apparent that unless Carle's Tigers can balance an extremely lopsided pitching staff and eliminate the fielding errors that have so far plagued the team, prospects are dismal indeed.
Tournament of Cycles Features Lower Times Warm sunshine, wind blown dust, exciting starts and photo finishes, and aching muscles made the 1962 Tournament of Cycles a thrilling event and a well-spent afternoon for both spectators and participants.
The Junkie Classic was handily won again by Gary Ziegler, repeating his first place finish last year.
In a seemingly effortless performance, Ziegler finished well ahead of the rest of the field.
In second place was Rory Weed, riding a ""junkie"" by anyone's standards.
The third ' finisher, Glen Foust, provided some excitement for the fans when, halfway around the IVz mile course, he slid on a fast turn, flew into the air, made a beautiful 4 point landing, recovered quickly, suffering only from well-skinned shins and elbow, and finished the race in good time.
In an uphill battle, Bud Mixon forged into the lead in the home stretch after following the pack most of the route to snag first place.
A last minute entry, Rob Pittaway, followed close behind Bud and finished second.
Right behind Rob was Russ Sperry to grab a very respectable third place in a hard-fought race.
The last race, for eight to fifteen speed bicycles, was undoubtedly the most interesting.
The field passed the starting line three times in the IVi mile course, and each time a different cyclist led the pack.
On the first lap Jerry Macon set a new course record with a blazing 7:12 for 2V 2 miles.
In the final lap John Tarr took over the lead and kept it to cross the finish line in first place.
Second place was not decided until the last few yards, a few seconds later.
Mark Stetson, last year's first place winner, took second by a wheel from Bruce Colvin.
The remaining entries were well strung out except for 8th finisher Dan Martin, who caught a second wind and zoomed past Evan Heckel just at the finish line.
A special award went to Kathy Murphy for her resolute attempt and for being the only female entry to complete the race.
Make-up drill for ROTC drill abscences will be conducted at 0700 hours on the eleventh and eighteenth of May.
All cadets who have drill ah. scences are strongly urged to take advantage of the earliest possible make-up drill date in order that an incompleted grade will not he submitted for the semester.
Tigers Nab Second As Bears Triumph In Golden Relays Before the RMC relay Coach Flood asserted that a little luck CC had a good chance of copping the meet.
However, the luck didn't come as Colorado State College swept seven of the twelve events to repeat as Conference Champions.
The Tigers took first place in the distance medley with the team of Bob Grant, Weinster, Dave Smith, and Tony McGinnis.
They further showed their power in the distances by winning the mile relay in 3:28.8.
This relay team made up of Bob Broyles, Krell, Norm Liden, and Dale Mc Neal.
However, there is still time before the RMC Championships for CC to catch up and surpass the Bears.
Even after this diappointing showing, our own track team is better than in past year e t, >etwei tt rith £ he be shen looks tyle.
Activities will begin Tuesday veiling, May 15 at 7m. when lastall Center will sponsor ""The brothers Karamazov"" in Perkins Jail.
Immediately following the novie, at 8:30m., Sloeum Hall ;ill sponsor a street dance in their arking lot.
The Astronauts, a flpular band from Boulder, will irovide music for dancing.
Wednesday morning, after spell awakenings in the dorms, a md will play during breakfast, md afterwards everyone will go to Coburn to begin the movng promptly at 8 a-m.
As students carry their loads, band will play on the lawn «tween the libraries.
Hopefully, sith all students participating, all books can be moved by noon i the All-School Picnic will beon the lawn behind Perkins.
Each shelf in the Library is marked with a distive number, and each unit of iooks in Coburn is marked with 3rresponding number on a 15"" slip placed in the first flok of the unit.
These numbers gnate, first, the floor number f the new Library, second, the number on that floor, and hird, the shelf number on that inge.
Thus B-l-1 designates the lasement, range number 1, shelf ber 1; and a number such as -147-6 designates the Third floor, ange number 147, shelf number ,s therefore possible to move he books from Coburn at random, long as they are moved in units, md have them land on the proper helf in the new Library.
Directional signs *ill lead students from these pickup points into the new Library by Bttier the front or rear entrance, depending on which part of Coburn is being moved, and to the floor corresponding to the numbering on the nuit of books being carried.
The books will be carried to the range corresponding to this number, and left to be loaded on the shelf.
Heavier materials, such as periodicals, newspapers, documents and special collections will be moved by a professional moving company beginning on May 17th.
Library operations will be discontinued at 4:00m. on Tuesday, May 15th.
Reserve books may be charged out at 3m. on that day, and will be due at 8:15m. on May 17th.
The Charles Learning Tutt Library will begin operations at 7 :45m. on May 17th.
The collection will be split between the two buildings for about a week until the collateral material can be brought over to join the books, but the Library staff will get from Coburn any books that are needed.
Young Republicans Elect New Officers The CC Young Republicans have recently elected their new officers for the 1962-63 academic year.
Chairman, Bill Hunter Vice Chairman, Nancy Shoup Secretary, Marta Phipps Treasurer, Kay Anderson.
The group is looking forward to a very important year, as it is a campaign year.
Although interest in the club has lagged, it is hoped that, due to the importance of the coming months, many Republicans on the campus will lend their support to the candidates for state and national office.
The group will be attending many rallies and speeches in the near future.
Anyone interested in the activities or projects of the group are urged to contact Marta Phipps, ext.6.
Street Dance Slocum Hall is sponsoring a street dance in the Slocum parking lot on Tuesday from 8:30 to 11:00 The Astronauts from Boulder will provide music.
Rossiter is director of studies on American communism and consultant for the Fund for the Republic, and has served as a member of the Rockefeller Committee on Legal and Political Philosophy.
He is also the author of many books and articles, and is the editor of a series of books on ""Communism in American Life,"" sponsored by the Fund for the Republic.
The Colorado College Community LIBRARY MOVING DAY is one of the historic events in the life of any college.
At Carleton, DePauw, Marietta and sev. eral other institutions during the past decade students, faculty and administration joined together to carry the volumes from the old building to the new.
A few administrators confessed they had not been so deep into the library for years.
At Colorado College we have the double challenge of a library collection larger than those at the other colleges and a new building which soon may be called the most striking and best-designed small-college library in America, fhe faculty have responded by cancelling classes May 16 and pledging their own portership.
Louis T Benezet Fine Arts Week To Begin Sunday Fine Arts Week will begin Sunday, May 13, and go through Friday, May 18.
The week is planned to give special attention to music, drama, art, and literature, with representation from other related fields, such as anthropology.
Thomas W Ross and Harris Sherman, who will play clarinet and violin duets of selections from the works of Bela Bartok and Mozart.
That evening, at 7:30m. in the W.E.S. room, the Experimental Theatre will present three one-act plays, under the direction of James Fox.
Monday, May 14, at 4:15m. in the north patio the Colorado College Woodwind group will give a concert.
Clinton Rossiter will speak on the American tradition with regard to the new age.
Tuesdav, May 15, at 4:15, the CC band' will play in the north patio of Rastall Center.
At 7:10 m., in Perkins Hall, the movie ""The Brothers Karamazov"" will be shown.
People are urged to attend this and then go on to the Slocum Hall Street Dance.
This is the film which stars Yul Brynner, Maria Schell, Lee J Cobb, and William Shattner.
No events for Fine Arts Week are scheduled for Wednesday, May 1G, because of the All-School Picnic and book-moving day.
Thursday, May 17, Mr Racey will give readings in poetry ""From Wyatt t Corso"" at 4:00m. in the W.E.S. room at Rastall, in conjunction with a coffee hour.
All day long, in the south patio of Rastall Center, there will be a student sculpture show.
Fine Arts Week will conclude Election News The candidates for the office of vice-president of ASCC are Jim Knapp, John Lewis, and Steve Sabom.
Running for the office of secretary are Nan Burroughs, Diane Johnston and Terry Kidner.
The two candidates for the office of treasurer are Bill Hybl and Steve Frink.
The election for these offices is being held Thursday and Friday, May 10 and 11.
Running for senior commissioner are Peigi Benham, Kathy Bruce, Pal Chapman, Norm Laurance, Ben Lewis, Buzz Poe, Don Wolfgang, and Alex Yankovich; for junior class commissioner are Chris Battley, Chuck Deaver, Ed DeGeorge, Dave Holdorf, Al Loosli, Bill Pelz, and Boots Stockton; for sophomore commissioner are Mike Emmett, Dave Helms, Jo Heller.
Rossiter is n fellow in the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, an honorary member of the American Antiquarian Society, former president of the Statler Club at Cornell, and is n member of the Century Association and the Sigma Phi.
W Lewis Abbott and friends of the college in honor of her husband, a professor of business, economics, and sociology at the college from 19:20 to 1949. on Friday, May 18, with an afternoon music hour in the Hub for which Abiodun Afonja will play African music.
Everyone is invited to as many events as possible during Fine Arts Week.
Programs will be distributed this weekend and there will be publicity about the various events.
The final day of Fine Arts Week, the ""Kinnikinnilc"" will be distributed.
Student Conduct A case involving three girls and three boys who were drinking in a fraternity man's room was brought before the Committee.
In the case of the boys, the Committee followed the action taken by the fraternity.
These boys were placed on social probation which means no attendance of fraternity functions.
The girls were prohibited to attend any of that fraternity's functions and their own sorority's scheduled social events.
If there is any violation of misconduct or of these penalties they will be automatically suspended from school pending a hearing of the Student Conduct Committee.
BUSINESS STAFF Marker DAYIDHITE Printed Friday* by PEERLESS PRINTING CO., Colorado Sprir.
Thereforecongratulations to Mr Power and congratulations to the student body for voting.
CEP Music Department Presents Recital The college music department announces the first of two student recitals for Wednesday, May 16, at 8m. in Perkins Hall.
Three advanced piano students, two string; groups, and a woodwind ensemble will be featured on this program.
Jane Humphrey, a freshman from Mullen, Nebraska, will perform two Intermezzi and one Capriccio by Brahms; and Barbara Couey, a sophomore from Trinidad, Colorado, will be heard in the first movement of Schumann's Piano Concerto in A minor, with Mr Lanner contributing the orchestra part on the second piano.
It will be of special interest to the audience that, with the exception of Miss Perry, the string and woodwind ensembles are made up entirely of non-music students.
The first string group will open the program wtih the first movement of Haydn's quartet in G Major, op.
The woodwind ensemble will be heard in two movements of the Suite for Woodwinds, op., by Charles Lebore.
SIGN of the ROSE CORSAGES for all occasions Shove Chapel Shove Chapel Sunday, May 13, 1962. 11:00m.
Burton The title of this sermon is borrowed from the title of a book by W Visser't Hooft, the general secretary of the World Council of Churches, which was published many years ago.
The thoughts contained in the sermon are partly stimulated by the recent visit of two distinguished guests to our campus.
As always, when confronted with some great theme or idea or institution connected with the history of the Church we encounter a paradox.
It is hoped that the sermon will shed some light on these and other questions; and that it will ,be seen that the contemporary Church as organized is too often ""an abomination of desolation standing where it ought not""; but that the idea of the Church in the New Testament will be seen to have power, love and relevance.
Honor Council Elections to Be Held Next Week On May 17, the Annual Honor Council Nominating Assembly will be held in Taylor Dining Hall, at 4:15 The importance of these elections of new Honor Council members is vital to the well-being of the Honor System and the college.
The method of election tries to combine the greatest possible democratic choice in permitting the nominations of anyone in the student body and in the two votes taken at the assembly in order to narrow the field of candidates to twice the number of vacancies.
Then, in order to eliminate any aspects of a ""popularity contest,"" and to provide the most judicious choices, the members of the old Honor Council choose the new members from the final field.
People elected from academic classes are required to be present by the Dean and the Honor Council.
Letters to the Editor Mr Cassius De Flon's pro-eugenics letter in the Tiger of May gratulate the Tiger on raising the proportion of news it has consistently printed since the first few issues.
It also gives me the opportunity to offer your readers some criticisms of the eugenics position, as none have appeared so far in your pages.
The version of his argument to which we were treated in the Roberts Lecture was eugenics at its most reckless, with none of the reservations added.
The fallacy of the eugenics argument, as Muller and De Flon present it, is that it makes deductions about human evolution from data derived solely from the biological sciences.
Although Muller uses the terms ""culture"" and ""cultural evolution,"" he shows little awareness that human socio-cultural life is more complex than the existence of other animal species.
On the face of it, the list of genetically ""good"" traits looks so desirable that to attack it would be like attacking mother-love.
But anthropologists would be more enthusiastic about selection in favor of them if psychologists could tell us more about their dynamics and geneticists more about their genetic makeup.
Muller fears that without selective breeding, human beings 'will eventually be able to do no more than ""prop up their own feebleness . . . and to doctor themselves as effectively as possible.
As I said on the 24th, this prediction ignores the fact that some physical conditions are apparently being selected against by modern cultural conditions which were neutral before the industrial revolution, just an instant ago in evolutionary time.
It also assumes that we have had accurate statistics on the incidence of specific diseases over long periods of time.
Phenylketonuria, for instance, is well diagnosed now but was not always.
One school of thought among physicians believes that the increase in statistics on this disease is an artifact of better diagnosis and better record-keeping.
The definition and even the desirability of a healthy body are ""more parochial than the eugenists apparently suspect.
In mid-twentieth century America we enjoy a cult of health, youth, and suppleness which is by no means shared in other parts of the world, not in Euro-American culture at other times.
A modern physician might well regard one of Titian's or Rubens' models as overweight.
A Hottentot male wants a female with a pot belly, swayed back, and fantastic eccumulations of fat on the buttocks.
There is good evidence that in paleolithic times men were selected for keen senses, fleetness, and grace — qualities which made them good hunters — and that in the neolithic sheer strength had better survival value.
In eighteenth century Europe, the tendency toward tuberculosis was fashionable.
In short, selection for the modern American concept of good health would violate the norms of other times and other places, and we have no guarantee that this concept will last longer than any other.
This fear of Muller's, and his even more inflammatory term ""genetic deterioration"" appear to ignore the problem of measurement.
Evolutionary theory has no measure of genetic goodness except natural selection, and if selection does not operate against a genetic factor, that factor can hardly be considered harmful.
A key to Muller thinking is his statement in a recent article that cultural existence is an ""artificial"" way of life.
Culture is a survival device, a part of nature no more ""artificial"" than the hide of the rhinoceros or the claws of the lion.
I shall not argue that the tendency toward disease is actually of use to our species, though such an argument might be made.
Mr De Flon seems to understand well enough the position of some geneticists on human genetics.
A sound knowledge of Homo sapiens, however, requires that one take a broad view of human behavior, including appreciation of the very intricate interaction between genetics and culture.
The Deak U PEAKS By Rosenfeld Once upon a time, in the lofty, mountainous region quite near Topeka, Kansas, there was a quaint liberal arts college nestled comfortably in the lush green valley where the sparkling River Styx wound its placid course.
Now it so happened that two young princes were^ enrolled in this college— and, they were roommates.
One, whose name was Cranfield Smartypants III, studied every night, never caroused with the local wenches, maintained a 3. overall, and was very good.
The other, whose name was Crazylegs Funandgoodtimes I, never studied, cut classes, lettered three vears in jousting, and was very bad.
One warm afternoon, Crazylegs was still in bed, having slept through Organic Alchemy, Fundamentals of Blood-Letting, and International Usury.
All of a sudden, the closet door burst open and out stepped a dumpy little old lady, dressed in faded cheese cloth ami wearing an old St.
Louis Browns baseball cap— she bore a sticking resemblance to Ma Kettle.
Now Crazylegs, being the shifty, rotten character that he was, did not feel it was his place to tell the dumpy litle old lady (he also calls 'em he way he sees 'em. ) that he was not Cranfield, considei-ing the fact that there might be something in it for him.
Then after a great deal of dickering and arguing, Crazylegs fnally decided on a maroon Corvette a lifetime pass to the ale-house, and a 3. overall.
And just at the instant that Crazylegs made his last wish, the real Cranfield stumbled into the hoom; he was so clumsy and made so much noise, that he startled the F.G.M. and she inadvertently turned him 1 into a toad.
Wedding Invitations See Our Exciting New Line of All the latest styles, including, ■ parchments — silver and gold designs — Protestant, Catholic, Mormon selections —complete accessories.
Send for Free Catalog and Samples Dept.-2, REXCRAFT, Rexburg, Idaho Colorado College Tiger • May 10, 1962 Pick and Pan Awards Given The Pick and Pan awards given each year for outstanding"" work in speech, radio, debate and drama have a long and interesting history at Colorado College.
The awards were first given in 1944 and have gone to students who have shown special interest and a willingness to perform in these areas, working for at least one year.
Sir Fletcher-Cooke has served the Colonial Office of the United Kingdom from 1034 to 1961 in London, Malaya, Palestine, Cyprus, and Tanganyyika.
This year the Pick and Pan awards for speech and radio go to Tom Rutenber, Dick Dugdale, John Trujillo, Vivian Arviso Onefeather, Tom Hook, Daniel Bernstein, and Steve Sabom.
Awards for debate go to Dave Furgason, David Bitters, and Susan Caudill.
Jane Pierce, Carol Fischer, Cynthia Lamb, and Sylvia Stenovec are the recipients along with Ann Collins, daughter of Dr.
These award winners will be the guests of ""Chief"" Woodson Tyree at his home this Sunday morning for breakfast.
The gold pan and miner's pick and burro, as in the cut above, is the design.
The symbolism shows that ""gold is where you dig it"" and in speech, drama and debate, as in prospecting, hard work and endurance are needed to profit.
Sunday afternoon there will be a picnic at the Tyree's where the award winners will be the guests while special recognition will go to the membership of the Talent and Speakers Bureau.
Owner The picnic will begin at 4:00 m. and last year's winners are invited to attend.
The sponsors of the the event, the CC Tiger Club, got the evening off to an enthusiastic start following a banquet honoring the newly tapped Tigers.
I.O.Us and cash donations so far, $72.79 Grand Sum Total— $491.04 served as acting governor of Cyprus and of Tanganyika, and he represented Tanganyika at the Ghana Independence Celebrations in Accra in 1957.
During World War II he was a Royal Air Force intelligence officer, was captured and recaptured by the Japanese in Java, and was imprisoned in Japan for three and one-half years.
Criticism of this performance is especially hard, consideringthe problems the people faced in somethingof this nature.
The cast as well as the technical staff are to be soundly applauded for their work and encouraged to continue with it.
However, the play, from a dramatic point of view, cannot in all fairin ^ often terr rt,i e to behold.
Hp _jss be dismissed with only a rewarding nod and a congratulatory smile.
The play as a total unit had little or no continuity.... each scene lacked the puissance to carry its action and its suspense over to the next.
They were disjointed almost without meaning'; a chain of disorganized events; a dream.
The use of gimmicks was an unsuccessful attempt to cover up for the poor acting of the players.
The music was excellent in itself, but it tried to create out of nothing something which did not exist.
As it faded sporadically into the nervous silence of the auditorium, it seemed that much of the mood and atmosphere of the play vanished along with it.
The lighting was generally good, but it was not memorable or excellent A few scenes such as the garden scenes or the one utilizing the King, Melisande, and her husband were noteworthy.
The rest of the lighting was neither dramatic nor intense, and it helped to painfully illustrate the condition of the play.
The settings, designed by Joan Carter, were the most outstanding, adding much to the atmosphere.
They expressed with more precision than dialogue could do the tragedy and the forboding in the plot.
Except for an anachronistic mop, the costumes were well chosen, flattering, and accurate.
As it was, the last scene would fade into obscurity and the shuffling of scenery and impatient feet before the darkness would be dispelled with the introduction of new activity.
The activity itself was, in general, on the par of fraternity skits and was matchless in its ability to embarrass the audience as a whole.
Arkel the King, played by Jay_ Hemingway, was perhaps the most credible performance of the evening.
Genevieve played by Margaret Neuman, was flat and colorless, without life or feeling, but perhaps this was intentional.
Pelleas, portrayed by Carl Chard, ranted and strutted his hour upon the stage with little mc tion.
The total effect was displseemed embarrassed with his part, as though he didn't believe in it.
But to see it enacted by this Pelleas one cringed and squirmed with uneasiness and repulsion waiting in trepidation for the inevitable laughter to follow.
As previously mentioned, his execution of Pelleas left something to be desired and was anything but effective.
He too gave the impression that his Method acting had failed, creating an incomplete and self-conscious combination of Golaud-John Giannes.
Ethel Six Geary's interpretation of Melisande, although it was not a profound projection of high dramatic quality, was nevertheless a far better attempt than most of the others.
There was even, at times, a true, sentiment, but it was soon lost in her flightiness.
Nevertheless she did perform one function in that she acted throughout as the scapegoat for the audiences nervous laughter and derisive scorn.
Even if it was only a minor role, the three servants added a welcome relief with their light comments, and were enjoyed by most.
Climbers Gather for Mountaineers' Weekend The Colorado College Mountain Club this Friday, Saturday, and Sunday is sponsoring Mountaineer's Weekend, an annual gathering of college mountain clubs from the Rocky Mountain region.
The weekend will begin Friday as the visiting clubs arrive and register in Rastall Center.
Registration will continue into the early part of Saturday morning to accommodate clubs coming from as far as Salt Lake City.
After 10m. registration will move from the main desk to the club headquarters in the Berg Heil room.
Any interested students are invited to come to the registration desk for information and are invited to participate in the activities of the weekend.
Of greatest interest to spectators will be the rock climbing in the Garden of the Gods and North Cheyenne Canyon.
Although there will be no formal demonstration, there will be climbers on many spectacular routes easily seen from the roads and CCMC members will be available to answer questions.
Saturday evening, the club will sponsor a barbeque and party at Hermann's Ranch in Woodland Park.
Traditionally this party has been one of the social highlights of the climbing season.
There are no formal activities planned for Sunday as clubs from Wyoming and Utah will have to leave early, but climbing will probably continue through much of the day.
The first Mountaineer's Weekend was held at Laramie in May 1957 in the rain and only four CCMC members participated.
Oskasita Hosts Annual Gymkhana The annual CC Gymkhana was held last Sunday in Penrose Stadium.
Enhanced by an unusually large turnout and beautiful weather, the events were interesting, as well as often hysterical to watch.
The most amusing of the events was Goat Tying, in which contestants had to ride out to the middle of the arena, dismount, throw and tie a goat which was tied to a stake.
Although one could not help feeling sorry for the unfortunate animal, one also could not help laughing at the antics of the contestants.
The event was won by Donna Story with an amazingly good time of 24 seconds.
Out of the nine classes, only three were really serious, the barrel racing and the freshman and upperclass equitation.
Sue Thompson won the barrel racing with a time of 17. seconds — extremely good for a college event.
The ""fun"" events included musical tires, water relay, walk and lead race, walk, trot, and canter relay and egg and spoon race, plus the goat tying.
All of these classes were just what they were billed to be — fun, not only for the riders, but also for the spectators.
The judge for all the events was Beverly Bryant, a young lady who is well known all over the state for her English and western riding.
The primary job of the viceresident of the ASCC is to suport and work closely with the isident.
It must be realized that [ie vice-president is subordinate the president, and if maximum ffectiveness is to be achieved the ffo will have to complement each ither.
Next year, because of deferred ish, the vice-president will be of jreat importance in helping to irient the freshman class into the etivities of the college.
He must ad the Enthusiasm Committee i'hich will coordinate the activities ,f the various pep organiaztions, md thus provide the school with jganized leadership' in various acuities.
The vice-president must also ilso guide the Social-Coordinating Committee which will coordinate jll student activities on the campus.
This will provide the necessary guidance to have a smooth running social program.
These are the basic duties of the te-president, and it is important [hat these duties be properly executed.
If elected, I will see that ihese jobs are carried out and anil assist the president in any cither capacity he deems necessary.
Steve Sabom Candidate for Vice-President A chief issue in any campus lection is that of student enthusiasm.
With rumors >f abolishing athletics and constant talk of student apathy, one :annot help but sense a need in important realm of campus life.
Nevertheless, as prevalent as the need may be, nothing is solved by mere complaint without subsequent action.
This action can be infilled into the student body through jffective ASCC leadership.
I vest issured that with the innovation )f a deferred rush program next 11, the pep organizations can and ;il undertake a more vigorous approach to the short-lived enjoyment of freshman agitation.
Uhis, most assuredly, is an area in vhich the members of ASCC could iiipport school spirit. ecutive Council backing hould follow along the line of such athletic ventures as the Hockey Rally held this past winter, which not only drew the school together in a rare display of unity, but also noticeably impressed members of the town and local sports professionals.
Other events, more on the campus scene, such as the Greek Weekend, Parents' Weekend, and the Sophomore Carnival need direct and indirect support from your Student Council.
This spirit can be increased with constant pressure on the publications, enthusiasm, and communication committees which are formed with chairmen elected by the student body.
The opportunity of a 3. beer parlor near the campus also offers a novel experience which could evolve into a vital factor in school spirit.
Moreover, it would provide the student body with atmosphere in which to relax, away from the humdrum of academic curriculum.
The toilsome but necessary task of convincing the residents of this area to lift the prohibitive zoning ordinance will rest with every student interested in the project.
These are a few of the vital issues facing your Executive Council next year.
Whether or not they are resolved effectively is left up to your participation in the election and support of the new administration.
As a representative of the student body, I would he proud to serve as your ASCC vice-president.
One of the main issues in the presidential campaign was that of more effective communication between ASCC and the student body.
This year's administration has amended the constitution so that the responsibility of communication will be a basic part of the secretary's job.
As a candidate for secretary, I want to see these improvements implemented.
It is of the utmost importance that the ASCC not be an ""ivory tower"" organization, closeting itself at 4:00 every Monday afternoon, but a representative organ, truly embodying the Associated Students of Colorado College.
I feel that the chairmanship of the newly revised Communications Committee gives the secretary a vast opportunity to utilize every possible method to insure this.
Added communication between students and their governing body should, I hope, also stimulate greater unity within the student body and an increase in common interests and goals.
To do this, not only must the student body be acquainted, through the Tiger and the ASCC minutes, with the issues handled in ASCC, but the latter itself must be equally cognizant of student issues and controversies.
In her fullest capacity, the ASCC secretary must act as a valuable intermediary between the student body and its government.
However, because the secretary is a regular voting member of the Council, there are many possibilities for initiative and originality.
This will be true to an even larger degree next year as the secretary will also serve as the chairman of the Communications Committee.
The duties of this committee will be to establish a firm, informative relationship between the student body and its governing body — the Executive Council.
By virtue of my office on the Council this year, I am thoroughly familiar with its function and duties and I would be able to help the new president immediately with the organization of the new Council.
I am very interested in the role which student government plays on the Colorado College campus and I would like to continue to participate in our student government.
Next year the Treasurer will take on the even greater responsibility — chairman of a much more influential Finance Committee than in the past.
Most all of the ASCC appropriations for clubs and special interest groups will go directly to the Finance Committee before the appeals for appropriations are voted on by the Executive Council.
This will require many more valued judgments on the part of the Treasurer.
Capable leadership must be shown in controlling the allocation of your money, which amounts to about $20 to $22 for each academic year.
In this current series of ASCC elections, it is your turn to make valued judgments.
The first duty of the office is to direct ASCC funds to the groups and organizations in such a way that these funds will be used to benefit the greatest number of students.
The second Greek News Monday night the Phi Delts elected and installed their new officers for next semester.
Bruce Franklin will serve as vicepresident, Ben Lewis as treasurer, and Pete Webster as secretary.
Other officers elected were Ed Lorson as social chairman, Chuck White as chorister, Ray Mithun as Wrnden, Paul Carson as historian, Steve Frink ns IFC representative, Chuck Lawerence as rush chairman, Mike Mayer as housemanager and Fred Singleton as steward.
Tomorrow night the Phi Delt White Carnation Dance will be held in Denver at the Petroleum Club.
It is in this area that the Treasurer comes in close contact with the financial and legislative matters of the students, and must act upon them with the concern of these students.
I feel that I understand the duties and responsibilities of this office, and if elected, am prepared to undertake their execution.
As an officer of the Executive Council, I would be prepared to act on any matters that anight arise, to the best of my ability.
A new school year will bring ASCC many problems, some of which will not have been seen before.
It is therefore that I feel the office of treasurer must be n flexible one, reudy to cope with the decisions that must and will be made.
EDDIE MACK'S GARAGE 3 1 71/2 N Tejon Jo Heller For Sophomore Class Commissioner A dynamic ASCC cannot exist without student interest.
The sophomore class can make a substantial contribution through its commissioners.
I feel that I am qualified for this position, and 1 would like to represent the interests of our class.
And, it's not too soon to be thinking of flowers for Mother on Mother's Day — we will wire them to her.
Elstun's Flowers 16 S Tejon ME 4-8951 GENUINE CORDOVAN by Guardsman $^95 Almost wearproof! thick soles, storm welts, genuine shell cordovan tliut shines with a quick Rick of a cloth.
Winthrop styles from $8.95/Flonheim Shoes Start at $19.95 1 SOUTH TEION CORNER PIKES PEAK AVE r5] May 10, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger GG and AFA Will Host Collegiate Golf Meet Colorado College's golf team remained undefeated at home this season as they won 6-3 from Adams State at 'the Broadmoor Golf Club last Friday and they blanked Regis 9-0 the following day at the Kissing Camels Golf Course.
Ralph Haddad of Adams State, defending medalist in this week's invitational sponsored by CC and the Air Force Academy, was low in Friday's match with a fine 73 that included three birdies and an eagle.
Despite the fact that it was their first round on the exclusive Kissing Camels course, both Bob Magie and Rich Nichols, freshmen members of the Tiger squad, tied for the medalist honors on Saturday with a pair of 76's.
Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stauffer, Rich Firmine, and Rich Nichols each won both their matches over the weekend.
This Friday and Saturday Colorado College ""and the United States Air Force Academy will be co-hosts to the Pikes Peak Intercollegiate Invitational Golf Tournament at the Eisenhower and Broadmoor golf courses.
Sixteen teams from seven states have filed six-man team entries for the tournament.
The tournament is a fifty-four hole medal play test, with thirty-sbc holes scheduled at the Eisenhower Golf Course at the Academy on Friday, and the final eighteen holes at the Broadmoor Golf Course on Saturday.
Each team may enter six men, but only the low four count toward the team title.
Trophies are awarded to winners in both the college and university divisions.
Colorado College will be represented by Gordon Aamoth, Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stouffer, Bob Magie, Rich Nichols, and Rick Firmine or Jim Schultz.
The low Rocky Mountain Conference team will be recognized as the conference champion, and the Tigers have their eyes trained on this goaL A buffet luncheon for all contestants is scheduled at the Broadmoor Golf Club following the final round on Saturday, at which the trophies will be presented.
Ellen Boughn, Susan Merrell, Mary Beth Bishop, Barbara Tolley, Sharon Shackleford, and Karen Tucker.
The tournament is recognized as one of the leading collegiate tournaments in the country, and in past years the champion of the IntramuralS Slocum Hall pushball competition ended May 2 as an outnumbered First West team fell to a more powerful as well as more plentiful Fourth West squad.
The game, played under the fairest refereeing yet seen in pushball competition, was not decided until the end of the final period when Fourth West finally choked off a vigorous rally by their smaller foe with a potent drive of their Both teams managed to score five points by entering their opponent's goal, but the victors managed to power the boggy ball across their opponents goal line to fet four ""partial"" goals of two points each, giving them eight points to their foe's four.
Perhaps the most unusual thing about the contest was that it was played between two West Wing teams.
In Slocum Hall competition, the West wings have generally fared poorly since they have fewer residents than the others.
That the two West wings could knock over their more numerous foe is clearly indicative of a greater wing spirit and desire to win, at least in pushball.
This year's Intramural program, at times unchallenging, has been generally successful in that it has involved the vast majority of Slocum Hall men in at least a little exercise.
Jim Hanks should receive the proper recognition for seting up schedules and rules which have allowed the program to reach its generally successful climax.
It is hoped that next year's program will be even more successful as measured in terms of competition and participation.
Tues., May 15, 8:30 Wed., May 16, 8:30 Final tryouts: Thurs., May 17, 7:30 The Enthusiasm Committee will judge the tryouts.
All girls are eligible who have been at CC for one semester and who had at least a 2. average last Bemester.
United States Amateur, British Amateur, and Mexican Amateur have been among the participants.
Many golfers, unknown as collegiate competitors in the CC Invitation, later have gained fame both as amateurs and on the professional circuit.
Both games saw a Tiger team plagued by the same seemingly insurmountable pitching weakness that has lost all but three games this season.
This weakness, together with an excellent showing for Western State from former Cologame against Colorado School of rado Springs High School ace Ron Mines here on the CC diamond.
Western State pitching held CC to only nine hits, while two Tiger hurlers were bombarded for a total of 27.
The Bengals jumped on Anderson early in the game when leadoff hitter Joe Cordova was hit by a pitch, Reno Van Putten singled, and Dennis Walker loaded the bases on a throwing error to first.
Anderson, having difficulty with his control, then walked Steve Gustafson and Joe Bergquist, driving in two runs.
Anderson stopped the rally by forcing Matt Railey to hit into a double play, then striking out Mike Mestek.
Tn the second, Western State rallied with two down to take the lead 4-3, only to lose it in the third as catcher Wayne McAlpine homered with the bases loaded to regain the lead for CC, 7-6.
It was the last Tiger lead of the game, which turned into a complete rout as the Mountaineers gained three l'uns in the fourth on two homers, then clobbered both Barry Anthony, who was charged with the loss, and reliever Gary Sparkman for five more tallies in the fifth.
CC looked considerably better in Saturday's game, as they almost grabbed the victory, largely on the basis of Jeff Sauer's consistently able pitching.
Going into the ninth, the Tigers were clinging stubbornly to a 10-7 lead, but muffed the chance for their fourth season win as Western State opened up with a three run barrage against reliever Don Jorgenson to tie it up.
The Tigers failed to come up with any serious threat in the bottom of the ninth, and Western State took full advantage of their tenth-inning opportunity to pound out 4 runs on two homers, one an inside the park home run eked out by the Mountaineer shortstop.
It could also be the occasion for students to show their support for a baseball team which sorely needs it.
The consistently empty bleachers which have characterized Tiger efforts at home can hardly act as an incentive for the sort of playing toward which Carle and his nine are aiming, and can only be a constant reminder to the team and to anyone who cares to notice, of the apathy which has come to characterize CC's students where sports events are concerned.
After Wednesday's game, the Tigers host the Bears of Colorado State College here on Thursday, May 10, then travel to Greeley for the second game of the series Saturday, May 12.
Tennis String Broken GU Wins Six Matches The CC tennis team's string of four straight wins was snapped abruptly last Saturday 6-0.
Playing at number one, Russ Spevry was leading 2-0 in the first set; but was then unable to put his big serve in the court, with grim results.
The match was very wellplayed, however, with plenty of sizzling ground strokes and brilliant net play on both sides.
At number two position, Rusty Bastedo injured his arm trying for a big service to close out the game after nine deuce points at 2-1 in the first set.
Unable to rely on his serve thereafter, he took to charging the net at full-bore, trying for the quick kill on the return, but even with this tactic he was unable to win.
Alan Anisgard also turned in a good performance, but he lost his service from 40-love and 3-4 in the first set, and psychologically that was the end of the match.
The matches were good preparation for the Conference meet at Greeley this weekend, and CC hopes to bring back all the silver this year.
Last year the finals were snowed out, necessitating no title for anyone.
This team looks like the best CC tennis team since the days of Doug Corley, and maybe the members can prove that statement this weekend.
Delivers 5th Annual Abbot Lecture The fifth annual Abbot Lecture was given last Monday night by Dr.
Before describing the general hanges that shoulu be effected in the American political system, Dr.
Kossiter described the three polititraditions from which the united States has drawn.
He spoke the Conservatism of Edmund Burke, generally associated with the British System, which was asciated with negative conceptions of progress and social welfare.
The American people have rejected this conservatism with the violence that they have rejected the radicalism of Marx, Rosseau. and Paine.
Instead of following either reactionary or radical paths, the American people had bhosen, according to the professor, a tradition of liberalism, or hopeful optimism which is, and has been, more willingthan conservatism to promote social and economic progress, but not at the violent pace of the radicals.
The Cornell professor then began to list characteristics of our liberal tradition, including our populism, constitutionalism, and our skepticism, especially skepticism of political power and its uses.
Along wih these ""narrow"" definitions of liberal doctrine, he added that we have incorporated into our body oi philosophy belief in God, an optimistic view of history working in our favor, and a dynamic and progressive spirit of growth.
Rossiter then pointed out the dangers which can arise from having unreal or unrealizable ideals.
He stated that although ideals should be more advanced than the eality they describe, they should iot be so advanced as to be imiractical, giving us a misleading onception of what our aims and purposes are in times of crisis.
Calling this disparity between ■deals and reality the ""ideal gap,"" he went on to declare that we should correct at least three errors )ur liberal tradition that are handicapping our progress today.
Dssiter declared that modern government demanded a greater sponsibility for our leaders and that with this responsibility must be corresponding political and personal power, still within the confines of democracy.
He pointed out that we must modify our present inhibitions against such increases of personal power.
Professor Rossiter went on to say that we must lose our reluctance to use our political power for our own good, both foreign and domestic.
Criticizing our longstanding fear of political power, the Cornell department head went on to declare that in the modern World political power is less dangerous than political vacuum.
His final point was that we must modify our blind faith in individualism.
That is, we must realize that the most effective action is performed by and for groups.
Rossiter appealed once more to the notion that all he had suggested had been previously suggested by other Americans in times past.
It almost seemed as though this argument cast a holy light on all his statements and made them ""homegrown"" and hence good.
In spite of this one ""irrational"" appeal, what the scholarly Abbot lecturer had to say was timely and articulate.
Rossiter admitted his proposals were far-reaching, but declared that they were consistent with the liberal tradition, an essential to he success of our nation and our ideals in the twentieth century.
Antuszewicz to Give Young ArtistRecital Nicole Antuszewicz, special piano student of Max Lanner, will be sponsored by the college music department in a Young Artist recital on Tuesday, May 22nd, 8 m. in Perkins Hall.
At 16, she was admitted to the Ecole Normale de Musique de Paris, founded by the famous pianist, Alfred Cortot.
From there, she graduated into the Conservatoire National de Music de Versailles, where she won the school's first prize in piano in her second year.
She continued her work at the Musig Hochsehule in Munich under Professor Koebel, and then again in Paris under Jean Micault.
This year, while in Colorado Springs, she has been studying with Max Lanner, preparing herself for an important competition in France, which she will enter upon her return next season.
Barbara Morgan, from Fort Collins, is a member of the Colorado Springs Symphony, and is studying cello with Richard Maag.
She will play the first movement of the cello concerto by Saint-Saens, with Mr Maag at the piano.
Enriched Courses On Honors Level RECENTLY HONORED AT THE AWS SENIOR HONOR'S BANQUET are present Cap and Gown members Sue Dare, Joan Jilka.
Kathy Lyon, Chessie Kemp, Jan Fry, Judy Gibson, Sue Holt, Marcia Moses, and Betsy Foote. philosophy will ,be offered to a selected group of superior sophomores next September.
The courses, ""Cosmology and Evolution"" and ""Philosophy Tutorial,"" will be as intensive as junior and senior level honors courses at many colleges and universities.
Warner ■ said that both courses will be open to students who successfully complete the current honors program in history and literature for superior freshmen.
Twenty-four top students are in the program which was launched last fall.
The special science and philosophy courses were approved by the faculty at its monthly meeting April 30.
As in the history-literature program, the two new courses will be taught by the topical rather than the comprehensive method.
Articles from scientific magazines and paperback books will be used instead of regular texts.
The course will count toward the science requirement for non-science majors only, according to college officials.
The meeting to discuss aspects oT this Symposium will be held on Friday, Mav 18th, at 3:30m. in Room 207/209 of Rastall Center.
All interested students and faculty, particularly those who might be willing to help with future planning and arrangements for the Symposium, are cordially invited to attend his meeting, which is designed to bring out as many good ideas as possible for the conduct of the Symposium Week.
Ann Armstrong, Peigi Benham, Karen Bessessen, Julie Buhlke, Seece Boyce, Polly Franklin, and Leilani Mavkisen.
Each of these girls has maintained an accumulative grade Steve Sabom was elected vicepresident of the Associated Students of Colorado College.
Steve Sabom, 369; John Levis, 154; Jim Knapp, 154; Steve Frink 3(i2; Bill Hybl.1; Terry Kidner, 308; Nan Burroughs, 221.
Blue Key Sponsors Honors Convocation The sixth annual Honors Convocation will be held Tuesday, May 22, at 11:00 in Shove Memorial Chapel.
Approximately 30 awards and honors will be presented during the convocation ceremony, sponsored by the college chapter of the Blue Key fraternity.
The convocation program was organized by a special Blue Key committee working with Miss Lorena A Berger, secretary of the collgee and alumni secretary.
Serving with him were Chris Griffiths, Stew Ritchie, and Jerry Osborne.
Louis T Benezet, and Dean Lloyd E Worner will present the departmental awards and honors.
Following the presentation of the awards, the new president of the Associated Students of Colorado College, Max Power, will he installed.
J Julius Baird, on the chapel organ, and the CC Choir, under the direction otf Donald Jenkins, The Rev.
Kenneth Burton will give the invocation and benediction. has nthu and inniunity fishly. founded CAP AND GOWN on the Colorado College campun in 1950; it hopes to petition fur membership in the national association of Mortar Board Chapters in 19(14.
Some of the activities of Cap and Gown this past year have been the coordination of the Shove Chapel coffee hours after the Sunday Morning Services, the conducting of an assembly and panel discussion on foreign study and travel, and tile preparation of a hook list containing professors' recommendations in their fields of specialization.
It is hoped that this book list, which will soon ,be distributed to all seniors, will provide oticincentive for each individual to continue his liberal arts education after graduation.
The members of Cap and flown have also invited a professor of their choice to dinner once a month in order to chat informally and hecome better acquainted.
During the past three years Cap and Gown has conn* to be a familiar and important part of the Colorado College community.
The girls sporting the black skirts and white blazers continue to be esteemed not only for their past achievements, but also for the collective contribution they make their senior year as members of Cap and Gown.
Plans are underway to organize a ski team at Colorado College next fall.
During the preliminary training period weekend (raining will move to Saint Mary's Glacier.
After the preliminary workouts, the team will hold timetrials where team selections will he made.
Those who are interested in such a team will please contact either Peter McLaughlin, Glenn Foust or Don Odea before the end of the school term.
This week has been an unusual one at CC— unusual because of the interest shown and enerev expended bv CC students.
The first thing lo support this is the student turnout for CC's Executive Council elections.
Mr Steve Sabom, vice-president; Mr Steve Frrak, treasurer: and Miss Terry Kidner, secretary.
Third the turnout at the Slocum Hall-sponsored dance Tuesday night and the Beta-sponsored twister Wednesday afternoon was quite unusual.
Probably more persons were at the Tuesday dance than have been at any CC 'dance (including Homecoming, formals, Winter Carnival, et. al.) in the past several years.
Perhaps this was due in part to the proximity of the dance, perhaps to the quality of the band, but in any event, this was quite a change from some of the other dances sponsored by various organizations this year.
Because of the enthusiastic participation and the contest between CC's social organizations, the job was completed in less than three hours.
This was much better than expected, and again shows the spirit that has pervaded the CC campus in the last week or two.
With its continuance, college at CC could become much more fruitful, and perhaps, just as important — more enjoyable.
CEP SHOWN ABOVE are this year's initiates into Pick and Pan gathered at ""Chief"" Tyree's for the traditional breakfast.
GANO DOWNS MEN'S CLOTHING — FURNISHINGS AND GIFTS BROADMOOR HOTEL Kachina Lounge Alta Vista Hotel I 18 N Cascade Ave.
During the past two weeks, we have seen two very stimulating and thought provoking letters appear in The Tiger.
Both pro and con arguments about artificial selection have been presented.
He has also implied that good health is only a matter of fashion, geography, or culture.
Mr De Flon bases his argument for artificial selection on the fact that there is a buildup of detrimental mutations occurring in mankind's genetic reservoir.
These mutations result in the inability of the organism to carry out vital metabolic processes, or to resist disease.
Mr Kutsche bases his argument on the hope that culture will counteract the pernicious effect of these mutations.
The examples Mr Kutsche cites of control by culture are rather easily counteracted lethal or sublethal mutations.
However, when the buildup of genetic defects has reached a certain point, humans will appear who carry a series of these defects, and control by medical means will become increasingly impossible.
Thus, defects which are not now selected against due to cultural knowledge can readily be considered harmful.
He doesn't seem to realize that it is precisely because of natural selection that a Hottentot male wants a female with a potbelly and a swayed back.
It also does not follow that because people once felt that tuberculosis was fashionable, it is good health in a purely objective sense.
On a statistical basis alone, I would object to the feasibility of this undertaking.
There is also the fact that new deleterious mutations would arise in each successive generation, and that some of these would not be detected for several generations until an appropriate mating resulting in a homogenote occurred.
Therefore, until our knowledge of genetics has increased sufficiently to provide us with an exacting method of genetic analysis in vitro, rather than a phenotypic analysis in vivo, the reduction of deleterious mutations by artifiicial selection would be impractical.
Aside from the above mentioned reasons, the cultural problems inCAMPUS CHEST AUCTIONEER, DON ODEN, strives to break last year's total of $489.60.
Bob Novig has been selected as Colorado College's Photographic editor for the 19G2-63 school year.
Henceforth, requests for photographs will be referred to him rather than Bill Stafford. volved would be so severe as to render the project impossible.
If we then decide to select against it, we would have to stop most of the African population from breeding in areas where malaria had been at all prevalent in times past.
It would seem much more appropriate at this time to talk in terms of what we do know than what we don't.
From even the most superficial study of genetics, one finds certain things that stand out.
First, all genetic structures exhibit a certain tendency to change,e. to mutate.
This tendency might be called the base mutation rate for that organism.
Second, this base rate may be raised by the presence of mutagenic agents such as ionizing radiations of various kinds.
Last, that most mutations have a pernicious effect on the organism involved.
It would therefore appear that, if we wish to do something about this problem, and this is another question in itself, we should do everything possible to prevent the rise of our base mutation rate.
This, at present, seems to me to be the most realistic answer to this question.
Respectfully, Herbert S Gaskill Jr Shove Chapel Shove Chapel Sunday, May 20, 1962 Sermon Title Called to be Saint* Worship Leader To be announced Preacher The Rev.
Burton This is the last Sunday Servici of the Academic Year at whidi Mr Burton will preach.
As a considerable section of the collegt community is contemplating tin problem of what each one of then will do in the year and the years to come, the preacher will speak about one aspect of our vocatioi as children of God.
It is tin preacher's contention that it is thi Christian man who is the norma man and that not only does he ""do' something in the activist traditi' but that he also become a rea person.
Next Sunday, May 27, will 1* the last Sunday morning Worshii Service of the academic year.
Dr John Bailey, Assistant Professoi of Religion, and Acting Chairmar of the Religious Department, wil be the preacher.
Bailey's last service at Colorad< College before he and family depart for East Africa.
SELF SERVICE DRY CLEANING AT ITS BEST DRY CLEANING IS EASIER THAN WASHING nothing to add — no wet clothes to handle FULL 8 lb.
This is a situation a Colorado College scientist is trying to correct, and he thinks he may have the as chemistry stuthis may be appl j ed ^h pron t,"" dents are concerned.
The system Professor Snyder is developing is actually a series of six to eight books designed to help students r the harder spots of freshman chemistry.
On the first page, the student reads a short body of text and then answers a series of multiple-choice questions.
Each of the multiple-choice answers requires i to turn to a different page in the book.
If he makes the correct answer, he continues on to the next body of text.
If he gives the wrong iwer, he will turn to a page where he will find an explanation how and why his answer was wrong.
If it is answered correctly this time, the student will be able to continue to the second question.
The idea is to allow the student to make a few mistakes but then capitalize on the mistakes to show him where he went wrong,"" e continued.
Programmed instruction might bridge the gap between these two areas while simultaneously giving the student some very excellent practice in applying the theoretical concepts to more practical situations.
To lease or buy:) House near Colorado College Small down payment and sonable rent.
It is entitled the Wristwatch Rally and will be considerably more fun than the Rally for the Keg.
The amount of calculating will be almost nil so you will have a chance to see some scenery.
The entry fee is $.75, starting time is 1m., Sunday, May 20, from the Rastall Center Parking lot.
The case before the committee involved two students who took a wallet from a town jewelry store.
In the case of the one boy. guilty of felony and grand larceny, we recommended to the administration that he be suspended from school, The quest ion of readmittance and of his obtaining credits for the present semester's work was left to the discression of the administration.
The other boy, an accessory to the action, was placed on disciplinary probation meaning that upon another violation of misconduct he will automatically be suspended from school pending a hearing of this committee.
Cogswell, Gray, Petzold Given Fulbright Grants Mariana Cogswell, Judy Gray, and Gay Petzold have been granted Fulbright Fellowships for graduate study and research abroad during the coming academic year.
Miss Cogswell is a student of modern diplomatic history, and hopes to continue graduate work toward an advanced degree in modern European history of international relations.
She is preparing herself for a career of translating foreign scientific papers into English.
She will study conditions of the Slovenian minority in the province of Carinthia.
She hopes to learn to what degree the Slovenians have become integrated into the political and social life of Austria.
Following this she will return to the United States and teach history and German on the high school level.
Paul Bernard, CC history professor, will undertake a longrange research project which may bring about a re-evaluation of the reform movement in 18th century Austria.
Bernard is making plans to spend the summer in Vienna, Austria, laying the foundations for the project.
He will study manuscripts in the National Archives, the War Archives, the Administration Archives, and the Aulic Archives.
Bernard hopes that close study of the reign of Austrian Emperor Joseph I (17051711) will result in a two or three volume work.
From his preliminary research this summer, he plans to establish a method for continuing the study from the CC campus.
He will be able to do this by requesting that several documents be microfilmed and mailed to him here.
He spent the 15)53-54 academic year there as a Fulbright Fellow, and, during 1900-61, he conducted a study of the Bavarian exchange project.
ACTIVATED CHARCOAL INNER FILTER PURE WHITE OUTER FILTER DUAL FILTER Tareyton May 17, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Profs.
It will not be the usual ""Goodbye, Mister Chips"" ceremony because one already has accepted a position at a state university and another is retiring for the second time.
The appointment is only a temporary one, however, to fill a vacancy"" during the first semester of the coming academic year.
Knapp' plan to return to Colorado Springs at the end of the term next January.
Professor Barnes joined the faculty at Colorado College in 1925, and since 1945 has been Veraer Z Reed Professor of Chemistry.
Professor Barnes also has been an engineering chemist with the Illinois State Highway Department and a consulting chemist for the Alexander Film Co. of Colorado Springs.
A specialist in the field of organic chemistry, Professor Barnes has written numerous articles and features for professional journals and magazines.
ME 2-088"" Paul's Flowers Cut Flowers and Corsages Reasonably Priced 1524 North Tejon MElrose 2-0164 Commitment Elects Officers, Says No To Peace Union Commitment held its final meeting of the year on May 10th where tentative plans were made for the coming year and officers were elected.
Ann Armstrong was elected president; Chris Thatcher, vice president, and Myles Hopper, secretary.
Members of Commitment seemed to reject a proposal of either joining or being offiliated with the Student Peace Union, the largest student peace organization in the United States.
The majority of those presentfelt that Commitment should continue to remain a discussion group which will present various programs on the questions of War and Peace.
Any students interested in Commitment's activities in the coming year should contact Ann Armstrong.
Matt Railey, and Stephanie Row have been elected to the Student Conduct Committee.
The author of three texts on illumination and advanced lighting, he has written more than 40 articles on illumination and electrical engineering subjects for professional journals.
His teaching experience dates back to 1921 when he was in instructor at Tennessee. tS YPEWRSTER SUHUYCO. y Physics Department To Receive $50,000 The Colorado College physics department has received assistance totaling nearly $60,000 for instructional equipment to help implement a new physics curriculum.
Under the direction of Professoi Howard M Olson, the physics department has embarked upon a completely revised curriculum designed to assist students in the crucial process of self -education in physics.
The new program was made possible by a grant of §24,500 from the National Science Foundation, matched by the college, in support of the undergraduate instruction equipment program.
The new curriculum was designed to meet the needs of four kinds of physics majors, including 1) students who plan to study physics in graduate school; 2) those who plan to teach physics at the secondary school level; 3) students who expect to go into industry immediately upon graduation; 4) those who are not planning to become professional physicists, but who are taking their major in the field for the perspective it gives them of all knowledge.
The new physics program is built around a course structure which consists of a solid core foursemester sequence of basic physics required of all majors in the field.
These courses are followed by progressively more sophisticated courses, not all of which are required for graduation.
For example, the student who plans to tench high school physics might elect to take only some of the junior courses and none of the senior level courses, while a prospective Ph.D. candidate would probably take all of the offerings in the department.
WAGER, Own« Results of Questionaire Show Student Opinions As a follow up on the All College Conference discussion on drinking, a committee was formed to pursue the possibilities of having a 3. place on or near campus.
The purpose of a place like this would be to promote informal gatherings, with or without dates.
A questionnaire was submitted to the student body and faculty to obtain their views on this subject.
Some of the effects on campus life would be; Increased social drinking rather than excessive, give the freshmen a place to go, increase school unity, drinking and driving would be cut down, a long needed informal atmosphere.
The female response to the questionnaire was poorer but similar.. 84 — yes, and of these 21 for on campus, 51 for near campus and 10 voted for either.
The suggestions for question five were similar to the males except one girl felt that it should be put on a trial basis.
Other coments included, coat and tie on Saturday night, entertainment, only open it on weekends, have bridge tables, cover charge, make sure of good management, use a big college sign, don't allow faculty, use ID's.
PRESIDENT LOUIS T BENEZET is shown here tying the ""best company"" banner on the flag of Company B Company sponsor, Norma Parker, looks on.
Be Stewardess UNITED AIR LINES If you are between 20 and 26, between 5'2"" and 5'8"" and single, you may qualify for this challenging and rewarding career.
Recreational facil Train i ing C ities tor trainees housed in the dormitory includes a year round pool.
COLORADO Colorado College Tiger • May 17, 1962 Benezet Clarifies CC Athletic Position Thindads Take second Our position in intercollegiate sports might be described the old minstrel joke involving the man accosted by the udge for deserting his wiife.
Big-time athletics leaves them, as it becomes more and more of a business, supportable only by large » receipts.
This is a fortunate thing for small colleges, since economic pressures make them do what they ought to be doing anyway for educational reasons.
In hockey Colorado College has its one so-called big time sport; and the relentless build-up among our much larger Western League competitors over the past five years has been hard on us.
It is still possible that by pinpointed selection of hockey-playing students who artable and discriminating enough to desire the kind of educational experience Colorado College affords d by achieving our own ice rink for practice — which we need anyway for all-student recreation — we may be able to compete, ever this formidable Western League of teams with professional backgrounds.
In football, as in other sports, ,'e are moving toward teams more cpresentative of the normal student athlete who elects to come to Colorado College, and the kino, of competition our kind of college ought to be playing.
Despite geoaphical limitations we see progss in these trends, mainly among lieges in the Great Plains.
Colorado College expects to keep broad program of intercollegiate sports so long as the student body will engage in them enthusiastically as particpants and spectators, and so long as we can manage the whole program without curbing commitment to a first-rate instructional program and a closeknit campus community.
If students should become indifferent to sports attendance, or disinclined to stay out for a team primarily for the sake of the sport itself, we would have no reason to continue the program.
That is why student expressions of interest in intercollegiate sports are the most important element in our planning. 1 seems important also, however, that such interest keep in mind the natural limitations imposed upon us, and the order of priorities which a college like ours must keep in order to succeed in education.
Mills Will Deliver Anthropology Lecture George Mills, lecturer in general education at Colorado College and associate director of the Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, will discuss ""Anthropology as Art"" at 7:30 today in Rastall Center.
The talk, a part of Fine Arts Week, will be open to the public without charge.
Mills has been on the facculy at Colorado College since 1957 and a member of the staff at the Fine Arts Center since 1949.
II EAST PIKES PEAK May 17, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger »l Netters Champs In KHC Doubles Before Small Crowd In an anticlimactic performance the best Colorado College tennis team in the school's history played out the finals of the Rocky Mountain Conference Doubles Championship last Monday afternoon.
W' say anticlimactic because, while crowds of several hundred had seen and applauded these four young men at Colorado State College over the weekend, yet on their home courts the team could do no better than to draw a roaring throng of four people.
No team in conference history has ever won the Conterence so convincingly.
The interest of the college student body remains as overwhelmingly dormant as ever.
He defeated CSC's first man in three sets, gaining the semi-finals of the singles before being defeated.
The next day Jim and Aian Anisqard came from a 1-4 deficit in the .third set to win 6-4 and reach the finals of the doubles.
In the other half of the draw Russ Sperry and Rusty Bastedo were down 2-5 in the second set of their match.
If the reader gets the impression that these players produce under pressure, that is certainly true; the matches mentioned were won on sheer grit and a refusal to throw in the towel.
The top player of the tournament was Russ Sperry, who did not lose a set, either in singles or in doubles, during the entire tournament.
His touch and pace on the ball, as well as his position play on the court .were flawless.
For sheer grit we must mention Rusty Bastedo who turned in excellent performances in spite of an arm injury which made backhands and services almost an impossibility, and Alan Anisgai'd, who put together an amazing sequence of sizzling backhand drives and impeccably-placed volleys to lead the comeback from 1-4 in the doubles match mentioned earlier in this article.
This is quite a team and worth most of the rest of this year's teams rolled together.
As Bears Win Final As the track season wore on this year it became obvious that CC was a better than average team.
However, it was also clear that CSC, because of its greater depth, would dominate the league.
Jim Blair once again dominated the pole vault taking the event at 13 ft.
This relay team was made up of Dale McNeal, Norm Liden, Bob Grant, and Dave Krell.
Also making good showings were Bruce Boyd and Steve Sabol, who took a close second and third in the shot put respectively.
Freshman Dave Smith ran third in the mile making it likely that he and Tony McGunnis would dominate the distances next year.
Unfortunately McGinnis broke his leg in CC's last meet, so he was unable to compete in the final.
College Golfers Capture Pair of Championships The Colorado College golf team won the Rocky Mountain Conference title as well as first place in the College Division of the 15th Annual Pikes Peak Invitational Golf Tournament held last Friday and Saturday at the Eisenhower and Broadmoor golf courses.
They outshot their closest RMC rival, Adams State, by the wide margin of 29 strokes.
Other members of CC's six man team were Bruce McLaughlin, Don Stouffer, Bob Magie, Rich Nichols and Rick Fir mine.
NEW TIGER MEMBERS are front row, Myrle Miller, Polly Thompson, Karen Mcllvaine, Sue Moore and Robin Beckwith; row two, Diane Frew, Lmnea Erickson, Sue Henrikson, Sue Lindholm, Judy Stampfli, and Gloria Farha; back row, Joan Schm.h, Audrey Snyder, Mary Collier, Marcia Irving, Sharon Shackleford and Carolyn Cool.
KEEP COOL WHEN THE HEAT'S ON classic The modern man takes to these College Hall traditional for their traditional comfort.
The third game was, sadly, more predictable as the Tigers dropped it, 15-3. two runs, but the CSC Bears looked considerably more like the CSC Bears are supposed to look The Wednesday game against Colorado School of Mines in Golden was a pleasant departure from the norm as the Tigers, paced by Barry Anthony's 7-hit pitching and Mike Mestek's clutch hitting, came back from a onetime 4-1 deficit, bombarding the Miners with two tallies each in the 5th and 6th, then clinching the win with a 4-run barrage in the 8th.
The Tigers could only have looked with dread at the prospects for Thursday , as they were slated to meet the extremely powerful and extremely overconfident CSC Bears.
Through that crucial eighth the game was all CC's, and might have remained so but for a wild pitch.
Batley had been turning in a brilliant job for the Tigers, but the blow he received as CSC pitcher Jay Woodward felled him with a wild fast ball, was to prove a fatal one disastrous for Tiger hopes.
Batley hobbled to first, and appeared rocovered, but as the ninth inning opened, CSC touched him for six quick hits to tie it up, 15 all, before Gary Sparkman could relieve Batley and retire the eager Bears.
The Tigers threatened to wrap it up anyway in the bottom of the ninth, but failed to score, giving the bedraggled but still formidable Bears one more chance.
The 10th opened as CSC second baseman Joe Bonaquista moved to second on a throwing error and an infield out, then scored the final, unearned, but winning run on a heart breaking Tiger fielding error.
In the bottom of the fatal inning a demoralized CC nine fell easily to Bear pitching, and the CSC squad, aided by more than a little luck, had gained a triumph against a surprisingly powerful Tiger nine.
CSC was better prepared and understandably less confident Saturday as they held CC to three runs and eight hits while blasting loser Jeff Sauer for 15 hits.
Center-fielder Alex Yankovitch paced Tiger efforts as he slammed in they romped, 15-3.
Saturday's game notwithstanding, Carle's squad made a fine showing for themselves in a week of play, and CC could point with pride to a team that had shown itself capable of beating the best, or at least capale of making the best appear considerably worse.
Fred A Sondermann, associate professor of political science, has been named associate dean and director of special studies.
The new assignment will also include directorship of the summer session, starting in 1963.
Sondermann's responsibilities will be the development of new programs, the winter symposium, and the college's public lectures program.
He will also continue to teach one course in the political science department.
The CC political scientist is coauthor of one book, ""The Theory and Practice of International Relations,"" and author of numerous articles in professional journals.
He is also active in many political organizations, both locally and nationally.
Sondermann lias specialized in international affairs, American Foreign policy, and modern dictatorships.
He was foreign student advisor for three years, and from 19591961, he directed the cross-roads program.
During the summer of 1950, he was one of 15 Americans selected to attend an eight week seminar on foreign policy.
Colorado College wishes to express its thanks to El Paso County, Colorado, for the use of mechanical voting machines during student elections. to help Tigers Into conference Blood donors arc requested for Michael Mingus, a CC student who is now at Penrose Hospital.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE Intra and intermural sports ar slowly coming to an end.
Las week intermural golf finished wit) ghove Robbie Robinson of third soul) winning with a fine 78.
The Zetas, who have been doi well all year in Intramural sports swept baseball.
The winning tcatr consisted of Roger Simon, Curphy, Larry Gilbertson, Bergluiul, Jacques Rivard, Dai Wright, Ken Cairns, Cliff Rousi Dave Scrim, Marv Parliament, am Barry Harrison.
Won Lost Zeta Kappa Sigma Phi Gamma Delta Phi Delta Theta Sigma Chi CAMPUS CLASSICS I SCENE II / GENUINE CORDOVAN by Guardsman $|995 Almost wearproof!— thick soles, storm welts, genuine shell cordovan that shines with a quick flick of a cloth.
Tacos 6"" Pizza Colorado College Tiger • May 17, 1962 lutstanding Students Awarded At Annual Honors Convocation Sponsored by Blue Key Honorary Fraternity, the sixth annual Honors Convocation was held Tuesday, May 22, in Shove Chapel.
Kenneth Burton, and a brief welcoming from Blue Key president, Tim Moe, was the presentation of the Departmental awards and Tom Rivers, chairman of the The award for excellence in Art as presented by Prof.
Professor Snyder presented three chemistry awards YlaxTavn ChemTheodore Chemical lived the ical Society Award, Wadman received tin Rubber Co.
Award for the outstanding freshman, and David Logan was the receipient of the Merk Index Award.
The Kaye Prices Awards in Eclomics and Business Administration were presented by Profs.
Paul Jones and Kenneth Curran to Bob Williams — Business Administration, John Formby — Accounting, nnd Charles Bates, Economics.
William Fisher, of the Geology Dept. presented the Rocky Mountain Association of Geologists Award to the outstanding senior in geology to Rod Feck and the John Mulford Award to Ted Callender for showing the most potential for geological field ■ards for excellence in G'ergiven by the Dept. and the L'al Republic of Germany gh its Consulate in Kansas were presented by Prof.
Thomas Brandt to Jan Fraser, Kossuth, Norm Colbert, Min, Cecilia Luschak, Don Norton, and Paul Anderson.
Louis Geiger, the Clyi'e Augustus Dunway Prize for the outstanding senior history ajor went to Kathy Lyons and arianna Cogswell.
The mathematics prizes for highest scores on GREs were presented by Prof.
Max Lanner of the Music Dept. presented a prize for excellence in organ to Mike Orem and the David and Karen Smith Cowp■thwaite Prize for excellence in usic to Joseph Wilcox.
Wilbur Wright, the Cowperthwaite Prize in physics went to Ron Biondini.
Suzanne Armstrong, Carol Wright, and Art Warwick received awards for excellence in French, and Joy Stoviak and Lorna Bates received them for excellence in Spanish.
Sociology and antropology /ards were presented by Prof. mShaw to Rosemarie Falbo and Martha Tilley.
Assoc, of Social Workers Award and Martha received the ^art-Abbott Prize.
Al Johnson presented Dave Ferguson with the Apollonn Prize for excellence in forenMost valuable player and top point athletic winner awards were presented by Prof.
M.V.P. awards went to Ed Kintz, football; Farrell Thompson, basketball; Duke Dutowski, hockey, and Ron Strasburger, baseball.
Top point winners are Bruce McLaughlin, golf; Russ Sperry, tenjj Ed Loosli, track, and Archie Prestayko, hockey.
After a brief speech, President auis T Benezet presented the All-College Awards for outstandg service to the college comanity.
For superior service to CC publications, Caroline Creyke was presented with the Publications Board TFC, Skip Meis, Rastall Center Board chairman, and ASCC President Chris Griffiths were given awards for outstanding service.
For his character and scholarly interest in social science, Chris Griffiths was presented with the Esden Memorial Award.
Presented by Tim Moe, the Blue Key Award to the outstanding freshman went to class commissioner, Paul Carson.
The special award for outstanding service to the student organization by a member of the faculty went to Dr.
The Convocation closed with the installation of Max S Power as president of ASCC, the singing of the Alma Mater, and the benedicColorado College Colorado Springs, Colorado, May 25, 1962 Vol.
LXV, No 27 THE NEWLY INSTALLED EXECUTIVE COUNCIL of the Associated Students of sists of Peigi Benham, Steve Sabom, Max Power, Terry Kid Thompson, front row; and Dave Holdorf, Al Loosli, Pat Chapman, Joe Heller, White.
Harry Griffiths Delivers Baccalaureate The Reverend Harry G Griffiths of the First Presbyterian Church of Pueblo, Colorado, will deliver the traditional baccalaureate sermon at Colorado College on Sunday, June 3.
Christopher Griffiths, a economics major and former president of the student body.
The baccalaureate speaker, a native of Fostoria, Ohio, served in three churches in that state before he was named pastor at First Presbyterian in Pueblo.
During World War II, Reverend Griffiths served as an army chaplain with the United States armed forces in Australia, New Guinea, and the Philippines.
He is active in community affairs in Pueblo and is former director of the Single Fund, the United Fund effort in Pueblo.
Col arado Collec e contier, Stevi Frink Polly Ben Lewis , and Chuck ?,, ilins Spends Summer in Dr.
Collins would supervise counseling interns and teach a course in group counseling.
During the six-week-long summer session, Professor Collins will participate in the summer Faculty Lecture series.
The Colorado College professor will be accompanied by his wife, Myrle, and their two daughters, Beth and Anne.
Collins is dean of girls at West Junior High School in Colorado Springs.
Following the six-week summer session they will spend two weeks touring the islands in the 50th state.
Senior, Ben Lewis, 85 votes; Piegi Benham, 79, and Pat Chapman, 77: Junior, Ed DeGeorge, 103; Dave Holdorf, 68, and Al Loosli, 66; Sophomore, Chuck White, 104; Polly Thompson, 82, and Jo Heller, 74.
Dean Moon —Meeting of all new men students, lecture room, Olin Hall, Speaker: Dean Reid —ASCC dinner for all new students, Rastall Center dining room TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 1962 —Chest x-rays for all freshmen and transfer men, Cossitt Hall.
Ftat, I would like to thank all of the Persons who have worked so closely with the Tiger tins semester Without ^theii tireless efforts the Tiger could never have made it to press My sincerest thanks and appreciation for the afternoons spent in its service.
Tomorrow brings the first day of finals, startling y showing us how little time is left.
CC will certainly miss the Class of '62 for all of the activities they participated in, and foi the singular mark they have made here.
ACADEMIC CALENDAR — 1962-1963 1962 — SUMMER SESSION June 17, Sunday _ Residence halls open June 18, Monday ~Eeg.strat.on June 19, Tuesday Instruction begms, 8:00m.
Thanksgiving holiday Saturday, December 8 Instruction ends, 12 noon Saturday, December 8, 12 noon Tuesday, December 11,9m.
Saturday, March 23, 12 noon Spring recess begins Monday, April 1, 8:00m Spring recess ends Saturday, May 11 Instruction ends, 12 noon Monday, May 13 Thursday, May 16 Reading period and Comprehensive examinations Friday, May 17 Saturday, May 25 Final examinations Sunday, May 26 Baccalaureate Monday, May 27 Commencement 1963— SUMMER SESSION Sunday, June 16 _ Residence halls open Monday, June 17 ; Registration Tuesday, June 18 Instruction begins, 8:00m.
AKS imp o_ By Rosenfeld Normally, when I feel a sentimental mood about to envelope me, I flick the Scripto into my abalone shell, heave -a sigh of surrender to the approaching wave of emotion, and count on eight hours of straight Z's to reimplant my feet on terra firma.
Now, however, I've decided it's high time to record these inner murmerings of my usually thankless soul, despite the shrieks and howls of posterity who doesn't want to be bothered with such nonsense.
So if posterity will kindly remove her hands from her ears, we'll have a round of Kleenex for everyone in the house while I pour a tumbler of 90 proof soul juice.
You couldn't have traversed those years any faster if you had been strapped to the back of a frightened iguana.
Rastall Center Letters to the Editor Dear Sir: The next time I hear anyone say anything about the softness of the younger generation, I will strike him down on the spot.
That surge of student bookmoving energy Wednesday was magnificent, not only in its quantity and intensity, but in the fine discoordination that moved so many .books so fast and so successfully.
It was a wonderful day; so good, in fact, that we now have under consideration the possibility of moving the entire Charles Learning Tutt Library back into Coburn next Spring, a project that poses an entirely different set of problems.
Pending this decision, I want to express my deep gratitude to the students of the College for their fine help in the move.
We thought the Student Body might be interested in knowing that ""our"" ASCC Traffic Committee was treated to dinner at the Embers Monday night.
The meal was paid for by you and I They used the proceeds from the traffic fines to pay for this repast.
We also noticed that the outgoing ASCC Executive Committee went to the Kachina Lounge Monday afternoon.
If CC can support an ice rink it can also support a Dog Track, The bleachers could continue the Great Olin Wall to Shove Auditorium, or Washburn Field could be modified and kennel space would be available on the old ROTC stomp grounds.
SPRINGS' HOUSE OF WHEELS SCHWINN and RALEIGH BICYCLES PEAK AVENUE And somehow you a million or so hours of panicked studying.
And you griped and complained every inch of the way, somehow loving and cherishing every one of those damn inches.
And now it's almost all over and you stand there barefooted, pushing your big toe in the sand and grinning sheepishly— trying to find someone to thank for those wonderful, gorgeous years.
You say thanks to your parents and marvel at the vastness of their understanding.
You say thanks to the professors who pushed and shoved you and you're just a little bit embarrased by the many curses you flung at them for imagined injustices.
You thank your friends for all the laughs, the mutual advice, and the companionship and you're very very sad because you must leave them.
And suddenly you realize the inadequacev and the smallness of those ""thanks,"" so you keep your mouth shut and hope they'll understand —and, of course, they do.
Then you stand up, look around for the final time, and force out a choked ""good-bye"" and, believe it or not, there's a little tear in your eye.
You whisper to yourself, ""Je ne regrette rien,"" and you start the next four years.
Senior Announcements Senior announcements are still available at the college bookstore.
SUMMER OFFICE JOBS DENVER Need skilled typists, stenos, bookkeepers, office-machine operators, etc., for vacation replacements in Denver's leading firms.
Work by the day, week or month according to your own desire and personal schedule.
The campus chapter, open only to fourth year ROTC cadets, was organized last fall.
The 34 juniors, who will be fourth-year cadets during the forthcoming academic year, received their legion lanyards from Col.
Amanda Ellis Judges Short Story Contest Miss Amanda M, Ellis, professor of English and writer in residence at Colorado College, was one of three judges for the annual short story contest sponsored by the Denver Women's Press Club.
Judging with Miss Ellis were Margaret Cousins, Doubleday editor, and Anne Einselin, assistant editor of the Ladies' Home Journony the Carson during a c campus last week.
Attending the ceremony were Donald Oden, director of student activities; Lt.
Alpha Lamba Delta Initiates Twelve Twelve new members were initiated last Tuesday, May 22, into Alpha Lambda Delta, a national honorary organization for Fresh; men women having a 3. grade point' or above.Services were held 1 in the'.'iWES room of Rastall, folI lowed' by dinner.
Janet Nyquisl,"" president;' Frieda Koster, secretary; Linda Dunkin, treasurer; Jan Afton, Onica Friend, Catherine Grant, Judy Jaccard, Norma ; Parker, Susan Phillips, Mrs; Ruth Thompson, Hilary Todd and Genevieve Vaughn.
The three judges selected a short story written by Margaret Shipley of Boulder, Colorado.
Among her works are the novel ""Elizabeth,"" such textbooks as ""Continental Literature"" and ""Recent Continental Literature,"" and ""Representative Short Stories"" which went through seventeen editions.
Her television play ""The Death Waltz"" was broadcast over the ABC network last year.
A member of the faculty at Colorado College since 1927, Miss Ellis was named writer in residence two years ago.
Digital Computing Offered in Fall Colorado College will introduce a new course in September designed to teach students how to work complicated mathematical problems with an electric computThe course, to be known as Introduction to Digital Computing, was approved by the college faculty at its regular monthly meeting Monday.
Two years of college level mathematics courses, involving analytic geometry and calculus, will be required to gain admission to the year-long course carrying two credit hours each semester.
The course will deal with logical and mechanical characterizations of a computer; number systems and computing codes; coding, mathematical models, numerical analysis, and flow-charting; and automatic programming systems.
Prior to going before the college faculty, the new course was approved by the mathematics department, the division of natural sciences, and the committee on instruction at the independent college of arts and sciences.
In other action, the college faculty voted to reorganize the geography program.
The result was four new geography courses to replace three differently structured courses.
Each of the new geography courses, to be given during the coming academic year, will carry three hours of credit.
Physical Geography — A study of the physical elements of geography, including the earth and its representation, the nature and distributinon of climate, soils, vegetation, and landforms.
Cultural Geography — A general introduction to the ways in which man has modified and used the landscapes of the world.
Geography of North America — The cultural, physical and economic geography of the United States and Canada, considered in historical perspective.
Black and Gold Black and Gold, campus men's enthusiasm group, recently elected 12 new members to its midst.
John Barker, Joe Bergquist, Newell Bossart, Chuck Deaver, Dave Herrington, Al Loosli, Dan Martin, Jeff Sauer, Jim Schultz, Gregg Smith, Bill Stafford, and Ron Taylor.
Newly elected officers for the 1962-63 school year are Roland Poe, president; Chris Batley, vice-president; George Klein, secretary; Wayne Deutscher, THREE-FIFTHS OF THE DRUM QUINTET who, in conjunction with Fine Arts Week, entertained CC students and faculty for an hour last Friday, May 18.
Also playing were Henry English and Rod Kenney, who drums with the Del Rays down at Suiseppe's.
For the official part of the program, they played African songs for an hour.
As an encore for the fasinated audience, they drummed for another hour and one-half.
Tacos & Pizza May 25, 1962 • Colorado College Tiger Red Top Drive In 1520 So.
Though a few of the athletes showed their lack of conditioning by nearly passing out at the end of their events, the performances on the whole were good.
Farrell Howell of the Kappa Sigs had the best over-all record, taking firsts in the high jump and broad jump and a second hi the discus.
The final order was Phi Gamma Delta, Sigma Chi, Zeta, Kappa Sigma, Phi Delta Theta, and Beta Theta Pi.
Though the Kappa Sigs could only take fourth in this last event, they still had enough points to grab the interfraternity championship.
Voll'yb'U 5 1 3 S Wrestling 3 Vz 5 M j Tr'ck & Fid 5 13 j Softball 3 1 5 I Tot.
Sanders' Kentucky Fried CHICKEN ""it's fingtr liclcin' good"" *z^-$> Take-Home yZ^> Department Tr-rfL^ Op»n J_U^j\ 12m.
This kind of a program should emphasize sports activities that will have a carry over value in later life, such as tennis, golf, swimming, horseback riding, etc.
Calisthenics should also be an integral part, because good shape is essential to success in sports, while it also demonstrably improves performance in other areas.
What must be avoided (and has not been in many schools) is a schedule that has students tramping through three feet of snow to get to an eight o'clock swimming class.
Ed. program will have the advantage of making sports an organic aspect of campus life through the participation of the whole student body.
It could also increase interest in intercollegiate sports, for participation in sports at an amateurish level almost inevitably elicits interest in seeing these sports performed in the more polished manner of the intercollegiate team play.
THE NEW CHEERLEADERS, selected by the Enthusiasm Committee are Bobbie Tolley, Linnea Erickson, Isabel Williams, Jennie Ivloore, and Cheryl Betts.
For best results, bring clothing on hangers Colorado College Tiger • May 25, 1962 Carle Reviews 1962 Sports Looks at '63 Season Hopes By Peter Bonavich and Jim Heckman In an interview Tuesday, May 22, CC Director of Athletics Jerry Carle provided the Tiger with a survey-of the year's sports activities together with a look at prospects for the future.
At Commencement Exercises top places in both tennis and golf, and took second in basketball and track, an extremely good showing for a school of CC's size and primary goals.
The coming season will in many ways mark a turning point in the iduct of both of these sports at Colorado College.
As before, no student will be considered for a schol■ship unless he is academically admissible and able; under the new program, however, athletic ability alone will no longer be sufficient to assure an award to a few such admissible students.
In the immediate future, however, and in particular where the football team is concerned, the benefits are less certain.
Next year's squad will have lost 22 senior players, and will therefore be heavily dependent on the support of incoming freshmen.
Up to this year, a given number of grants could be ""earmarked"" for award to incoming admissible students who displayed ability in football.
The team will be a young one, the Tiger coach said, emphasizing the importance of experience as a factor in winning and as a factor that can only be built up over a long period of time.
Facing a strong Rocky Mountain Conference next year, the Tigers were expected to make at least a creditable showing against heavy opposition.
In hockey, another new policy, this time on the part of the El Pomar Foundation, promises an upturn in Tiger rink hopes.
Since the Tigers are the only team in the Rocky Mountain Conference to play hockey, and since this rule does not apply for any of the teams with which CC competes on the ice, the Tigers this year removed their hockey program from RMC jurisdiction.
This action will enable El Pomar to increase their grants, beginning next year, to a level that is more consistent with that prevailing in the rest of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association.
Again, even with this improvement in the grants program, building a hockey team is a slow process, and the prospects for next season's conference play are if anything more formidable than was the case this year.
To provide a greater variety of competition still consistent with our level of play, a number of Eastern teams have been added to the schedule for 1962-63, and the completion of the new practice rink should provide even more incentive both to active student support and to team improvement.
Basketball prospects for next year, after a 1962 showing that pushed Eastlack's squad to an RMC second this year, promise to be good, with perhaps not quite so strong a showing against a conference whose quality of basketball is rapidly increasing.
Turning to spring sports, Carle looked for a good performance from track, golf, and tennis.
The track squad, losing only three graduating seniors, promises to excel again after a Conference 2nd this year.
The golf squad, 1st this year in Conference play, loses only one senior, Gordy Aamoth, and can look for a good showing on the links in 1963.
The Tiger tennis team, also sporting a 1st place award this season, loses only number one man, Rusty Bastedo, and looks forward to three highly rated freshmen next spring.
After a painful 4-16 overall record this year (1-13 in Conference play), the Tiger coach emphasized the youth of the team, which is losing only two seniors, and the excellence of this year's frosh players.
Again pointing to experience as a vital factor, Carle looked to next season's play as a time for building on this year's improved nucleus.
The Tiger nine wound up the season last weekend (May 18 and 19) with a twin loss to Western State College at Gunnison.
The season statistics show sophomore shortstop Dennis Walker pacing the Tiger hitting efforts with a .423, followed closely by freshman Steve Gustafson, with a .420 mark.
Though baseball this year was something less than spectacular, Carle seemed justified in looking for considerable improvement next year with a returning group of more seasoned players.
In summary, Carle outlined a year's progress in an athletic program that, if not always a victorious one, is an extremely adaptable one, and one which promises to put up a strong showing in every aspect of intercollegiate competition during the coming season.
The two honorary degree recipients are Walter K Koch, leading Colorado business executive, and Dr.
President Bernard will deliver the Colorado College commencement address.
National Bank, the Silver State Savings and Loan Association, The Wheat Ridge Foundation, the Denver Dry Goods Company, and the Great Western Sugar Company.
He also holds an honorary doctor of engineering degree from the Colorado School of Mines.
He joined the telephone company in 1923 and within two years was advanced to traffic superintendent at Pueblo.
During the following 20 years he was Denver traffic chief, general sales manager, Salt Lake City commercial supervisor, and Denver commercial supervisor.
In 1945 he was promoted to general commercial manager and in 1949 was named vice president.
He is also vice-president of the Metropolitan Safety Council, Colorado civilian aide to the secretary of the army, and past president of the Denver Chamber of Commerce.
Bernard is a Colorado College alumnus, having attended the college during 1912 and 1913.
He holds a B.A. from Pomona College and an LL.D. from Claremont Men's College.
Bernard is president of the Association of Independent California Colleges and Universities, president of the Independent Colleges of Southern California, Inc., and a member of the executive committee of Independent Colleges of America.
A college administrator for the past 45 years, he began his career in education as assistant to the president of Pomona College, a post he held for 10 years.
He has served as events committee chairman of the Brides Auditorium and secretary and managing director of Claremont College.
He holds a BA from Pomona College and an honorary LL.D from Claremont Men's College.
They are Judith Gibson, who is majoring in mathematics, and James Blair, majoring in history, both of Grand Junction, Colorado.
Miss Gibson plans to enter graduate school to continue her study of mathematics once she completes her tour of duty in Africa.
She has turned down three assistantship offers for graduate work to accept the African assignment.
She hopes eventually to teach mathematics in the United States either on the high school or college level.
At Colorado College, Miss Gibson has been a member of Cap and Gown and Alpha Lambda Delta, and is president of Gamma Phi Beta.
This year she was named to Phi Beta Kappa, scholastic honorarv society.
Each student will live with a Colorado Springs family during his stay here.
This marks the first year the program will be attempted at another educational institution.
The program is co-sponsored by the International institute of Education in co-operation with the United States State Department.
Tin 1 local program will give 50 foreign students the opportunity to compare and evaluate their various experiences in this country.
The United States State Department again this year will contribute toward the travel expenses of ten of the students.
A host committee is busy assigning students to host families for the week of June 9-16, Mrs.
Douglas Freed of Colot rado College will servo' as ""town >, and gown"" general chairmen for e the program.
Henry I Szymiinski is chairman of the international pot luck dinner, Mrs.
These students have studied at 75 colleges scattered from Maine to Oregon and from Florida to California.
Crossroads participants and local college students will hold at Colorado College's Rastall Center, Announcement to Seniors Seniors — Be sure to pick up caps and gownn at college bookstore either Friday June 1, or Saturday June 2 until noon.
Council Nominates Seven Student Members Nearly 80 students were nominated in the Honor Council Assembly to fill the seven positions on the Honor Council.
Graduating members of the Honor Council are Lynn Carmichael, Gay Petzold, Karen Williamson, Tim Moe, Jerry Moore, Stew Ritchie, and Gordy Aamoth.
Returning members of the Council are Erv Hinds, chairman; Seece Boyce, secretary; Ben Lewis, Karen Bessesen, Rachael Jensen, Ed DeGeorge, and Steve Sabom.
Classes were dismissed for the move which featured an all-campus picnic at noon.
The modern glass and curtain-wall structure, featuring wall-to-wall carpeting on each of the four floors, was financed through a gift from EI Pomar Foundation of Colorado Springs.
Not all of the 180,000 volumes in the old Coburn Library were moved Wednesday due to the fact that not all of the shelves for the new library arrived in time.
Providing more than 50,000 square feet of floor space, the Charles Learning Tutt Library will contain seminar rooms, typing rooms, microcard rooms, a special collection room, tape recording rooms, a periodical room, administrative offices, and stacks.
The new library consists of a garden-level opening on one side to a sunken court, a glass-walled main flooor, and a third and fourth floors walled with pre-cast concrete panels measuring 11 by 22 feet each.
The two upper stories are pierced by six-inch wide vertical strip windows.
THE INFAMOUS CHUTE leading from the upper stories on the north side of Coburn Library to the eager hands of carriers waiting below.
Business Firms Want Broad Backgrounds Early Graduates to Get Degrees A majority of the business and industrial firms recruiting graduating seniors at Colorado College this spring have been looking for students with a broad academic background who are capable of eventually stepping into management positions.
But most of these sales jobs are designed to lead to junior executive posts.
The average starting salary offered this year was $400 — ranging from a low of §375 to a high of $475 — for students with no experience.
Representatives from 19 different firms visited the college campus here this year during the three-month recruiting period.
He attributed a part of this to encouragement from professors in the field in which they are taking their major.
Rich Love, Thomas Burk, Rick Carroll, Tony Ayers, Tony Gaskill, Chuck White, Lee Hunt, Jim Knapp and Pete McLaughlin.
Both Clay Sorrick and Steve Cross, who acted as counselors this year, will retain their jobs for the coming year.
The 49 seniors and graduate students who earned degrees at Colorado College last August and in January will receive their degree diplomas at commencement exercises here June 4.
The August graduates included 18 seniors who will receive bachelor's degrees and eight graduate students who will receive master of arts in teaching degrees.
Of the January graduates, two will receive master of arts degrees and 20 will receive bachelor's degrees.
Ralph J Streamer of 1304 N Foote; Jeanine Kochar Bramwell of Route 3; Penelope Jane Hylbom of 15 W Uintah; Don Gregory Robbins of 1517 Prairie Rd.
Also receiving bachelor's degrees are Ruth S Black of the United States Air Force Academy; Juanita Presley Caroom of the United States Air Force Academy; Carol Joyce Hammond of 1430 Pine, Rocky Ford, Colo.
An all-around athlete at Colorado College, Blair was end on the Tiger football team for two years, and for three years was one of the college's star trackmen.
LOST— Class ring with eagle, date 1960, and name ""Wilson"" on the crest.
Toole, Utah; R William Goodacre of 4904 45th St., Red Deer, Alberta, Can.
