LIBERTY UNIVERSITY JOHN MCCONE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS AUGUST 1-NOVEMBER 3, 1962 A THESIS SUBMITTED TO TO FACULTY OF THE HISTORY DEPARTMENT IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS IN HISTORY BY CHRISTOPHER M HEIST LYNCHBURG, VIRGINIA NOVEMBER 12, 2010 APPROVED Dr.
Deputy Director of Research, CIA Sorensen, Theodore “Ted” Special Counsel to the President Stevenson, Adlai E American Representative to the UN Taylor, General Maxwell D President’s Military Representative Chairmen, Joint Chiefs of Staff Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr.
For the next two weeks, both countries went to their highest military alert levels, and it seemed likely that both countries would go to war, with the probability of nuclear exchange greater than ever before.
In the months preceding the crisis, United States intelligence sought to discover the true nature of the Soviet buildup in Cuba, while their Soviet counterpart tried to keep that buildup secret as long as possible.
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency , John McCone, was one of the first government officials that discovered the large military buildup underway in Cuba.
Because of his own personal beliefs about communism and his experiences with nuclear power, McCone led a personal effort to convince members of the intelligence community and the Kennedy administration that the Soviets might take such a risk and place nuclear weapons in Cuba.
During the crisis, McCone was one of the intelligence officials responsible for briefing the Kennedy administration on the Soviet efforts in Cuba.
After the crisis subsided, McCone provided Kennedy with confirmation that the Soviets had begun removal of the missiles, officially ending the crisis.
John McCone‟s role in the crisis is one of the key facets to understanding the reasons of the crisis and its outcome.
Because of the declassification of government documents and memoirs from the participants, historians have a wide range of documentation for their studies.
Most historians focused on the reasons why the crisis happened, and the role of government officials in his outcome.
In most historical works, McCone received little attention before or during the crisis.
Even in the most detailed works, 1 historians viewed his role as secondary to the crisis.
McCone maintained throughout the summer and fall of 1962 that the Soviet Union might place nuclear weapons into Cuba.
McCone made his concerns clear to President Kennedy and other members of the administration before leaving on his honeymoon in late August 1962.
During his honeymoon, he called for more reconnaissance flights over Cuba, empowering his deputy, General Marshall Carter, to continue his efforts in Washington.
When he returned from his honeymoon, he found gaps in the reconnaissance over western portions of Cuba, and pushed for more reconnaissance flights.
On the final of those authorized flights, October 14, the reconnaissance flights found the missiles.
McCone‟s “crusade”4 during the summer and fall of 1962 was a primary reason for the early discovery of the missiles.
At the start of the crisis, McCone delegated many of his responsibilities to his subordinates, and created a committee composed of several intelligence groups to deliver daily intelligence recommendations based on the daily reconnaissance flights.
Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy 1958-1964 , 198. 2 proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion.
Despite his push for air strikes even during the blockade, McCone had the job of briefing the administration on the intelligence reports, keeping Kennedy and his cabinet informed on the Soviet military buildup in Cuba.
Despite his emotional calls for attacks on Cuba, McCone‟s efforts to combine the intelligence reports, analysis, and photo interpretation branches during the crisis allowed the president to have a detailed picture on the withdrawal of the missiles, and allowed him to make informed decisions when dealing with the Soviet government.
After Kennedy made the decision to blockade Cuba, McCone utilized the committees he organized during the first week of the crisis to bring detailed intelligence reports on the construction efforts in Cuba and the status of Soviet ships bound for Cuba.
He also had the important task of briefing members of the press and Congress on the situation, and provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks, despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the diplomatic standing of the United States.
When the crisis weakened his emotional state, he urged caution during EXCOMM deliberations, and requested that his deputies prepare daily memorandums combining the evaluations of the joint committees and other CIA intelligence reports.
After Khrushchev authorized the removal of the missiles in Cuba, Kennedy, under intense pressure from Congress and public, relied on the CIA Director for analysis on whether the missiles had indeed left Cuba.
McCone gave the administration the conclusions of the analysts and committees studying the Soviet withdrawal, concluding that the Soviet Union dismantled and shipped the missiles back to the Soviet Union.
XI, 3 important role of giving Kennedy the evidence he needed that the missiles were in fact leaving Cuba, officially ending the crisis.
After the crisis subsided at the end of 1962, American historians began searching for the reasons why the events took place as they did.
In the years immediately following the crisis, historians focused on what happened before and after, asking why the events happened and why the government failed to prevent the crisis.
Without classified government documents, historians used their own experiences, evidence available at the time, and previous surprise attacks to prove or disprove that the government could have prevented the crisis, or defend the government‟s actions before and during the crisis.
In the 1970s and 1980s, several historians used emerging primary evidence from personal memoirs, actual intelligence training, and newly declassified documents to shed light on the events, methods, and problems facing an earlier detection of Soviet intentions in Cuba.
These archives led many historians to re-evaluate interpretations of events.
These new historians focused more on the mindset of the United States government during the crisis, Soviet motivations for the introduction of missiles into Cuba, and the intelligence efforts to keep that introduction a secret from the Americans.
Other historians used the massive amount of primary evidence in the post-Cold War era to make dramatic narrative histories of the Crisis.
However, even with the number of works produced on the crisis, historians produced no encompassing work on the importance of McCone‟s participation.
One of the reasons McCone has a secondary role in the majority of histories is the lack of a published memoir.
Most historians choose to utilize the large array of sources to discover the reasons why the crisis happened and how select members of the government influenced the outcome.
Most of the information on McCone‟s involvement in EXCOMM comes from other participants such as George Ball, McGeorge Bundy, Robert Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., and Theodore “Ted” Sorensen.
Ball‟s memoir examined McCone‟s management of the intelligence effort before and during the crisis, and showed McCone‟s repeated requests for more flights even during his honeymoon.
Bundy takes a more critical view on McCone, showing how McCone used his position to convince the administration, without evidence, that the Soviets were placing nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy‟s work is one of the best tales on the crisis, but contained little information on McCone except for a few quotations.
Brugioni‟s insight as a peripheral member in the crisis provided key insights into McCone‟s management style and his role outside the EXCOMM meetings.
Most of the information on McCone‟s involvement came from excerpts from larger works on issues facing the United States during the crisis.
The most detailed work that studied McCone‟s involvement in depth was Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali‟s One Hell of a Gamble, where McCone received a small section on his “crusade” during the summer and fall of 1962.21 Another excellent source on McCone‟s involvement with the intelligence mission comes from James Nathan‟s Anatomy of a Missile Crisis.
Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow focused on the reasons the Soviets placed missiles in Cuba, and noted that McCone was one of the first officials to recognize the Soviet reasons.
Beschloss detailed how McCone‟s background influenced his views about the Soviet Union, and his belief that the Soviets might place nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Eisenhower, Kennedy, and the JUPITERS gave an excellent analysis on McCone‟s arguments supporting the decision to remove the JUPITER missiles from Turkey in their negotiations with the Soviet Union.
A complement to Nash‟s work is Bohning‟s detailed analysis of the covert operations authorized against Castro during the summer of 1962.
Bohning provided information on how the intelligence resources used for the earlier operations helped McCone discover the true nature of the Soviet buildup in Cuba.
Allyn, Blight, and Welch‟s Cuba on the Brink contained a brief section on McCone‟s clash with members of Kennedy‟s administration on the missile issue, and credited McCone as the principal figure in the discovery of the missiles.
Most historians viewed McCone as the primary reason that the United States found the missiles, but used information on his role as part of a larger study on the crisis itself.
McCone was a key member of the intelligence effort to find the missiles, and served as one of the core members of EXCOMM when the president needed solutions to the discovery of the missiles in Cuba.
When Khrushchev made the decision to remove the missiles from Cuba, McCone took on the responsibility of overseeing the intelligence sources he created during the crisis to determine if indeed the Soviets were removing the missiles from Cuba.
John McCone and the Intelligence Mission John McCone was the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency from November 1961 to April 1965.
During the summer and fall of 1962, he maintained that the Soviet Union might place nuclear weapons into Cuba.
McCone made his concerns clear to President John Kennedy and other members of the administration before leaving on his honeymoon in late August 1962.
During his honeymoon, he used his deputy, General Marshall S Carter, to continue his efforts in Washington.
When he returned from his honeymoon a few weeks later, he still found gaps in the reconnaissance over western portions of Cuba and pushed again for more reconnaissance flights.
After the president finally authorized more flights, the October 14 flight found the missiles.
McCone‟s “crusade”31 was a primary reason for the early discovery of these missiles.
His father, Alexander McCone, ran the family‟s iron foundries throughout California.
McCone rose through the ranks of several steel factories, became the Vice President of the Consolidated Steel Corporation, and helped establish the BechtelMcCone Corporation.
As founder and as an engineer, McCone had a role in the design and construction of several oil refineries, factories, and power plants in the Americas and the Middle East.
Even during the Great Depression, McCone managed his businesses making large sums of money through construction projects.
During World War II, he founded the Seattle-Tacoma 29 Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 146.
After the war, McCone served in the Truman administration as a Deputy to Secretary of Defense James Forrestal, and as the Under Secretary of the Air Force.
During his time within the Truman administration, McCone played an important role in the incorporation of nuclear weapons into air warfare tactics.
McCone‟s comments made him many enemies within the Eisenhower administration, especially on the issue of the nuclear test ban, which he opposed.
McCone believed that Soviet propaganda encouraged many Americans to support the test ban treaty, and fought against President Eisenhower‟s support for the ban as well.
The main reason McCone maintained his position as Chairmen of the AEC was the fear of the political consequences if Eisenhower removed a Republican he had placed in the position.
The dictatorship of Fuglencio Batista led many Cubans to resent their government and his American supporters.
Castro and his movement toppled the Batista government faster than experts in both the United States and the Soviet Union had predicted.
As Castro consolidated his power, he declared Cuba a socialist state, modeled after the teachings of Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin.
This dramatic event provided the Soviet Union with a tremendous opportunity, while for the United States this event proved its worst fears.
With a Soviet-backed communist nation in Latin America, the Soviet Union could pressure many Latin American countries into accepting communism, undermining the U.S.‟ close neighbors.
With the close proximity of Cuba to the United States, roughly ninety miles, the Soviet Union could threaten the security of the United States by placing weapons in Cuba.
In response to recommendations from the intelligence community, the newly elected President John F Kennedy approved a plan for an invasion of Cuba to remove Castro from office.
On April 12, 1961, the invasion commenced, with surprise air strikes against Cuba air force buildings and installations with Cuban forces landing on the beaches.
However, the attacks eliminated only half of the Cuban air force, and Kennedy denied several requests for air support.
There were several reasons Kennedy placed the Republican executive at the head of the CIA.46 Both McCone and Robert Kennedy‟s families attended the same Catholic Church, and they became close during the sickness and death of McCone‟s first wife, Rosemary Cooper.
Arthur Schlesinger, an aide to Kennedy, believed this friendship had a large role in the selection of McCone, but McCone‟s reputation as a “rigid cold warrior” was also important.
McCone replaced many of Dulles‟ deputies and most of the division chiefs, and battled with the Pentagon on the use of intelligence planes, satellites, and better logistical support.
Because of his prior relationship with the AEC, McCone set up a CIA 45 Polmar and Gresham, DEFCON-2, 46.
McCone also had the advantage of being new to the intelligence community, giving him a more objective viewpoint on intelligence estimates.
McCone entered the office as the Agency released reports on the Bay of Pigs operation.
One report, from Lyman Kirkpatrick, detailed the reasons for the failure of the operation.
Kirkpatrick made the mistake of handing the report directly to McCone instead of using the proper channels, a breach that angered McCone as much as the report itself did.
This incident led “the hawkish republican” to impose stricter guidelines on intelligence reports, and later blamed Kennedy and Dulles for failing to make the invasion work.
McCone earned the reputation of a “hard-driving executive” as DCI, but many believed him to be a much more cautious and realistic manager than previous directors.
McCone had the important role of repairing the reputation and morale of the CIA, by utilizing new measures to protect secrecy and provide quality national intelligence.
While McCone reformed the CIA, tensions mounted between the Soviet Union and the United States.
After the Bay of Pigs, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet government voiced support for the Castro regime and issued several warnings to Washington.
Castro, fearful of future invasions, began requesting larger arms shipments from the Soviet Union.
The Seven Leaders who Built the Soviet Regime , 236. 13 the economic assistance to the fledging communist nation.
In Khrushchev‟s mind, the situation in Cuba and the success of the regime coincided with the overall prestige of the Soviet Union in the international independence movement of the early 1960s.
The Soviet assistance at the time involved personal weapons and vehicles, as Khrushchev delayed his decision to introduce weapons systems that were more expensive.
In April 1962, after making the decision to send military aid to Cuba, Khrushchev continued receiving reports of increased American subversion efforts in Cuba.
The Soviet premier analyzed the situation and realized Cuba‟s importance to the communist movement and the advantages to placing nuclear weapons on the island to secure Castro and balance the strategic situation with the Americans.
It was then that Khrushchev decided to supply Cuba with long-range weapons to accomplish his goals.
Khrushchev saw that the best option to solve these dilemmas was to introduce medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles , weapons that the Soviet Union had in surplus.
This decision solved the two issues without overstretching the Soviet economy.
The first step in formulating the plan was to sell the idea to Fidel Castro.
While many in the Soviet government believed that Castro would not accept a large Soviet base in Cuba, the negotiations concluded with the decision to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Khrushchev assigned Rodion Malinovsky, his Defense Minister, to create an operation to hide the deployment from Western intelligence.
On May 24, the Soviet government initiated Operation ANADYR to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba, and prepared the selected units for deployment.
Khrushchev believed that the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba would counterbalance the American superiority in long-range ballistic missiles and guaranteed the safety of Cuba.
Operation ANADYR went into effect in June 1962, and preparations for the shipment of materials to Cuba began.
With the amount of materials and personnel assigned to ANADYR, the operation marked the clear divergence from past Soviet assistance to non-bloc countries.
According to Anatoly Gribkov, one of the staff assigned to planning ANADYR, the sheer size of the operation meant American intelligence would eventually discover the missiles.
The plan called for large shipments that contained several missile divisions of the Soviet Rocket Forces, anti-aircraft weapons, jet fighters and bombers, and radar equipment.
Soviet personnel received orders to pack for frigid weather, stating their destination for somewhere in the upper regions of Siberia.
En route into the Atlantic, Soviet captains, under the supervision of Committee for State Security officers, opened their destination orders, learning that Cuba was their destination.
Soviet personnel offloaded the materials at night in Cuba only, and concealed their transport to the construction sites.
These methods limited the possibilities of premature discovery of the contents of the shipments.
The Kennedy administration enacted MONGOOSE to remove Castro‟s government from power.
A select group of Washington officials met together to discuss subversion and reconnaissance plans.
Officials such as Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Deputy Undersecretary Alexis Johnson, General Maxwell Taylor, and General Lyman Lemnitzer served in the Special Group.
Robert Kennedy also attended many of the MONGOOSE meetings, but had a more limited role.
While MONGOOSE focused on efforts to collapse the Castro regime, it had the unexpected role of revealing the beginnings of the Soviet buildup in Cuba, which led to increased reconnaissance of the island.
The first method involved surveillance of shipments destined for Cuba, and the types of weapons or materials they contained.
The second came from first-hand accounts from refugees fleeing Cuba for the United 77 Ibid.
The use of intelligence agents on the ground in Cuba provided the most accurate information on the ground.
Photoreconnaissance, the final method, provided the concrete proof needed for Washington to act on the intelligence reports from Cuba.
The surveillance of shipping bound for Cuba carried with it inherent limitations and problems.
While satellite and reconnaissance planes provided detailed photographs of the ships bound for Cuba, much of the contents remained in the holds within the ship.
For those crates on the decks, the CIA used a specialized system known as “crate-ology”.83 This system utilized a computer and calculated measurements of items in reconnaissance pictures, formulating their size for analysts to compare to their data on Soviet technology.
The system did correctly identify the crates transporting bomber and fighter parts on the decks of the Soviet ships, but neither the crate-ology system nor the standard shipping intelligence methods found the MRBMs within the holds of the ship.
Since the overthrow of the Batista government in 1959, thousands of Cuban refugees fled to the United States and brought reports with them.
These refugees brought stories of dramatic events in Cuba, notably reports of missiles in Cuba.
This caused the “cry wolf phenomenon”85 to develop inside the intelligence community.
The sheer volume of the reports also made this form of intelligence insufficient on its own.
In terms of providing evidence for Soviet actions in Cuba, the system could do little more than describe the situation for the people of Cuba and for the mentality of the common people on American efforts in Cuba.
The most useful photo-reconnaissance came from the Lockheed U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance plane.
The main problem to this method of reconnaissance is its dependence on good to fair weather to bring back accurate pictures.
Within hurricane season in the Caribbean, there were a limited number of days each month for complete coverage of Cuba.
The Soviet Union also devised a defensive missile system to engage high altitude aircraft, increasing the risk over areas where the system existed.
Up to September 1962, Cuba lacked this missile system, but after their installation, the Kennedy administration decided to limit the flights over the island.
MONGOOSE became the primary focus for McCone and the CIA in the summer of 1962.
On August 1 during the Special Group meeting, McCone presented the intelligence community‟s analysis of the strength of Castro‟s regime and the potential for organized resistance against his government.
The report concluded that Castro had consolidated his control over the communist party in Cuba, a fact recognized by the Soviet government.
Despite their differences, the intelligence community believed that the Soviet and Cuban relations improved from March to August, with the Soviet Union sending military equipment and advisors to aid the Cuban military.
The report stipulated that while the Soviets increased their military shipments to Cuba, they provided only defensive weapons.
This conclusion led the community to believe that the Soviets would not enhance their commitment to Cuba in the near future.
McCone‟s experiences in the Air Force and the Atomic Energy Commission along with his anti-communist ideals influenced his unique analysis of the early reports of Soviet military equipment in Cuba.
The experiences in the Truman and Eisenhower administrations made him skeptical of Kennedy‟s “Flexible Response,” because he believed that the nuclear balance remained the crucial deterrence to Soviet aggressions.
To McCone, the minimum number of nuclear missiles and warheads did not count as deterrence and assumed Khrushchev felt the same way.
Because of this mindset, McCone was more receptive to the idea of the Soviet Union using Cuba as a missile base, despite the prevailing mindset within the administration and the rest of the intelligence community that the Soviets would not take such a risk.
While the intelligence community had little knowledge of Soviet plans for Cuba, the early reports of increased shipments from the Soviet Union to Cuba alarmed McCone.
On July 26, the first ANADYR shipment aboard the Maria Ulyanova arrived at the port of Cabanas.
Reports of the first shipments arriving in Cuba did not reach Washington until the first week of August.
McCone viewed the increase in Soviet personnel and the sudden increase in shipments as the first steps in a new Soviet commitment to Cuba.
On August 10, McCone voiced his concerns about Cuba during a meeting with the Special Group.
McCone‟s fears of the future deployment of missiles in Cuba continued to grow as more reports arrived in Washington.
On August 20, he presented the Special Group with the analysis of the intelligence gathered since the August 10 meeting, based on sixty intelligence reports arriving from Cuba and reconnaissance flights over Soviet vessels and Cuban ports.
According to intelligence reports, twenty-one Soviet ships docked in Cuban ports during the month of July, with seventeen ships en route in the Atlantic at the time of the report.
Soviet personnel offloaded unknown materials from the docked vessels in large crates under extreme security precautions.
McCone believed that these crates possibly contained airplane fuselages or missile components, and some contained components for radar equipment.
Along with increased supplies, approximately 4,000 to 6,000 Soviet personnel arrived in Cuba in July and August, but no evidence of organized units.
The implications of this operation, according to McCone, were that the crates possibly contained components for surface-to-air missile systems, Communications Intelligence equipment, or Electronic Intelligence systems.
These systems posed a problem for future reconnaissance flights and operations in the Caribbean.
On August 21, Rusk held a meeting in his office with McCone, McNamara, Johnson, Taylor, Lemnitzer, and Bundy.
McCone stated its purpose was to bring other members of the cabinet up to date on the recent intelligence on Cuba.
The DCI detailed that at the August 10 meeting, he gave as much information as available, and that since there was a substantial increase in Soviet assistance to Cuba.
The extent of the Soviet operation was much more involved than previously believed, with preliminary indications of sophisticated electronic equipment and missile sites.
McCone reiterated his concerns that the Soviets might place MRBMs into Cuba, and proposed that the administration have plans in place if it occurred.
The group understood the critical nature of the situation and discussed various options in case the Soviet Union decided to risk placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The group proposed a partial and total blockade, but feared that it might lead to similar actions by the Soviet Union in Berlin, Italy, and Turkey.
McCone proposed aggressive actions in intelligence, sabotage, and guerilla warfare, and detailed the disappointing results in Cuba up to that point.
The committee at the end of the meeting agreed that the situation was critical enough to brief the president, and McCone arranged a meeting with the president for Wednesday, August 22.98 The following day, McCone brought the military buildup in Cuba to President Kennedy‟s attention.
McCone believed the Soviets had begun an unprecedented military aid program to Cuba, a program new and different from previous efforts.0 Despite the large number of Soviet personnel, the report stipulated there was no direct evidence of organized army units in Cuba.
Intelligence sources reported two large military construction sites on the northern coast of Cuba, with regular convoys from the ports to those construction areas.
The construction appeared confined to northwest Cuba, and photoreconnaissance showed limited activity in other regions of the island.
McCone concluded that while they had little knowledge of the nature of the construction, it could be the initial phases of a SAM defense system, intelligence-gathering facilities, or possibly missile sites.
The general conclusion that the community and McCone agreed on was that the construction proved that the Soviet Union had taken a strong step forward in protecting Cuba.
Despite McCone‟s suspicions on the introduction of missiles into Cuba, the president, Rusk, and McNamara doubted that the Soviets would risk moving nuclear missiles into Cuba.1 While Kennedy did not believe the Soviets would risk placing missiles into Cuba, he joined the Special Group meeting on Thursday, August 23 with McCone, Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, and Bundy.
When the group discussed possible responses for Soviet actions in Cuba, McCone again raised the issue of what the administration should do in case the Soviets placed offensive missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy requested more intelligence of Soviet personnel presently in Cuba, and the number and type of weapons delivered to the island.
During the discussion, McCone questioned the value of the JUPITER missiles in Italy and Turkey, and inquired how difficult they were to remove.
It called for a study on the implications of giving the intelligence to members of the Organization of American States and asked them to limit their assistance to Cuba.
It also called for an analysis of possible actions if they discovered Soviet surface-to-surface missiles in Cuba.
Bundy reiterated to the agencies that the president wanted an immediate response.7 On August 25, McCone made his final recommendations before leaving on his honeymoon.
After giving his last orders to Carter, McCone left Washington on August 26, bound for Seattle, Washington, where he married Theiline Pigott110 on August 29.111 On August 30, the couple departed for Cape Ferrat on the French Riviera where they remained for most of the month of September.
With McCone out of the country, Carter replaced McCone in meetings with the United States Intelligence Board and the MONGOOSE Special Group.
On August 29, Carter met with the USIB, where he detailed his conversation with McCone and Lemnitzer on using Air Force RF-101114 and Navy RF-8115 reconnaissance aircraft to supplement the U-2 in Cuba.
The following day, Carter attended the Special Group meeting, where he argued that other types of photography failed to provide enough detail on certain construction sites.
Based partly on Carter‟s arguments, the Special Group agreed to study the issue further and locate specific targets that had the greatest need of low-level flights.7 Carter sent several telegrams to McCone keeping the Director informed of the recent intelligence on Cuba and on the outcome of the meetings with the administration.
Both McCone‟s first wife and Pigott‟s first husband died within the year before they re-married, and the two families had known each other for some time.
The RF101 served alongside of the Lockheed U-2 and the Vought RF-8 as the primary photo-reconnaissance aircraft in the early 1960s.
It was a fast and agile aircraft, making it well suited to low-level reconnaissance flights.
With a top speed of 1,225 mph and a range of 1,500 nautical miles without the weapons, it had the capacity to make repeated flights over Cuba.
Rather than suppress McCone‟s repeated statements that he believed the Soviets would place missiles in Cuba, Carter reiterated his ideas to important officials in Washington.
Carter‟s importance to McCone‟s efforts became clear as the agency received more and more reports on construction projects in Cuba.9 The first definitive report of the presence of SAM sites in Cuba came from a U-2 reconnaissance flight on August 29.
The U-2 flight that day covered areas around Havana and other parts of Western Cuba, and showed several construction sites consistent with previous SAM sites in the Soviet Union.
Preliminary analysis identified the SAMs as the SA-2 Guideline120, the same missile system responsible for downing Gary Power‟s U-2 in 1960.
On August 31, Carter reported the readout of the U-2 flight to Bundy and Lemnitzer.
After Bundy informed Kennedy of the conversation, Kennedy contacted Carter that afternoon.
Kennedy put a freeze on distribution of the report, giving the intelligence community time to prepare an extensive briefing for him.1 On September 1, Carter spoke with Ray Cline, the Acting Deputy Director of Intelligence , authorizing him to prepare a full analysis of the photography.
Cline presented his analysis to Carter on September 3, which showed not only the presence of SAM sites, but also guided missile boats, and additional land armaments.
The photography discovered eight SAM sites under construction, and another unknown site being prepared.
The missile had a range 24 nautical miles at a speed well in excess of any American aircraft.
See also Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 127. 25 operational within two weeks.
The U-2 also discovered eight Soviet missile boats, each armed with anti-ship missiles.
The following day, Carter informed McCone in a telegram of the construction as well as his belief that the report altered the Cuban situation.
Carter assured McCone that he would continue to push the administration for more reconnaissance flights during the scheduled briefing with the president later that day.2 Following the briefing at the White House on September 4, Kennedy released a statement on the presence of SAMs and guided missile boats in Cuba.
The statement included much of the information from Cline‟s report, and the conclusion that reconnaissance showed no offensive missiles.
The summer weather over the Caribbean had limited the amount of useful photography on a majority of the August flights, leaving the Group to choose where to concentrate future reconnaissance flights.
At the time of the telegram, the Soviet Union had remained silent on the president‟s speech.
Sources in Cuba believed that Castro might use the situation to justify increased Soviet military assistance, to divert intelligence sources from his economic and political problems.
The intelligence analysis from the August 29 mission led the intelligence community to believe that another missile site near Banes, Cuba might be a SSM site.
The president once again chose to limit the dissemination of the report outside of the intelligence branches.
When McCone received the report of this site, it fueled his suspicions concerning the Soviet intentions in Cuba.
McCone prepared to meet with the French General Paul Jacquier in Paris, while he continued advocating low-level flights.
According to Carter, Congressional Republicans gave the president the authority to invade Cuba if necessary.
Carter planned to take McCone‟s statements on using RF-101 for reconnaissance and the introduction of missiles to Cuba again during the scheduled meeting with Bundy on Saturday, September 8.131 Despite McCone‟s continuing correspondence to Washington, a series of problems with the U-2 complicated the intelligence-gathering mission.
The U-2 flight on September 5 failed to produce any usable photography over the Banes site because of cloud cover.
On August 30 and September 8, a series of U-2 incidents led the Kennedy administration to re-evaluate the risks involved in using the aircraft over Cuba.
On September 4, the day of Kennedy‟s ultimatum, one of the U-2s accidentally penetrated Soviet airspace in the Soviet Far East, prompting the Soviets to send fighters to intercept.
On September 8, a U-2 was lost over the Chinese mainland, prompting even more restrictions on U-2 flights over Cuba.
After this incident, Kennedy halted the entire program pending a briefing to review procedures.6 Carter informed McCone of the decision to halt reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
In Carter‟s September 8 telegram, he provided McCone another intelligence report on the September 5 U-2 flight.
The new photographs showed three more SAM sites, located in the Las Villa Province in Central Cuba.
In addition to the sites found on August 29, the total number rose to thirteen with the current report.
Carter believed that 25 sites provided Cuba with a complete missile defense against approaching aircraft.
Reconnaissance also showed one advanced Soviet MiG-21 fighter137, and possibly the parts to assemble nineteen more.
Rusk asked Carter to convey his thanks for suggesting the creation of contingency plans with Latin American allies, and promised to take it under advisement.
At the end of the telegram, Carter informed McCone of the decision to halt further U-2 flights pending an investigation.8 On September 10, Carter sent another message to McCone, updating him on the search for the missing U-2.
Despite a detailed search, intelligence had yet to find any sign of the U-2 and had no information on the fate of the pilot.
There was no evidence of any mechanical malfunction, leaving either pilot error or attack as the primary possibilities.
Carter pointed out the interesting fact that the Soviet Union failed to take advantage of the incident as in previous incidents, but the community had no other information on the Soviet reaction.
The presence of this fighter in Cuba added to the risk of low-level reconnaissance flights.
In response to McCone‟s suggestion on using PROJECT KELLY139 over Cuba, Carter argued that the program might be usable in April of the following year.0 McCone was apprehensive of the president‟s decision to halt U-2 flights over Cuba.
While he believed that the U-2 incident was distressing, in his mind, the U-2 remained the best intelligence-gathering method available to the intelligence community.
Once again, McCone took the opportunity to make his views on missiles in Cuba known to Carter.
It was in this telegram that McCone gave his reasoning for the placement of missiles in Cuba.
McCone concluded his message with a remark on how the beautiful weather helped make that determination and urged Carter to have the BNE study the possibility in detail.1 Later that afternoon, Kirkpatrick attended the White House meeting on Cuban overflights and sent notes from the meeting in the daily cable to McCone.
The A-12 was designed to penetrate enemy airspace at speeds in excess of Mach 2. to reduce the risk to the aircraft.
Rusk then analyzed the proposal for two more overflights to over the areas that the August 29 and September 5 flights missed.
The risk of a third incident convinced Rusk to allow for peripheral flights around the island and over international waters.
Rusk authorized four flights, two peripheral and two over international waters, to limit the risk to the safety of the pilots.
At the end of the meeting, Kirkpatrick noted that Bundy and Rusk agreed that the overflights would continue if no further incidents occurred.2 While the Special Group considered the future of U-2 flights over Cuba, Carter sent McCone‟s recommendations to the DD/I and requested that the BNE create the necessary analysis.
Carter sent another memorandum to McNamara asking for further reconnaissance over the Banes site.
The U-2 could not effectively photograph this site, meaning that other reconnaissance aircraft might be useful.
On September 11, Washington also received the first official Soviet response to the President‟s September ultimatums and the U-2 incidents, which Carter sent to McCone along with the BNE‟s response.
According to the Soviets, any American attack on Cuba would unleash a global war.
The Soviet government believed the United States had plans to invade Cuba, and took steps to boost its defenses.
The BNE promised to include their preliminary report in the Special National Intelligence Estimate.4 While McCone and the Board of National Estimates argued over Soviet intentions, the intelligence community continued analyzing the photography.
On September 13, intelligence reports provided more information on the suspicious missile site near Banes.
It stated that the facility appeared to be a cruise missile battery, possibly the SS-N-1, the SS-N-2, or the SS-C1.145 The report showed the location of similar missile sites near Bay of Pigs and other beaches, which led to the analysis that their placement coincided with probable invasion locations from American troops.6 When McCone learned of the SSM site at Banes, he immediately repeated his statement that the present construction projects were the prelude to the introduction of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The SS-N-1 Scrubber was the NATO codename for the Soviet P-1 Strela cruise missile.
It entered service aboard Soviet destroyers in 1958, and in shore installations.
It had a range of 22 nautical miles and could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads.
The SS-N-2 Styx was the NATO codename for the Soviet P-15 Termit cruise missile.
Carter made no comment on McCone‟s statement about the missiles, but Kirkpatrick confirmed that Carter took the comments to the BNE and kept the Special Group informed on McCone‟s fears.8 McCone made repeated requests to the BNE to study the prospects for the Soviet Union placing missiles in Cuba.
When McCone received word of the Soviet comments comparing their aid to Cuba with American aid to nations surrounding the Soviet Union, he again urged the Board to study the feasibility of the Soviets secretly sending offensive weapons to Cuba.
He made the comment “we must carefully study the prospect of MRBM‟s in Cuba” to show how strongly he believed that the Soviets would introduce those weapons.
McCone believed that the Soviets would use Cuba similar to how the United States used Britain, Italy, and Turkey.
He argued that the CIA and rest of the intelligence community had the responsibility to keep the government informed of the dangers if the Soviets chose to take the risk.
From the press report McCone received, the director believed that the estimate needed to include a usable distinction between the terms “offensive” and “defensive” weapons.
If nuclear weapons did exist in Cuba, McCone suggested a study on how long the Soviets needed to install the missiles and asked the board to consider regions of the island where the SAM defenses would hinder overflights.
McCone concluded that the estimate should include all these elements and include alternative plans of action should they find missiles in Cuba.0 The rift between the analysts and McCone became apparent with the release of the BNE‟s report on Cuba.
While McCone‟s suspicions of Soviet intentions in Cuba continued to grow as he received more intelligence reports, a majority of the intelligence community believed that the Soviets did not intend to take such a risk in light of the expected American response.
This estimate stated that the purpose of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was to strengthen Castro‟s regime by creating an advanced air defense and coastal defense network to thwart any invasion.
The board believed there was a great temptation for the Soviet Union to introduce nuclear weapons into Cuba, and other offensive weapons such as IL-28 bombers, submarines, and short-range SSMs.
McCone responded to the estimate on September 20, in which he made several recommendations to Carter.
He believed that the Board should re-evaluate their conclusion on the risk of the Soviet Union placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The agent reported a large convoy of vehicles headed for the San Cristobal area of Cuba, with trailers seventy feet in length, believed to be carrying large missiles.
A similar report arrived in Washington on October 1, detailing another large convoy in the Pinar Del Rio with eight large trailers, carrying “huge tubes” larger than the flatbed.
These detailed reports from reliable sources led some analysts in the CIA to study the possibility of the trailers transporting SS-4 “Sandal” missiles.9 McCone viewed these reports as confirmation that the United States needed to increase surveillance of the island.
During the Special Group meeting on October 4, McCone urged the administration to authorize a series of U-2 reconnaissance flights.
Robert Kennedy began the meeting reiterating President Kennedy‟s concern with the lack of success in the subversion of Castro‟s regime.
McCone told Robert Kennedy that one of reasons for the problems in MONGOOSE was the hesitation of the government to risk American assets.
After a brief argument, the group agreed to re-consider the limitations placed on the U-2.
The missile had a range of 1,080 nautical miles, capable of hitting targets as far north as Maryland if placed in Cuba. 35 the group to authorize flight plans to include complete coverage of the island along with the approved peripheral flights.
Because of the limited number of flights and the peripheral coverage, McCone noticed a large gap over Western Cuba overlooked since September 5.
The group agreed with McCone, and proposed that the members prepare a plan of action and submit their proposal during their next scheduled meeting.
He wanted the president to authorize complete coverage of the island with the U-2.
The meeting ended with the agreement to review the situation in more detail over the weekend.3 While the administration did not believe the Soviets would place missiles into Cuba, President Kennedy made a public statement that the United States would conduct overhead reconnaissance of the island.
From October 10 to October 13, the weather halted the U-2 flight, but on October 14, the U-2 covered areas around Havana, and was the first flight to discover the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba, the missiles that McCone believed the Soviets might place in Cuba.4 McCone came to the Central Intelligence Agency as a successful manager with strict anti-communist ideals and great insight into intelligence.
When the intelligence community received the first reports of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba, McCone correctly argued that the present buildup was the first phase in the establishment of a nuclear missile base on the island.
He justified this belief through his understanding of the strategic situation between the Soviet Union and the United States.
He believed that while the risk was great to the operation, it also provided the Soviet Union a way to balance many of their objectives without risking reprisal from either Cuba or the United States.
While McCone took a lengthy honeymoon during the crucial month before the crisis began, he pushed Deputy Director Carter to continue his efforts to keep the administration from being surprised if intelligence confirmed his beliefs.
McCone continued to encourage Washington officials and the BNE to consider that the Soviets saw the great advantage to having nuclear missiles in Cuba, sending several cables to Carter and other CIA officials.
While the BNE believed that the Soviets would not risk placing offensive weapons in Cuba, several reports from intelligence sources led several analysts to agree with McCone that they needed more reconnaissance flights.
When the U-2 covered the island on October 14, it found the MRBM missile sites under construction.
Had it not been for McCone‟s continued efforts, the missiles would have been operational before their discovery by the United States.
John McCone and the EXCOMM After learning of the October 14 U-2 flights, McCone pushed the Kennedy administration to remove Castro and his communist government from power.
Continuing his crusade against Castro, McCone joined several prominent members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council in proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion.
McCone had the job of briefing the administration on daily intelligence reports and construction efforts in Cuba.
His greatest contribution to the intelligence effort was his coordination and integration of all the major civilian intelligence agencies during the Crisis to reduce the time required for analysis.
He also had the job of briefing former President Eisenhower on the situation in Cuba, and pushed for briefings with the allies.
Despite his emotional calls against negotiations with the Soviet Union, McCone‟s efforts to coordinate and integrate intelligence reports allowed the president to have a detailed picture on the status of the Soviet missiles, allowing Kennedy to make informed decisions when dealing with the Kremlin.7 On October 14, a U-2 reconnaissance flight found several Soviet MRBMs construction sites in Western Cuba.
When the film arrived at the National Photographic Intelligence Center , analysts found three MRBM sites near San Cristobal, with eight MRBM transporters located adjacent to those sites.
The report stipulated that there was no evidence precisely when the missiles arrived in Cuba, but their judgment was that they arrived sometime in September.
The decision to place missiles in Cuba showed the determination of the Soviets to deter any American intervention against Castro‟s regime, by increasing the risk and costs of such a conflict.
The report concluded that the Soviet leadership must have known that it would complicate the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union, and that the presence of missiles in Cuba threatened the large military bases and urban areas in the southeastern United States.
The Strategic Air Command had eighteen bomber and tanker bases within that range, and an Inter-continental Ballistic Missile silo.
The Navy had three major bases and other smaller facilities from Panama to Puerto Rico that the missiles had the range to reach.
The biggest target that the missiles could reach was Washington D.C.173 When the U-2 discovered the missiles, McCone was on the West Coast preparing to bury his stepson.
Because McCone needed to escort the body from California back to Seattle for burial, Carter replaced him in meetings with the National Security Council, while Cline replaced him at the Commonwealth-US Intelligence Methods Conference.
When Cline returned from the conference, he met with a delegation of intelligence analysts who informed him of the presence of missiles in Cuba.
See also Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 189. 40 intelligence reports before attending the gathering.
When Carter received word from Cline about the intelligence report on Cuba, Carter authorized its dissemination to members of the United States Intelligence Board and to McCone.
Rusk made the comment that McCone saw the possibility of missiles back in August, and related the conversation with McCone about the Soviets using Cuba like the United States used Turkey.
He first proposed a series of air strikes, followed by an invasion of the island.
He also proposed a warning to Castro and steps to isolate Cuba from the rest of the Free World.
McNamara argued that if they attacked Cuba, they must attack before the missiles became operational, while Taylor confirmed that a surprise attack was essential to that attack.
The members of the committee would meet every day to determine the course of action, taking the name EXCOMM, an abbreviation of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
When McCone arrived back in Washington, he immediately became an active member of EXCOMM, along with Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, George Ball, Bundy, Dillon, Gilpatric, Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Rusk, Taylor, Ted Sorensen, the Special Counsel to the President, and Llewellyn Thompson, the Ambassador to the Soviet Union.
He also approved the transfer of information to the NPIC in order to reduce the time it took to create intelligence reports, and established a joint committee of the major intelligence boards to release several estimates on the reports.
At 10:30 PM, McCone concluded his day with a briefing with the president for further study of the photographs.
He gave Lundahl greater authority at the NPIC by passing most of the intelligence directly to their offices to reduce the time it took to prepare estimates.
Albert Wheelon, Chairmen of the GMAIC, took on an added role of preparing joint estimates from the major intelligence boards after it came to Lundahl.
When Lundahl received the information, he passed it immediately to Cline, who then passed that information to McCone.
McCone‟s delegation of authority gave him more leeway in making recommendations during EXCOMM meetings, while still receiving the raw intelligence from his deputies and the estimates from the intelligence board.9 Before meeting with EXCOMM on Wednesday, October 17, McCone prepared a list of talking points.
While the Soviets installed the missiles in Cuba, the defensive capabilities of the island continued to expand, a point that McCone reiterated from his earlier concerns about such an expensive missile defense system.
For McCone, there was no doubt that despite the number of Cubans working at the sites, the missiles themselves remained entirely under Soviet control.
McCone proposed sending a warning to the Soviets giving them twenty-four hours to remove the missiles, and proceed with a massive air attack if the Soviets refused.3 The first meeting of EXCOMM focused on the choices available to the United States regarding the Cuban situation.
Ball argued that any military action in Cuba would limit their options with their NATO allies.
Further, he believed that the U.S government needed to consider that Khrushchev might not know what was going on in Cuba.
Ball and Maxwell Taylor agreed that it might just be a ploy by Khrushchev to provoke an American response.
McNamara avoided taking a position during the first meeting, wanting more time to study on all the facts available.
Current intelligence reports showed fifty or sixty MiG-17 and MiG-19 fighters in Cuba.
Soviet ships delivered parts for IL-28 bombers, along with at least one MiG-21 interceptor.
The report confirmed three MRBM sites under construction, which could be ready in two weeks.
The report showed no evidence of nuclear warhead storage sites, and failed to determine if the Soviets intended to place conventional or nuclear warheads on the missiles.
McCone received reports from Lundahl on a number of crates of unknown purpose, and at least twenty-eight Soviet ships en route to Cuba with similar cargo.
McCone argued several points from his notes, including how strongly he believed that the Soviets were using missiles in Cuba to force the United States to trade their bases in Europe.
The meeting focused on the intelligence-gathering actions for that day, along with the proposed plans of action to remove the missiles.
The discussion was brief because of the short amount of time between meetings scheduled for that day; so, McCone only referred to several of his warnings that he proposed in his memorandum.
Kennedy entrusted McCone with the role of briefing former President Eisenhower on the Cuban situation.1 McCone immediately departed for Gettysburg, Pennsylvania to brief Eisenhower.
The DCI met with Eisenhower to review the developments in Cuba, including all the current intelligence on the Soviet military buildup and the U-2 photographs of the MRBM sites.2 McCone followed Kennedy‟s order not to promote a position during his meeting with Eisenhower, presenting many the proposals of EXCOMM members.
The former president criticized the failure at the Bay of Pigs and the failure of MONGOOSE to remove Castro from office, especially during the months before the Soviets sent weapons to Cuba.
He believed that an ultimatum to Castro and Khrushchev would fail, and that a blockade would bring difficulties of its own.
McCone believed that Eisenhower favored military action to cut off the Cuban government with an invasion, ending the situation with limited bloodshed.
McCone promised to keep him informed and consult him, whether or not he received a message from Kennedy.6 McCone immediately returned to Washington to attend afternoon and evening EXCOMM meetings.
During the meetings, the group once again discussed plans of action for Cuba.
Ambassador Charles Bohlen, who joined EXCOMM during the first few days, argued against any military action in Cuba, because it would divide their allies and subject the United States to criticism around the world.
Rusk believed that the administration should ask Congress for a declaration of war against Cuba, but keep their options open afterwards.
Ball emphasized the time constraints on action, meaning that the quicker they acted the less risk it imposed on the United States.
Kennedy wanted to know how America‟s allies, notably Turkey, Italy, and Britain might respond to an American response to missiles in Cuba.
McNamara did not believe the missiles were that great a threat to the United States, and Gilpatric supported his opinion.
Despite their disagreement on the military importance of the missiles, McNamara, McCone, and Taylor agreed that talks with the Soviets gave Khrushchev the time to prepare the missiles for launch and to camouflage the sites.0 After considering the military option, the group moved to the pros and cons of a naval blockade.
The group argued over a partial or total blockade, with McCone pointing the strengths of a total blockade.
Before the group adjourned for dinner, McCone once again argued that the primary goals of action in Cuba were to dispose of the missile sites and remove Castro‟s government from power.
Rusk proposed a timetable that began with a briefing of key allies followed by a series of sorties against the sites.
McCone and Taylor supported the military strike option, while Bohlen continued to support the diplomatic route.
Thompson and Martin supported the blockade option, while the rest of the group remained neutral on the issue, including Gilpatric, Johnson, Bundy, and Sorensen.
Based on the photographs from the U-2 flight on October 14 and the two flights from October 15, the committee found at least one Soviet missile regiment with eight launchers and sixteen MRBM missiles at two launch sites in Cuba.
Further analysis of the photography showed two other MRBM launch sites under construction, bringing the total to three.
The photographs from the October 14 and 15 missions showed remarkable building progress, including the appearance of erectors for the missiles along with temporary buildings and vehicles.
The report stipulated that if the missiles were of the 1,020 nautical mile range, the first of them could be operational immediately if needed.
However, because the photos did not show the missile silhouette facing upwards, the committee argued that the Soviets might not have the warheads in place for use.
If not ready immediately, the committee agreed that the missiles could become operational in a matter of days.6 McCone also received an intelligence report from Lundahl on the October 15 flight.
On the second flight on October 15, the U-2 found what appeared to a probable IRBM site under construction, previously reported as military equipment.
The photographs showed an erector already in place with six missiles in the vicinity.
While the report did not stipulate that the missiles were in fact IRBM, the construction site itself confirmed to previous Soviet emplacements in Eastern Europe.
Lundahl met with McNamara at his home the next morning, which led McNamara to call McCone expressing his concern about the IRBM sites.
After briefing the group on the report from Wheeler, Lundahl delivered his report on the October 15 photography.
The president asked Lundahl if a novice could see that the pictures showed MRBM missiles, and Lundahl believed that they must have low-level photography for the public to understand the images.
Thompson and Bohlen reiterated their previous objections to immediate military action, with Thompson pushing for a declaration of war from Congress if the group authorized military action, and proposed a blockade instead.
McCone, Dillon and Taylor suggested immediate military strikes, because they believed that diplomatic efforts would limit the options.
McNamara and Ball argued that a strike without warning would lead to Soviet retaliation somewhere in the world.
The group agreed that the president should confront Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet minister of Foreign Affairs, on the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy requested that the group study the advantages and disadvantages to either a blockade or air strike against Cuba.1 McCone joined many EXCOMM members in promoting the air strike option to remove the missiles from Cuba.
One of the reasons he feared the Soviet missiles was his belief that the Soviet military gave more control to their battlefield commanders.
The intelligence reports from October 18 solidified his beliefs, and led other members such as Dillon, Taylor, Acheson, and Bundy, along with the Joint Chiefs, to support the air strike option.
McCone even suggested that an air strike alone could not remove all the missiles.
He proposed an invasion of Cuba to remove the missiles and Castro‟s government.5 By the end of the Thursday meetings, however, many EXCOMM members had moved away from the air strike option, due largely to arguments by Robert Kennedy and McNamara about the historical impact of a surprise attack.
After hearing the attorney general‟s arguments, Rusk and Bohlen became more outspoken in their opposition to the air strikes, and instead pushed for the blockade options.
McCone, while becoming more open to the idea of a blockade, also took a strong stance against Ambassador Adlai Stevenson‟s suggestion that the United States confront the Soviet Union at the United Nations.
He continued to emphasize the problems with a blockade, and during the evening meeting with the president, supported the air strike option.
By the end of the meeting, the consensus that existed earlier in the meetings broke down, leading the president to order them to return to their arguments, scheduled to continue on Friday morning.8 McCone showed his support for the air strike during the meeting with the president, but understood that the group favored the blockade option.
McCone believed that the group favored a blockade, and that the United States should declare war on Cuba only as a last resort.
The limited blockade sought to prevent more weapons arriving in Cuba and to become a total blockade if Castro and the Soviets continued construction on the missile sites.
McCone believed that continued surveillance was critical to either option, because it provided crucial information on the status of the missiles.
McCone argued that if they chose the blockade option, it would begin with a public announcement from the president and limited notification of allies on Monday, October 22.231 It seemed to McCone that the air strike option was on hold until after they attempted the blockade, because many in the group believed an air strike and invasion was unwise.
Those who supported the blockade believed it gave the administration the ability to increase or decrease pressure according to the situation, and provoke a less severe Soviet reaction.
McCone wanted the board to give him the assistance he needed to choose the best options for the United States.3 Following McCone‟s request, the USIB released a Special National Intelligence Estimate on October 19, which analyzed the possible Soviet reactions to American actions regarding Cuba.
If the United States did nothing about the missiles, the Soviet Union would introduce strategic nuclear weapons, contributing greatly to the Soviet strategic capabilities.
If Kennedy chose to warn the Soviets, it would hinder the surprise air strike option.
However, the board considered the Soviet decision to launch a war unlikely; instead, they believed they would launch an attack against Berlin.9 Cline reported on the board‟s intelligence estimate during the Friday morning EXCOMM meeting.
After hearing the report, Rusk argued that the president needed a legal framework if he launched a military invasion of Cuba.
After deliberations, many in the group supported the idea of rationalizing action in Cuba as self-defense.
On the issue of a warning, McCone stipulated that a warning did not improve their position and possibly hindered it.
If they decided to support a defensive blockade of Cuba, it would involve force, which the United Nations charter prohibited except in certain situations.
It would give the president a legal framework for an air strike, invasion, or blockade.2 After the group discussed the legal ramifications of the actions for Cuba, it renewed its disagreements on either an air strike or a blockade.
He asked for further deliberations on both suggestions, because of the problems inherent with both.
A blockade did not remove the missiles, meaning they needed something more substantial.
He moved to support the air strikes, because he supported decisive action.
Robert Kennedy also supported the blockade, because an air strike had too many implications for international opinion, and went against the traditions of the United States.
Besides killing many Cubans, it would kill many Soviet personnel as well.
He proposed two working groups, each tasked with writing papers on the advantages and disadvantages to their assigned option.
Johnson headed the blockade group, composed of Thompson, Martin, Gilpatric, and Meeker, while Bundy was to head the air strike group, which contained Dillon, Acheson and Taylor.
Despite his belief that the air strike option posed the best course of action for the president, McCone remained off the air strike group due to his position in the intelligence community.9 During the course of the day, McCone shifted his support away from the air strike option, but did not fully support the blockade.
At that time, each group voiced their proposal, after which each member showed their support or criticism for the plan.
The group began with the blockade proposal, where criticism led to many changes in the original plan.
First, the group agreed there was not enough time to have everything ready for the president to make an address on Sunday.
Legally, Thompson stipulated that they needed twenty-four hours between Kennedy‟s address and enforcement of the blockade, to allow the Soviet commanders the time needed to inform their ships.
The blockade plan also contained a list of actions needed to ensure success of the operation, including a scenario that mapped out the blockade and international reactions.
After each group voiced their plans, there was general agreement that either option posed its own risks, including the possibility of the Soviets forcing the United States to give up the missile bases in Turkey and Italy.
At this point, McNamara made an important statement that calmed many of the air strike proponents.
The committee reported that the October 16 flights confirmed the existence of three MRBM sites and two IRBM sites.8 Current intelligence showed the sites manned by Soviet personnel, but they did not know if regional forces or Soviet high command had direct control of their use.
One key component to the Wednesday intelligence was the identification of a nuclear warhead storage site near the most completed construction site at Guanajay.
The committee believed that the warheads could already be in Cuba, despite the lack of photography on an operational nuclear storage site.
At present, intelligence photographs showed twenty-four launchers when completed, each with the ability to fire multiple missiles.
Of the twenty-six SAM sites located in Cuba, intelligence reported 16 operational batteries.
For the coastal defense sites, the committee believed two were operational.
The following morning, McCone met with Dave Boyle, one of the NPIC ballistic missile experts, who showed him the construction sites that conformed to previous IRBM sites in Eastern Europe.
Following that briefing, McCone traveled with Cline and Lundahl to another meeting with the president at 2:30.266 This meeting had a particular importance because the president, his advisors, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the regular EXCOMM members were meeting to give their reports on blockade or air strikes.
McCone instructed Cline to brief the group on the Joint Evaluation from October 19, and Lundahl showed the locations of both the MRBM and IRBM sites.
Current intelligence showed sixteen SS-4 MRBMs, aimed towards the central United States.8 McNamara argued that despite the disagreements in the group on plans of action, the military commanders were ready to implement either option.
This weapon nullified the advantages of an amphibious assault by inflicting enormous casualties to the men and their equipment.
One of the key problems with the blockade was the length of time it took to achieve their objective of removing the missiles from Cuba.
The blockade also risked “serious political trouble in the United States” and a weakening of the United States international position.
However, the blockade did have the advantage of doing less damage to America‟s allies in Europe, and allowed the United States to maintain its traditions against surprise attacks and leadership in the Free World.
Robert Kennedy informed the president that the plan had the support of Bundy, Taylor, the Joint Chiefs, while Dillon and McCone supported parts of the plan.
Taylor argued that the air strikes gave them the chance to take out the missiles, the IL-28 bombers, and the SAM sites.
McNamara again cautioned the president that an air strike might not remove all the missiles, which Taylor countered with the argument that not removing those weapons meant the United States had to invent new procedures for dealing with military threats.
Robert Kennedy argued that the air strikes were an option if the blockade failed, which McCone supported.
A limited use of force in a blockade made it much more difficult for a military strike because of the time needed to implement the blockade and measure its effectiveness.6 Towards the end of the meeting, Stevenson again argued for a diplomatic solution involving the United Nations.
This had the effect of turning most of the Council‟s attentions from their own opinions to criticize Stevenson‟s position.
Taylor, Dillon and McCone argued against the diplomatic solution as well as Stevenson‟s claim that there might be no nuclear weapons in Cuba.
While McCone admitted there was no photographic evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba, he referred to Stevenson as the “St.
McCone also requested that the president allow the CIA to send copies of the aerial photography to allies in Western Europe, even suggesting sending a CIA officer along with the brief.
He suggested Tidwell to brief the Canadian government first, giving the administration the chance to gain support from its allies before taking action.
Kennedy requested that Ball, Johnson, and Martin prepare a detailed timeline for briefing all the groups suggested by McCone.
According to Brugioni, McCone was a devout Catholic, which meant he used the term as an insult.
As the administration informed key allies about the missiles, McCone secured more intelligence reports and estimates from the intelligence committees.
The USIB released another Special National Security Estimate while EXCOMM deliberated with the president.
After the committee reported on the current status of the weapons in Cuba, along with the purposes of these weapons, the group analyzed the options provided by McCone‟s notes, providing several consequences to each action.
If the United States failed to confront the Soviets on the missiles, the Soviets most likely would continue the buildup indefinitely.
It believed no action by the Kennedy administration would provide encouragement to communist movements around the world and cause considerable damage to American power.
A simple warning would not remove the missiles, and perhaps would lead to negotiations for concessions.
On the issue of the blockade, even a total blockade would not prevent the Soviets from using submarines to deliver nuclear warheads.
The presence of a blockade would place considerable pressure on the Soviet government.
It would require direct action to remove Castro‟s regime, not a blockade.5 If the president chose the air strike option, it would have a much greater chance of provoking the Soviet Union, by forcing the Soviets to attack the United States somewhere in the world.
General war became a real possibility if the United States chose to attack, but the board stipulated that they did not believe the Soviet Union would directly attack the United States.6 McCone also received the Joint Committee‟s analysis on the U-2 flights up to October 18.
At the third MRBM site in the Sagua La Grande region, photography showed portions of the missile regiment arrived on October 17, but was not ready for more than an emergency deployment before November 1.
The speed of construction at the fourth MRBM site in the Guanajay area showed a much higher construction rate than previous Soviet efforts, with control bunkers, blast walls, and concrete all visible from the photography.
However, the board did not believe that the missiles would be ready for launch at the IRBM sites until December.
The last flight on October 17 also confirmed the presence of nuclear storage sites under construction, along with an unidentified SSM site in the Remedios area.9 Before McCone met with Kennedy on Sunday morning, October 21, he received another detailed report from Carter and the USIB, which confirmed that two missile sites were operational.
Similar to their October 20 Special estimate, Carter informed McCone that the construction efforts and presence of guided missiles in Cuba meant that the Soviets had been planning the operation for at least a year.
Reports showed that the parts to assemble 22 light bombers and 40 MiG-21 fighters were present in Cuba.
Along with twenty-four SAM sites and three coastal defense missile sites, current intelligence showed twelve guided missile patrol boats in Cuba.4 After receiving all the reports from the USIB and the Joint Committee and having a brief conversation with Eisenhower, McCone attended an EXCOMM meeting with Kennedy later that morning.
According to McCone, McNamara and Taylor argued that the air strikes themselves would only destroy ninety percent of the missiles and that an advance warning would give the Soviets time to move the missiles to undisclosed locations.
General Walter Sweeney296 detailed the plans for the air strike per the president‟s suggestion, and the group decided that an air strike must include missile sites, airfields, and SAM sites.
Taylor and McNamara argued that if the president decided to authorize the attacks, they must begin by Monday morning.
The president then asked for McCone‟s opinion, and McCone advised against a surprise attack, agreeing with Robert Kennedy‟s reasoning from the prior meetings.
McCone reiterated his opinion that the President should issue a public statement that the United States would remove the missiles if intelligence showed they were not removing them.8 At 4:30 PM, McCone met in private with the president on Eisenhower‟s recommendations on the blockade.
He noted that he received an intelligence report from Lundahl that morning, followed by his meeting with Eisenhower.
Eisenhower believed that the air strikes by themselves were never conclusive, and a surprise attack set a precedent to the world that other nations might follow.
Eisenhower agreed that the situation called for a warning to the Soviets prior to either option and favored the use of a blockade and eventual air strikes if the Soviets kept the missiles in Cuba.
McCone told Kennedy that because Eisenhower had only certain information on the Soviet buildup, it was important to understand that his opinion represented “a flash judgment rather than considered judgment” on the former President‟s part.0 After the briefing, Kennedy requested that McCone also brief Vice President Johnson.
At 8:30 PM, McCone had Lundahl brief the Johnson on the current photography from Cuba and discussed the president‟s proposed speech.
Johnson believed a surprise attack was the best option and questioned the use of a blockade followed by air strikes and invasion.
He believed that a warning limited the effectiveness of the air strikes, and argued that the blockade might not work.
McCone countered Johnson‟s arguments with his briefing paper from the October 20 EXCOMM meeting.
After learning of EXCOMM‟s conclusions and Eisenhower‟s recommendations, Johnson agreed to accept the blockade option.2 After his meeting with Johnson, McCone received another evaluation from the Joint Committee, focused on the status of the missile sites in Cuba.
Based on the missions of October 18 and 19, the committee believed that the current MRBM sites had the ability to launch eighty missiles, with each launcher reloading once.
Photographs showed eight Soviet missile regiments, each with eight launchers and at least sixteen missiles each.
Lundahl provided McCone with the readout from the last mission on October 19, which showed another confirmed MRBM site, bringing the total to five MRBM sites and two IRBM sites in Cuba.
Each site showed missile trailers, erectors, and support vehicles, with construction at each site continuing at an accelerated pace.5 McCone requested that Cline prepare a briefing for the president during the afternoon meeting with EXCOMM on the intelligence readouts received over the past week.
He reported on seventeen separate U-2 flights from October 14 to October 20, which confirmed twenty-four launchers for MRBM missiles at six sites, and 12 launchers for IRBM sites located at three bases.
Photography showed between over thirty missiles currently in Cuba, with no evidence of IRBMs among them.
The report showed four MRBM sites believed to be operational, with the remaining two sites expected to be operational by October 25.
McCone also informed EXCOMM that the CIA received a report that a fleet of Soviet submarines was en route to Cuba and expected to arrive within the week.
Because the blockade plans allowed shipments of food and medicine to continue to Cuba, the president stipulated that the group should show the differences between the Cuban blockade and the Berlin blockade.
Kennedy argued that he chose the blockade option over the air strike option because the air strikes would not remove all the missiles.
Failure to destroy all the missiles would allow the Soviets time to use the remaining missiles to attack the United States.
However, because they might use air strikes in the future, the president agreed with Bundy not to discuss that fact with the public.1 The president had his final briefing with EXCOMM and members of the Senate at 5:00 PM before he addressed the nation.
Having made his decision to authorize the blockade, the meeting centered on the Soviet responses to the blockade.
McCone had the task of repeating to the group the intelligence reports from that morning, and the president reviewed the situation over the last 8 days.
After informing the attendees of the steps taken regarding Cuba, Senator Richard Russell of Georgia wanted Kennedy to consider stronger steps than currently taken.2 Similar to Vice President Johnson, Russell believed a warning message hindered their options in Cuba.
McNamara described for Russell that an attack on Cuba would follow the blockade should it fail.
Other members of the group began asking questions, pertaining to the impact of the blockade verses the air strikes.
Arkansas Senator J William Fulbright also questioned the president‟s decision to impose a blockade instead of invading Cuba, while Congressman Carl Vinson of Georgia urged Kennedy to strike with the maximum force available.
Except for the members of EXCOMM, most of the attendees of the meeting challenged the president‟s decision.
The United States discovered the missiles in Cuba while McCone traveled to the West Coast to bury his stepson.
When he arrived back in Washington on October 17, he immediately delegated his authority as head of the intelligence community to his deputies, to allow the major intelligence-gathering services to issue reports on intelligence at a quickened pace.
These decisions allowed him to concentrate on the policy decisions during EXCOMM meetings while still receiving intelligence reports as they arrived.
McCone spent much of the first week of the crisis in meetings with EXCOMM, determining what course of action Kennedy needed to take to ensure the removal of the missiles from Cuba.
He also had the important role of briefing former President Eisenhower on the situation.
Because of McCone‟s coordination of intelligence organization during the first week of the crisis, Kennedy and EXCOMM had the information they needed to make informed decisions when dealing with the Soviet government.
John McCone and the Climax of the Cold War After a week of lengthy deliberations with EXCOMM, President Kennedy decided that the best course of action to confront the Soviet missile threat in Cuba was to initiate a blockade of Cuba.
The president informed the American public of his decision during a televised address on Monday evening, October 22.
For the next week of the crisis, McCone continued to receive detailed intelligence estimates and reports from the committees he established at the beginning of the crisis.
He kept many members of Congress and the press informed on the crisis, and gave United States Ambassador Stevenson the support of his deputies Ray Cline and Arthur Lundahl to answer any questions on the evidence presented during the United Nations discussions.
Because of his own personal involvement in EXCOMM and the strain of the crisis, McCone requested that Cline prepare official CIA briefings containing all current intelligence.
After Khrushchev made his decision to end the crisis by removing the missiles, McCone pressed the intelligence community and the administration to maintain its intelligence mission in Cuba to insure that the Soviet Union was removing the missiles as pledged.
By early November, the intelligence community confirmed to McCone that the Soviets were indeed removing the offensive weapons from Cuba, and the crisis officially ended.
McCone briefed members of Congress and the press, advised the government on the intelligence, and advocated continued intelligence operations in Cuba until the Soviets removed the missiles.
He told the American people that his administration received the first reports of the missiles on Tuesday morning, October 15, and increased the surveillance of Cuba thereafter.
He explained that the MRBM sites in Cuba had the ability to launch nuclear warheads at Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, along with any city in the southeastern United States and Central America.
While the Navy instituted the blockade, the administration planned to continue the increased surveillance of Cuba, and if the Soviets continued construction of the missiles, resolution of the crisis might require further action.
Kennedy also called for a meeting with the Organization of American States to consider the threat to their nations and to give the United States the legal means to protect the hemisphere.
Finally, he urged Khrushchev to remove the missiles from Cuba that threatened the stability of the region and relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy left no doubt that the United States and its people faced a difficult task, but argued that the United States did not enter the fight for victory, but for freedom and peace in the hemisphere and the world.4 While the president addressed the nation, the Joint Committee released their daily evaluation on the intelligence gathered from the U-2 flights of October 20.
The readout showed three additional MRBMs and four additional launchers, bringing the total to thirty-three MRBMs along with twenty-three launchers.
The U-2 discovered another SAM site as well, bringing the total to twenty-four operational SAM sites.
The photography showed no IRBMs in Cuba, and still no information on the presence of nuclear warheads.
The National Security Agency also released an intelligence report that showed several Soviet ships had reversed course during the evening and headed back to the Soviet Union.
After McCone received the intelligence reports from the NSA and the Joint Committee, he promised to bring them up during his EXCOMM briefing.
Along with a report on Soviet ships, McCone showed increased evidence that the Soviets controlled the missile sites in Cuba without Cuban personnel.
McCone then asked Lundahl to show the group the photographs from the recent U-2 missions.
McCone asked the group to allow him to brief certain members of the Senate and members of the press, which EXCOMM approved.
The committee then discussed the steps needed to establish the blockade.
McNamara wanted to inform the Soviets on the exact time the blockade was to begin, and created plans to intercept the closest Soviet ships when the blockade began.
McCone believed that the Soviets might launch a blockade of West Berlin, and had a greater chance of capitulating before the Cubans.
McNamara wanted a policy in place to inform the chain of command so they could quickly respond to any attack.
If the Soviets launched an attack on the reconnaissance planes, the president approved the use of attack aircraft to destroy any SAM site that engaged them.
Taylor ordered eight attack aircraft be ready to launch immediately, and the Navy prepared to conduct search and rescue operations in case the pilot survived the attack.
McCone agreed to send copies of the relevant photography to Stevenson.0 Ball conveyed to the group Stevenson‟s concerns about not having enough evidence to bring to the United Nations Security Council meeting.
Stevenson proposed one large map showing the locations of the missile sites, photographs of the construction, a list of all the missile sites, and prior images gathered from U-2 reconnaissance over IRBM and MRBM sites in the Soviet Union.
McCone decided to accept all of Stevenson‟s requests except for the prior photographs of missiles in Soviet territory, and ordered Lundahl and Cline to report to the UN to answer Stevenson‟s questions.
After McCone‟s suggestion to send Lundahl and Cline to the UN, Bundy suggested that each member of EXCOMM have a staff member as an aide.
The group accepted McCone‟s suggestion to have Carter confer with members of the State Department and the Department of Defense to find the best candidates for the positions.2 At the conclusion of the EXCOMM meeting, McCone returned to CIA headquarters to brief members of the press.
McCone showed them several photographs to convince them the evidence existed for their actions in Cuba.
Lawrence and Scott wanted to know why the intelligence community did not know sooner about the buildup in Cuba, and how Senator Kenneth Keating350 received intelligence information in August and September.
McCone explained the reasons for the intelligence problems and the timing of the President‟s response, but said nothing about Keating‟s statements.
Lawrence and Scott argued that members of the administration informed the press that no offensive weapons were in Cuba, even after the White House received the contrary reports during the prior week.
The two columnists believed that the White House briefings over the last week misled the press, and they questioned the decision to have those briefings.4 McCone had another conversation with Scott, where Scott attacked McCone‟s creation of the Board of National Estimates because of its failures to predict the placement of missiles in Cuba.
During the buildup to the crisis, he believed that the Soviets were placing IRBMs into Cuba, and wanted Kennedy to action action.
He claimed to receive intelligence reports in late August that confirmed the presence of missiles in Cuba, but the evidence was not accurate since the first missiles did not arrive in Cuba until two weeks after his statements.
Despite the fact that McCone tried for weeks to make the Board consider the possibility of missiles in Cuba, McCone told Scott that he knew nothing of the estimates.
He believed that an air strike and invasion were the next crucial steps after the blockade.
Senator Hicklenlooper, a Colorado Republican, shared Russell‟s support for the president‟s speech and choices, as well as concerns that the president‟s advisors might pressure Kennedy to take a weaker position in Cuba.
Congressman Vinson, another Georgia Democrat, felt that the president made an excellent speech, but believed military action was the next step if the blockade failed to produce results.
Vinson reviewed the naval situation with McCone, and insisted that the blockade be effective, and preparations for a swift attack be in place to remove Castro.
It was during this meeting that Kennedy signed the documents authorizing the blockade and other assets needed for the operation.
Rusk reported that the OAS made a unanimous decision to support the American blockade, giving the United States the legal support needed for the operation.
In response to the decision by the OAS, Kennedy told McNamara to review all relevant details with the Fleet Commanders to ensure that the Navy followed his instructions.4 The group discussed the actions needed to combat Soviet resistance, including the failure of a community ship to stop, the refusal then to allow boarding, or the Soviet captain‟s decision to reverse course.
Assistant Secretary Steuart Pittman375 moved the discussion towards protection of the southeastern United States in the event the president authorized the invasion of Cuba.
Pittman reported that if the Soviets launched the missiles from Cuba, only 40 million Americans out of 92 million residing in the southeastern United States had a chance of reaching fallout shelters.7 Pittman‟s reports worried Kennedy.
See also Lawrence Burd, “Kennedy Signs Quarantine in Cuba,” October 24, 1962, Chicago Tribune, 12.
He received an estimate from Abbott Smith, the Acting Chairmen of the BNE, on the blockade‟s probable effects on Cuba.
SMith believed there would be no challenge to the Navy on October 24 and 25, but after that point the Soviets could decide to engage the blockade fleet if their political efforts failed.
Smith‟s summary noted that the Soviets might stage an incident using a ship with non-military cargo and force the United States to attack the vessel.
If the attack failed to end the blockade, the board agreed that the Soviets might attack Berlin in retaliation.
If the Soviets decided to retaliate, they would attack either a United States ship or the access routes to Berlin, but Smith stipulated that despite the board‟s recommendations on possible Soviet retaliation, most members of the board believed the Soviets would not take military action.5 McCone also received the daily evaluation from the Joint Committee on the U-2 flights of Monday, October 23.
At McCone‟s suggestion, the committee focused its evaluation on the completion status of the missiles, along with any changes found from the low-level photography.
The Soviets continued construction at the rapid pace identified during the weekend, and the committee expected the completion of all the MRBM sites within the week.7 Neither the U-2 nor the RF-8s located any additional missiles, transports or launchers on Monday, and showed no new missile sites under construction.
The new photography also confirmed that while there were no IRBMs present at the construction sites, there were increasing efforts to camouflage equipment at those sites.
The committee confirmed earlier reports that several ships suspected of carrying missiles had reversed their courses, and it still had not discovered any definite nuclear warhead storage bunkers.
The committee believed that while there was no evidence of nuclear warheads on the island, several Soviet transport aircraft could also deliver up to ten nuclear warheads at a time while remaining hidden from intelligence.1 At 10:00 AM on Wednesday, October 24, EXCOMM met in the situation room at the White House.
After McCone‟s briefing, McNamara outlined his efforts to defend the American bases in the southeastern United States.
McNamara showed photographs of the dispersal of United States aircraft, while Taylor outlined the procedures to decrease the time needed to respond during a missile attack.
McNamara then recounted his meetings with Fleet Commanders, and their recommendations for naval interception of suspected ships.
McNamara also provided evidence that Soviet submarines escorted some of the ships suspected of carrying missiles, meaning that the president might have to authorize the ships to attack those submarines during the boarding process.
At the conclusion of the meeting, Kennedy authorized McCone, Rusk, and McNamara to take immediate action to improve communications in the Caribbean area in order to decrease the time needed to formulate a response to any Soviet attack on the blockade fleet.7 Most EXCOMM members spent the rest of the day dealing with the blockade.
The next day, he delivered his all the relevant intelligence as of 6:00 AM that morning.
The intelligence reports confirmed that fourteen out of the twenty-two ships presently on course for Cuba reversed their course.9 However, eight ships appeared to be continuing their approach to Cuba, five of which were tankers.
Rusk asked McCone for answers regarding any changes to the course of the ships returning to the Soviet Union, the destination of Soviet ships bound for other nations besides Cuba, and the reaction of the Cuban public to American actions.
McCone promised answers to those questions during subsequent meetings.2 After the intelligence briefing, McNamara reported that an American destroyer intercepted the tanker Bucharest earlier that morning.
The destroyer hailed the vessel asking what is was transporting, and discovered from its captain that it carried petroleum.
Because it contained only fuel, the group decided to keep the vessel under close surveillance rather than board it.
When the president asked the status of other ships en route to Cuba, McCone informed him that a number of those ships in the Eastern Atlantic had changed course, but needed more time to gather information on the Soviet ships in the Pacific.
At the urging of McNamara and McCone, Kennedy also authorized another series of low-level reconnaissance flights over the missile sites, airfields, naval ports, and the suspected nuclear storage sites.6 McCone received a plethora of information from the U-2 and RF-8 reconnaissance flights throughout the day.
The low-level flights showed that the Soviets had indeed started a crash program to complete construction on the MRBM sites.
The photography also confirmed the presence of a nuclear storage site, probably completed between October 20 and 22.
They also found two assembled IL-28 bombers, three under construction, and the crates present indicating an ability to construct twenty more.
McCone provided this information to EXCOMM during the afternoon meeting, along with the list of Soviet ships approaching the Panama Canal from the Pacific.
McCone noted that all ships underwent searches as they passed through the port, negating the need for a blockade of the canal as well.
Rusk asked the group about the possibility of getting the missiles out of Cuba or at least place them under the control of the United Nations.
It was crucial in the next two days for the American delegation to convince the Soviets to stop the missile buildup in Cuba.
If the decision came down to the Security Council vote, Rusk believed it would receive a seven-to-two vote; therefore, to keep the pressure on the Soviet Union during the negotiations, both McNamara and Rusk approved the tightening of the blockade to include non-military equipment.
To limit the possibility of an incident, Rusk suggested the United States purchase the charter and cargo of any steamers en route to Cuba, and offer to let the captain and owner of the ship defect if needed.
McCone agreed with Rusk‟s suggestion, because it would hinder the Soviet economy.4 When the president joined the meeting, McNamara briefed him on the East German ship, the Voelker Freundschaft.
It was currently beyond the quarantine line and being trailed by the destroyer USS Pierce.
Because of the message from Secretary General U Thant to avoid any incidents until after talks concluded at the UN, Kennedy asked if the East German ship fell under the message‟s request.
Bundy argued that U Thant‟s message did not cover the ship, while McNamara showed how difficult it was to stop a passenger ship.
The group decided to allow the ship to pass through the blockade, but decided to tighten the blockade to keep up the pressure on the Soviet Union.
The president then received a series of documents proposing a series of air strikes against the offensive missile bases and bombers, a complete blockade of all military aircraft and shipments to Cuba, and plans for an invasion of the island to remove Castro and the missiles.0 Following the meeting, McCone received a message from Carter on a MONGOOSE operation scheduled for that week.
Carter informed McCone that the main problem in using MONGOOSE plans was the jurisdictional issues between the intelligence community and the JCS.422 Carter noted that another problem was the length of time it took to approve operations under the MONGOOSE system, time not available in the current crisis.
He confirmed that MONGOOSE secured 50 Cuban refugees to infiltrate the island prior to the invasion, to gather as much intelligence as possible.
The problem was the operation proposed by General Edward Lansdale425 had severe logistical problems.
In addition, the Cubans assigned to the operation had their own interests in mind, and not that of the greater United States strategy for the invasion.7 Carter noted that despite these problems, planning continued on the operation.
The preliminary plan for the operation included reconnaissance of the MRBM and IRBM sites, collecting data and establishing a network to deliver that information.
The board analyzed the nine lowlevel flights as well as the single U-2 flight.
Thankfully, the photography from the low-level flights showed no additional missiles, vehicles, or launch equipment at the missile sites.
The group believed that the heavy rains of the prior day kept the Soviets from activating the San Cristobal missile site.
The photography also confirmed that three of the Soviet ships believed to be transporting missiles continued their course towards the Soviet Union.3 Early on the morning of Thursday, October 26, McCone received the CIA‟s briefing on the intelligence received during the night.
As of 6:00 AM that morning, McCone confirmed that two Soviet freighters and five tankers remained on course for Cuba.
One of the freighters, the Belovodsk, carried up to twelve Mi-4 helicopters437, and was currently in the North Atlantic.
The other remaining freighter, the Pugachev, was near the Panama Canal, and appeared to have stopped or slowed its progression to Cuba.
According to the CIA reports, McCone believed that the Soviets and its satellites had increased their alert status, but made no major changes in deployment of forces in Europe.
On the political front, sources in the Soviet Union confirmed that Khrushchev accepted U Thant‟s proposal for U.S.-Soviet negotiations.
McCone noted that the decision to enter negotiations angered Chinese officials, who wanted a stronger response from the Soviets to the crisis.
McCone then informed the president that he halted a CIA operation that used submarines to deliver fifty Cuban refugees to the island, pending discussions by the group.
Kennedy believed that the Special Group should study the proposal that day, suggesting that the group reintroduce MONGOOSE as part of EXCOMM‟s deliberations.
Kennedy believed that the JCS and the CIA needed to coordinate all existing plans for possible covert activities as a prelude to invasion.
McCone then informed the president that the location of the SS Oxford, one of the CIA‟s communications ships, left it open to attack from the Cuban mainland.
The Soviet Union replaced the Mi-4 with the Mi-8 at the time of the crisis, passing most of the remaining models to Soviet allies in Europe, Middle East, and Cuba.
He wanted both day and night reconnaissance flights to challenge the Soviet air defenses, including dropping flares during the night flights.
When asked his opinion, McCone informed the group that the USIB had recommended against night reconnaissance flights.
Rusk also questioned the effect that night missions might have on the negotiations at the UN.447 When McNamara promoted the issue of a warning about the flights, Stevenson supported Rusk‟s position on the issue.
Due to the efforts of McCone, Rusk, and Stevenson, the president authorized the daylight missions but delayed the night missions.8 EXCOMM discussed the objectives of the UN negotiations for that day, including forcing a commitment from the Soviets to halt construction, halt further shipments, and removing the existing missiles from Cuba.
To accomplish these goals, the quarantine had to continue, and they had to increase the list of items on the embargo list.
McCone argued that any decision the group made must end with the removal of both Castro and the missiles, because even if they removed the missiles, Castro still could undermine his Latin American neighbors.
Because of the rift forming between Lansdale and the CIA, McCone held the meeting to coordinate MONGOOSE operations with the JCS plans for the invasion of Cuba.3 McCone argued that because they designed MONGOOSE to create uprisings in Cuba to remove Castro from power, it must remain subordinate to the invasion plans.
He quelled any belief that the CIA failed to give Lansdale the support he needed by confirming that Lansdale would continue as director of the operation.
However, the changes brought by the crisis meant that covert operations needed to compliment invasion strategies, so the military would assume some of the responsibilities previously assigned to MONGOOSE.456 While many of the responsibilities shifted to the military, McCone and the rest of the Special Group confirmed that Lansdale was to be in charge of all covert activities in Cuba.
They charged Lansdale to analyze the needs of the government and formulate a procedures based on his available assets.8 The strain on McCone and other members of the administration became apparent during the long Friday deliberations.
At the same time, Roger Hilsman, the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, received a message from John Scali, an ABC news correspondent.3 In his message, Scali told Hilsman of a meeting with Alexander Fomin464 earlier that morning, where Fomin asked if the State Department might be interested in settling the Cuban crisis by dismantling the missile sites in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba.
Hilsman passed this message to the president, who met with select members of EXCOMM to question the proposal.
Khrushchev used Fomin as a means of opening secret negotiations with Kennedy to end the crisis.
The group agreed it was a very emotional and personal letter written by Khrushchev intended to end the threat of nuclear war.
Khrushchev promised to remove the weapons presently in Cuba and end further arms shipments to the island.
He would only do this in exchange for the end of the American blockade of Cuba and a promise not to invade Cuba.0 The members of EXCOMM continued their examination of the document into the early morning hours, after which the group decided to allow the State Department to prepare its own analysis because of their emotional and physical condition.
The president requested that intelligence sources have their analysis ready for the Saturday morning EXCOMM meeting.1 The hope felt by many of EXCOMM‟s members faded when Washington received another statement from the Soviet government.
The second letter added the removal missiles in Turkey to the original agreement, which severely complicated the political situation and increased the intensity of the crisis.
See also “ United States Bars Any Deal With Turkey,” October 28, 1962, Washington Post, A1.
Intelligence failed to determine if the ships approaching the blockade changed their course during the night or the status of Soviet troops.
CIA intelligence sources also reported on the mobilization of Cuban and Soviet units in Cuba, but stipulated that these units were under orders not to take action unless the United States attacked.
Other intelligence reports confirmed the activation of all twenty-four SAM sites, and the presence of Soviet submarines near the quarantine line.0 The tense situation reached its breaking point on Saturday, October 27.
McCone started the meeting once again with a briefing on current intelligence.
To warn the Soviets against approaching the line, the president requested that U Thant inform the Soviet delegation of the established quarantine line.
See also Lawrence Burd, “Reds Speed Cuban Missile Buildup,” October 27, 1962, Chicago Tribune, A1.
However, McCone countered McNamara‟s request for night missions, because of Carter and Lundahl‟s reports that it would have no great benefit to the intelligence mission.
Kennedy chose to keep the flights grounded for the time being, but he requested they remain on standby in case he needed to alter the plans.
Ball and Paul Nitze488 argued that removing the missiles would be difficult politically.
Nitze recommended that the group focus on Cuba, and not on the United States bases in other nations.
Rusk and Bundy believed they should not link Cuba to Turkey, because the Soviet missiles remained in Cuba.
The president noted that he considered removal of the missiles several days prior, but the second letter from the Soviets eliminated the possibility of quietly removing the missiles.
McCone argued that the missiles were obsolete, but wanted to add more ballistic submarine patrols if they decided to remove the missiles.
Because of the political problems in removing the missiles, Kennedy believed that the missiles in Turkey were of great military value with the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
He proposed a meeting with the Turkish government to explain the situation and the possible need to remove the JUPITER missiles to stop a war.9 Saturday afternoon created more problems for EXCOMM to consider.
Rusk reported to the group that a U-2 penetrated Soviet airspace over Siberia because of a navigation error.0 McNamara also reported that the Air Force aborted the first U-2 flight over Cuba because of a mechanical problem.
Other reports also showed that the U-2 afternoon flight over Cuba encountered ground fire and was overdue.
The letter also emphasized the American position that the Soviets must cease construction on the missiles.3 At this point in the meeting, McCone received a report that the Soviets attacked a U-2 with a SAM missile, destroying the aircraft and killing the pilot.
After hearing this report, the group began a discussion on how and when to launch attacks on Cuba.
McNamara recommended that the group examine the plans for air strikes against Cuba.
McNamara believed that if the Soviets launched attacks against the reconnaissance aircraft on Sunday, the United States should launch immediate attacks against the SAM sites.
The president agreed but refused to make a definite decision on how to attack the SAM sites.
When the group asked about the status of Soviet forces, McCone confirmed that the East German forces remained in their defensive positions, and had made no advances towards Berlin.7 The last hours of the crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union from the brink of war to its successful conclusion.
During that meeting, he approved the activation of several of the air force reserves.
Finally, if the Soviets continued construction, he would authorize the beginning of air strikes on Cuba for Monday morning.
Later that night, the Joint Committee reported that all twenty-four MRBM launchers were operational, and the Soviets appeared to be dispersing their equipment to defend against air attacks.
The photography also showed a nuclear storage site at each of the missile complexes, as well as the port possibly used to transport those warheads to the sites.
The CIA confirmed that construction on the missile sites continued at a rapid pace, and that the Cuban military units remained at high alert.
However, intelligence sources established that the Soviets had yet to change the deployment of their armed forces, which led McCone to believe that the Soviets wanted to avert the possibility of war by downplaying their traditional rhetoric against the United States.
Khrushchev confirmed McCone‟s belief that the Soviets did not want to start a war when he made the decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba on Sunday morning, October 28.511 Khrushchev‟s decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba lowered the threat of war.
Washington Times reporter James Reston referred to this moment as “following the normal pattern of the cold war.
See also Howard Simons, “Reds Could Fire Missiles in 15 Minutes, Bases Indicate,” October 28, 1962, Washington Post, A25.
See also Lawrence Burd, “Kennedy Offers to Negotiate If Reds Abandon Missile Sites,” October 28, 1962, Chicago Tribune, 1.
The group agreed to halt the reconnaissance flights scheduled for the day and prepared statements to the public and to the negotiators at the United Nations.
The group also ordered McCone to release all pertinent intelligence information to the UN delegation and send CIA experts along to answer any questions.
To protect the intelligence sources and his deputies, he authorized Cline to send Bill Tidwell516 and Colonel David Parker517 to conduct the briefing.
He also wanted to protect the intelligence sources used in the crisis and convinced EXCOMM to send older intelligence photographs to the UN.519 McCone believed that the United States needed to maintain its pressure on the Soviet Union during the negotiations, in order to maintain their position until the Soviets removed the missiles.
Over the next several days, McCone pushed EXCOMM to continue surveillance of Cuba to determine if the Soviets were removing the missiles from Cuba.
On November 1, when the Air Force grounded the remaining Agency U-2s, McCone pushed EXCOMM to allow the flights to continue.
Finally, on November 2, the photography confirmed the dismantling of the missiles, officially ending the crisis.3 McCone spent much of the time after the president‟s public address receiving the most up to date intelligence to bring to EXCOMM meetings.
McCone had the important task of briefing members of the press and Congress on the situation.
He also provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks, despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the diplomatic standing of the United States.
Thanks largely to the changes he made to the intelligence process during the first week of the crisis, he provided the first reports of the course changes in Soviet ships, giving Kennedy the time to halt any action against those ships.
When McCone realized the strain on himself and the rest of the EXCOMM, he had his deputies prepare detailed intelligence memorandums containing the most recent intelligence reports.
These groups allowed McCone to confirm for EXCOMM that while the Soviets continued construction, their armed forces remained in their defensive posture, eliminating some of the concern within the group.
When Khrushchev chose to remove the missiles, McCone protected the intelligence sources and his deputies from the public eye, which allowed those sources to continue their efforts to determine whether the Soviet was withdrawing the missiles.
His management during the last days of the crisis allowed the group to maintain detailed surveillance on the removal of the missiles, and pinpoint definitively that the Soviets were removing the missiles.
He believed that Khrushchev wanted to place missiles in Cuba as a way to solve the Soviet Union‟s strategic goals and secure Castro‟s communist government.
During his honeymoon, he called for more reconnaissance flights over Cuba, and remained informed of the situation through his deputy.
When he returned from his honeymoon, he still found gaps in the reconnaissance over western portions of Cuba and immediately requested more overflights.6 After the president finally authorized more, the October 14 flight discovered several Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Because of McCone‟s “crusade”527 during the summer and fall of 1962, the United States confirmed that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
When McCone learned of the October 14 U-2 flights, he wanted the Kennedy administration to remove Castro and his communist government from power.
McCone joined several prominent members of EXCOMM in proposing a surgical strike against missile sites followed by an invasion.
During the first days of the crisis, McCone favored immediate action against Cuba, but realized that the blockade best served their immediate goals while limiting the risk of war.
He expedited the time between receiving intelligence reports from Cuba by creating several intelligence committees and delegating his authority to his deputies, Carter, Cline, and Lundahl.
McCone also briefed Eisenhower on the situation, and reported to Kennedy on Eisenhower‟s recommendations.
McCone‟s efforts to coordinate and integrate intelligence reports permitted the president to have a detailed picture on the status of the Soviet missiles, allowing him to make informed decisions.
He also briefed members of the press and Congress on the president‟s decision to launch a blockade.
During the negotiations with the Soviet Union, he provided deputies to answer questions during the UN talks, despite his personal belief that the talks hurt the standing of the United States.
Because of the changes he made to the intelligence process during the first week of the crisis, he provided the first reports of the course changes in Soviet ships, giving Kennedy the time to halt any action against those ships.
When the strain started to affect his decisions, McCone had his deputies prepare detailed intelligence memorandums containing the most recent intelligence reports.
The groups McCone established allowed him to confirm for EXCOMM that while the Soviets continued construction, their armed forces remained in their defensive posture.
When the crisis ended in the 1962, scholars focused on the reasons why the crisis happened.
The historians of this period relied on interviews, memory, and previous surprise attacks on the United States as evidence for their conclusions.
In the late 1960s and 1970s, members of EXCOMM began to release memoirs on the crisis, and actual intelligence training to emphasize the timeline, intelligence methods, and the problems facing the Kennedy administration during the crisis.
In the 1980s, the release of several more memoirs and classified documents allowed historians to construct detailed pictures of the event.
Most historians viewed McCone as the primary reason that the United States found the missiles, but otherwise focused their studies on the larger crisis itself.
The personal memoirs from EXCOMM participants and intelligence officials give insight into the mindset and actions of the participants, but remain limited in their interpretations.
Even with the declassified documents, memoirs, and histories on the crisis, nothing connects McCone‟s participation from the discovery of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba to the resolution of the crisis.
When the majority of the intelligence community and the government failed to predict the introduction of missiles into Cuba, McCone pressed for a re-evaluation of that belief.
When the president needed a group of advisors to help make decisions on the crisis, McCone served as one of the key members of that group.
He established new intelligence committees to expedite the release of that information to Washington, allowing Kennedy to make informed decisions in Cuba.
Selections from the Speeches and Statements of Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
Garthoff, Douglas F Directors of Central Intelligence as Leaders of the United States Intelligence Community, 1945-2005.
Eisenhower, the CIA, and the Hidden Story of America’s Space Espionage.
