These operations would employ primarily radio broadcasts and other means of propaganda, and at informing the Cuban masses of the truth.
King's memorandum pointed out that representatives of various of the Cuban opposition groups organized in the United States had requested Agency assistance to set up propaganda operations directed against the Cuban mainland, and, in addition, he also indicated that he and the Director of Communications, Gen.
McClelland, had his people studying the best methods for carrying out such propaganda broadcasts.
NAR A~ ~Cj^6 ' DAT E S* Sfch^ King's initial memorandum, contained no information about potential locations of transmitters, personnel security, inter-Agency coordination or costs.
King to the Director, the subject of propaganda directed against the Castro government was introduced to discussions in the Special Group.
Following the first such meeting at which the subject came up seriously, the DCI requested that Wfl Division provide more specifics on such matters as requirements for real estate, recommendations for someone to be in charge of the propaganda operations, the equipment that would be required, and how the broadcasting might be controlled.
By ; mid-November, following additional discussions both within the Agency and by the Special Group, WH Division proposed that the broadcasts originate from £* / © j under the guidance of Manuel Benitez, andfrom £^ II j under the Monte Cristi Group, headed by Col.
The presumption was that thefc /& J operation would be selfsufficient, but that the£ ft 7 operation would be CIA funded, supported, and directly under Agency control.
Consequently, there was considerable discussion about the possibility of getting permission from £ <& y ft 7 "" to agree to permit the broadcasts from his country.
Some members of the Special Group also suggested the possibility that the antiCastro broadcasts might be originated from other of v ■ ' the Latin American countries, a project which Mr Dulles discouraged because of the lack of suitable broadcast facilities that would be available in countries outside of the immediate Caribbean area.
Somewhere along the line C Tracy Barnes, the ADDP/A and Mr Bissell's right hand man, came up with the T6P Sl ' ICKEl I NAR A^rjg-O ^ '"" DATE ^ffiPS nrnn nnnn i — r suggestion that broadcasts against Castro could be originated from continental United States.
How Barnes came by this proposal is not known, for no such activity was ever given the slightest sanction.
He has agreed not to interfere If we initiate broadcasts from available transmitters in c u 1v Even though thought had he&n given to the establishment of a special transmitting facility for the Frente Revolucionario Democratico , or whoever would run the anti-Castro broadcasts, Z *& J had made it clear thaty he would not permit the establishmeht of special new transmitting facilities in his country.
In addition, it will be necessary for CIA to create such unilateral, FRD, and third country operations as may be feasible and useful.
Black operations will be carefully coordinated within CIA prior to implementation.
All direct dealings with members of the FRD wiir^be under unofficial cover .5/ The outline of the propaganda program made it clear that funding of the propaganda operation was going to be a major problem, and it was also clear that CIA, was going to be responsible for a considerable portion of this.
It was decided that personal contributions were most advisable because they would not require action and approval by Boards of Directors, and therefore could be most easily concealed.
King met with on 15 March 1960, werejT &/ £f J ** Other companies, including £. £7 7 3 and ' C 3""^ 3 ' made donations in the company names and the Agency notified the Commissioner of Internal Revenue about the donations so that they could be treated as corporate tax deductions.a/ InAR A~cJ?-o"" '"" DAT E^^yS WH/4 had requested Chief, WHD's permission to obligate JMATE funds for support of the station; but Chief, WHD refused, indicating that private money would be available.
In October 1960 a similar proposal was made and rejected for the same reasonsBy December 1960, however, payment from JMATE funds was authorised because private funds were unavailable.b/ In terms of the broadcast facilities that were to be established under the propaganda program, CIA was to create and control both short and medium wave shipborne radio broadcasting operations, and to investigate the feasibility of an airborne radio transmitter capable of black broadcasts into Cuba.
Based on DPD's estimates, Phillips figured that three flights per week to six selected Cuban cities — among others, Havana, Santiago and Cienfuegos — over a two month period would show operating costs in excess of $83,000, plus an additional $60, 000. for transmitting equipment on a C-54, and a cost of $250,000 if the C-54 were lost.c/ q per accRcr 1 NAR A CJ&O DATE_S^^3 -TOP OCCRCT editorial offices so that. the propaganda materials could be prepared.
Phillips had done propaganda work for the Agency at the time of the Guatemalan activity, but subsequently retired and had been in private business in Havana.
According to his own story, he had intended to stay in private business; but in the course of Castro's rise to power, he was recontacted by Agency personnel and persuaded to take on the job of running the Agency's propaganda campaign against Castro.
In the Guatemalan campaign, Phillips had worked with a handful of completely controlled Latin American propaganda writers, and had been able to develop a single credible propaganda line.
Washington orders, t« offer radio broadcasting time to all the major and competing Cuban exile groups.
Q W '"" DAT E S^ffi^S TOP 3CCRDTeffort went into overcoming the idea that CIA financed radio programs should become a forum for the varying views of rival exile splinter factions.
Already located on the island was a Federal Aviation radio beacon, and a Department of Commerce weather station.
In April 1960, v the cover storywhich was devised for the * Among those Jrho worked in Phillips's Political and Psychological Section in WH/4, were William Kent, John Isaminger, Phillip A Toomey, Earnest I.Harrison, Paul Oberst, and Michael J Maney.
The loading of the transmitters, the unloading, the construction of the facilities to house the transmitters, and the installation of the transmitters was done by the Navy Seabees under the direction of Alfred Cromartie of CIA's Office of Logistics.
James Burwell, a logisitcs officer who was thoroughly involved in the JMATE operation, reported that the construction activity at Swan Island required the movement of 180,000 pounds of equipment from/; /Q J, aboard Agency trucks for delivery to Norfolk — ' J and the reloading aboard two LST's.
In addition to locating the transmitters and constructing the facilities for housing the transmitters, a crude landing field also was cleared.
The total time involved was approximately 20 days, and the cost was something under $225,000.
Involved in this brouhaha were the Department of Commerce, the United States Customs Service, and numerous Agency components — Cover Staff, Commercial Division, the Office of Logistics, and the Office of Security.
Common sense ultimately prevailed and the question of export licences was dropped.
CjfrO ' * DAT E S 'jfijfc ""+UF SbCR'tT included representatives from the Agency, Mr Abbot Washburn, the Director of the United States Information Agency, and various of Mr Washburn's senior people.
The meeting made clear that the Agency was doing medium wave broadcasting directly into Cuba.
Although it was not specified at the meeting in Mundt's office, CIA also was supporting station WRUL, which had made a direct application on its own initiative for funding such broadcasts — even though the Agency was behind such broadcasting and such financing.
Frankel — who was designated as the Chief representative of the Office of Naval Intelligence by Admiral Fauste, then Director of ONI — the flfevy declined further involvement in supporting the cover story.
Frankel was that the USN was already so heavily involved in the project that it would do them more harm than good to withdraw.
Information on this meeting with the Navy and other information pertaining to the development of the Swan Island facility is contained in the sources listed under Reference 14/ . -215 TOP SECRET NAR A CjR-O DAT E <jj •€$£& WF SfcLRg r Navy was successfully resolved when the Agency found that through its own resources it would be able to provide for resupply of all of the Island's needs, including transportation of personnel between JMWAVE in Florida and Swan Island without undue difficulty.
The problem of security of the island — particularly the fear that perhaps Castro would send saboteurs to the island — was never put to any real test.
In fact, what might have been the only serious security incident was most successfully resolved by£ «j£ /, the Security Officer for the island and the Deputy Chief of Base.
A potentially dangerous situation was averted by the tactful handling of the group by Mr £ 3 ^who persuaded them to leave thexr armament of 13 pistols and three submachine guns aboard their boat and conducted them on a tour of the island.
The group leader indicated that he wanted to take a census of the population, and was furnished with pertinent information, with no divulgence of Agency interest in Radio Swan or its personnel.
Upon completion of the census, the group was permitted to raise the Honduran flag, was given lunch nr . r > n pui""» nn r I NAR A . frg-Q DAT E 3 ffi 2ft TOP 3CGRGT and refreshments, and departed shortly thereafter.
The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, for example, called Jake Esterline, Chief, Project JMATE to report on conversation that he had with ""a person of considerable importance who was very familiar with Cuba,"" concerning the nature of the propaganda which should be aimed at the Cuban population.
Cabell stated that according to this important person, if tapes of Castro's radio broadcasts could be acquired and then patched together for rebroadcasting to the Cuban population for hours on end, the effect would be ""to bore the people horribly with Castro, but would * The island was manned by 24 people, all but nine of whom were CIA personnel.
Following receipt of this call from the Deputy Director, Esterline passed the word on to Dave Phillips with the comment that he thought perhaps such broadcasts might be used as filler during the intervals when Swan was not doing its regular broadcasts.
It was COS Havana's suggestion that wide publicity be given to this article in the Spanish language, presumably including broadcasts from Radio Swan.
Additionally, the NATO Council also received a copy of this document; and it was the hope of the Department of State that the document would have some impact on the upcoming meeting of the foreign ministers of the Western Hemisphere countries, which was to begin 16 August 1960 in San Jos§, Costa Rica.
According to one interview of WH/4's propaganda chief, Dave Phillips, the theme of the Revolution Betrayed Hammered across the idea that Castro had double-crossed the Cuban people by abandoning the programs and promises that originally won him support.
None of CIA's propaganda, spoken or printed, ever urged the populace to rise up against Castro.
This appeal, suicidal before the invasion, would be used when, and if, a Provisional Government obtained a lodgement on the island.
Friendly third country diplomats in Havana monitored CIA's principal broadcasts and confirmed that the signals were loud and clear.
To verify its audience the Swan Island radio offered simple gifts to any listener who would write to the station.
Considering the police controls inside Cuba, listeners' letters were an act of defiance to the regime.
King, Chief , WH Division, who pointed out that WH had a copy of a letter from a Cuban listener who, in the form of a letter bitterly attacking Swan, made it clear that the Swan broadcasts were coming in loud and clear.
One problem which would plague Radio Swan — as well as other elements of Project JMARC — was the shortage of Spanish language capability.
Among 4* It appears that perhaps baseball cards also were going to be offered as an inducement to get listeners to indicate that they had picked up Swan's broadcast.
He has contacted a company making baseball cards who claim 'this most unusual order ever, received.
Additionally radio propaganda — via both short and medium wave transmitters — was to play an important role immediately following the landing of the anti-Castro forces on Cuban soil.
Both of these were published in Miami by the exile groups, and at ^ one time Bohemia Libre was reputedly the most widely circulated Spanish language weekly in the world.
Although barred ^n Cuba, selected items from both publications were broadcast by Swan or WRUL. 23a/ One of the strangest of all activities in which WH/4 PP engaged was a public opinion survey conducted by the Lloyd Free organization to assess the attitudes of the Cuban people toward the Castro regime.
Among the findings of the Free survey, the following comments were included in the summary report of mid-August of I960:* The great majority of Cubans surveyed felt that both they personally and their country were very much better off than during the days of Batista.
Attesting the apparently genuine enthusiasm of the great majority for the Revolution, the Castro Government and its program were the replies when the sample was asked about the worst aspects of life in Cuba today.
In view of the overwhelming popularity of the Revolutionary program, it is patently clear that criticisms of Castro's program as such,, will fall very largely on barren, ■vf not counter -productive ground.
The point was made strongly to ADDP/A that the Free report, in fact, is not at all valid other than for a limited ""sample"" of the City of^Habana.
ADDP/A agreed, but said he did not thinJc State should be made aware of the fact CIS, actually paid for the report.
He further indicated that he was still endeavoring to find out how the report — copy of which CIA never received in full — got out of control.
In an interview with the author of this history, Dave Phillips stated that Enno Hobbing had provided the editorial guidance for WH/4's propaganda efforts; but that to his knowledge, no study ever was conducted of the Castro propaganda effort.
That the Klein and Saks contract was not blocked at the DDP or DCI level is equally incomprehensible.
In an Eyes Only memorandum to the Director of Central Intelligence, Col.
J King informed Allen Dulles that it had been learned that Khrushchev had accepted an invitation from the Government of Cuba to visit that country.
Working with Havana Station, a two-pronged program was being developed with the intention of either forcing the cancellation of the trip or indicating the opposition of the Cuban people to Communism.
Havana Station was to be responsible for organizing church opposition to the visit, and WH/4 and other elements of WH Division would be responsible for instigating rumors throughout Latin America that an assassination attempt would be made on Khrushchev's life if he appeared in Cuba.
One of the WH/4's contacts suggested that leaflets should be prepared depicting the crucifix upside down, to signify the Soviet treatment of religion, and that these leaflets should be distributed widely through Cuba.
On 22 October 1960 in the course of an interview in Moscow with a Cuban journalist Khrushchev did state that he wanted to visitCuba and its people as. soon as possible.a/ XSXJ-J1AOE1J rjQKJf.l,-iUZ-D/0(Ji'J^ AUiJ Reproduced at the National Arch* NAR A c&O DAT E 3'^^ XOPSCCRCT If not particularly successful in projects other than Radio Swan, WH/4/PP cannot be charged with lack of imagination.
Among other projects, it was proposed that the Office of Medical Services' psychiatric study of Fidel Castro be surfaced because the profile was not particularly flattering to the Cuban leader; and the Castro image also would have suffered if a disorienting drug could have been placed in Castro's food.
These proposals were similar in intent to others aimed at the Castro ""image"" as revealed in the Senate Select Committee investigation of CIA plots against the Cuban leader.
In light of a rumor that had been picked up to the effect that the Cubans reportedly were painting some of their British Sea Fury aircraft with the American flag said planes to be used in a provocation action to discredit the United States — WH/4 investigated the possibility of doctoring some photos of the Sea Furies with the flag being painted on in order to forestall any such provocations by the Cubans.
Unfortunately, however, the Agency art shop pointed out that it would be technically infeasible to attempt to make such fake photos.
A^iJ Reproduced al the National Arcnive propaganda campaign aimed at terrorizing Castro's militia (and apparently at the request of Col.
Jack Hawkins, Chief, WH/VPM) , WH/4/PP gave some thought to preparing a purported secret order to Castro's militia to establish an ""elite suicide squad"" which would fight on even after the defeat of the other troops.
The gentleman who would later become infamous in connection with the Watergate activity, E Howard Hunt, and Dave Phillips assessed the possibility of sending a white painted ""flight of truth"" airplane on a trip to several of the Latin American countries, bringing — in a ""Billy Graham type operation"" — the message of Castro's betrayal of the Cuban Revolution.
The DCI, General Cabell, and Mr Helms discussed this cable on 24 August and concluded that since Fidel' Castro is definitely identifying himself more and more with the Russians, it is not worth the candle to launch an operation such as that one proposed in subject cable.
Mr Helms said that we may discreetly try to find a body for this operation, providing we play it very carefully and do not XUHJlAOnu rCK V.L,1 U2-32b Reproduced at the National Archive NAR A Cj&O dat e a-ffia^ TOP GCCRCT let the body in on what we definitely have in mind; also, that any further cables which go out on this proposed operation are to be signed off by him.
There are numerous acts of sabotage reported from all provinces of Cuba.
In fact, one of the earliest and most thoroughly discussed sabotage programs against Cuba — disruption of the Cuban petroleum industry — was a complete and total bust.
Being suggested even before President Eisenhower's authorization of the anti-Castro program, attempts to sabotage and interfere with the operation of Cuba's petroleum refineries continued until well into the middle 60' s — with at least one of the sabotage ""experts"" displaying the same notable lack of success, but excess of foolishness, that characterized his activities during Project external action groups.
In addition, we feel that a great deal of the other sabotage were the results of the demolitions we supplied to the various teams and other action groups in Cuba with which we were in contact.
It is a story worth recording here, because of the extremely close and continuing relationship between one of the major United States oil companies operating a refinery in Cuba, L *%■& ^X , and WH Division.
As early as 9 March I960, the minutes of a Special Group meeting reflect conversations that both Allen Dulles and Gordon Gray had concerning the problems being faced by the major petroleum companies operating in Cuba — SONJ, Texaco, and Shell — and particularly the need for ""discreet means of intercompany consultation"" in order to avoid possible anti-trust prosecution.
Unfortunately, however, there was a communications gap between the operations people and the intelligence analysts most familiar with the world petroleum industry and a number of demonstrably unworkable — though subtle — sabotage efforts came to naught.
This, in turn, was supposed to alienate Venezuela and Mexico, normally among Cuba's crude suppliers.
The former manager of the U .9*^ 5 refinery commented to this effect after reviewing the all source intelligence materials available on the plant.
C|tex> IW3BjbSS3 Reproduced at Ihe National Archives prohibited were attacks under Agency sponsorship on Soviet and Soviet-bloc targets located in Cuba.
Agency were far less efficient than such attacks would be if they were mounted through Agency efforts.
Because of its areawide nature, the activities of the goon squads were run out of WH/D rather than out of WH/4.
In contact with a group of dissidents capable of violent action, including assassination.
This group has killed a number of agents of the Servicio de Inteligencia Militar , Dominican Secret Police.
NAR A CJPrO DATE_3_^l£5 I kjilj: NAR -TOI' iLLKET rather than in direct action programs against Cuba, representatives of the Special Projects Group, Counterintelligence made a pitch to Chief, JMATE to acquire a vessel which — for its acquisition, operational maintenance, crew, including incentive bonus would run roughly $200,000 for a 6-month period — could also be used in deception operations against Castro.
In viev; of the high cost involved, and the other factors mentioned above, I do not concur in the acquisition of this craft for deception purposes as proposed in the reference.
Because of the continuing repetition of many of these stories, a careful search was undertaken of the voluminous CIA records of the operation in order to recover those items pertaining to Nixon's participation directly or indirectly — through his aides, assistants, or correspondence — in the Bay of Pigs operation.
During the course of his unofficial visit to the United Stages in the spring of 1959, Fidel Castro accepted the invitation of the Vice President of the United States to meet with Kr.
Nixon in his official office in the Capitol for an informal discussion.
B NAR A CJPO DATE_3_^^5 "" FOP OCCRET that the administration might profit if one of its leaders could gain additional inside information about what made Castro tick.
The thrust of the meeting was that Nixon was emphasizing the need for Castro to establish a democratic form of government as he understood it, with Castro on the other hand emphasizing that the * In his Readdr's Digest article of November 1964 Nixon indicated that copies of the memorandum went to the three individuals as noted in the text above, however, in his recent Memoirs, EN, Nixon states that a copy also went to John Foster Dulles.
John Foster Dulles was technically Secretary of State until 22 April 1959, on which date he was succeeded by Christian Herter.
At the time of the meeting between Nixon and Castro, however, Mr Herter had been acting in Mr Dulles' place.
Reportedly Castro was not particularly enchanted with the meeting either, for according to a member of his party when Castro emerged from the meeting he ""was angry.
Cushman made it^clear that the Vice President was * It was only after making a direct request to Mr Nixon that a copy of the memorandum was obtained.
No copies were found in the files of CIA, State, or the Eisenhower Library.
Among the other subjects discussed with General Cushman on 23 February 1960 were propaganda attacks on the Castro government and the possibilities of economic sanctions similar to those which had been suggested by former Assistant Secretary of State Henry Holland, whose views on the need for economic sanctions had not only been discussed with Agency representatives, but also had been forwarded to the Vice President's office.
Another facet of the Agency's anti-Castro efforts which were of some interest to the Vice-President were CIA's relations with the Department of State, which obviously was not one of the Vice President's favorite organisations; but Col.
King made it quite clear that all of CIA's actions were undertaken only after policy approval.
King some derogatory information that the FBI had provided the Vice President about both Ambassador Bonsai and William Wieland of the Bureau of American Republic Affairs.
King's memorandum provided no details about the nature of this information, but the probability is that both were accussed of being too tolerant of Castro and communists.
Cushmannoted that the Vice President had suggested that possibly the Agency would want to consult with, or acquire the services of.
Lansdale «s activities in helping to quell the Huk rebellion in the Philippines, apparently were well known to Nixon.
Details were given on the preparations being made for resistance activities including the acquisition of training bases in third countries,' and both Ydigoras Fuentes, President of Guatemala, and President Luis Somoza of Nicaragua were noted as having made offers of support for this country's anti-Castro activities.
Plans for economic warfare against Castro were also outlined for the Vice President.
Delaying deliveries of necessary spare parts for the sugar industry, tightening credit by oil companies to restrict delivery of the essential petroleum products, and possible restriction in sugar quotas were mentioned as under study.
Subsequent to that announced policy, the author has found no other references to drugs or other types of attack which were being considered upon Castro's person, or the persons of any of the other Cuban leaders, as a part of the Agency's official program.
This copy was sent to the DCI through the DDP and carries Mr Bissell 's initials.
The carbon of the memorandum does not show this stamp and the presumption is that it was the Director who did the briefing.
The author assumes that regardless of reader's biases regarding the former Vice President, that the fact that he heard about this drug in the course of a briefing will not be construed to make him a member of a conspiracy to assassinate Castro and other of the Cuban leaders.
For the Director's use at the NSC 5412 Representatives Meeting which will consider the Cuban covert action program paper.
This would seem to imply that perhaps the DCI did in fact do the briefing.
While the briefer may not be positively identified, there is no question however, that the Vice President did receive a detailed briefing on the Agency's plan for action against Castro prior to the time of Eisenhower's formal proclamation.
Mr Nixon's only reported comments during this meeting concerned the cutting off of new"" capital to Cuba, the pulling out of private American firms, and the possibilities of reducing tourism to stop the flow of American dollars into Cuba.
Pawley also was a principal contributor to the Republican party, particularly to Mr Nixon's cause.
Apparently hopeful of an appointment as Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American affairs assuming a Republican party victory in the 1960 presidential election — Pawley was a widely known conservative.
In the spring of 1960, shortly following President Eisenhower's decision to promote the anti-Castro program, Pawley 's contacts with the Agency (particularly 2«9 I OF SECRET CJ&O DAT E 2'$tt2>^ with WHD) and with Nixon's office became increasingly frequent /and apparently quite close.
On 21 March 1960, four days after formal approval of the anti-Castro program, Jake Ester line met with Pawley to plan a meeting to be held in Pawley 's Miami residence which would include the DCI, Col.
Details and the agenda were not discussed other than to say the principal emphasis would be on reviewing what work could be done throughout the hemisphere and public opinion on the pending operation against Castro.
It was carefully explained to Mr Pawley that any action involving exiles now should be most carefully coordinated with Chief, WHD and Chief, Branch U to avoid any flaps.
V.L1 U2026 Reproduced at the National Archive NAR A rjgQ DAT E 3-^^ I JNJ1.
NAB '-fUF iJtCRET The meeting mentioned in the foregoing paragraph was convened in Pawley's Miami residence on 1 April 1960, and the Agency's representatives briefed, among other things, on the problems being faced by the Cubans in exile who were trying to form a government.
There was considerable discussion as to who should be the nominal leaders of this government in exile, with Pawley pushing in particular for Dr.
For the benefit of the Vice President's representative, it was stressed that none of the Latin American countries seemed particularly anxious to provide a base of operations for the government in exile.
King pointed out that over and above a bond issue which will be floated in the name of the government in exile with Mr Pawley's help, that donations are being made by private citizens and corporations.
He cautioned that this arrangement was being limited to a very small group.
Mr Pawley suggested that rather than lean toward the OAS, better use should be made of the United States Military Mission in the Latin American countries, especially having them pass the word on about the dangers of the Castro Government to one and all in the Western Hemisphere.
Other items of importance that were discussed by the group were the planned propaganda program and ""the present pathetic effort on the part of the Catholic Church to face up to the Communist plot in Cuba This meeting demonstrated that from the very outset of the formalization of a United States anti-Castro policy x Mr Nixon was being fully informed of the plans that were underway to accomplish the United States objectives, and that certain private American citizens were closely involved in the planning.
What Barnes stressed to Mr Bissell, the DDP, was the need for the United States to decide whether or not it wished to be charged with supporting reactionary movements in Latin America, not only in Cuba, but in the rest of the Central American and Caribbean areas as well.
King that he intended to make his views regarding the FRD known to Vice President Nixon.
In addition, Pawley also had a meeting with President Eisenhower on 12 or 13 May 1960 at which time he stated his opinions with regard to the Dominican Republic and probably with reference to Cuba.
In view of Pawley"" s recalcitrance to continue to work on the funding of the FRD, the DDP, ADDP/A, Chief WH/D, Chief WH/4 and others, discussed the pros and cons of cutting off the communications channel between Pawley and the Rubio groups into Cuba — a channel which was provided by the Agency's communications. facility.
Ida/ . jiiirLuuu xxij.vjr.^-iUZ.-J^O( i JrJV AL-1J Reproduced at the National Ar NAR A CJ^O DAT E 3 -^^ ^^-—g; ^ s ^ it did provide a window to the activities of the Pawley group.
Moreover, the Pawley group had a duplicate channel into Cuba and would not necessarily have been restricted by denial of the Agency channel.
A restriction was placed on the transmittal of communications which would be prejudicial to CIA operations in Cuba; but it was agreed that Pawley should be advised of the cancellation of such messages by Chief, Western Hemisphere Division.
The monitoring of such cable traffic, however, was to be the responsibility of Chief, WH/4, Jake Esterline.
These views in our opinion are mimical to the best interest of the United States.
If such action Is not tSenf no guarantee can be made fox the security of the JM&HC operation, In poiat of fact, the information in the foregoing message indicates that security already' has been damaged severely.
Group has entre to Veep For a time Pawley was having trouble with an Agency or Agencies who wanted back another junta, but after Pawley offered withdraw completely, he was talkedout of doing so, and given assurance his group only would be backed, / resulted resignation person backing other group.
If any'1UF SbCktiTNAR A CJ^O DAT E 3 'fyt^ Inar -hji 1 ^lCITet On 20 June 1960 at the request of General Cushman, Jake Esterline joined him for lunch, the purpose being to provide the General with sufficient information on the state of the anti-Castro program so that he could bring the Vice President up to date from the time of the Miami meeting that had taken place at William Pawley's house.
Rubio' s failure to join the Frente, however, has not held up progress in forming the junta, and/or the other important aspects of the operation.
General Cushman was told that the Frente 's headquarters were to be established in Mexico, and it was on this occasion that Esterline introduced General Cushman to E Howard Hunt, who was going to move to Mexico with the Frente.
Cushman noted that the Vice President requested this information in order to prepare for an upcoming NSC meeting at which he would be a senior official.
The Vice President's aide also asked if there were any particular problems with relation to the operation that Chief, WH/« wished to have brought to the attention of the Vice President.
Esterline reported that the only problems that had occurred concerned political differences among the exiles, but that for the moment all factions seemed to be quiescent.
ACT) J QP S I XTT ET President presided and the meeting was attended by the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury, the Director of the Office of civil g Defense Mobilization, the Acting Attorney General, a representative of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and, among others, Messrs.
Bissell, King, Esterline, and McMahan of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The propaganda picture also was discussed, with particular emphasis again on radio broadcasts from Swan island.
The teams would go into Cuba to organize and to train indigenous dissident , groups.
The ADCI also mentioned the plans to create an anti-Castro air force, but his comments about this air force were very much in error.
Some trained Cuban fliers are currently available and we hope soon to have access to additional numbers.
Should this eventuality occur it would seriously affect the * See Volume I of the Official History of the Bay of Pigs Operation, Air Operations.
Cabell then introduced a suggestion which would be heard right up to the time that the invasion fleet was being boarded — that ""volunteers"" be acquired for the anti-Castro forces, such volunteers to be drawn from United States Special Forces.* 18a/ As the presiding officer at the special National Security Council meeting.
Vice President Nixon raised a number of questions with the Department of State representatives concerning support that the Organization of American States would likely give to this country's anti-Castro efforts; and he also posed a series of questions concerning the economic pressures that the United States might put on Cuba.
First, Mr Nixon was interested to know if there were any obstacles that the Agency was encountering vis-a-vis other agencies in support of JMATE; and if there were, the Vice President indicated that he personally would help to resolve such problems.
This information [regarding Cushman 's telephone call] could not be given to Col.
Garcia was a Cuban exile who claimed to have extensive backing both within the Cuban community in Miami and among dissidents inside Cuba.
At one point he claimed that he could raise a force of 2,000 men in the Miami area and 10,000 men inside of Cuba — if he were given proper financial support for training and equipping these men.
Garcia 's name first came before the Agency in mid-June 1960 following a meeting he had with a Cuban exile who was an Agency contact.
During this * ■ * Whether the FCC was chastened by Mr Nixon or whether a determination was made concerning the increased use of commercial advertising for Radio Swan is left in doubt.
But Barnes's suggestion of official USG participation in Swan was rejected.
Word of Garcia apparently got to the FBI, to General Cabell, and apparently to the Office of Vice President Nixon.
In any event, on 9 July 1960 Jake Esterline met with Mr Marshall Diggs, a Washington lawyer and Garcia 's sponsor, where he was told of Garcia 's grandiose plans to overthrow Castro, in a follow-up meeting in Diggs's office on 11 July, Mr Phillip Toomey, WH/4/Prop met with Garcia, Cameron Pulley, and two reputed underwater demolitions experts.
Garcia went into his act about how his force could overthrow the Castro Government, assuming that he could get some financial assistance for training and equipping the troops.
Mr Pulley proceeded to tell Mr Toomey that Garcia «s project was part of a program that was being promoted by former Senator Owen Brewster for the entire Caribbean area — apparently a program designed to eliminate all the bad guys.
Distribution Outside the USA ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England ^Uli ""LiLUlu"""" ~~ listening to Garcia denounce the FRD leaders as Communists — as well as being unimpressed by his credentials — on 15 July 1960, Marshall Diggs was informed that the Agency had no interest in supporting Mr Garcia.
The subject dragged on, however; and at one point Mr Pulley, who with Mr Diggs and ex-Senator Brewster, was a strong supporter of Mr Nixon, indicated that the administration's policies with regard to Cuba might hurt the Vice President in the. upcoming election.
Moreover Pulley also is reported to have indicated that a congressional investigation of the anti-Castro plan was possible.
In fact, the hand of Garcia readied from beyond the grave to touch on the BOP operation.
On 2 August 1976, almost a year after Garcia""s death, the Washington Star carried a UPI dispatch saying that Rep.
In return for support of the invasion from Mario G Kohly, a popular right-wing leader who was exiled from Cuba, then Vice President Nixon agreed in October 1960 to order the CIA to arrest the leftist leaders and turn them ove^ to Kohly for ""elimination"" after Premier Fidel Castro was thrown out of office.
The affidavits reportedly came from a former CIA contract agent and Mario G Kohly, Jr., son of the would-be invasion leader.
These materials were supposed to have some bearing on House of Representatives * s investigation of the assassination of President Kennedy; but there is no indication that they were given any credence./ fUP SELREr* NAR A r^-O DAT E 3 2fi £**> Central Intelligence Agency ~ except for the Garcia case — for all practical purposes ended by August I960.
On 23 July 1960, following the Democratic convention, Allen Dulles briefed Sen.
In his memorandum to President Eisenhower, who had directed that Dulles give these briefings, the DCI reported that in the two hour period for each briefing he had covered United States relations with the Soviet Union, developments in the Berlin situation, in the * Whether this /reflects the concentration of the Vice President's activities on the upcoming November election, whether the principal contacts came to be maintained between Col.
King's files, which have disappeared from the sight of God and man — or whether, in fact, this is an accurate reflection of the limited contacts, the author cannot confirm.
Kennedy was briefed again on 19 September I960, and again the briefing touched on relations with the Soviet Union and on the trouble spots in the world, including Cuba.
The White House was informed of this briefing prior to the event; and subsequent to the briefing of Kennedy, Mr Dulles reported on the meeting to both Jerry Morgan of the White House Staff and also to Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster, Staff Secretary to the President.
We mus£ attempt to strengthen the nonBatista democratic anti-Castro forces in exile, and in Cuba itself, who offer eventual hope of overthrowing Castro.
Thus far, these fighters for freedom have had virtually no support from our Government.
I immediately had a member of my staff call the White House on the security line to ask if these briefings covered Cuba.
At the time of the debate, however, and after checking with the White House, I had to proceed with the assumption that Kennedy had been briefed on the secret program.
If in the TV debate I were to reveal the existence of the training program and point out that I had been one of its strongest advocates, I would pull the rug out from under Kennedy's posxtion.
But if I did so, the project would be doomed, and also the lives of the brave men, both inside and outside of Cuba, who were receiving training and assistance.
The result of the introduction of the Cuban issue into the late stages of the * In an interesting conversation with Pawn M Brodie who is writing a Nixon biography, the author of this history, in response to Brodie' s concern about the fact that Nixon knowingly lied to the American public, emphasized that plausible deniability was of real concern at the time of the TV debate.
He also emphasized the Catch-22 aspect of the situation as explained by Nixon.
Brodie that it seemed equally valid to infer that perhaps Kennedy had been leaked detailed information about the antiCastro program and that he used this device to put Nixon in a corner during the TV debate.
Arthur Schlesinger, of course, claimed that the Kennedy comments ""were no more than a rhetorical flourish.
A«^ I) Reproduced atlhe National Arcnive KAR A rj«rO DAT E 3 Sp ^ 3-OP SECRET election campaign, struck sensitive nerves within the Agency; and on 26 October 1960, General Cabell met with Gordon.
Gray, President Eisenhower's National Security Adviser, indicating that the discussion and debate about Cuban issues were touching on areas which, in the end, might be damaging to the nation's interest.
On 27 October at the Special Group meeting, Mr Gray reported that he had talked to ""certain Nixon people in the White House"" in an attempt to enlist their support to bring such discussions to an end.
I have also seen the White House statement, issued today on this subject.
This was probably due to the nature of the message Mr Nixon writes he received as to these briefings.
The Cuban situation was, of course, dealt with in the briefings I gave to Senator Kennedy.
The last briefing I gave him was over a month before the debate^in which the issue arose.
They did not cover our own Government's plans or programs for action — overt or covert.
This interest was especially strong in the period from the winter of 1960 through the late summer of 1960.
It also should be apparent to the reader that while some of the Vice President's interest — particularly in his insistence on placating William Pawley, especially in giving undue attention to Pawley* s concerns that the Agency-sponsored Cuban-exile organization was being taken over by the pro-Communist groups — was politically motivated, his basic concern was the fear of the establishment of a communist government in the Western Hemisphere.
I Sar a Tcjf^^ '"" dat e jjT-ffizft #■4 OP SECRtT affairs in 1979, particularly in the third world countries, if Richard Nixon had been elected President in I960.
In addition to the individuals just named, it also appears highly probable that Allen Dulles, the Director of Central Intelligence (and possibly both Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy) was aware that Castro was an assassination target.
Unfortunately the Senate Committee Report and the media coverage of the investigation of the Central Intelligence Agency's participation in assassination plots made it appear that the Mafia involvement was a fundamental part of the Agency's response to President Eisenhower's March 1960 authorization for CIA to be principally responsible for the ouster of Fidel Castro.
Bissell, Edwards, .and Harvey, with Maheu and the Mafia remained strictly compartmented and isolated from the officially authorized Project JMARC — the Project which cane to be known as the Bay of Pigs operation.
I have no recollection that any specific other plot against Castro during this period when the.
I do remember my own feeling that the Mafia plot had a very modest chance for success, and that it was not something to be depended*on in any way.
In effect, he and his immediate subordinate were case officers for that activity; and I don't think anybody else involved.
I think probably Tracy may have known about it, but I don't think anybody else involved with the Bay of Pigs operation knew anything about xt, whatever.
My recollection is that it never went to the Special Group, and that is the vie* of Bundy.
Edwards was concerned about the elimination of Castro, CIA's Deputy Director for Support, Col.
General Cabell agreed to talk with the Director about this, and to try to obtain his approval to increase Mr Tighe's force to six people.
King, Chief, WH Division, a blank check when King refused to tell Jake the purpose for which the check was intended.
Esterline reported that King nonetheless got a FAN number from the Office of Finance and that the money was used to pay the Mafia-types.
SbCkbt I ' ve been giving, you lessons here about a COPS should know a little about everything Well, I promise you, until it came out in 1975, this allegation, at least, that Shef Edwards and Mr Maheu were working with the Mafia to assassinate Castro, concurrent with the Bay of Pigs Operation, that is the first time I ever heard about it.
My thought, when I saw this, was Jesus Christ, I must have been a little over-compartmented, because we had spent a considerable amount of nervous energy figuring out how are we going to get a shot at the old son-of-abitch concurrent with the landing.
If anybody with whom I participated in planning for that . . . something that we never had figured out how to do, because so many of our agents went down just prior to the invasion.
Then it occurred to me that maybe there was very good reason for me not to know.
Well, mind you, I am not saying what I've just said in any kind of pique; and I certainly don't want to leave you — or this tap«< recorder — with the impression that had I known about this, I would have been opposed.
I must say, I don't think I would have enjoyed the instrument very much — whereas we put out an awful lot of bullshit to the Cubans about the restoration of democracy and all that.
Those Cubans that were working with us were not, I submit, working, for the re-establishment of the Mafia as a controlling factor in Havana.
We surveyed all of our agent material to see who could take a shot at him, but the assassination of that charismatic guy, coincidental with the invasion, would have been a highly desirable thing.
Whether the instrument to be picked should have included the Mafia, I think I might have questioned at the time.
Although far from satisfactory or complete, there is evidence to indicate tha^t the white-hatted guys would haye had no objection — as reported by Mr Drain — if a successful assassination attempt could have been made.
Contrary to General Cabell's reported put down of Assistant Secretary of State Livingston Merchant for Merchant's query about the possibilities of taking nup Sbcm< NAR A CJ&Q DAT E 2'tydfi ^WShlkb T ""direct positive action"" against the Castro brothers and Che Guevara, WH/4 records reveal interest, and possibly limited, direct participation, in a number of such activities.
So far as I have been able to determine no coherent plan was ever developed within CIA to assassinate x * As the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Cabell pointed out to Mr Merchant that such action was highly dangerous both in conception and execution, and, further, he indicated that it was beyond the Agency's capability.
Only someone who consistently engaged and in omphaloskepsis would have a problem understanding the meaning to be anything other than assassination.
He is to be also checked out this we.ek in the use of a sporting rifle with telescopic lens attachment.
It was revealed subsequently that upon his reinfiltration into Havana, £ (6 Jhad two principal sabotage missions one against the Esso refinery and the other aimed at the Havana Electric Company.
L-lU2-526 NAR A CjP-Q DAT EB-^^ TOP 3CCXEI On 15 July 1960, the Cuban Government uncovered a plot to kill Prime Minister Fidel Castro Ruz on 26 July 1960 during his visit to Mina del Frio, an army camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, between Bayamo and Manzanillo in Oriente Province.
No, I think it [silenced weapons in particular] is for hit and run operations, where tney could do their maximum damage and get out without necessarily alerting people I know of no — within JMARC as I knew it -I know of no attempt, no plans that were made to assassinate.
Asked Ed , Dave P, Hinkle, Moore, and Jake [Esterline] why not proceed with Operation AMHINT to set up a program of assassination.
I said that I was not failing to give some attention to the business of assassination.
Now, here on the 24th of February, when I asked Ed, Dave Phillips, Hinkle, Moore, and Jake ""why not proceed x with Operation AMHINT to set up a program of assassination,"" either none of those bastards knew anything about Sheffield Edwards arftl Maheu in the Mafia ... or some of them did, and didn't see fit to say ""Drain, take your AMHINT and stuff it.
AMHINT program was mentioned, |"" WH/4 apparently was involved in a disinformation action where"" re ports of an attempt to assassinate Che Guevara were to be directed at Cuba from the CIA controlled radio transmitter on Swan Island.
The only evidence tha* has been found which might have been related to an assassination attempt concerned an AMHINT request of 14 January 1961 for ""Silenciadores Rifles de marilla teiescopica.
I have never seen that list in my life, but this is the whole top gang at that time.
They got rid of Olivares, and Roca was pushed aside Armando Hart was also half nuts at this point, and he still is.
I guess he is still fairly prominent, „but he is not really in the power structure.
Well, whether this ""Must Go"" is in terms of the assassination, or in terms nobody, none of these people must be allowed to have a role in the new government.
I guess ""Must Go"" came to pass eventually in the case of number one on this list, Che Guevara.
I myself, contemplating the future government, thought it might be interesting to try to keep Raul in, with Fidel out.
Capture what magic there was in the name of Castro, but do it with that little homosexual, instead of with Fidel, the real man.
Instead, he turned to the Soviet Union and its allies for military, technical, and economic assistance.
This was the officially sanctioned program approved by President Eisenhower on 17 March of 1960.
It broadly outlined the political, economic, propaganda, and paramilitary programs which would be implemented in an attempt to oust Fidel Castro.
Once the official United States position was announced, CIA made organizational plans to carry out the policy.
A separate Task^oirce within the Western Hemisphere Division was established under the leadership of Jacob D Esterline, on whose shoulder Col.
Strong support was to be provided for' anti-Castro publications launched in the area of Miami.
Paramilitary programs initially called for the training of cadres of communicators and paramilitary instructors who would go into Cuba and provide leadership and training for the numerous dissident elements that reportedly were ready to move against Castro.
Unfortunately, however, ""as the summer of 1960 drew to a close, it became apparent that Castro's military strength and training programs were sharply improving and that the initial plan to infiltrate small teams to organize the dissidents no longer was feasible.
At that time Mr Eisenhower reinjected himself into the program and stimulated action to the point where some of CIA""s planners hoped that — in addition to the propaganda program which was already underway — paramilitary operations might be initiated.
When our country was in danger of direct aggression and mobilized itself, it waited for the presidential inauguration thinking that this asm would do something different, because all in all, we didn't jooderstaad why a man who assumed the administration of the United States would want to bear the guilt of someone else's mistakes.
Cabell, ADCI, were two of the most vigorous proponents of direct action, vith Cabell proposing air and naval protection for the invasion and, if necessary, use of United States marines tc hold the beachhead.
J.-lUZOZOUl-'K AU 1 j Reproduced atttie Nafonal Archives NAR A Cj&O DAT E 3 ^£^ eeTTET"" end of Eisenhower's administration.
There was considerable concern over the necessary formalities of diplomacy in order that the United States not be involved in investigations by. either the' UN or the OAS for its anti-Castro program.
It was the role of an interested senior officer in the Executive Branch, and by no stretch of the imagination could Nixon's role be construed to have had a major impact on the development of operational planning by the Central Intelligence Agency in its anti-Castro effort.
Similarly, because of the sensationalism which surrounded the Senate Select Committee's report on Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, including Fidel Castro and the indications that the Mafia plot was a part of the authorized planning for the Bay of Pigs Operation, thorough examination of the evidence was undertaken to determine if this allegation was supportable.
At most, four or five senior officials — Allen Dulles, Richard Bissell, Shef Edwards, Bill Harvey, and possibly, Tracy Barnes — probably were knowledgeable about the Mafia connection and Mr Maheu.
In terms of Project JMATE itself, the few bits of information which indicate the possibility of assassination attempts against the Cuban leadership also fail to demonstrate any responsibility for their initiation on the part of WH/4. if anything, the evidence would indicate that WH/4's position was one of watchful waiting and wishful thinking that dissident Cubans would themselves eliminate the Castros and Che Guevara.
The possibility, of course, that Agency-supplied weapons might be involved in such an attempt cannot be ruled out.
