Declassified January 15, 1989, this document reveals details of a proposed overthrow of Castro.
Minutes from an October 24, 1962 Executive Committee meeting Subject The most critical and dangerous event in the Nuclear Era: the Cuban missile crisis, 1962.
The Archive has for several years been diligently locating, obtaining declassification of, organizing, and indexing government documents on the Cuban missile crisis as part of its commitment to capture the documentary record of the critical events, issues, and decisions of the Nuclear Age, along with other contemporary defense, intelligence, and foreign-policy subjects.
The collection presents a uniquely integrated, comprehensive history of the crisis, covering the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs; the United States secret war against Castro; the first intelligence reports which pointed to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba; the intense crisis management and decision-making process in Washington; the military's enforcement of a naval blockade of Cuba and its preparations for a massive invasion; and the agreements reached by John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev that pulled their nations back from the brink of war.
Here is a one-stop retrieval for information on events, issues, and players.
Prepared by the Archive staff, the hard-bound index to names and subjects--designed by indexing specialist David Bearman--is a major historical contribution in itself.
This title is Number 4 of a reference series, The Making of United States Policy and the first of the Nuclear History Series.
Each document bears a unique accession number, to which all indexing is keyed.
Any microfiche found to be physically substandard in any way will be replaced free of charge.
A two-volume printed Guide, prepared by the National Security Archive, accompanies the microfiche collection.
Volume I is an index providing in-depth, document-level access to names, organizations, and subjects.
Volume II contains an events chronology, glossaries of names and organizations, a chronological document bibliography, and a bibliography of secondary sources.
Douglas Dillon Secretary of Treasury ; ExComm Member Raymond Garthoff Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution; State Department Officer during Missile Crisis Richard Ned Lebow Professor of Government and Director, Peace Studies Program Robert S McNamara Secretary of Defense ; ExComm Member Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.
The National Security Archive has the essential empirical grounding necessary for the further study of the crisis.
