After a week of secret President John F Kennedy thought the deliberations with his most trusted advisers, chance of escalation to war was ""between he announced the discovery to the world ι in 3 and even,"" and what we have learned and imposed a naval blockade on further in later decades has done nothing to shipments of armaments to Cuba.
And a tense second week to Cuba, and the local Soviet commander followed during which Kennedy and Soviet there could have launched these weapons Premier Nikita Khrushchev stood ""eyeball without additional codes or commands to eyeball,"" neither side backing down. from Moscow.
The United States air strike and Saturday, Uctober 27, was the day or invasion that were scheduled for the third decision.
Thanks to secret tapes Kennedy week of the confrontation would likely made of the deliberations, we can be flies have triggered a nuclear response against on the wall, listening to the members of American ships and troops, and perhaps the president s ad hoc Executive Commit even Miami.
At the last The main story line of the crisis is minute, the crisis was resolved without war, familiar.
In October 1962, a United States spy plane as Khrushchev accepted a final United States offer caught the Soviet Union attempting topledging not to invade Cuba in exchange sneak nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba, for the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
An Iranian bomb could later, with the Soviet Union itself only a trigger a cascade of proliferation, making distant memory, the lessons of the crisis more likely a devastating conflict in one for current policy have never been greater. of the world's most economically and Today, it can help United States policymakers strategically critical regions.
A preventive understand what to do—and what not to air strike could delay Iran's nuclear prog do—about Iran, North Korea, China, and ress at identified sites but could not erase presidential decision-making in general. the knowledge and skills ingrained in many Iranian heads.
Such a combination would keep missiles, a private ultimatum threateningIran as far away from a bomb as possible to attack Cuba within 24 hours unless for as long as possible.
Khrushchev accepted that offer, and a The Israeli factor makes the Iranian secret sweetener that promised the nuclear situation an even more complex withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey challenge for American policymakers than within six months after the crisis was the Cuban missile crisis was.
The sweetener was kept so two players were allowed at the main table. secret that even most members of the Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro sought ExComm deliberating with Kennedy to become the third, and had he succeeded, on the final evening were in the dark, the crisis would have become significantly unaware that during the dinner break, more dangerous.
But precisely because theany White nation in the Western Hemisphere House recognized that the Cubans as could an attack by the Soviet Union on the become a wild card, it cut them out of theStates, requiring a full retaliatory United game.
Kennedy informed the Kremlin response upon the Soviet Union."" that it would be held accountable forToday, any the threat of an Israeli air strike attack against the United States emanating strengthens United States President Barack Obamas from Cuba, however it started.
Hishand firstin squeezing Iran to persuade it to public announcement said, ""It shall make be concessions.
After tensions not repeated whereas the North Korean have risen, a third party, usually China, ones have been, repeatedly. steps in to propose that ""all sides"" step In confronting Khrushchev, Kennedy back and cool down.
Soon thereafter, ordered actions that he knew would increase side payments to North Korea are made the risk not only of conventional war but by South Korea or Japan or the United also of nuclear war.
He raised the United States States, leading to a resumption of talks. nuclear alert status to defcon 2, aware After months of negotiations, Pyongyang that this would loosen control over the agrees to accept still more payments in country's nuclear weapons and increase return for promises to abandon its nuclear the likelihood that actions by other indi program.
Some months after that, North viduals could trigger a cascade beyond his Korea violates the agreement, Washington control.
For example, nato aircraft with and Seoul express shock, and they vow Turkish pilots loaded active nuclear bombs never to be duped again.
And then, after and advanced to an alert status in which a decent interval, the cycle starts once more. individual pilots could have chosen to take If the worst consequence of this charade off, fly to Moscow, and drop a bomb. were simply the frustration of being bested Kennedy thought it necessary to increase by one of the poorest, most isolated states the risks of war in the short run in order on earth, then the repeated Korean crises to decrease them over the longer term. would be a sideshow.
They have repeatedly Berlin, a free enclave inside the East warned Pyongyang that it cannot export German puppet state.
Why producing reactor that, had Israel not should they not continue, in Romney's destroyed it, would by now have produced words, ""playing the United States like a enough plutonium for Syria's first nuclear fiddle and smiling all the way to the bank"" bomb.
If you do have redlines geopolitical challenge of the next half that would lead to war if crossed, then century will be managing the relationship you have to communicate them crediblybetween the United States as a ruling to your adversary and back them up or superpower and China as a rising one. risk having your threats dismissed.
North Analyzing the causes of the Peloponnesian Koreas sale of a nuclear bomb to terrorists War more than two millennia ago, the who then used it against an American Greek historian Thucydides argued that target would trigger a devastating Ameri""the growth of the power of Athens, and can retaliation.
These rules had evolved during previous crises, and the resolution THE RULES of the standoff in Cuba helped restore and A similar dynamic may have reinforce emerged them, allowing the Cold War to in the United States economic relationship end with witha whimper rather than a bang.
The Republican presidential The United States and China will have candidate Mitt Romney has announced to develop their own rules of the road in that ""on day one of my presidency order to escape Thucydides' trap.
These I will designate a currency manipulator will need to accommodate both parties' and take appropriate counteraction."" core interests,The threading a path between response from the political and conflict economic and appeasement.
In 1996, after some deliberations over its Afghanistan p steps by Taipei that Beijing considered playing out in public, removing mu provocative, China launched a series of his flexibility to select or even cons missiles over Taiwan, prompting the United unconventional options.
This experie States to send two aircraft carrier battle led him to demand a new national sec groups into harm's way.
The eventual result decision-making process led by a was a clearer understanding of both sides' national security adviser.
One of the redlines on the Taiwan issue and a calmer of the revised approach was a much region.
Acting on that advice, the president took six days in secret to deliberate, changing his mind more than once along the way.
As he noted afterward, if he had been forced to make a decision in the first 48 hours, he would have chosen the air strike rather than the naval blockade—something that could have led to nuclear war.
In today's Washington, Kennedy s week of secret deliberations would be regarded as a relic of a bygone era.
The half-life of a hot secret is measured not even in days but in hours.
