United States Institute of Peace www.usip.org Special Report 1200 17th Street NW • Washington, DC 20036 • 202.457.1700 • fax 202.429.6063 About the Report Michael Dobbs Few events have been as studied and analyzed as the Cuban missile crisis.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, Dobbs argues that the real danger of war arose not from the actions and wishes of Kennedy Crisis and Khrushchev, but unpredictable events that neither leader was fully able to control.
As a USIP senior fellow in 2006–07, Dobbs researched the Cuban missile crisis at the National Archives, the Naval Historical Center, and the Library of Congress; concluded research in Russia and Cuba; and wrote the book.
In this Special Report, Dobbs distills the key findings of his book, including ten lessons for a modern-day president.
A Twentieth Century Odyssey, and • Nonetheless, the Cuban missile crisis remains the best-documented study of presiSaboteurs: The Nazi Raid on America. dential decision making at a time of supreme national danger.
It offers policymakers and students of history unique insights into the interplay between the debates in the Oval Office and fast-moving events in the rest of the world.
It is better understood as an example of All rights reserved. the limits of presidential power and the haphazard returns of crisis management.
Cohen argued that the hubris engendered among the small circle of aides About the Institute around Presidents John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson following the “eyeball-to-eyeball The United States Institute of Peace is an independent, confrontation” with Nikita Khrushchev helped pave the way for a series of disastrous nonpartisan institution established and funded by Congress. foreign policy decisions, most notably in Vietnam.
Its goals are to help prevent and resolve violent conflicts, Having just completed an exhaustive study of the thirteen days in October 1962 when promote post-conflict peacebuilding, and increase conflictthe world had its closest-ever brush with nuclear destruction, I share many of Cohen’s management tools, capacity, and intellectual capital worldconcerns about the misinterpretation of history.
The Institute does this by empowering others with that the “best and the brightest” fell victim to their own propaganda about their skill at knowledge, skills, and resources, as well as by its direct “crisis management” and “calibrated” message sending.
Furthermore, the circumstances of involvement in conflict zones around the globe. the Cuban missile crisis—the leader of the rival superpower deploying nuclear weapons 90 miles from American shores—were indeed unique.
Transcribed and dissected by rival groups of scholars, the tapes are exceptionally World Institute on Disability • George E Moose, Adjunct important historical documents, but they represent just one slice of a much larger story.
President Kennedy was at the center of this Director, Primparous Productions, Inc.
The problem with all these models is that they offer a rational, government-centric view of the world, leaving out all the unpredictable, unforeseen incidents that played The views expressed in this report do not necessarily havoc with the careful calculations of both Kennedy and Khrushchev.
As we have belatreflect the views of the United States Institute of Peace, edly come to understand with the war on terrorism, history is determined not just by which does not advocate specific policy positions. the so-called rational actors, the men in suits, the bureaucrats, and the top military brass.
At other times, history can be yanked from its normal path by a combination of chance events, such as an airplane going astray, a soldier losing his temper, or a spy misidentifying a piece of weaponry.
Statesmen try to bend the chaotic forces of history to their will, with varying degrees of success.
The likelihood of an unpredictable event occurring that can change the course of history is always greater at times of war and crisis, when everything is in flux.
In my study of the Cuban missile crisis, I tried to integrate the debates in the White House with a minute-by-minute narrative of events in the rest of the world.
Information flowed into ExComm (the executive committee of thirteen “wise men” established by President Kennedy to manage the crisis) that was often incomplete, misleading, or simply wrong.
The tapes offer a wonderful fly-on-thewall perspective on what the president said and did, but they cannot be taken as an accurate account of everything that transpired during the crisis.
The president’s most confidential and intimate exchanges with his brother Robert went unrecorded for the most part.
By triangulating information from a wide variety of sources, including the White House tapes, interviews with Soviet military officers deployed to Cuba, previously undiscovered documents in the National Archives, and raw United States intelligence film, I believe that I have been able to assemble the most complete and detailed history of the decisive hours of the crisis.
I was stunned by the amount of documentary material ignored or unappreciated by other historians.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, includes an exclusive account of Soviet plans to attack Guantanamo naval base with tactical nuclear weapons, the first detailed description of the handling and movement of Soviet nuclear warheads around Cuba, and previously unknown details about CIA activities inside Cuba.
I was amazed to discover that an episode that has become part of the mythology of the missile crisis—the confrontation at sea on October 24 between United States warships and Soviet freighters carrying missile parts to Cuba—never actually happened.
The Soviet leader did not want to risk a confrontation with the United States Navy on the high seas.
But the imagery of the “eyeball-to-eyeball” showdown was easily understandable by journalists, historians, and political scientists and lent itself naturally to dramatic re-creation in movies like Thirteen Days.
It has become a staple part of the popular understanding of the missile crisis.
By contrast, a much more dangerous moment, the unauthorized ninetyminute overflight of the Soviet Union by a United States spy plane at the height of the crisis, has received scant attention from historians.
When Kennedy found out that a U-2 had gone missing over the Soviet Far East, he gave vent to his frustration.
Such episodes were—and remain—infinitely more dangerous than the wishes and decisions of more or less rational policymakers.
As the Iraq war has amply demonstrated, the important role played by mistakes and misThe important role played by calculations should never be underestimated in world affairs.
For all his failings, Kennedy mistakes and miscalculations understood from personal experience that there can be a huge gulf between the orders and wishes of the man in the Oval Office and how these orders are actually implemented should never be underestimated on the ground.
His experiences commanding a patrol boat in the Pacific during World War in world affairs.
II, reinforced by the lessons from the Bay of Pigs fiasco in April 1961, had taught him to mistrust the assurances of military leaders.
For many years, the Cuban missile crisis was presented to the public as a case study in courage, wisdom, and fine-tuned signal sending on the part of Kennedy and his aides.
Cohen draws a tight connection between “the success in Cuba” and the subsequent failure of United States policy in Indochina.
Instead of devising a strategy for winning the Vietnam War, the White House whiz kids settled on a policy of “signal sending” through the “tightly controlled escalation of the air war over North Vietnam,” including the personal selection of bombing targets by President Johnson.
The objective was not to defeat the North, but to use United States air power to send signals of intent to Hanoi, much as President Kennedy had used the quarantine of Cuba to send a signal of determination to Khrushchev.
Unfortunately, the North Vietnamese communists failed, or refused, to read the signals Washington was sending.
Instead of backing down, they matched the Americans escalation for escalation.
Support for Cohen’s argument comes from former defense secretary Clark Clifford, who eventually took over from McNamara.
Modern-day neoconservatives drew a somewhat different—but equally flawed—lesson from the Cuban missile crisis.
In planning for the war in Iraq, they shared the conceit that the political will of the president of the United States trumps all other considerations.
They were fervent believers in the “eyeball-to-eyeball” version of history, but they took the argument one step further.
In a speech in Cincinnati five months before the war, George W Bush praised President Kennedy for being willing to resort to force to eliminate a new kind of peril to the American homeland.
In effect, Bush was crediting President Kennedy as the authority for junking the cold war strategy of containment that had been in effect for more than half a century.
What he omitted was that his predecessor stubbornly resisted calls from some of his closest advisers for a military strike during the crisis.
United States leaders drew the wrong lessons There is a good argument to be made that United States leaders drew the wrong lessons from the from the Cuban missile crisis in the Cuban missile crisis in the case of both Vietnam and Iraq—the two greatest military disasters in modern American history.
With a track record like that, we have every reason to be case of both Vietnam and Iraq. exceptionally cautious in drawing sweeping foreign policy conclusions from the events of October 1962.
It is safe to say that when President Bush referred to the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis in Cincinnati, he was not engaged in a detached academic analysis of a historical event.
He was using history to lay the political groundwork for justifying a war with Iraq.
History rarely offers a clear guide for how political leaders should respond to international crises.
Nevertheless, as I researched the crisis in the aftermath of the United States invasion of Iraq, I was repeatedly struck by parallels between then and now.
There are many lessons to be derived from the missile crisis and other similar historical episodes—not simplistic guides to action of the kind  often favored by policymakers, but cautionary reminders of the pitfalls and opportunities that have confronted previous presidents at moments of extreme national danger.
In that, more modest spirit, here is a list of ten lessons from the Cuban missile crisis, nearly half a century after the event.
I have addressed the lessons to a hypothetical future president facing a grave international crisis, but they could equally well be addressed to any student of history.
If you are going to draw lessons from history, wait until you can get the full story.
The journalistic accounts written in October 1962 captured only a small fraction of what was happening within the Kennedy administration and largely ignored the Russian and Cuban perspectives.
Over the next few years, these early accounts were supplemented by memoirs written by the key participants, the best example of which was Robert F Kennedy’s posthumous account, Thirteen Days, which first appeared in 1969.
All the early versions of the crisis were heavily influenced by the Kennedys and their immediate aides and told the story from their point of view.
Detailed documentary evidence about the crisis did not begin to become available to scholars until the late 1980s when the National Security Archive in Washington fought a landmark court battle for access to the records of the State Department historian.
The Soviet and Cuban versions of events only emerged in the 1990s following the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and landmark conferences in Havana in 1992 and 2002.
Even today, official Soviet and Cuban records are largely inaccessible to western historians.
By my estimate, less than 50 percent of United States records on the crisis are publicly Less than 50 percent of U.S. available, including most records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Defense Department, the records on the crisis are publicly Strategic Air Command, and the United States Air Force.
Incredibly, the official Air Force history of Maultsby’s unit describes his air sampling Defense Department, the Stratemission as gic Air Command, and the U.S. “100 percent successful” and makes no mention of his 1,000-mile detour.
In the immediate aftermath of the missile crisis, President Kennedy and his aides fed stories to the press putting themselves in the best possible light.
President Kennedy gave a long off-the-record interview to one of his closest journalistic friends, Charles Bartlett, which became the basis for a laudatory account of the president’s handling of the crisis in the Saturday Evening Post.
Bartlett and his coauthor, Stuart Alsop, depicted President Kennedy as the steely minded leader who “never lost his nerve” despite going “eyeball to eyeball” with Khrushchev.
The article suggested that the Kennedy brothers had stood up not only to Khrushchev, but also to United States ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson, who wanted to trade away United States missile sites in Turkey, Italy, and Britain for Soviet missile sites on Cuba.
The official version of history, as relayed to Bartlett and Alsop, omitted some inconvenient facts.
The tapes of the ExComm meetings make clear that Robert Kennedy’s position was more ambiguous and contradictory than the early accounts suggest.
He was hardly “a dove from the start,” as Schlesinger claimed in his 1978 biography, Robert Kennedy  and His Times.
On the first day of the crisis, he was one of the leading advocates for invading Cuba and even ruminated aloud about staging a “Sink the Maine” type incident as a pretext for getting rid of Castro.
He veered from one camp to another depending on the signals he was getting from his brother and from Moscow.
As for President Kennedy, the historical record shows that he was willing to go to great lengths on Black Saturday to avoid a showdown with Khrushchev.
He authorized his brother to tell Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that he was prepared to dismantle United States missiles in Turkey “within four to five months” of a Soviet pullback from Cuba.
The main difference between Kennedy and The president wanted to keep Stevenson was that the president wanted to keep the missile swap idea as a last-minute gambit to avoid war while the ambassador was willing to put it onto the negotiating table the missile swap idea as a lastfrom the very beginning. minute gambit to avoid war while Stevenson was willing to put it 3.
Presidential decision making—under any administration—is a lot more chaotic onto the negotiating table from than the memoir writers would have you believe.
In their desire to claim credit for Khrushchev’s sudden about-face on the morning of Sunthe very beginning. day, October 28, Kennedy aides came up with the notion of the “Trollope ploy” to describe the United States diplomatic strategy on Black Saturday.
The gambit was named after a scene from a novel by Anthony Trollope in which a lovesick Victorian maiden chooses to interpret an innocent squeeze on the hand as an offer of marriage.
He suggested that his brother simply ignore Khrushchev’s call on Saturday morning for a Turkey-Cuba missile swap and instead accept his ambiguously worded offer of Friday night to dismantle the missile sites in return for a United States guarantee not to invade Cuba.
With the help of Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen, Robert Kennedy did rewrite the reply to Khrushchev to focus more on the conciliatory-sounding parts of his first letter.
Far from ignoring the second Khrushchev letter, President Kennedy ordered Robert to tell Dobrynin that the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
He also began laying the diplomatic groundwork for a public Turkey-Cuba swap should one become necessary.
In general, the “Trollope ploy” version of history ascribes greater coherence and logic to the tense ExComm debate of Saturday afternoon than anybody felt at the time.
The meeting was a case study of government by exhaustion, in which frazzled policymakers weighed down by heavy responsibility argued and stumbled toward a mutually acceptable compromise.
The “best and the brightest” around Kennedy, and later around Johnson, made the fatal mistake of believing their own laudatory press clippings.
The seeds of the hubris were already on display on the afternoon of Sunday, October 28, in the immediate aftermath of Khrushchev’s climbdown.
To many of the men, who had spent the last thirteen days in the Cabinet Room agonizing over the threat posed by Soviet missiles, it suddenly seemed as if the president was a Official accounts of the missile miracle worker.
According to the Kennedy version, long accepted by missile crisis historians, the first place.
Khrushchev wanted to correct the nuclear imbalance between the Soviet Union and the  United States.
He was worried about Soviet strategic inferiority, but also he wanted to protect the world’s newest socialist state from United States attack.
Recent revelations about Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy brothers’ secret war against Fidel Castro, show that Khrushchev had real reason for concern.
Cuban and Soviet fears of United States intervention were not simply the result of communist paranoia.
In return for withdrawing the missiles, the Soviets extracted a promise from the Kennedy administration not to invade Cuba.
The missile crisis ended in The missile crisis helped ensure a humiliating climbdown for Khrushchev but helped ensure that Castro would remain in that Castro would remain in power power for more than four decades. for more than four decades.
The president of the United States may be the most powerful, and best-informed, person in the world, but there is still much that he does not know.
In fact, there were 43,000 Soviet troops on Cuba, including heavily armed combat troops.
Soviet troops moved nuclear cruise missiles to within fifteen miles of the naval base at the height of the crisis, according to Soviet soldiers who took part in the deployment.
In fact, CIA officials had already correctly concluded that the Grozny was carrying ammonia for a nickel plant.
Both McNamara and his deputy, Roswell Gilpatric, complained about the lack of timely information from United States Navy brass during the implementation of the quarantine.
Neither man saw the messages that went back and forth between the Pentagon and the ships enforcing the blockade.
United States admirals also were in the dark much of the time about what was going on.
The overloading of communications circuits caused a four-hour delay in “emergency” message traffic and a sixto seven-hour delay in “operational immediate” traffic.
The chief of naval operations, Admiral George Anderson, grumbled to an aide that he was “amazed” at the lack of information from air reconnaissance about the movements of Soviet ships in the Atlantic.
Sometimes, the enemy acts in ways that United States leaders consider “rational,” but often America’s enemies are driven by beliefs and motivations that are difficult for Americans to understand.
He was horrified by the prospect of a nuclear war and felt an obligation to rein in the dark, destructive forces that he had unleashed.
For all his bluster and bravado, he understood that he had no real option but to back down once confronted with America’s overwhelming nuclear superiority.
His entire political strategy was based on convincing the United States that he was a “madman,” ready to risk the destruction of his country in order to defend its sovereignty and independence.
At the height of the crisis, Castro urged Khrushchev to consider using nuclear weapons to “liquidate” the imperialist menace “once and for all” if the Americans invaded Cuba.
He ordered his forces to open fire on U.S. reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba and persuaded his Soviet allies to do the same.
Under the heading of “irrational Under the heading of “irrational actors,” one should also include people who stumble onto the stage by chance but can change the course of history.
An obvious example is actors,” one should also include Maultsby, the U-2 pilot who was blinded by the aurora borealis en route to the North Pole people who stumble onto the and ended up over the Soviet Union during the most dangerous moments of the Cold War. stage by chance but can change Neither Kennedy nor any of his advisers had any idea that the Strategic Air Command was still conducting air sampling missions around the borders of the Soviet Union the course of history. during the missile crisis.
The news that a U-2 had strayed off course came as a surprise even to the commander of Maultsby’s regiment, Colonel John Des Portes, who was too busy supervising U-2 operations over Cuba during the crisis to think about seemingly routine missions elsewhere in the world.
According to my reconstruction of the incident, it took SAC commanders an hour and a half to report Maultsby’s penetration of Soviet air space to McNamara.
Both Kennedy and McNamara were unaware until after the event that the Soviets had sent up MiG fighters to try to shoot down Maultsby, and the Alaska Defense Command had scrambled nuclear-armed F-102s over the Bering Strait in response.
The corrosive power of conventional wisdom was fully on display during the missile crisis, particularly in intelligence gathering.
Consider the United States intelligence trail in the case of the first medium-range R-12 missiles to arrive in the Cuban port of Mariel on board the Soviet freighter Poltava on September 16.
The missiles were unloaded on the night of September 19 under the gaze of a CIA informant who had somehow managed to gain access to the docks.
He promptly reported what he had seen to the CIA, describing “large intercontinental rockets more than 20 meters long” being unloaded from a Soviet ship.
An R-12 rocket packaged for transport without the nose cone measures 67 feet in length, double the length of a V-75 surface-to-air missile.
But lower-level analysts were reluctant to challenge the con clusions of an NIE, written largely on the basis of past Soviet behavior.
It was not until a U-2 took pictures of the missiles being deployed nearly a month later on October 14 that the CIA revised its initial estimate.
This intelligence failure is almost the mirror image of the one that occurred during the run-up to the Iraq war in March 2003.
Reporting and analysis that was at variance with the October 2002 NIE on Iraq’s WMD programs was played down or dismissed.
Another example of erroneous conventional wisdom in the missile crisis was the search for the nuclear warheads.
Declassified CIA records and raw intelligence film show that the agency had its eye on underground storage facilities near the Cuban towns of Bejucal and Managua.
The CIA deputy director, Marshall Carter, even informed ExComm that the Bejucal bunker was the “best candidate” for a nuclear storage site.
But both bunkers were dismissed from serious consideration because they were protected by a single security fence, in contrast to the multiple fences and guard posts visible at similar installations in the Soviet Union.
Forty-five years later, I concluded on the basis of the raw intelligence film and interviews with Soviet veterans that the Bejucal and Managua bunkers served as the principal hiding places for the Soviet nuclear warheads.
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, most people, certainly most Americans, would probably have singled out Kennedy as the big winner.
He achieved his basic objective— the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba—without plunging the world into a catastrophic war.
He learned of Khrushchev’s decision to withdraw the missiles over the radio and was so furious that he smashed a mirror.
And yet, in a perverse way, the missile crisis guaranteed Castro’s hold on power in Cuba for more than four decades.
A little over a year after his greatest foreign policy triumph, Kennedy was dead, murdered by a Fair Play for Cuba Committee activist.
A year later, Khrushchev was forced to retire by his colleagues in the Soviet leadership, in part because of his Cuban adventure.
As the years went by, it became clear that Kennedy’s missile crisis victory had produced Kennedy’s missile crisis victory many unintended consequences.
One result was an escalation in the Cold War arms race had produced many unintended as Soviet leaders sought to erase the memory of the Cuban humiliation.
One result was minister, Vasily Kuznetsov, told a senior United States official shortly after the removal of the Soviet an escalation in the Cold War missiles.
The Soviet Union would never again allow itself to be in a position of strategic inferiority.
In order to achieve military parity with the United States, Khrushchev’s succesarms race. sors embarked on a vast intercontinental ballistic missile program.
In yet another twist to history, this huge military buildup was one of the principal reasons for the Soviet Union’s ultimate demise.
Even a fabulously rich country, with huge natural resources, could not sustain the burden of ever-increasing military budgets.
The free world led by the United States eventually won a victory over the totalitarian world of Soviet communism—but it came about in a different manner than many people expected.
The missile crisis marked a turning point in the debate over whether a nuclear war was winnable.
Prior to October 1962, an influential group of generals headed by Curtis LeMay  had favored a first strike against the Soviet Union.
After the missile crisis, even those generals had to rethink the notion of a military victory over the Soviet Union.
Killing all the communists was obviously impossible without millions of Americans being killed as well.
The United States and the Soviet Union would never again become involved in a direct military confrontation of the scale and intensity of the Cuban conflict.
There would be many proxy wars—in Vietnam, the Middle East, Africa, and elsewhere—but no wars, or even near wars, pitting United States troops directly against Soviet troops.
The impossibility of military victory had the salutary effect of shifting the superpower competition to other areas, in most of which America enjoyed a comparative advantage.
Countries that successfully resisted the military might of the United States—Vietnam is the most obvious example—ended up adopting free market economic systems and opening up to the outside world.
In his own mind, Castro won a great victory over the yanqui enemy merely by remaining in power for so long.
In reality, he transformed the most prosperous island in the Caribbean into a defeated, impoverished country stuck in a 1950s time warp.
You only have to travel to Havana from Miami to understand who are the victors and who are the vanquished.
Communism was not defeated Communism was not defeated militarily; it was defeated economically, culturally, and ideologically.
Khrushchev’s successors were unable to provide their own people with a militarily; it was defeated economibasic level of material prosperity and spiritual fulfillment.
The Cuban missile crisis demonstrates the sometimes pivotal role of personality in politics.
Had someone else been president in October 1962, the outcome could have been very different.
Even with the benefit of hindsight, it is impossible to know what would have happened had President Kennedy followed the advice of the hawks.
It is conceivable that Khrushchev would have swallowed the humiliation.
It is also conceivable that Soviet commanders on Cuba would have used tactical nuclear weapons to defend themselves, whatever their instructions from Moscow.
A breakdown in military communications would have devolved effective control over such weapons to the officers who commanded each individual battery.
The nuclear-tipped cruise missiles aimed at Guantanamo were under the command of a major.
Had the naval base been destroyed by a nuclear weapon, Kennedy would have been under enormous pressure to order a nuclear response.
Knowing what we know now, it is Knowing what we know now, it is hard to quarrel with President Kennedy’s decision to go with a blockade of Cuba rather than an air strike leading to a possible invasion.
We can only be grateful for his restraint. blockade of Cuba rather than an air strike leading to a possible invasion.
Conclusion For decades, the Cuban missile crisis has been studied and analyzed as a case study in presidential power and crisis management.
The great drama during the missile crisis was not whether Kennedy and Khrushchev wanted to control events; it was whether they could.
By authorizing the Bay of Pigs invasion, followed by Operation Mongoose, Kennedy had given the Soviets every reason to believe that he was determined to get rid of Castro once and for all.
To protect his Caribbean ally, Khrushchev made the reckless decision to deploy nuclear missiles nearly ten thousand miles from Soviet shores, right on America’s doorstep.
The story of the Cuban missile crisis is the story of The Cuban missile crisis is the two chastened leaders struggling to contain the specter of nuclear destruction that they story of two chastened leaders themselves had unleashed.
Fortunately, Kennedy had studied history and absorbed some of its lessons.
He viewed struggling to contain the specter history not as a rationale to justify his political decisions, but as a cautionary tale. of nuclear destruction that they Earlier in 1962, he had read a best-selling book about the origins of World War I, The Guns of August, by the historian Barbara Tuchman.
President Kennedy was so taken by themselves had unleashed. the book that he insisted his aides read it and had it distributed to every United States military base in the world.
One of Kennedy’s favorite passages was a scene in which two German statesmen are analyzing the reasons for the most destructive military confrontation up until that time.
As Kennedy tried to imagine a war with the Soviet Union over the missiles in Cuba, one thought kept troubling him.
The world had its closest-ever brush with nuclear destruction on John Kennedy’s watch in October 1962.
To prevent such a moment from ever happening again is reason enough to continue to study the Cuban missile crisis.
An exception is a private meeting between President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy on October 23, 1962, at which both brothers express the fear that the president “would have been impeached” had he failed to take strong action over Cuba.
For the precise coordinates of the Soviet and United States ships, see Dobbs, One Minute to Midnight, 91.
Air Force Historical Research Agency, History of 4080th Strategic Wing, October 1962.
Stuart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, “In Time of Crisis,” Saturday Evening Post, December 8, 1962.
