A Persistent Approach to the IntelligencePolicy Relationship In the wake of the Iran-contra affair, the role of intelligence in United States national security policy process is again being examined by members of both the executive and legislative branches.
Not since the Church and Pike committee hearings in the mid-1970s have the activities of the Central Intelligence Agency come under such extensive public scrutiny.
The findings of both the Tower Commission and the Iran-contra Committee exposed the extent to which key CIA officials were involved in the Reagan administration's efforts to secure the release of the American hostages in Lebanon and to finance and supply the resistance forces in Nicaragua.
The CIA's involvement in these two policy initiatives has raised questions about the overall relationships between intelligence and policy during the Reagan presidency.
While the spotlight was recently focused on covert action, the heart of the intelligence-policy relationship remains the analysis and dissemination of intelligence information.
How closely intelligence officials should collaborate with policymakers and to what degree analysts should be integrated into the policy process has long been debated.
William Casey's role as Director of Central Intelligence in the Reagan administration exemplified one of the extreme positions in this debate.
Casey, the first DCI to serve as a cabinet member, was a strong policy advocate who advised the president on both intelligence matters and policy issues.
While Casey has been credited with improving the quality, relevance, and timeliness of the agency's intelligence analysis, his active role in the policy process had adverse effects on the intelligence-policy relationship.
Currently, he is in the Central Intelligence Agency's Photographic Interpretation Center.
For example, Secretary of State George Schultz testified that even before the Iranian arms deal, he ""had come to have grave concerns about the objectivity and reliability of some of the intelligence"" he was getting.
Those advocating a clear separation between intelligence analysis and policy formulation, with intelligence officials keeping a safe distance from policymakers, will draw upon Casey's record to support their argument.
Yet Casey's example should not stand as the reason a DCI should be excluded from active involvement in the policy process.
The short history of the American intelligence establishment contains other cases where the DCI, by directly engaging policymakers, not only served the intelligence community well but also enhanced the formulation and execution of national policy.
The net result in such cases was a smooth and effective intelligence-policy relationship.
Among these cases, John McCone's leadership and the CIA's role before and during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis stand out as a good example of an effective intelligence policy relationship.
The thirteen-day incident has, for two decades now, been used as a textbook case for studying national security crisis management.
But when viewed from the perspective of the intelligence-policy relationship, the missile crisis also offers valuable lessons on how senior intelligence officials can work closely with policymakers, while protecting the objectivity and integrity of intelligence.
Previously classified information released over the past five years, including CIA documents, National Security Council files, and executive committee-meeting transcripts has shed light on the role played by McCone and the CIA throughout the period when the Soviet Union attempted to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba.
McCone's role is here examined by tracing his participation in executive committee meetings; evaluating the quality, timeliness, and relevance of the intelligence reporting related to the crisis; and assessing McCone's influence on the president and senior policy officials.
In the context of the debate over the proper role of intelligence in the policy process, the positive and negative implications of McCone's approach will then be considered.
ACTIVISTS Theoretical arguments about the role of intelligence in the policy process usually center on the interaction between intelligence officers and policymakers and the integration of intelligence analysis into policy formulation.
The traditionalists believe a clear separation between intelligence analysis and policy formulation should be rigorously maintained.
They regard the policy process as a prescribed sequence of events with intelligence providing an important but isolated input into this process.
This division of labor is believed necessary to preserve the objectivity of intelligence.
The intelligence community must distance itself from policy interests and avoid the policymaker's partisan pressures.
By failing to do so intelligence officials jeopardize the integrity of their judgments and risk becoming just another voice in the policy debate.
Therefore, according to the traditionalists, little direct interaction should exist between intelligence officials and policymakers.
Activists, on the other hand, advocate a much closer relationship between the intelligence and policy communities.
They assert that intelligence analysis and policy decisionmaking is an interactive process.
The evaluation of intelligence information must be carried out within the framework analyzing policy problems.
According to the activists, knowledge and action should continually interact throughout the policy process.
Intelligence officials should be brought out of their protected intellectual world into the real world of policy problems.
There they would be involved in the various stages of the formulation and implementation of national security policy.
Intelligence analysts should present their findings and express their views to policymakers, who, in turn, should inform the analysts about decisions having an impact on intelligence analysis.
Intelligence analysts need a general knowledge of the policy problems and should receive proper guidance from the policy planners in order to supply the necessary intelligence support.
Policymakers, furthermore, should be aware of the limitations of intelligence support and how the available intelligence can best satisfy their requirements.
Although the activists acknowledge that the objectivity of intelligence judgments can be lost in a close working relationship between intelligence producers and consumers, they argue that effective intelligence support suffers more when the intelligence officials and policymakers are kept too far apart.
An active dialogue between the producer and the consumer guarantees that intelligence information and judgments relevant to the contending policy issues are quickly and clearly disseminated to the appropriate people.
The key factor in this activist framework is the role played by the Director of Central Intelligence.
The DCI largely determines the direction of the overall intelligence-policy relationship.
At the highest level of policy planning and decisionmaking, the DCI is essential to assuring effective use of intelligence.
As the president's principal foreign intelligence advisor, the DCI can assure that key estimates and other crucial pieces of intelligence are brought to the attention of senior policymakers.
An activist Director must stay informed of policy priorities, press for admission into policymaking circles, convincingly convey intelligence judgments, and anticipate future policy requirements.
To carry out these responsibilities effectively, the DCI must maintain a good working relationship with the president and other high level policy officials.
The director should be someone in whom the president and his senior advisers have confidence.
At times, a DCI risks placing himself in an unfavorable position when his intelligence assessments challenge the premises of the president's policy.
To preserve the integrity and effectiveness of his role, however, the Director of Central Intelligence must maintain his objectivity in the face of adversity.
MCCONE AND JFK John McCone assumed the position as President Kennedy's Director of Central Intelligence with no experience in the intelligence business.
Unlike his predecessor, Allen Dulles, and many other high level CIA officials, McCone did not serve in the Office of Strategic Services.
During World War II he was involved in organizing and managing steel, aircraft modification, and shipbuilding industries.
Following the war, he served in various government assignments, most notably as Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission.
McCone had earned a reputation as a forceful, demanding, but sensible administrator.
While he could be a tough ""street fighter,"" McCone could also be reasonable and conciliatory.
As a high-level executive he was effective in organizing new operations, introducing innovative practices, and establishing clear lines of responsibility.
While respect for McCone's administrative abilities generally cut across partisan lines, agreement with his views on national security issues, prior to his appointment as DCI, was found mostly among conservatives.
He saw the course of post-war international developments as a moral struggle between democracy and communism.
Certain sectors of the American liberal establishment opposed Kennedy's nomination of the Republican McCone as DCI partly out of fear that his hard-line anti-communist views would influence the Agency's intelligence reporting.
Other opponents of the McCone nomination pointed to the fact that as a complete outsider, he did not know enough about the intelligence business.
Undeterred by his critics, McCone, in testimony before the Senate panel acting on his nomination, defended his policy positions and outlined his concept of the Director's and the agency's roles in the policy process.
President Kennedy's decision to appoint McCone as DCI in September 1961 was part of the president's overall shakeup and reorganization of the national security apparatus in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
In choosing a successor to the legendary Allen Dulles, the president was looking for an able administrator on whom he could rely to carry out the changes necessary to improve the CIA's performance.
John McCone brought to the CIA an administrative style much different from that of Dulles.
McCone was more interested in intelligence production than in covert action.
He focused his attention on analytical intelligence activities and the management of intelligence collection.
He carefully read the agency's daily intelligence reports and intelligence estimates.
His foremost concern was to keep the president up to date on substantive intelligence matters.
McCone was also interested in the technical collection of intelligence and in the ongoing research aimed at improving collection capabilities.
He did not want to devote much time to covert action, preferring to leave the day-to-day administration of those activities to his Deputy Director for Plans.
McCone took his role as head of the entire intelligence community very seriously.
In this capacity he was not only concerned with overseeing the production of national intelligence but also with coordinating the community's various intelligence activities.
Unlike Dulles, who tried to avoid bureaucratic infighting, McCone was not afraid to engage in political battles with other bureaucratic chiefs inside and outside the intelligence community.
Within the CIA itself, McCone took measures to redeem the agency's reputation in the eyes of the president and his senior advisors.
In the area of intelligence production, McCone directed his attention to the process of communication between the intelligence analysts and the policymakers.
He wanted not only to guarantee that the policymakers were aware of the agency's intelligence judgments but also to insure that his analysts were focusing their efforts on issues related to the policymakers' concerns.
To achieve these objectives, McCone persistently asserted himself within administration circles.
McCone personally saw to it that important intelligence reports were quickly disseminated to the president and senior policymakers.
Intelligence estimates and intelligence memoranda were not only put before the National Security Council for discussion but were also included in the president's weekend reading packet.
McCone carefully made certain that key intelligence findings and judgments did not escape the president's attention.
President Kennedy fully supported McCone's efforts and strengthened McCone's authority over the CIA and the intelligence community.
In a 16 January 1962 memorandum to McCone, the President specifically defined the duties of the DCI, emphasizing the DCI's roles as the president's principal intelligence adviser and as the coordinator of the entire intelligence establishment.
MISSILES IN CUBA The Cuban missile crisis was a dramatic example of the importance of sound intelligence judgments and timely intelligence information in the post-World War II world.
The performance of the CIA and other key elements in the intelligence community in this crisis demonstrated the direct influence of intelligence on the national security policymaking process.
First, by identifying the presence of the missiles in Cuba before they had become operational, the intelligence community gave the policymakers adequate warning of the impending crisis situation.
Second, after the initial discovery of the missiles, the intelligence community carefully monitored the status of the Soviet missile bases.
The information they gathered kept policymakers constantly informed of the ongoing situation and thereby assisted the administration in evaluating alternatives, making decisions, and managing the overall crisis.
Third, after an understanding had been reached between the United States and the Soviet Union, intelligence was able to verify that the Russians were fully complying with the terms of the agreement The intelligence support during the crisis was a community-wide effort.
John McCone not only managed the overall intelligence effort but also became an important figure during the discussions and deliberations on how best to handle the crisis.
The CIA's discovery of the Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba was made in the course of monitoring the Soviet-sponsored military buildup in Cuba.
Since late 1960, the Soviet Union had begun a program of limited military assistance to support the Castro revolution.
To assist the buildup of the Cuban armed forces, the Soviets provided armored vehicles, artillery, antitank weapons, and fighter aircraft.
Cuban military personnel were being trained and instructed by Soviet military technicians and advisers.
By the spring of 1962, the Soviet Union's military assistance program had enabled Castro to improve the force structure of all three branches of his military establishment.
The Cubans had not received any of the Soviet Union's most modern military equipment.
By the standards of other Soviet client states, the Cuban military buildup by the spring of 1962 was limited.
It was not until the summer of 1962 that the Soviets began large-scale arms deliveries to Cuba.
The available information on Soviet merchant shipping provided statistics on the number and type of dry cargo and passenger ships scheduled to arrive in Cuban ports.
The thousands of Cuban refugees arriving in the United States furnished a hodgepodge of information on Soviet military deliveries to Cuba.
Some of their reports were accurate and reliable, but most of them were either fictitious or not useful for intelligence purposes.
United States intelligence agents in Cuba were likely to provide more accurate and useful information on the military buildup than that passed on by the refugees.
The tight internal security controls established by Castro after the Bay of Pigs invasion, however, made getting any accurate or timely intelligence out of Cuba difficult.
The most timely and the most accurate information on the military buildup in Cuba was obtained from U-2 aerial photographs.
Since 1960, U-2 aircraft operated by the CIA had regularly carried out photographic reconnaissance missions over Cuba.
In early 1962, as the administration became more concerned with military developments in Cuba, the frequency of these flights was stepped up.
This surveillance included flights over Cuba's principal airfields and ports, and other areas of military significance.
The U-2 photography furnished the most effective way for the CIA to monitor such specific developments in Cuba as the delivery and assembly of new military equipment, the upgrading of airfields, the construction of new military facilities, and the deployment of air defenses.
MCCONE'S SUSPICIONS The Cuban military buildup proceeded at a moderate but steady pace through the first half of 1962.
By late July, an increase in Soviet military assistance first became evident in the changes in the level of Soviet shipping activity.
The arrival rate of Soviet merchant ships in Cuban ports during late July and August was significantly higher than it had been during the previous six months.
Also, human source reporting during July and August indicated that special security measures were being taken by the Soviets during the offloading of equipment from these ships.
Non-Soviet personnel were evacuated form the port areas, fences were put up around the docks, and the equipment was unloaded at night.
The U-2 reconnaissance flights were therefore unable to detect the equipment as it was brought into Cuba.
In addition to the increased Soviet merchant shipping activity, a greater number of Soviet passenger ships had arrived in Cuba in late July and August.
Strict security measures were also implemented to conceal the activity associated with these vessels.
In early August he suspected that the Soviets were preparing to deploy offensive ballistic missiles on the island.
McCone apparently conveyed his suspicion about the Soviet activity to others in the CIA on 10 August,25 but not as yet to the president and his policy advisers.
McCone met with senior policy officials on 10 August at a session of the Special Group Augmented, a group organized to plan the covert action campaign against Castro.
The available record ofthat 10 August meeting shows that McCone did not bring up the possibility of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The discussions centered on the next phase in the covert program known as MONGOOSE.26 A week later, at a meeting with Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk, McCone did discuss his thoughts on Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Despite the lack of reliable evidence and supporting judgments from his experts, McCone argued his case with the two Secretaries.
Both McNamara and Rusk asserted that the building in Cuba was purely defensive.
They felt it would be out of character for the Soviets to place offensive missiles outside of their own territory.
Without hard intelligence, McCone was unable to convince McNamara and Rusk.
The DCI next met privately with Kennedy on 22 August to take up the matter of the Soviet buildup in Cuba.
The day after his meeting with McCone, the president met with the National Security Council to discuss the Soviet activities in Cuba.
While the exact nature of McCone's conversation with Kennedy is not known, it is clear that the idea of Soviet basing of surface-tosurface missiles in Cuba was on the president's mind.
Kennedy, however, was not prepared to take any action solely on the basis of McCone's intuition.
Prior to his departure, he instructed his intelligence production directorate to publish a daily special report on their intelligence findings in Cuba.
During McCone's absence, the operations of the intelligence community would be run by his deputy, General Marshall ""Pat"" Carter.
Throughout August, the intelligence community was busy piecing together every bit of information to try to form a clear picture of the Soviet Union's activities in Cuba.
The U-2 mission flown on 29 August uncovered positive evidence of surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba.
The CIA's analysts determined that the construction of the SAM sites was proceeding on a crash basis, meaning that some could be operational within two weeks.
They also expected additional sites to be established in the near future.
The 29 August mission also provided evidence of other defensive measures.
The photo interpreters discovered a coastal defense cruise missile site in eastern Cuba and Soviet-made missile patrol boats in Cuban ports.
The CIA's analysts cautioned, however, that the Soviet shipments of military equipment and personnel showed no signs of letting up.
At this point he took no immediate major action in response to the buildup.
During August and the first half of September, Cuban refugees continued to pour into the United States with reports of Soviet military activity.
The aerial photographs taken through mid-September were unable to confirm the refugee reports of offensive missiles in Cuba.
The CIA still had no hard intelligence that the Soviet Union was turning Cuba into an offensive military base.
In the meantime, while in Europe, John McCone was in daily contact with CIA headquarters in Washington.
He received telegrams on current developments and sent back cables containing his opinions and concerns.
In these so-called ""honeymoon cables"" the DCI expressed his thoughts on the reasons for Soviet introduction of surface-to-air missiles in Cuba.
I couldn't understand why these surface-to-air missile sites were there, so useless for protecting the island against invasion.
SOLID PROOF The evidence available through early September had been enough to heighten the president's concern over the activities in Cuba.
He accordingly asked the intelligence community for its evaluation of the implications for the United States of this Soviet-sponsored buildup.
Sherman Kent, head of the Board of National Estimates, and his estimators quickly went to work on a Special National Intelligence Estimate.
They assessed the strategic and political significance of the current military buildup in Cuba and evaluated the implications of possible future military developments.
Based on what they knew thus far, Kent's analysts believed that the immediate military significance of the Soviet military deliveries was to improve Cuba's air and coastal defenses.
The pattern of the Soviet assistance clearly denoted a defensive buildup designed to defend against an external attack.
According to the analysts, the risk of confrontation with the United States over military aid to Cuba had to weigh heavily in the Soviet leaders' calculations.
There were a number of weapons and weapon systems the Soviets might believe they could safely deploy to Cuba without provoking a hostile United States response.
These included advanced jet interceptors, IL-28 light short-range bombers, tactical surface-to-surface missiles, submarines, and other naval combatants.
The 19 September estimate did not overlook the possibility of the Soviets using Cuba as a base for their offensive missiles.
Kent's analysts determined that such an action would be incompatible with their estimates of Soviet policy on such matters, believing it would entail a greater risk of confrontation with the United States than the Kremlin had ever been willing to take.
It received no objections or dissent from representatives of the United States Intelligence Board, the approving authority for all National Intelligence Estimates.
The State Department's chief Soviet experts, Charles Bohlen and Llewelyn Thompson, both former ambassadors to the Soviet Union, also concurred with the estimate.
The lone voice of dissent against the collective judgments contained in the 19 September estimate was that of John McCone.
As McCone was winding up his European trip, he was kept informed of the work being done on the estimate.
McCone cabled his doubts to General Carter about the conclusions being reached by the CIA estimators.
He felt that the estimate should clearly state that the deployment of a surface-to-air missile system was an indication that the Soviets were taking measures to stop the American U-2s from detecting the impending arrival of long-range missiles.
The day after this Special National Intelligence Estimate was released, McCone again cabled Carter and asked him to have the BNE reassess their findings.
McCone argued that the estimate, as published, did not take into account the bargaining power the Soviets would gain by successfully deploying offensive missiles in Cuba.
Kent's analysts assessed the problem again but found no reason to change their original conclusions.
He did not take up the issue with anyone from the United States Intelligence Board.
The acting DCI, General Carter, kept McCone's exchanges with Kent and the CIA estimators an internal CIA matter.
MCCONE'S VIEW VINDICATED Less than a month after the release of the SNIE, the CIA found that it had incorrectly estimated the extent to which Khrushchev would risk confrontation with the United States.
The failure of Kent and the Board of National Estimates analysts to predict the Soviet gamble cannot be ascribed to incompetence or carelessness, but rather to the constraints of intelligence gathering and analysis.
In reaching judgments on future developments, the estimators worked with known facts and identifiable trends.
As of 19 September, there was no available evidence that the Soviets were preparing to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba.
During his absence from Washington, McCone remained interested and involved in the production of national intelligence.
He had correctly anticipated the Soviet objectives in Cuba, but without stronger evidence he was unable to overrule the contradictory judgments of his analysts.
He took his case directly to the president and his senior policy advisers.
While acknowledging the DCTs suspicions, they all doubted that the Soviets would be so provocative.
The 19 September estimate, while addressing the possibility of the Soviets placing offensive missiles in Cuba, did not list this alternative as a likely course of action.
Had the intelligence community chosen to emphasize all of the ""worst case"" situations, it probably would have warned of a possible deployment of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
The objective of an estimate is to reduce the uncertainty of future developments, not simply to provide a list of all possible outcomes.
RUSK'S BLUNDERS From mid-September through early October, the U-2 missions over Cuba were severely constrained.
While McCone was in Europe, Secretary of State Dean Rusk recommended changes in the U-2 mission program.
Rusk had convinced the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance , the intelligence community group responsible for recommending the U-2 flight tracks, that the U-2 missions should be shorter and flown along less vulnerable routes because of the risk of a shoot-down from the SA-2 missiles.
Instead of a single flight across the entire island, Rusk recommended that several flights should dip into Cuban air space.
Upon his return from Europe in early October, John McCone reviewed the previous month's aerial reconnaissance program.
He found that the western end of Cuba had not been covered for a month.
At a 4 October COMOR meeting, he argued that it was imperative that the entire island, especially the western half, be photographed as soon as possible.
At McCone's urgings, COMOR recommended a new flight plan on 9 October, cutting across the western part of the island.
On 10 October, President Kennedy approved the recommended flight over western Cuba.
MCNAMARA'S BAN Although the track was designed to minimize the risk of the U-2 being shot down by an SA-2 missile, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara urged that the Strategic Air Command pilots, rather than the civilian CIA pilots, fly the U-2s.
He argued that in the event of a hostile action by SA-2 missiles, it would be more appropriate for the mission to be flown by a military pilot than a civilian one.
With this transfer of command, the CIA, in essence, relinquished control over one of its most important intelligence operations.
Despite his outrage over this loss of responsibility/John McCone did not protest to the president.
After being grounded for several days because of weather, the U-2 mission approved by the president of 10 October was finally carried out on Sunday, 14 October.
The film was available for the National Photo Interpretation Center photo interpreters by Monday morning, 15 October.
Previous human source reporting had directed attention toward the small town of San Cristobal where unusual activity was noted.
In a heavily wooded area near that city, they identified equipment associated with a Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missile unit.
Temporary military barracks, missile erectors, missile launchers, missile transporters, missile shelter tents, propellant vehicles, and other missile support equipment were seen at this newly constructed MRBM site.
A few miles to the east of this site, the photo interpreters discovered another MRBM installation outfitted with the same type of equipment.
The photographs of 14 October offered the first conclusive evidence that the Soviet Union was deploying offensive missiles in Cuba.
While these startling discoveries were being made, John McCone was in Seattle attending his stepson's funeral.
The process of alerting the senior policymakers to the new evidence began with the Director of NPIC, Art Lundahl.
After guaranteeing that his photo interpreters were absolutely sure of their observations and analysis, Lundahl informed Deputy Director for Intelligence Ray Cline of the discovery.
Cline notified the president's National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, whom he was able to reach at home.
Cline then alerted General Carter, who in turn contacted the Pentagon's top intelligence and policy officials.
Following his discussion with Carter, Cline phoned Roger Hilsman, head of the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, to insure that senior State Department policymakers were informed of the new intelligence.
They had been informed by telephone and word-of-mouth communications, apparently without compromising the very sensitive information.
The timely dissemination of this intelligence was most remarkable given the fact that many of the senior officials were busy conducting business at various scattered locations.
Neither Carter nor Cline brought the matter to the president's attention.
Alerting Kennedy was McGeorge Bundy's responsibility, however, Bundy chose not to inform the president until the next morning.
He felt that before bringing the issue to the president's attention it was necessary to get his staff prepared and insure that the intelligence material was in order.
You were tired from a strenuous campaign weekend, returning at 1:40 Monday morning.
They first presented the evidence to McGeorge Bundy and Robert Kennedy.
Kennedy instructed Bundy to arrange for an immediate meeting of his top national security advisers.
This group of high level officials became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or simply ExComm.
The first ExComm meeting opened with a presentation of the photographic evidence.
General Carter, sitting in for the absent John McCone, introduced Art Lundahl, who began his briefing with the sites at San Cristobal.
Lundahl carefully pointed out the missile-related equipment that could be identified and evidence of the rapid establishment of field-deployed Soviet MRBM sites.
Many of the officials present were not familiar with photographic intelligence and had to rely on the experts' interpretations.
The president directed that only a select number of top policy officials be informed of this latest intelligence.
In addition to complete and current intelligence reports on the status of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba, Kennedy wanted a more comprehensive aerial reconnaissance program over Cuba implemented immediately.
While discussing the appropriate United States response, Kennedy and his advisers questioned why the Soviets would take such action.
In hindsight, John McCone's earlier speculation, which at the time had been treated skeptically, was now given greater attention.
Dean Rusk noted that McCone had ""some weeks ago"" suggested that Khrushchev may want to take some measures to affect the United States nuclear superiority.
President Kennedy was clearly convinced by 16 October that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles in Cuba.
The CIA and the intelligence community had been able to provide him with irrefutable evidence before the missiles had become operational.
During the crisis itself, John McCone, as the president's principal intelligence adviser, was responsible for providing Kennedy with the latest and best intelligence on developments in Cuba and the Soviet Union.
He also looked to the CIA for estimates on how Khrushchev might respond to possible United States courses of action.
Furthermore, once Kennedy implemented his decision, it was imperative that the Soviet Union's military and political responses be immediately brought to his attention.
Beginning on the morning of 17 October and every morning throughout the crisis, he held meetings of the United States Intelligence Board .76 McCone used these meetings to insure that the current intelligence was properly coordinated, the latest estimates thoroughly reviewed, and the president's intelligence requirements promptly satisfied.
The USIB sessions prepared McCone for his participation in the ExComm meetings, which usually followed immediately thereafter.
NPIC's Art Lundahl also attended when important photo intelligence briefings were scheduled.
Each of the ExComm meetings always began with an intelligence briefing that included the latest aerial reconnaissance photography.
McCone would give a detailed summary of the CIA's daily report on the crisis.
Photography of 17 October not only revealed additional MRBM sites but also showed construction of intermediate range ballistic missile sites in central and western Cuba.
Unlike the MRBM sites, the IRBM launch areas were fixed sites that required such facilities as launch pads, launch rings, flame deflectors, and control bunkers.
Their construction would take longer than construction of the MRBM sites.
SS-5 SKEAN missiles launched from these sites could have hit almost all of the key targets in the United States and Canada.
The photo surveillance program and the briefings by McCone and Lundahl gave the president a clear picture of the size and capability of the Soviet offensive missile deployments.
By 22 October, when Kennedy first publicly revealed his awareness of the Soviet activity in Cuba, the photo interpreters had identified six MRBM sites and three IRBM sites, each equipped with four launchers.
From 16 October through 22 October, the president and the ExComm examined all possible responses to the Soviet action.
John McCone, in the meantime, reported an acceleration in the pace of construction of the Soviet missile sites, adding a greater sense of urgency to the ExComm deliberations.
The danger of the Cuban-based missiles, according to the agency's experts, was in their first-strike capabilities.
In looking at the Soviet missile program as a whole, the CIA reported on 21 and 22 October that although it was evident that the Soviets were working on the missile sites at a rapid rate, they apparently had not set out to make any single site fully operational on an all-out crash basis.
During the first phase of the crisis, McCone was asked to estimate the probable consequence of each potential United States action.
According to the 19 October estimate, if the United States accepted the missile deployment in Cuba, the Soviets would continue to expand their strategic weapons buildup there.
Alternatively, if the United States simply confronted Khrushchev with the evidence and pressed him to withdraw, he was not likely to back down.
Since the USSR could not hope to prevail in a conflict in the Western Hemisphere, it was felt that the Soviets would respond in an area outside Cuba, such as Berlin,where they had an advantage over the United States.
Their response might include interrupting access to the city or a full-scale blockade.
The CIA analysts believed that if the United States used force to impose a blockade of Cuba, the Soviets would probably respond at an equal level but not provoke an escalation.
A blockade, in essence, would not put the Soviets under any immediate pressure to respond with force.
According to the 20 October estimate, the prospects of Soviet military action were greater if the United States used force against the missile sites or any other Cuban military targets.
The particular Soviet reaction would depend on the type of military operation the United States conducted against Cuba.
Taken as a whole, the two estimates reached the conclusion that the Soviet Union would respond cautiously to actions being considered by the United States.
Insofar as Soviet response to a blockade versus some other form of United States military action, the estimates implied that a quick and decisive invasion of Cuba by U.S. forces would be the most effective way of resolving the issue.
Any limited form of military action that was likely to drag out for a long time would not be effective in bringing about the removal of the missiles.
Such limited action would not put enough pressure on Khrushchev to back down.
It would instead put him in a position to respond elsewhere on a level that matched the United States action.
The estimates suggested that a blockade would only temporize the situation while preserving the inherent risks of escalating the confrontation A rapid military invasion, on the other hand, would effectively eliminate the missile sites while minimizing the risks of dangerous step-by-step escalation.
After several days of intense debate and discussion, the ExComm remained divided over how the United States should respond.
Suggestions included a naval blockade, a military invasion, and an airstrike.
While keeping the ExComm informed of the latest intelligence reports and estimates, John McCone also participated in the policy deliberations.
Though his estimators had alluded to a speedy invasion as an effective way to handle the situation, McCone neither proposed nor supported this course of action.
McCone, in fact, pointed out to the ExComm members that if the missiles were removed but Castro was left in control, then the Cuban dictator would still be in a position to undertake the communization of Latin America.
A successful invasion might in fact achieve the intended objective of removing the missile sites.
McCone pointed out that invading Cuba would be a more difficult operation than most invasion advocates realized.
He favored more decisive action, aligning himself with the hardliners who advocated an air strike against the missile sites.
After reviewing the intelligence and assessing the points raised by all sides, President Kennedy elected to go with a blockade as an initial response, though he called it a ""quarantine,"" being reluctant to term it a blockade.
Kennedy noted that the blockade was only a first step and military action might become necessary.
On 22 October, in a nationally televised address, he publicly revealed his plan of action.
MANEUVERING AND ANTICIPATING Shortly after the announcement, Kennedy ordered an enhanced aerial reconnaissance program by authorizing low-altitude reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
These missions sought more detailed information on the activity and equipment at the Soviet missile sights and other military targets in Cuba.
The lowlevel missions and the U-2 overflights provided the president with a continuous stream of detailed information on Soviet and Cuban military activities on the island as the crisis entered into its most serious stages.
A crucial issue that the president hoped the low-level reconnaissance flights would clarify was the presence or absence of nuclear warheads in Cuba.
The threat to the United States from Cuba stemmed not simply from the operability of the sites but from the arrival of nuclear warheads at each site.
Kennedy constantly questioned McCone whether the warheads were in Cuba.
The CIA had not been able to confirm their presence, although several new buildings were suspected of possessing a nuclear storage capability.
The low-level photography had not provided solid evidence to indicate that nuclear warheads had actually arrived in Cuba.
Without such a confirmation, Kennedy and his advisers did not know if the operational sites were a threat to the United States.
Most members of the ExComm, however, assumed that warheads were present with the operational sites now a real danger.
With Khrushchev aware of measures being taken by Kennedy, John McCone and the CIA necessarily had to keep the ExComm alerted to any changes in the status of the Soviet military forces around the world.
On 23 October, at his first intelligence briefing since the blockade went into effect, McCone reported that the Soviet Union had not instituted a general military alert nor taken any unusual military measures.
Each day during the remainder of the crisis, McCone reported that the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc forces were not taking steps to achieve a heightened level of military readiness.
Having implemented the blockade , Kennedy's next concern was Khrushchev's tactical response.
Naval intelligence through the USIB and the DCI kept the president and the ExComm alerted to the movement of ships approaching the United States blockade line.
The CIA's Office of National Estimates, in the meantime, responded to a Kennedy request for an analysis of the effects of the quarantine on Cuba.
At that point, McCone told the president that the Soviet ships en route to Cuba had either stopped or turned around.
Many of the ships that turned around were apparently carrying offensive weapons.4 As the behind-the-scenes negotiations became more intense following the Kremlin's decision to avoid confronting he United States blockade, the intelligence community's resources remained focused on the areas of immediate concern to the ExComm.
McCone continued to inform the president about Soviet military activities at the missile sites in Cuba and at the military installations in the USSR, which kept him up-to-date on Soviet naval deployments in the Atlantic and the Caribbean.
On the diplomatic front, the situation became more complicated when Khrushchev on the evening of 26 October publicly released a letter to Kennedy demanding that the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba be exchanged for the removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Such a trade had been raised at an ExComm meeting earlier in the day by United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson.
McCone, who up to that point had been somewhat reticent during discussions on diplomatic alternatives, disagreed with Stevenson's linking of the missiles in Cuba with the missiles in Turkey.
Noting the importance of American commitments to the free world, the DCI felt that the administration should maintain pressure on the Soviet Union until the missiles were removed from Cuba.
Other ExComm members, likewise, did not want to link the missiles in Turkey with the missiles in Cuba.
After a lengthy debate on the morning of 27 October, the president and the ExComm agree to ignore Khrushchev's public letter and respond to the private letter he initially sent.
In that letter Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles in Cuba in exchange for an American pledge not to invade the island.
By the afternoon of 27 October, the approach of the ExComm changed dramatically when the president was informed that a U-2 was shot down while on a mission over Cuba.
The loss of the United States aircraft was the first indication that the surface-to-air defense network in Cuba was operational.
The blockade had demonstrated American resolve but it had not stopped the Soviet military buildup on the island.
In response to the U-2 shootdown, McCone urged that the administration should send a letter directly to Khrushchev strongly protesting this new act of defiance.
Robert McNamara and others, however, felt that continued surveillance was required and agreed that the SAM site responsible for shooting down the U-2 should be taken out.7 With the issue now further complicated by the U-2 incident, the ExComm discussions later that day again turned to the removal of the missiles and Khrushchev's recent demands.
Secretary of Defense McNamara raised the possibility of an escalation to nuclear war in the event that a deal could not be made with Khrushchev.
At this point, McCone again suggested an immediate letter of protest to Khrushchev.
Some felt McCone's willingness to cave in on the Turkish missiles was premature.
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, for example, still believed that despite the increase in tensions as a result of the U-2 shootdown the president should respond diplomatically to Khrushchev's first letter as they had discussed earlier.
In addition to sending the Kremlin the administration's response to Khrushchev's initial proposal, the President sent his brother Robert to see Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin on the evening of 29 October.
The Attorney General wanted the Soviet ambassador to pass on a personal message from the president to Khrushchev, making it clear to Dobrynin that time had run out and the missiles had to be removed.
His warning was nothing less than a threat to use American military force against Cuba and the Soviet missile sites.
Kennedy also pointed out that if the missiles were removed from Cuba, the United States, in due course, would remove its missiles from Turkey.
The next morning, Khrushchev ended the crisis by agreeing to remove the Soviet missiles and destroy the sites in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
Khrushchev had agreed to verification under United Nations supervision.
Castro, however, was unwilling to allow United Nations inspectors into Cuba.
The United States, therefore, relied on aerial reconnaissance to verify the dismantling of the sites and the removal of the equipment from the island.
Low altitude flights covered the MRBM and the IRBM sites while low and high altitude flights covered the ports and logistics bases.2 The Soviets agreed to transport the missile equipment on their ships above deck to allow the United States, by means of aerial inspection, to confirm the withdrawal.
CIA AND THE CRISIS Before, during, and after the Cuban missile crisis, the CIA played an important part in the national security process.
Its performance in the weeks prior to the 14 October U-2 mission was marked by clear-cut triumphs as well as mistakes in judgment.
Under John McCone, the agency directed and coordinated the national collection and analysis effort as the administration's concern over the Soviet military buildup in Cuba increased.
As events leading up to the missile crisis took place under a cloak of tight security, the president and his senior advisers looked to the agency for reliable information on Soviet activities in Cuba.
McCone administered a collection strategy that relied on extensive U-2 coverage over the island.
During McCone's absence in September and early October, however, Acting DCI General Carter managed the reconnaissance effort with considerably less vigor, deferring to the limited approach recommended by Secretary of State Rusk.
Based on the limited information available through mid-September, the CIA's intelligence analysts concluded that the Soviet Union was sponsoring a major defensive buildup of Castro's Cuba.
In their 19 September estimate, the CIA had not regarded the deployment of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba as a likely possibility.
John Me Cone, on the other hand, as early as 10 August had believed that the Soviets were preparing to deploy strategic missiles in Cuba and accordingly warned the president and his senior advisers.
Kennedy, however, was not ready to act on the basis of suspicions and looked to the DCI and the CIA for hard intelligence.
Once having obtained strong evidence, the agency confidently warned the administration of the Soviet attempt to establish an offensive missile base in Cuba in sufficient time for the president to take action.
With John McCone providing timely intelligence, Kennedy and the ExComm were able to assess the situation, weigh the feasibility of possible alternatives, and plan the timing of their responses.
The CIA's estimates on Soviet responses to the possible United States actions furthermore helped reduce the uncertainty in calculating the outcomes of difference alternatives.
Moreover, intelligence reports revealed that the Soviet Union had not put its conventional military forces or its strategic nuclear arsenal on alert.
This indicated that the Kremlin was not prepared to raise the level of the conflict.
The president, therefore, could act boldly and decisively without fear that the situation would quickly escalate.
Overall, the steady stream of current intelligence and the timely and relevant intelligence estimates kept the president and the ExComm informed, defined the nature of the policy debate, and added precision to the calculations inherent in the subsequent policy decisions.
ASSESSING MCCONE Throughout the critical thirteen days of the crisis, John McCone, as the president's principal intelligence adviser, took measures to insure that the required national intelligence was quickly brought to the president's attention.
McCone met with the United States Intelligence Board every morning of the crisis, thus guaranteeing that representatives of the various intelligence services were given the opportunity to present their evidence and assessments.
McCone was therefore in a position to offer the president and the ExComm the best judgments of the community as a whole, not of just one agency or department.
When necessary, he had the substantive intelligence experts themselves brief the president at the ExComm meetings.
McCone, furthermore, used his close association with the policymakers to make sure they understood the limitations of intelligence during the crisis.
For example, he was candid in reporting that the intelligence community could not confirm whether nuclear warheads were actually at the missile sites in Cuba.
McCone felt it was important that the president and his advisers not hold unrealistic expectations of their intelligence support.
Having been included in the tightly controlled ExComm meetings not only enabled the DCI to present intelligence reports to Kennedy and his advisers in a timely manner, it also put McCone in a position to fully appreciate the president's intelligence requirements.
McCone used the USIB sessions to coordinate the intelligence efforts of the entire community as the President and the ExComm issued new intelligence requirements.
He could therefore insure that the community was focusing its efforts on the proper areas and asking the right questions.
His was not a major voice during the policy discussions, which were instead dominated by the president, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Attorney General.
The president and senior policy officials present at the ExComm sessions did not pay a great deal of attention to McCone's policy opinions, as was seen during the 27 October meeting.
The president looked to the DCI for his intelligence assessments and judgments, not for his thoughts on policy.
Although he would have liked to have been part of the policymaking elite, McCone had no pretensions of being one of Kennedy's policy advisers.
Overall, McCone was not an activist DCI as defined by the activist school.
His involvement in the Cuban missile crisis, however, clearly went beyond the role outlined by the traditionalists.
His absence from Washington during critical periods before and during the crisis and his relatively passive participation in the ExComm's policy discussions demonstrated that he was at times less than active in engaging senior policymakers.
Yet, as an intelligence officer, McCone consistently crossed the line separating intelligence production and policy formulation.
Although he did not assert himself aggressively within the administration on policy matters, he was persistent in dealing with the president and his senior advisers on intelligence matters.
McCone was active in seeing that intelligence was promptly brought to the policymakers attention, making certain that the intelligence community clearly understood the policymakers' requirements, and assuring that the policymakers were aware of the intelligence community's capabilities.
As a result of his efforts, Kennedy was confident that his DCI was providing him with the best and most accurate intelligence information as well as honest and objective intelligence judgments.
In this case, once the presence of the Soviet missiles in Cuba had been verified, the DCI and the president had been able to establish and maintain an effective intelligence-policy relationship.
REFERENCES 1"" Schultz Sees Lesson in Casey's Dual Roles,"" The Washington Post, 26 July 1987, A16.
Policy and Process"" at the United States Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, June, 1984.
Congress, Senate, Interim Report, 6; United States Congress, House of Representatives, Hearings, 3.
