Yet informal agreements and oral bargains suffuse international affairs.
They are the form that international cooperation takes in a wide range of issues, from exchange rates to nuclear weapons.
Except for the regional European Monetary System, there have been no formal, comprehensive agreements on exchange rates since the downfall of the Bretton Woods system in 1971.
A prolonged effort to resurrect the pegged-rate system failed, although new treaties were drawn up and duly signed.
Private financial markets simply overwhelmed these official efforts, and central bankers eventually conceded the point.
For the past fifteen years, monetary arrangements have been a succession of informal agreements of indefinite duration, most recently the Plaza Communique and the Louvre Accord, designed to cope with volatile currency movements.
The Bretton Woods system itself depended on such agreements in its declining years.
It was held together by the tacit agreement of European central banks not to convert their major dollar holdings into gold.
The system fell apart when Germany and France abandoned that commitment.
They did so because they believed that the United States had abandoned its own commitment to restrain inflation and to avoid large current account deficits.
Kenen reproduces key portions of the Plaza Communique (22 September 1985) and the Louvre Accord on 50.
America's relations with the Soviet Union have relied heavily on unspoken understandings.
First, the Americans and Soviets have made very few direct treaty commitments, and fewer still in key areas of national security.
Second, for much of the postwar period, each side was openly hostile to the other and outspoken in denying the value and even the legitimacy of cooperation.
The rhetoric went much further at times, challenging the adversary's right to govern at home, its basic security interests abroad, and its trustworthiness in diplomatic dealings.
For all that, the United States and Soviet Union have generally framed their basic security policies in more prudent and cautious terms.
The United States decision to pursue containment rather than ""rollback,"" even at the height of Cold War tensions, was a tacit acknowledgment of the Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
When popular uprisings broke out during the 1950s, the United States did nothing— nothing to aid resistance movements in Germany, Poland, and Hungary and nothing to deter their forcible suppression.
In a related area of unspoken agreement, each side has been careful to avoid any direct engagement of military forces, despite the frequent involvement of Soviets and Americans in limited wars around the world.
Unspoken rules are not the only kinds of informal arrangements between the superpowers.
In the case of strategic arms limitations, both the Americans and the Soviets publicly announced that they would continue to observe the first SALT treaty after it expired in October 1977.
The principal aim was to sustain a climate of cooperation while SALT II was being negotiated.
Leonid Brezhnev and Jimmy Carter signed an interim SALT II agreement in 1979, but the treaty itself was never ratified by the Senate.
Some diplomatic efforts were made to articulate the rules, but they did little in themselves to clarify expectations.
In 1972, as the strategic arms limitation talks were concluded, Nixon and Brezhnev signed the Basic Principles Agreement.
It sought to specify some key elements of the superpowers' relationship and thereby facilitate the development of detente.
Worse, it seemed to indicate—wrongly— United States agreement with the Soviet position on peaceful coexistence and competition in other regions.
This cooperation is remarkable because the Reagan administration had come to power strenuously opposing ratification of the SALT II agreement, helped prevent its passage in the Senate, and held fast to its declared opposition.
In dealing with the Soviets, however, the administration was more accommodating.
In the early days of the Reagan administration, the State Department announced that the United States ""would not undercut"" the agreement.
The President himself made a similar statement in 1982 and largely kept to the bargain.
The unratified treaty was observed informally even during the Reagan administration's major arms buildup.
Both sides restricted specific categories of long-range nuclear weapons to meet SALT II limitations, despite the absence of any formal agreement to do so.
The Reagan administration always claimed that its nuclear policies were unilateral and voluntary.
Yet it devoted considerable attention to possible Soviet ""violations"" of what was, after all, a nonexistent treaty.
These violations were important because President Reagan always stated that United States arms restraints depended on Soviet reciprocity and progress toward a new arms treaty.
Reagan repeatedly criticized the Soviets on both counts but in practice 4.
The State Department announced its position in a brief public statement on 4 March 1981.
In late May 1982, on the eve of the strategic arms reduction talks , Reagan finally stated that the United States ""would not undercut"" the SALT II agreement.
He continued to criticize it, however, and left uncertain which portions of the agreement the United States would observe.
SALT II violations were included, and the reference to ""political commitments"" alludes to them.
The Soviets rejected these charges and made counterclaims regarding United States violations.
President Reagan did restate the United States commitment not to undercut SALT II in June 1985, some six months before the unratified treaty would have expired.
United States policy, however, was always contingent on reciprocal Soviet adherence.
The United States has fully kept its part of the bargain; however, the Soviets have not Certain Soviet violations are, by their very nature, irreversible.
Such is the case with respect to the Soviet Union's flight-testing and steps toward deployment of the SS-X-25 missile, a second new type of 1CBM prohibited by the unratified SALT II agreement.
Informal accords among states and transnational actors are not exceptional.
The scale and the diversity of such accords indicate that they are an important feature of world politics, not rare and peripheral.
The very informality of so many agreements illuminates basic features of international politics.
It highlights the continuing search for international cooperation, the profusion of forms it takes, and the serious obstacles to more durable commitments.
All international agreements, whether formal or informal, are promises about future national behavior.
To be considered genuine agreements, they must entail some reciprocal promises or actions, implying future commitments.
Agreements may be considered informal, to a greater or lesser degree, if they lack the state's fullest and most authoritative imprimatur, which is given most clearly in treaty ratification.
The informality of agreements varies by degrees, along two principal dimensions.
A commitment made by the head of state is the most visible and credible sign of policy intentions short of a ratified treaty.
In important matters, commitments by lower-level bureaucracies are less effective in binding national policy.
They are simply less constraining on heads of state, senior political leaders, and other branches of government, partly because they lack a visible impact on national reputation.
It may be outlined in an elaborate written document, or it may involve a less formal exchange of notes, a joint communique, an oral bargain, or even a tacit bargain.
Written agreements allow greater attention to detail and more explicit consideration of the contingencies that might arise.
They permit the parties to set the boundaries of their promises, to control them more precisely, or to create deliberate ambiguity and omissions on controversial matters.
At the other end of the spectrum—most informal of all—are oral and tacit agreements.
It is worth noting that all of these distinctions are ignored in international law.
What is missing is not only the political dimension of these agreements, including their status as domestic policy, but also any insight into why states choose more or less formal means for their international agreements.
Tacit and oral agreements, by their very nature, do not specify promises in great detail and rarely spell out contingencies or remedies.
Consider, for example, the informal cooperation between friendly intelligence agencies such as the United States Central Intelligence Agency and Israel's Mossad.
Besides exchanging information, both sides engage in unacknowledged spying on each other.
If disputes later arise, it is often difficult to specify what was intended ex ante.
They are not if they simply involve each actor's best strategic choice, given others' independent choices.
This Nash equilibrium may produce order and predictability—that is, regular behavior and stable expectations—without cooperation.
Genuine cooperation, the United States and Israel have signed informal accords, beginning with a secret agreement in 1951.
Even so, such agreements are necessarily incomplete, sometimes making it difficult to differentiate cheating from permissible activity.
According to Blitzer, "" United States law enforcement officials . . . long suspected that Israel was playing fast and loose with the longstanding U.S.-Israeli understanding barring covert operations against each other.
Yes, there is always some spying going on, even among very close friends and allies.
But that is a far cry from actually planting a 'mole' in a friendly country's intelligence community.
Over time, actors can use sanctions and exhortation to specify these contingent obligations and to signal the limits of their tolerance.
The State Department has unambiguously committed the United States by using the standard diplomatic language of obligation to a treaty pending ratification.
The debate within the Reagan administration raged for another year before the President publicly ratified the State Department position.
Even then, the Congress and courts need not be bound by these executive branch statements.
Recognizing these limitations on oral bargains, domestic courts refuse to recognize such bargains in many cases, thereby creating a powerful incentive for written contracts.
There is no such incentive to avoid oral bargains in interstate agreements.
Actions, not diplomatic words, are the crucial form of communications, and their aim is joint, voluntary cooperation rather than outright coercion.
Downs and Rocke's contribution is to show how imperfect information affects states' strategic choices and may produce inadvertent arms races.
Their focus is on uncertain estimates of others' strategies, preferences, and specific actions , and not on the ambiguous meaning of tacit agreements and other informal bargains.
Elster's key distinction is between regular behavior patterns and cooperation.
In this article, my discussion of international cooperation focuses only on reciprocal contractual exchanges, which involve future performance and where the possibility of profitable defection might arise.
It is based on shared expectations that each party can improve its own outcome if its strategic choices are modified in expectation of reciprocal changes by others.
What distinguishes cooperation, whether tacit or explicit, are the subtle forms of mutual reliance and the possibilities of betrayal and regret.
The central point here is not taxonomic, presenting definitions of tacit arrangements and other informal bargains simply to classify them.
The goal is to understand how different kinds of agreements can be used to order international relationships.
The means of international cooperation are frequently informal, and it is important to explore their rationale, uses, and limitations.
At the same time, we should not mistake all shared understandings for voluntary, informal bargains.
Informality is best understood as a device for minimizing the impediments to cooperation, at both the domestic and international levels.
They can be adapted to meet uncertain conditions and unpredictable shocks.
Negotiators need not try to predict all future states and comprehensively contract for them.
Second, because informal arrangements do not require elaborate ratification, they can be concluded and implemented quickly if need be.
In complex, rapidly changing environments, speed is a particular advantage.
Finally, informal agreements are generally less public and prominent, even when they are not secret.
This lower profile has important consequences for democratic oversight, bureaucratic control, and diplomatic precedent.
Informal agreements can escape the public controversies of a ratification debate.
They can avoid the disclosures, unilateral ""understandings,"" and amendments that sometimes arise in that open process.
Because of their lower profile, they are also more tightly controlled by the government bureaucracies that negotiate and implement the agreements and less exposed to intrusion by other 13.
In tacit cooperation, one party in effect takes a chance in the expectation that another will simultaneously take an equivalent chance, leaving both better off.
Neither party takes such chances when it maximizes unilaterally and independently.
Stable expectations can arise in either case, based upon stable Nash equilibria.
Anthony Aust, ""The Theory and Practice of Informal International Instruments,"" International and Comparative Law Quarterly 35 , 791.
Agencies dealing with specific international issues, such as environmental pollution or foreign intelligence, can use informal agreements to seal quiet bargains with their foreign counterparts, avoiding close scrutiny and active involvement by other government agencies with different agendas.
The lower profile and the absence of formal national commitment also mean that informal agreements are less constraining as diplomatic precedents.
They do not stand as visible and general policy commitments, as treaties so often do.
In all these ways, the most sensitive and embarrassing implications of an agreement can remain nebulous or unstated for both domestic and international audiences, or even hidden from them.
Yet all of these diplomatic benefits come at a price, and sometimes a very high one.
Theflexibilityof informal agreements also means that they are more easily abandoned.
Avoiding public debates conceals the depth of national support for an agreement.
Ratification debates can also serve to mobilize and integrate the multiple constituencies interested in an agreement.
These policy networks of public officials and private actors sustain agreements during the implementation stage.
Joint communiques and executive agreements sidestep these basic democratic processes.
This evasion typically means that the final agreements are less reliable for all participants.
Because speed, simplicity,flexibility,and privacy are all common diplomatic requirements, we would expect to find informal agreements used frequently.
Because the associated costs and benefits vary in different circumstances, we would also expect to find a distinct pattern of formal and informal agreements.
Finally, we would expect to find various types of informal agreements used to meet particular needs.
This article examines the strengths and weaknesses of informal agreements.
It is an inquiry into the neglected institutional constraints on international cooperation—and the imperfect devices to overcome them.
It considers the basic choices between treaties and informal instruments, as well as the choices among different kinds of informal arrangements, all of which can be used to express cooperation among states.
Finally, it asks what these varied forms of cooperation can tell us about the more general impediments to international agreement.
The aim here is to use the choice of forms of agreement to explore some problems of rational cooperation in international affairs and particularly their contextual and institutional dimensions.
The most formal are bilateral and multilateral treaties, in which states acknowledge their promises as binding commitments with full international legal status.
At the other extreme are tacit agreements, in which obligations and commitments are implied or inferred but not openly declared, and oral agreements, in which bargains are expressly stated but not documented.
In between lie a variety of written instruments to express national obligations with greater precision and openness than tacit or oral agreements but without the full ratification and national pledges that accompany formal treaties.
These informal arrangements range from executive agreements and nonbinding treaties to joint declarations, final communiques, agreed minutes, memoranda of understanding, and agreements pursuant to legislation.
Unlike treaties, these informal agreements generally come into effect without ratification and do not require international publication or registration.
Although these agreements differ in form and political intent, legal scholars rarely distinguish among them.
The dominant view is that international agreements, whatever their title, are legally binding upon the signatories, unless clearly stated otherwise.
Thus, informal agreements, if they contain explicit promises, are conflated with treaties.
This distinction between agreements that legally bind and agreements that do not is a traditional one.
It is central to the technical definition of treaties codified in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
The implicit claim is that international agreements have a status similar to domestic contracts, which are binding and enforceable.
The one general legal treatment of informal agreements is ""The Theory and Practice of Informal International Instruments"" by Anthony Aust, a practitioner in the British Foreign Office.
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties was opened for signature on 23 May 1969 and entered into force on 27 January 1980, after ratification by thirty-five nations.
Although international agreements are contracted commitments, any simple analogy to domestic contracts is mistaken for several reasons.
First, in domestic legal systems, binding agreements are adjudicated and enforced by courts, backed by the instruments of state power.
It includes, among other things, the right to interpret the parties' intentions at the time the bargain was initially made, the right to decide whether an agreement exists legally or is impermissible because it is procedurally flawed or violates public policy, and the right to interpose missing contract clauses to deal with unforeseen conditions.
Most fundamentally, the courts can hold parties responsible for their promises, whether those promises were originally intended as contracts or not, and can settle their meaning.
When parties discuss compliance after agreements have been signed, they bargain in the shadow of law and judicial enforcement.
Individuals and corporations can appeal to the courts to determine whether an ostensible promise, perhaps one given orally or without full documentation, is actually binding, with specific obligations.
The courts can thus transmute informal or incomplete agreements into formal obligations.
The legal battle between Texaco and Pennzoil illustrates this judicial power.
Their case hinged on the meaning of Pennzoil's ""agreement in principle"" to buy Getty Oil.
The question arose because, soon after the agreement had been reached, another company, Texaco, mounted a higher bid for Getty.
Texaco indemnified Getty and its largest shareholders against any lawsuits and completed the purchase.
For a system of contract law to be effective, the parties cannot simply abandon their commitments unilaterally.
Or, rather, they cannot abandon these commitments without facing legal penalties.
Reflecting this understanding, the key disputes in contract law revolve around what constitutes a binding agreement and what constitutes an appropriate penalty for nonperformance.
They are beyond the reach of international court decisions, much less enforcement.
For an astute discussion of the weakness of treaties that contemplate further, detailed negotiations, see Richard Baxter, ""International Law in 'Her Infinite Variety,' "" International and Comparative Law Quarterly 29 , 552.
In these general treaties, Baxter says, the individual provisions ""are pacta de contrahendo, which cannot be enforced if the parties do not reach agreement.
There is no way in which an agreement can be forced upon them and there is likewise no way in which they can be compelled to negotiate.
The case raised significant questions about the legal status of ""agreements in principle,"" which are commonly used in business as precursors to formal contracts.
But there was nothing unprecedented about the power of the courts to settle contractual disputes such as this, to determine whether a contract even exists, to infer its terms, and to ensure compliance with any damage awards, however large.
The definitive settlement of such conflicts is the routine province of domestic legal systems.
Courts are empowered to decide rights and obligations in specific disputes.
They can sort out the inevitable mistakes, negligence, and outright fraud that bedevil agreements.
We need not concern ourselves here with this body of law in any detail or with important cross-national differences.
But we should recognize the fundamental impact of judicial authority on exchange relationships.
Whether the issue involves simple promises or complicated commercial transactions, the availability of effective, compulsory arbitration by courts supports and facilitates agreements.
It does so, in the last resort, by compelling adherence to promises privately made or, more commonly, by requiring compensatory payment for promises broken.
They are crucial in complex capitalist economies in which independent agents work together by voluntary agreement.
What legal scholars debate is not the propriety of enforcement power but its substantive content and the underlying principles that should govern damage awards when promises are broken.
In the dispute over Getty Oil, compliance issues were complicated by the possible size of any judgment against Texaco.
In this case, a bond of unprecedented size—well beyond the capacity of a bonding agency—was required.
The unprecedented scale of Texaco's bond was an important element in the appeals process and the ultimate out-of-court settlement.
The dispute also illustrates the high transactions costs that can accompany major litigation—costs that discourage litigation and encourage the establishment of institutions for the private governance of contractual relationships.
One study indicates that the legal dispute reduced the combined wealth of Texaco and Pennzoil by some $3 billion.
Approximately two-thirds of this sum was regained after the final settlement.
Second, it assumes that the contested promises can somehow be demonstrated to the satisfaction of a third party.
Fried argues that the common law of contracts is based on the moral institution of promising, rather than on commercial exchange.
It demands that the recipients of promises receive the benefits they might reasonably have expected had the promises been kept.
Whatever the standard for damages, it is clear that the courts offer political backing for the exchange of promises and, indeed, for the institution of promising in all its facets.
Their role provides an important measure of protection to those who receive promises.
It diminishes the tasks of selfprotection, lowers the costs of transactions, and thereby promotes contractual agreements and exchange in general.
To lower the burdens of self-protection is not to eliminate them entirely.
Using local courts to sustain agreements is often costly or impractical.
These costs and uncertainties raise the possibility that breaches of contract will go uncompensated or undercompensated.
Knowing that, the parties must look to themselves for some protection against opportunism.
It is also true that domestic courts do not become involved in contract disputes through their own independent initiatives.
They are called upon by parties to the dispute—at the parties' own initiative, at their own cost, and at their own risk.
In that sense, access to the courts may be seen as an adjunct to other forms of self-help.
Hanging over domestic bargains is the prospect of judicial interpretation and enforcement, whether the disputes are settled in court or not.
There is simply no analogue for these functions in international agreements.
Of course, the parties to an interstate dispute may, by mutual consent, seek judicial rulings or profit.
Atiyah argues that court decisions have moved away from this strict emphasis, which arose in the nineteenth century, and returned to an older notion of commercial practice, which limits awards to the costs incurred in relying on broken promises.
Occasionally, it is a requirement to perform the specific promises in the contract.
See John Adams and Roger Brownsword, Understanding Contract Law , 144; and Fried, Contract as Promise.
Once a contract has been breached, for instance, the ""innocent"" party is expected to take reasonable actions to minimize the damages and cannot win awards that cover a failure to do so.
Mnookin and Kornhauser also conclude that the impact of differing legal arrangements on divorce settlements cannot be specified with precision.
In multilateral treaties, states may also agree in advance to use procedures for dispute resolution.
They can raise the diplomatic costs of violations and ease the burdens of retaliation.
For the most part, they simply define and justify certain limited acts of self-enforcement or retaliation.
At most, they may force a violator to withdraw from an agreement or a multilateral organization, giving up the benefits of participation.
That can j be punishment, to be sure, but it falls far short of the legal sanctions for ' violating domestic contracts.
There, the rights of withdrawal are accompanied by external enforcement of damages, usually based on disappointed expectations of profit.
The fact that all agreements contain some elements of self-protection and some institutions for private governance should not obscure these basic differences between domestic and international bargains.
Domestic legal systems not only aid in enforcing contracts but also set effective boundaries on the scope and nature of private agreements.
Statutes and court rulings limit the private, voluntary ordering of relationships.
A significant portion of criminal law, for example, is devoted specifically to punishing certain categories of private agreements, from prostitution and gambling to the sale of illicit drugs.
The presence of quasi-judicial bodies attached to specific agreements indicates, once again, the limits of international adjudication.
And it points to the ad hoc means devised to manage the risks of international cooperation.
A signatory always has the practical option of withdrawal, whether it is included as a legal option in the treaty or not.
There have been proposals, based on efficiency grounds or libertarian principles, that private agents play a much larger role in enforcing domestic laws and contracts and that they be compensated by bounties, paid either by violators or the state.
These proposals cannot be applied to international agreements without significant modification, since they ultimately envision authoritative judicial interpretation and enforcement.
As Mnookin and Kornhauser point out in their study of divorce laws, ""A legal system might allow varying degrees of private ordering upon dissolution of the marriage.
One clear-cut and prominent example is the United States Statute of Frauds, which requires that certain agreements be put in writing.
According to the statute, if a contract is larger than $500, and if neither party has made payment or performed its obligations, then the courts will only enforce written agreements.
Although there are exceptions to this straightforward rule, it does underscore the capacity of domestic law to channel agreements, by requiring particular documentation, for example, or witnesses or specific language.
Again, there are simply no equivalent restrictions on either the form or substance of international agreements.
The domain of permissible international agreements is simply the domain of possible agreements.
It is due equally to the absence of an effective system of adjudication.
One major limitation on prohibited domestic bargains, aside from any direct penalties, is that illicit bargains are not enforced by courts.
Indeed, the costs may be prohibitive if they leave unsolved such basic problems as moral hazard and time inconsistency.
The same obstacles are inherent features of interstate bargaining and must be resolved if agreements are to be concluded and carried out.
Resolving them depends on the parties' preference orderings, the transparency of their preferences and choices , and the private institutional mechanisms set up to secure their bargains.
It has little to do, however, with whether an international agreement is considered ""legally binding"" or not.
Three standard reasons are given for the legal requirement that contracts be put in writing.
Second, it should make clear to the parties that they have undertaken specific obligations.
Third, if disagreements later arise, it should provide better evidence for courts.
There is one restriction worth noting on the legal form of international agreements.
The World Court will only consider agreements that have been formally registered with the United Nations.
If the World Court were a powerful enforcement body, this restriction would influence the form of major agreements.
Criminal organizations such as the Mafia can be understood partly as an institutional response to the problems of providing criminal services when the bargains themselves are illegal.
In international affairs, then, the term ""binding agreement"" is a misleading hyperbole.
For that reason, it is misleading to understand treaties in purely formal, legal terms, as instruments that somehow bind states to their promises.
It is quite true that treaties incorporate the language of formal obligation, chiefly phrases such as ""we shall"" and ""we undertake,"" together with specific commitments.
Such conventional diplomatic language is a defining feature of modern treaties.
But that language cannot accomplish its ambitious task of binding states to their promises.
This inability is an inherent limitation on bargaining for international cooperation.
It means that treaties, like all international agreements, must be enforced endogenously.
The chief reason, I think, is that states wish to signal their intentions with special intensity and gravity and are using a wellunderstood form to do so.
The decision to encode a bargain in treaty form is primarily a decision to highlight the importance of the agreement and, even more, to underscore the durability and significance of the underlying promises.
The language of ""binding commitments,"" in other words, is a diplomatic communication aimed at other signatories and, often, at third parties.
In the absence of international institutions that permit effective self-binding or offer external guarantees for promises, treaties use conventional forms to signify a seriousness of commitment.
By making that commitment both solemn and public, the parties indicate their intention, at least, to adhere to a particular bargain.
The effect of treaties, then, is to raise the political costs of noncompliance.
The more formal and public the agreement, the higher the reputational costs of noncompliance.
The costs are highest when the agreement contains specific written promises, made publicly by senior officials with the state's fullest imprimatur.
States deliberately choose to impose these costs on themselves in order to benefit from the counterpromises of others.
Given the inherent constraints of international institutions, these formal pledges are as close as states can come to precommitment—to a contractual exchange of promises.
The loss of credibility is a real loss, although it is certainly not always a decisive one, in terms of policy calculus.
Informal agreements are generally less reliable and convincing precisely because they involve less of a reputational stake.
The stakes are diminished either because the agreements are less public (the audience is narrower and more specialized) or because high-level officials are less directly involved.
In a world of imperfect information, where others' current and future preferences cannot be known with certainty, reputation has value.
As a result, it can be used as a ""hostage"" or bond to support contracts.
Because breaking a contract or even appearing to do so degrades reputation, it produces a loss of reputational capital.
The threat of such loss promotes compliance, although it cannot guarantee it.
Whether it succeeds depends on the immediate gains from breaking an agreement, the lost stream of future benefits and the rate of discount applied to that stream, and the expected costs to reputation from specific violations.
Some that are seen may be considered justifiable or excusable, perhaps because others have already violated the agreement, because circumstances have changed significantly, because compliance is no longer feasible, or because the contracted terms appear ambiguous.
Thus, memory, inference, and context— social learning and constructed meaning—all matter.
Some simply do not have much to lose, whether their violations are visible or not.
That does not rule out treaties, but it suggests that they may be disingenuous and cannot be relied upon.
The incorporation of the new territories also postponed a confrontation between the two.
The pact was useful for these immediate and simultaneous gains, not for any future promises of cooperation it held out.
Of course, commitments may be cast aside, no matter how formal, as Saddam Hussein did when he declared Iraq's border agreement with Iran ""null and void"" in 1981.
There is a cost to discarding such an agreement unilaterally, even if that cost seems remote at the time.
It virtually rules out the ability to conclude useful agreements on other border disputes.
See also Iran, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Legal Department, A Review of the Imposed War , including the text of the 1975 treaty, the treaty addendum, and Iran's interpretation.
In other words, if the future is highly valued, there can be an equilibrium in which the value of a reputation exceeds any short-run gains from taking advantage of it.
If the prospective gains from reputation are sufficiently large, then it also pays to invest in reputation.
Banking in the Shadow of Defection in Japan,"" Journal of Legal Studies 20 , 96.
Sovereign debtors, for example, value their reputation least when they do not expect to borrow again.
Alternatively, actors with poor reputations may choose to invest in them precisely to create expectations about future performance.
If these expectations can produce a stream of rewards and if the future is highly valued, it may be rational to make such investments.
Thus, the value of reputation lost depends on the visibility and clarity of both promises and performance, on the value of an actor's prior reputation, and on the perceived usefulness of reputation in supporting other agreements.
Compliance with treaties, as I have noted, is specifically designed to be a salient issue, supported by reputation.
Some states foresee little gain from enhanced reputation, either because the immediate costs are too high or the ongoing rewards are too little, too late.
They may sign treaties cynically, knowing that they can violate them cheaply.
Others may sign treaties in good faith but simply abandon them if their calculations about future rewards change.
Finally, some states may invest heavily to demonstrate the credibility of their promises, to show that they are reliable partners, unswayed by short-term gains from defection.
If future rewards are sharply discounted, then it pays to exploit prior reputation to reap short-term rewards.
Elsewhere, I have shown that sovereign debtors in the nineteenth century moved to settle their old defaults when they contemplated seeking new loans.
Creditors had the greatest bargaining leverage at precisely these moments.
The short-term price of reputation may either be foregone opportunities or direct expenditures, such as fixed investments that are most valuable within a specific bilateral relationship.
Williamson has explored the use of such fixed investments to make credible commitments in The Economic Institutions of Capitalism.
The United States made such an investment in reputation in the late 1970s, after its credibility as leader of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was damaged by the neutron bomb affair.
The problem arose after the Carter administration first supported and then opposed NATO's deployment of new antitank weapons, equipped with enhanced radiation warheads or neutron bombs.
Key European leaders had already declared their support publicly, at considerable political cost, and now they had to reverse course.
It did so despite a rising tide of public protest abroad and wavering support from European leaders, especially the Germans, who had initially proposed the modernization.
The Carter administration itself felt it needed to compensate for its handling of the neutron decision.
Just as there can be economic markets with some sellers of high-quality goods and some sellers of shoddy goods, both of them rational, there can be diplomatic environments in which some states are reliable treaty partners and some are not.
Reputation, then, can contribute to treaty self-enforcement if not ensure it.
Self-enforcement simply means that an agreement remains in force because, at any given moment, each party believes it gains more by sustaining the agreement than by terminating it.
That calculation includes all future benefits and costs, appropriately discounted to give their present value.
It is of particular value to governments engaged in a range of international transactions requiring trust and mutual reliance.
Of course, other costs and benefits may outweigh these reputational issues.
The key point, however, is that reputation can be used to support international cooperation and has important implications for its form.
The choice of a formal, visible document such as a treaty magnifies the reputational effects of adherence and buttresses self-enforcement.
Nations still can and do break even their most formal and solemn commitments to other states.
Indeed, the unscrupulous may use treaty commitments as a way of deceiving unwary partners, deliberately creating false expectations or simply cheating when the opportunity arises.
This price comes not so much from adverse judicial decisions at The Hague but from the decline in national reputation as a reliable partner, which impedes future agreements.
Indeed, opinions of the World Court gain much of their significance by reinforcing these costs to national reputation.
Put simply, treaties are a conventional way of raising the credibility of promises by staking national reputation on adherence.
Controlling the Cost of Coordinating, Communicating, and Decision Making , 147.
Thus, a single agreement can be self-enforcing, even if it is divorced from any reputational concerns.
Conversely, even when reputational issues are salient, a treaty may break down if other costs are more important.
Second, the violation or perceived violation of a treaty may give rise to specific, costly retaliation, ranging from simple withdrawal of cooperation in one area to broader forms of noncooperation and specific sanctions.
Some formal agreements, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , even establish a limited set of permissible responses to violations, although most treaties do not.
Finally, treaty violations may recast national reputation in a still broader and more dramatic way, depicting a nation that is not only untrustworthy but is also a deceitful enemy, one that makes promises in order to deceive.
This logic also suggests circumstances in which treaties—and, indeed, all international agreements—ought to be most vulnerable.
The present value of that reputation is the discounted stream of these current and future benefits.
When time horizons are long, even distant benefits are considered valuable now.
When horizons are short, these future benefits are worth little,50 while the gains from breaking an agreement are likely to be more immediate and tangible.
Thus, under pressing circumstances, such as the looming prospect of war or economic crisis, the long-term value of a reputation for reliability will be sharply discounted.
As a consequence, adherence to agreements must be considered less profitable and therefore less reliable.
This weakness is sometimes recognized, though rarely emphasized, in studies of international law.
All treaties are treated equally, as legally binding commitments, and typically lumped together with a wide range of informal bargains.
Treaties that declare alliances, establish neutral territories, or announce broad policy guidelines are 49.
When that search must cover unknown future behavior, such as a partner's likelihood of complying with an agreement, then reputations are particularly valuable.
See George Stigler, ""The Economics of Information,"" Journal of Political Economy 69 , 224.
This discount rate refers only to the present value of known future benefits.
Greater risk or uncertainty about future benefits can also affect their present value.
This logic should apply to all agreements lacking effective third-party enforcement, from modern warfare to premodern commerce.
My point is that if the costs are high , their decision will be guided largely by their calculus of short-term gains and losses.
That determination is largely independent of alliance agreements and formal treaties of mutual support.
Knowing that, states facing war are reluctant to count too heavily on prior commitments, however formal or sincere, by alliance partners.
By the same token, opponents have considerable incentives to design coalition-splitting strategies by varying the immediate costs and stakes to individual coalition members.
Yet it is also understood, by diplomats and jurists alike, that these three types of treaty are especially vulnerable to violation or renunciation.
For this reason, Richard Baxter has characterized them as ""soft"" or ""weak"" law, noting that ""if a State refuses to come to the aid of another under the terms of an alliance, nothing can force it to.
Baxter admits, in effect, that international law is marginal to the major political projects of states.
He admits, too, that treaties are sometimes concluded with no expectation of effective enforcement.
If treaties of alliance are weak because they lack such enforcement mechanisms, so are most international bargains.
If ""political treaties"" are sustained solely by perceptions of mutual advantage, so are all international bargains.
The real point is to understand how these perceptions of mutual advantage can support various kinds of international cooperation and how different legal forms, such as treaties, fit into this essentially political dynamic.
The environment of contesting sovereign powers does not mean, as realist theories of international politics would have it, that cooperation is largely irrelevant or limited to common cause against military foes.
He does not define the term further or distinguish it from other kinds of treaties.
Although such alliances are important, they are simply considered the by-products of a world fundamentally characterized by conflict and the contest for relative gains.
It does mean, however, that the bases for cooperation are decentralized and often fragile.
Unfortunately, neither the language of treaties nor their putative legal status can transcend these limitations.
Rationales for informal agreements Speed and obscurity What we have concentrated on thus far are the fundamental problems of international agreements.
Treaties, like less formal instruments, are plagued by difficulties of noncompliance and self-enforcement.
These potential problems limit agreements when monitoring is difficult, enforcement is costly, and expected gains from noncompliance are immediate and significant.
The traditional legal view that treaties are valuable because they are binding is inadequate precisely because it fails to comprehend these basic and recurrent problems.
To understand the choice between treaties and informal agreements, however, we need to move beyond the generic problems of monitoring, betrayal, and self-enforcement.
Imperfect information and incentives to defect apply to all kinds of international bargains; they do not explain why some are framed as joint declarations and some as treaties.
To begin with, treaties are the most serious and deliberate form of international agreement and are often the most detailed.
After the diplomats have finally left the table, the agreement must still win final approval from the signatories.
That usually means a slow passage through the full domestic process of ratification.
The process naturally differs from country to country, but in complex governments, and especially in democracies with some shared powers, gaining assent can be time-consuming.
Adelman emphasizes the slowness of negotiating formal agreements, especially major agreements with the Soviets.
The Limited Test Ban Treaty took eight years to complete; the Non-Proliferation Treaty took more than three years; and the SALT I agreement took more than two years.
The SALT II agreement took seven years and still failed to win Senate ratification.
The slowness and difficulty of ratifying complex agreements and the problems of adapting to meet changing circumstances often lead states to choose less formal mechanisms.
The United States and European Community have made exactly that choice to deal with their conflicts over ""competition policy"" and antitrust.
It also opens the agreement and the silent calculus behind it to public scrutiny and time-consuming debate.
For controversial treaties, such as the ones ceding United States control over the Panama Canal, ratification can be very slow and painful indeed.
The canal treaties had virtually universal support among foreign policy professionals dealing with Central and South America.
But they also faced heated opposition within the United States Senate, mainly from conservative Republicans, who charged that America was giving away a valuable strategic asset and getting nothing tangible in return.
When the treaties were presented for ratification, the 1978 midterm elections were approaching, and polling data showed that some proponents were vulnerable on this issue.
After exhaustive hearings, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee reported the bill favorably.
The treaty debate on the Senate floor was the second longest in American history; repetitive arguments dragged on through February, March, and April 1978.60 Opponents had a clear incentive to prolong the debate, not only to defeat the treaty or weaken it with unfriendly amendments but also to punish treaty supporters in particular and the Democratic party in general on election day.
Even when agreements are much less contentious, the machinery of ratification can grind slowly, as in the case of the relatively straightforward treaty covering criminal extradition between the United States and Turkey.
One reason United States diplomats favored the Panama Canal treaties was that Latin American states were so uniformly opposed to continued United States ownership of the waterway.
The disposition of this issue was crucial to America's role in the hemisphere.
A number of Latin American leaders were involved in the negotiations, and some eighteen heads of state attended the final signing ceremony.
The whole episode clearly demonstrates how ""third parties"" can have a direct stake in bilateral treaty arrangements and how these diplomatic relationships can be enhanced or, more likely, embarrassed by frank disclosures during the public ratification process.
This key treaty won ratification by a single vote, and only then after intense presidential lobbying and some significant amendments.
There was nothing unusual about the United States treaty with Turkey, nor was there any special domestic opposition to it.
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee acted quickly, as such matters go, and reported favorably on 20 November 1979.
Turkey did not complete its ratification for another year, in late November 1980.
The formal exchange of ratifications between the governments took place two weeks later.
At the end of December, the United States President proclaimed the treaty, and it entered into force the next day, 1 January 1981, some eighteen months after the initial documents had been signed.
It is little wonder, then, that governments prefer simpler, more convenient instruments.
It is plain, too, that executives prefer instruments that they can control unambiguously, without legislative advice or consent.
But there are important domestic constraints, some rooted in constitutional prerogatives, some in legal precedent, and some in the shifting balance of domestic power.
To cede control of the Panama Canal, for instance, the President had no choice but to use a treaty.
His authority to conduct foreign affairs is broad, but not broad enough to hand over the canal and surrounding territory to Panama without Senate approval.
American courts, following common law precedent, simply will not extradite defendants without this formal instrument.
Informal extradition, done at the discretion of political authorities, is permitted in some countries with judicial systems based on Roman civil law.
But the United States, Britain, and most other common law countries require explicit, reciprocal treaty arrangements.
Aside from extradition, which bears directly on the civil rights of accused criminals, the courts rarely affect the form of international agreements.
That is true even for United States courts, which are normally quite willing to review political decisions.
They try to avoid direct involvement in foreign policy issues and hold to this narrow line even when larger constitutional questions arise.
It is a constitutional question, of course, but also a question of the political balance of power between the Congress and the President.
At one point, President Carter's chief of staff, Hamilton Jordan, announced that Carter would decide whether the Panama Canal agreements were treaties or not.
Despite the courts' reluctance to rule on these issues, informal agreements do raise important questions about the organization of state authority for the conduct of foreign affairs.
Informal agreements shift power toward the executive and away from the legislature.
In recent decades, the United States Congress responded by publicly challenging the President's right to make serious international commitments without at least notifying the Senate.
It also disputed the President's control over undeclared foreign conflicts by passing the War Powers Resolution.
This law fell short of equating informal agreements with treaties, since it did not require congressional approval for all informal bargains, as is constitutionally required for treaties.
But it did serve notice that informal agreements had proliferated unacceptably and had assumed important implications for policymaking.
The Case Act tentatively bid to open these back channels to legislative supervision and broader debate.
See the War Powers Resolution, 87 Stat.5,1973; and 50 United States Code 1541-48,1980.
The Case Act passed the Senate and House overwhelmingly in 1972 and has been amended several times since then.
The State Department finally issued implementation regulations in 1981.
A detailed study of the Case Act shows the limits of congressional activism.
The Senate, in particular, wanted a more direct role in shaping informal agreements.
But during the period from the 1950s through the 1980s, there was never a majority that would require informal agreements to be submitted for ratification.
The Case Act succeeded, in part, because it recognized these political limits and required only notification.
These two rationales are often intertwined, but each is important in its own right, and each is sufficient for choosing informal means of international cooperation.
This flexibility is useful if there is considerable uncertainty about the distribution of future benefits under a particular agreement.
In economic issues, this uncertainty may arise because of a shift in production functions or demand schedules, the use of new raw materials or substitute products, or a fluctuation in macroeconomic conditions or exchange rates.
These changes could sabotage national interests in particular international agreements.
The consequences might involve an unacceptable surge in imports under existing trade pacts, for example, or the collapse of producer cartels.
In security affairs, nations might be uncertain about the rate of technological progress or the potential for new weapons systems.
By restricting these innovations, existing arms treaties may create unexpected future costs for one side.
Such developments can produce unexpected winners and losers, in either absolute or relative terms, and change the value of existing contractual relations.
States are naturally reluctant to make long-term, inflexible bargains behind this veil of ignorance.
Even if one state is committed to upholding an agreement despite possible windfall gains or losses, there is no guarantee that others will do the same.
The crucial point is that an agreement might not be self-sustaining if there is an unexpected asymmetry in benefits.
Such uncertainties about future benefits, together with the difficulties of self-enforcement, pose serious threats to treaty reliability under conditions of rapid technological change, market volatility, or changing strategic vulnerabilities.
The presence of such uncertainties and the dangers they pose for breach of treaty obligations foster the pursuit of substitute arrangements with greater flexibility.
States use several basic techniques to capture the potential gains from cooperation despite the uncertainties.
First, they craft agreements (formal or informal) of limited duration so that all participants can calculate their risks and benefits under the agreement with some confidence.
Second, they include provisions that permit legitimate withdrawal from commitments under specified terms and conditions.
Third, they incorporate provisions that permit partial withdrawal, covering either a temporary period or a limited set of > obligations.
GATT escape clauses, which permit post hoc protection of endangered industries, are a well-known example.
Finally, states sometimes * frame their agreements in purely informal terms to permit their frequent adjustment.
The quota agreements of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries do exactly that.
While the OPEC agreements are critically important to the participants and are central to their economic performance, they are framed informally to permit rapid shifts in response to changing market conditions.
Once again, the form of agreements is not dictated by their '*• substantive significance.
OPEC's primary goal is to enhance national revenues by managing the world oil market.
Its basic strategy is to achieve price targets through quotas for individual members.
That entails frequent meetings on an irregular schedule, at least twice a year and sometimes more if conditions warrant.
After all, energy demand is hard to forecast, and •* ' OPEC does not entirely control the supply.
Its control is incomplete because there are important non-OPEC producers, because there are alternatives to petroleum, and because OPEC members cheat on their quotas.
To facilitate these negotiations, there is a small formal organization, headquartered in Vienna.
But OPEC's reasons for existence—its price targeting and production quotas—are set out in informal agreements and conference communiques, approved by participating oil ministers.
The oil output quotas reached in June 1989, for example, covered only the second half of the year.
As soon as the bargain was sealed, the ministers agreed to meet again in three months to review market conditions and quotas.
OPEC's formal, institutional framework can facilitate negotiations, but it does not transcend or 75.
Typical was the communique issued in late 1983 at the conclusion of OPEC's sixty-ninth conference.
It restated OPEC's production ceiling of 17. million barrels per day and its marker price of $29.
What really matters is not the formal organization but the nexus of informal agreements on crude ** oil production and the members' compliance.
At the other end of the spectrum, in terms of formality, lie arms control treaties with detailed limitations on specific weapons systems for relatively long periods.
They do so principally by restricting the agreement to verifiable terms and a time frame that essentially excludes new weapons systems.
The institutional arrangements * are thus tailored to the environment they regulate.
As a result, military capacity and technological advantages shift slowly within specific weapons categories.
With modern surveillance techniques, these new weapons programs and shifting technological capacities are not opaque to adversaries.
The military environment to be regulated is relatively stable, then, * so the costs and benefits of treaty restraints can be projected with some confidence over the medium term.
Given these conditions, treaties offer some clear advantages in arms control.
They represent detailed public commitments, duly ratified by national political authorities.
Moreover, at least in nuclear weaponry, both sides feel that they could cope with major treaty violations, if necessary, by withdrawing from the treaty and pursuing their own weapons programs at an accelerated pace.
Strong treaty commitments, in other words, would not expose them to the possibility of a devastating surprise defection.
Both sides are confident that their satellites and human intelligence can detect major violations in time to produce and deploy countervailing weapons.
Following this logic, most arms control agreements have been set out in treaty form.
Whether the subject is nuclear or conventional forces, test bans or weapons ceilings, American and Soviet negotiators have always aimed at formal documents with full ratification.
OPEC's founders had hoped to create an operating international institution, not merely a negotiating forum.
The section was effectively dropped by 1964 and disappeared formally in 1966.
Following the same logic, both sides have been cautious about treaties covering chemical and biological weapons, whose production and deployment have been much more difficult to detect.
Monitoring a partial ban would be extremely difficult, especially since other kinds of production facilities could be converted to military uses.
Over the history of superpower arms control, only the tacit observance of SALT II could be classified as a major informal agreement.
Of course, the SALT negotiators had actually produced a formal agreement, filled with contractual details and the language of binding commitments.
It had majority support in the United States Senate, but afinalvote was never held because it lacked the necessary two-thirds majority.
Members of the Reagan administration publicly debated the matter with no guidance from above.
For well over a year, however, the President himself refused to make a similar acknowledgment.
Perhaps these tacit arrangements and encoded signals were the most that could be salvaged from the failed treaty.
Note, however, that if the discussions pertained to domestic bargains, a court might interpret these ""agreements in principle"" as contractually binding, depending on the level of detail and the promissory language.
President Carter declared that the United States would continue to observe the terms of the interim SALT II agreement after its expiration and was roundly criticized for exceeding his legal powers.
In the 1984 Defense Authorization Act, it declared that the United States should not undermine existing international agreements on offensive strategic arms, at least until the SALT II agreement expired in December 1985, provided the Soviet Union did the same.
In December 1986, the United States exceeded the aggregate SALT limits on strategic weapons when it put a new B-52, equipped with cruise missiles, into service.
Even then, one year after the original expiration date of the SALT II agreement, the United States defended its actions as a sanction for Soviet violations.
Like most arms control agreements, it had been written with a limited life span so that it applied in predictable ways to existing weaponry, not to new and unforeseen developments.
Time limits like these are used to manage risks in a wide range of international agreements.
They are especially important in cases of superpower arms control, in which the desirability of specific agreements is related both to particular weaponry and to the overall strategic balance.
As the military setting changes, existing commitments become more or less desirable.
Arms control agreements must cope with these fluctuating benefits over the life of the agreement.
The idea is to forge agreements that provide sufficient benefits to each side, when evaluated at each point during the life of the agreement, so that each will choose to comply out of self-interest in order to perpetuate the treaty.
Given the relative equality of power, U.S.-Soviet military agreements are not so much enforced as observed voluntarily.
What sustains them is each participant's perception that they are valuable and that cheating would prove too costly if it were matched by the other side or if it caused the agreement to collapse altogether.
To ensure that treaties remain valuable over their entire life span, negotiators typically try to restrict them to known weaponry and stockpiles.
The preference orderings that once supported cooperation may no longer hold.
That has been one of the dilemmas surrounding the antiballistic missile treaty in recent years.
The ABM treaty established strict, permanent limits on United States and Soviet missile defenses.
Since its ratification in 1972, however, the possibilities of missile defense have advanced considerably.
The United States, with its more advanced economy, has widened its lead in the relevant new technologies of 87.
Raymond Vernon, writing on foreign investments, has shown the dangers of violating this approach.
Even if an agreement provides significant benefits to both sides, it may provide those benefits to one side immediately and to the other much later.
Such agreements are vulnerable to noncompliance in midstream, after one side has already received its benefits.
It is a variant of Hobbes's critique of covenants, in which one side performs its side of the bargain first.
This allows negotiators to make reasonable calculations about the various parties' ex post incentives to defect during the life of the agreement.
The Reagan administration relied on this superiority to develop the strategic defense initiative and urged a reinterpretation of the ABM treaty in order to test some of its weaponry.
The dispute over how to interpret the ABM treaty is thus grounded in the consequences of these new technologies and in the slow, cumulative shift in national advantages they have produced.
The debate illustrates, once again, the difficulties of using rigid, formal instruments, which lack external enforcement, to regulate a shifting and unpredictable international environment.
All of these issues refer to the detailed regulation of slow-changing strategic environments.
Although the issues are crucial to national defense, they are not so sensitive diplomatically that the agreement itself must be hidden from view.
Cooperative arrangements in such issues, according to the arguments presented here, are likely to be in treaty form.
Hidden agreements When security issues must be resolved quickly or quietly to avoid serious conflict, then less formal instruments will be chosen.
If the terms are especially sensitive, perhaps because they would humiliate one party or convey unacceptable precedents, then the agreement itself may be hidden from view.
That meant rapid agreement on a few crucial issues, with implementation to follow quickly.
These informal exchanges were not the prelude to agreement, as in SALT or ABM negotiations; they were the agreement.
The deal to remove missiles from Cuba was crafted through an exchange of letters, supplemented by secret oral promises.
During the crisis, the Soviets had put forward a number of inconsistent proposals for settlement.
The next day, Kennedy accepted its basic terms and set a quick deadline for Soviet counteracceptance.
The essence of the bargain was that the Soviets would remove all missiles from Cuba in return for America's pledge not to invade the island.
They completely overturned the Soviet policy of putting nuclear missiles in the Western Hemisphere.
United States acceptance of the bargain was set out in diplomatic messages sent directly to Khrushchev.
In modern international politics, these hidden agreements are informal because ratification is public and the treaties are registered with the United Nations.
In earlier international systems, however, neither condition applied and secret treaties were possible.
Dobrynin had asked if the United States would also remove its older missiles from Turkey as part of the deal.
Their aim was to salvage some thread of victory from the diplomatic confrontation.
The Turkish missiles were no longer strategically important, and for some time the United States had been considering withdrawing them unilaterally.
But now any agreement to remove them would acquire a markedly different meaning.
The Soviets could then claim some symmetry in the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis.
Each side would have gotten its adversary to remove some threatening missiles based near its territory.
The United States, bargaining from a position of overwhelming nuclear superiority, refused this direct, visible linkage.
A concession on the Turkish missiles simply could not be part of the Cuban missile agreement.
Having said this, the President's brother then stated that the United States ""expected"" the Turkish missiles to ""be gone"" soon after the crisis.
The Soviets continued to press for some written assurances, not because they doubted that the missiles would be removed but because they wanted some credit for their removal.
Dobrynin took an unsigned letter from Khrushchev to Robert Kennedy on 29 October 1962, again seeking some direct, written commitment on the Turkish and Italian missiles.
He informed Dobrynin that if the Soviet Union published anything claiming that there was such a deal, the United States intentions with respect to the Jupiter missiles would change, and it would negatively reflect on the U.S.-Soviet relations.
The Soviets said nothing publicly, and NATO quietly removed its aging missiles from Turkey and Italy within six months.
The key decisions to remove missiles from Cuba in exchange for a pledge of noninvasion were informal because of time pressure.
They were embodied in an exchange of messages, rather than in a single signed document, but at least the key points were in writing.
The removal of outdated Turkish and Italian missiles was also part of the overall bargain—an essential part, according to some participants—but it was couched in even more informal terms because of political sensitivity.
If a hidden agreement is exposed, its presence could well suggest deception—to the public, to allies, and to other government agencies.
Even if the agreement does stay hidden, its secrecy imperils its reliability.
Hidden agreements carry little information about the depth of the signatories' commitments, poorly bind successor governments, and fail to signal intentions to third parties.
These costs are clearly exemplified in the secret treaties between Britain and France before World War I They could do nothing to deter Germany, which did not know about them.
On the one hand, this low profile may be a valuable tool of bureaucratic or executive control, excluding 97.
It is sometimes argued that the Turkish and Italian missiles were not part of any deal, since the United States would soon have removed them even if the Soviets had not raised the issue.
The counterargument, which I find more convincing, is that the Soviets sought their removal as part of the bargaining on Cuba and the United States did, in effect, agree that it ""expected"" to remove them.
The American decision was timed and disclosed specifically to encourage Soviet acceptance of the larger deal.
Given the high stakes in Cuba, Soviet behavior was probably little changed by the Turkish side-payment.
When information is imperfect, as it was in this case, clever negotiators can ""bargain away"" concessions that would have been undertaken anyway.
The tactic is to make them appear contingent, with the goal of extracting additional concessions and sealing thefinalbargain.
That is exactly what the United States did with the aging Turkish and Italian missiles, while minimizing the reputational costs of any apparent concessions.
In 1906, the British Foreign Minister, Sir Edward Grey, discussed the dilemmas posed by these expectations.
The entente agreements, signed by a previous British government, ""created in France a belief that we shall support in war If this expectation is disappointed, the French will never forgive us.
On the other hand, the ignorance of the excluded actors may well prove costly if their actions must later be coordinated as part of the agreement.
One example is the postwar American effort to restrict exports to the Soviet bloc.
With considerable reluctance, West European governments finally agreed to help, but they demanded secrecy because the embargo was so unpopular at home.
First, informal agreements are generally less visible and prominent, and so they are less readily available as models.
Second, treaties are considered better evidence of deliberate state practice, according to diplomatic convention and international law.
Public, formal agreements are conventionally understood as contributing to diplomatic precedent.
Discussions between long-time adversaries, for instance, usually begin on an informal, low-level basis to avoid any implicit recognition of wider claims.
Trade relations may also be conducted indirectly, using third-party entrepots, to avoid any formal contract relationships between estranged governments.
Relations between the People's Republic of China and Taiwan have been conducted informally for these very reasons.
The point is not so much to keep the dealings secret but to limit linkage to any larger issues.
Both sides, for example, can profit from commercial exchange, but neither wants to prejudice its claim to be the sole legitimate government of China.
The result is a proliferation of informal contacts and agreements, often using overseas Chinese as middlemen.
Although the State Department did try to persuade Congress that Western Europe was aiding the embargo, its efforts were in vain.
Quiet reassurances from the State Department were distrusted by a hard-line, anticommunist Congress, which saw them as self-serving maneuvers to preserve diplomatic ties.
See Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951 , 82d Congress, 1st sess., 65 Stat.4.
In 1989, this commerce reached $3. billion, up from $1 billion in the mid-1980s.
Singapore, which has cultivated political ties to both countries, now occupies ""a unique position of advantage in the conduct of informal relations"" between them, according to Michael Leifer and Michael Yahuda.
In April 1989, Singapore served as the conduit for the first known criminal extradition from the mainland to the island.
Three mainland police flew to Singapore with their prisoner and transferred him to Taiwanese officers for return to the island.
A more formal, regularized procedure, like the extradition treaty between the United States and Turkey, would present insurmountable problems.
It would require documentation that named the two signatories and was ratified by them.
In this case and in many others, informal agreements are useful because they facilitate cooperation on specific issues while constraining any wider implications regarding other issues or third parties.
The form may be written or oral, detailed or general, but there is some kind of explicit bargain.
Note that Singapore and Hong Kong do not have formal diplomatic relations with either the People's Republic of China or Taiwan.
Far from being an impediment, this absence of formal ties contributes to their role as intermediaries.
Given the long-standing controversy over diplomatic recognition, the best way to maintain links to both the mainland and the island is through these informal, back channels.
The same channels have been used extensively by overseas Chinese communities to arrange for burials or to visit the graves of ancestors interred on the mainland.
Because informal extradition arrangements are ad hoc, they are easily severed.
It means that extradition issues are directly implicated in the larger issues of bilateral diplomacy.
They cannot be treated as distinct, technical issues covered by their own treaty rules.
For example, the bloody suppression of popular uprisings in 1989 in the People's Republic of China blocked prisoner exchanges and made trade and investment ties politically riskier.
They go beyond the secrecy of oral agreements and, at times, may be the only way to avoid serious conflict on sensitive issues.
Such bargains, however, are all too often mirages, carrying the superficial appearance of agreement but not its substance.
The unspoken ""rules"" of the Cold War are sometimes considered tacit agreements.
The superpowers staked out their respective spheres of influence and did not directly engage each other's forces.
In the early years of the Cold War, the United States quietly conceded de facto control over Eastern Europe to the Soviets.
The policies that laid the basis for NATO were designed to contain the Soviet Union, both diplomatically and militarily, but nothing more.
They made no effort to roll back the Soviet army's wartime gains, which had been converted into harsh political dominion in the late 1940s.
America's restraint amounted to a spheres-of-influence policy without actually acknowledging Moscow's regional security interests.
This silence only confirmed the Soviets' worst fears and contributed to bipolar hostilities.
In the bitter climate of the early Cold War period, however, no United States official was prepared to concede the Soviets' dominance in Eastern Europe.
Earlier conferences at Yalta and Potsdam had seemed to do so, but now these concessions were pushed aside, at least rhetorically.
Backed by these domestic sentiments, United States foreign policy was couched in the language of universal freedoms, conceding nothing to the Soviets in 106.
A few international lawyers argued that the Yalta and Potsdam agreements were binding treaty commitments.
The one major exception among United States politicians was former vice president Henry Wallace, representing the left wing of the Democratic party.
Wallace openly stated that the Soviets had legitimate security interests in Eastern Europe and should not be challenged directly there.
In practice, however, the United States tacitly accepted Soviet control up to the borders of West Germany.
The most fundamental problem in analyzing so-called tacit bargains lies in determining whether any real agreement exists.
Often, what pass for tacit bargains are actually policies that have been chosen unilaterally and independently, in light of the unilateral policies of others.
There may be an ""understanding"" of other parties' policies but no implicit agreements to adjust these policies on a mutual or contingent basis.
Each party is simply maximizing its own values, subject to the independent choices made or expected to be made by others.
Each party can adjust its policies on a provisional basis, awaiting some conforming adjustment by others.
Thomas Schelling has consistently argued that this is the most fruitful approach to superpower arms control.
Robert Axelrod has used experimental games to analyze the possibilities and robustness of such tacit bargains.
In Axelrod's games, there can be no explicit bargains, however informal, because direct communication is prohibited.
That move is sensible only if some respond with generosity themselves, rather than aggressively playing them for a sucker.
The problem, as George Downs and David Rocke have shown, is that states may not always know when others are cooperating or defecting and may not know what their intentions are.
One state may then punish others for noncompliance or defections that are more apparent than real and thus begin a downward spiral of retaliation.
Such imperfect knowledge does not prevent tacit cooperation, but it does suggest 110.
In ongoing diplomatic interactions in which each side continually responds to the other's policies and initiatives, it may also be difficult to distinguish between tacit bargains and unilateral acts.
One side may consider its own restraint part of an implicit bargain, while the other considers it nothing more than prudent self-interest.
In the early Cold War, for instance, the United States could do nothing to reverse Soviet control in Eastern Europe without waging war.
There was little to be gained by providing substantial aid to local resistance movements.
Their chances for success were slim, and the dangers of escalation were significant.
Any United States efforts to destabilize Soviet control in Eastern Europe would have markedly increased international tensions and raised the dangers of U.S.-Soviet conflict in central Europe.
More aggressive action in Eastern Europe was deterred by the risks and poor chances of success, not by the implied promise of some reciprocal restraint by the Soviets.
Moreover, what may appear to be implicit agreements are often explicable as outcomes of more narrowly self-interested unilateral policies.
Tacit bargains, like their more explicit counterparts, are based on the reciprocal exchange of benefits.
There will be talk of betrayal and recriminations, words of regret at having extended generous but uncompensated concessions.
There ought to be some distinctive recognition that reasonable expectations and inferences, built up during the course of joint interactions, have been breached.
After the Cuban revolution, the Soviets managed to develop a de facto ally in the Western Hemisphere.
The United States was shocked by a challenge so close to its own territory.
It was shocked because the Soviet-Cuban alliance challenged America's unique power in the Western Hemisphere and posed significant new strategic problems, not because it broke some silent understanding with the Soviets over respective spheres of influence.
What had been violated was America's unchallenged position as the great power in its own region.
In The Cement of Society, Elster makes this distinction between regret and surprise and relates it to two forms of order.
Departures from regularized, predictable behavior give rise to surprise.
There was no claim, however, that the Soviets had violated some general understanding with the United States or had somehow failed to reciprocate America's restrained policies near the Soviet border.
On the basis of America's pronouncements and reactive policies, there was simply no evidence that a tacit bargain had been broken.
Compare that with America's reaction to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
The Carter administration, which had been pursuing a policy of increased trade and normalized relations with the Soviets, clearly considered the invasion a direct attack on the broad, implicit agreement underlying detente.
For the first time, Soviet troops had been used for aggressive purposes outside Eastern Europe.
President Carter's own sense of shock, outrage, and betrayal were widely shared in America and, to a lesser extent, among the Western allies.
It was this deep sense of violation, and not just the potential military threat to the Persian Gulf, that ended a decade of closer ties between the superpowers.8 The Soviets, of course, saw matters differently.
Until the Afghanistan invasion, there had been a sharp debate within the Carter administration over the implied terms of detente.
The problem with implied terms, after all, is that they may well be ambiguous and differently understood by different actors, across states and within them.
The eventual winner was National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski, who clearly stated his position early in the Carter administration while discussing the Horn of Africa.
In March 1978, he wrote to President Carter that ""the Soviets must be made to realize that detente, to be enduring, has to be both comprehensive and reciprocal.
They may give rise to radically different interpretations, which go unnoticed at the time.
There is, unfortunately, no way to identify and reconcile such differing views except retroactively, when disputes arise over nonperformance.
The dangers of misunderstanding are certainly not unique to tacit agreements.
But the process of negotiating written agreements does offer a chance to clarify understandings, to agree on joint interpretations, to draft detailed, restrictive language, and to establish mechanisms for ongoing consultation, such as the U.S.-Soviet Standing Consultative Commission.
Tacit agreements, by definition, lack these procedures, lack this detail, and lack any explicit understandings.
If the agreement covers only a few basic points, if the parties clearly understand the provisions in the same way, and if there are no individual incentives to betray or distort the terms, then some key defects of tacit bargains are irrelevant.
They involve tacit agreement among multiple participants who cannot communicate directly with one another.0 Unfortunately, the hard issues of international politics are different.
If cooperation is to be achieved, the terms must be crafted deliberately to minimize the risks of misunderstanding and noncompliance.
Choosing between treaties and informal agreements Because tacit bargains are so limited, states are reluctant to depend on them when undertaking important projects.
For the Soviet leaders, on the other hand, detente represented an expected opportunity to neutralize superpower relations and exercise Soviet power in a more active way in the Third World.
Garthoff, himself a notable student of superpower relations, sees Soviet policies in Africa and Asia as opportunistic rather than strategic.
See Raymond L Garthoff, ""Review of Bowker and Williams' Superpower Detente,"" International Affairs 65 , 311.
This does not rule out deliberate vagueness on some issues as part of a larger, more detailed settlement.
Cooperation is not comprehensive, and some issues have to be finessed if any agreement is to be reached.
When a state's choice of policies is contingent on the choices of others, it will prefer to spell out these respective choices and the commitments they entail and will want to improve information flows among interdependent actors.
These requirements can be met by either a formal treaty or an informal agreement, each with its own generic strengths and weaknesses.
Each is more or less suited to resolving specific kinds of international bargaining problems.
These differences mean that actors must choose between them for specific agreements.
However, they may also complement each other as elements of more inclusive bargains.
The treaty commitments that define NATO, for instance, are given their military and diplomatic significance by a stream of informal summit declarations that address contemporary alliance issues such as weapons modernization, arms control, and Soviet policy initiatives.
Some of the most elaborate are quite similar to treaties but with two crucial exceptions.
The diplomatic status of the promises is less clear-cut, and the agreements typically do not require elaborate ratification procedures.
They lack, to a greater or lesser extent, the state's fullest and most authoritative imprimatur.
They are often unwilling to grant them the status of legally binding agreements.
The argument presented here is that treaties send a conventional signal to other signatories and to third parties concerning the gravity and irreversibility of a state's commitments.
By putting reputation at stake, they add to the costs of breaking agreements or, rather, they do so if a signatory values reputation.
These escape hatches are the common denominators of informal agreements, from the most elaborate written documents to the sketchiest oral agreements.
The Helsinki Final Act, with its prominent commitments on human rights, is otherwise virtually identical to a treaty.
It includes sixty pages of detailed provisions, only to declare that it should not be considered a treaty with binding commitments.
The Helsinki Final Act, formally known as the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, was concluded in 1975 and signed by thirty-five states.
On the one hand, the states declared their ""determination to act in accordance with the provisions contained"" in the text.
On the other hand, these were not to be the binding commitments of a treaty.
The text plainly said that it was not eligible for registration with the United Nations, as a treaty would be.
Several democratic states, led by the United States, declared at the time that this document was not a treaty.
The speed and simplicity of oral bargains make them particularly suited for clandestine deals and crisis resolution.
But for obvious reasons, states are reluctant to depend on them more generally.
Oral agreements can encompass only a few major points of agreement; they cannot set out complicated obligations in any detail.
First, it is difficult to tell whether they have been officially authorized and whether the government as a whole is committed to them.
Second, they usually lack the visibility and public commitment that support compliance.
Third, to ensure implementation in complex bureaucratic states, oral agreements must be translated into written directives at some point.
Sincere mistakes, omissions, and misunderstandings may creep in during this translation process with no opportunity to correct them before an interstate dispute emerges.
Last, but most important of all, it is easier to disclaim oral bargains or to recast them on favorable terms.
Nobody ever lost an argument in the retelling, and oral bargains have many of the same properties.
Perhaps this is what Sam Goldwyn had in mind when he said that verbal contracts were not worth the paper they were written on.4 Putting informal agreements into writing avoids most of these problems.
First, because states do not acknowledge them as fundamental, self-binding commitments, they are less convincing evidence of recognized state practices.
For example, informal agreements on trade or extradition are no proof of implicit diplomatic recognition, as a formal treaty would be.
These limitations mean that informal agreements are more easily bargain.
It juxtaposes elaborate ""commitments"" with a claim that they are not to be registered, as a treaty would be.
The point, clearly, is to exempt the provisions from the legally binding status of treaty commitments.
For an interesting analysis of the Helsinki agreement and its ambiguous status in international law, see Schachter, ""The Twilight Existence of Nonbinding International Agreements,"" 296.
This translation of oral agreements into writing is required by the United States State Department's regulations implementing the Case Act.
Goldwyn's disparaging comments about oral agreements are themselves probably apocryphal.
He regularly mangled the English language, and quotes like this were often attributed to him, whether he said them or not.
The murky origins of this quotation underscore a fundamental problem with oral bargains.
There is no requirement to ratify them or to enact them into domestic law, and there is no need to register them with international organizations for publication.
For highly sensitive bargains, such as the use of noncombatants' territory in guerrilla wars, that is a crucial attribute.5 Treaties, too, can be kept secret.
Indeed, secret treaties were a central instrument of balance-ofpower diplomacy in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The first and most fundamental is the rise of democratic states with principles of public accountability and some powers of legislative oversight.
Secret treaties are difficult to reconcile with these democratic procedures.
The second reason is that ever since the United States entered World War I, it has opposed secret agreements as a matter of basic principle and has enshrined its position in the peace settlements of both world wars.
The decline of centralized foreign policy institutions, which worked closely with a handful of political leaders, sharply limits the uses of secret treaties.
Foreign ministries no longer hold the same powers to commit states to alliances, to shift those alliances, to divide conquered territory, and to hide such critical commitments from public view.
Instead, democratic leaders rely on informal instruments to strike international bargains in spite of domestic institutional restraints.
That is precisely the objection raised by the United States Congress regarding war powers and executive agreements.
When leaders are freed from such institutional restraints, they can hide their bargains without making them informal.
They can simply use secret treaties and protocols, as Stalin and Hitler did in August 1939 when they carved up Eastern Europe.
States on the borders of a guerrilla war are vital allies to the protagonists.
They offer a secure launching pad for military operations and a secure site for communications and resupply.
If their role becomes too open and prominent, however, the bordering states could be brought directly into the fighting as protagonists themselves.
It is best managed by informal agreements, usually secret ones, such as those reached by the United States and Laos during the Vietnam War.
The importance of secret treaties in European diplomacy was underscored when Woodrow Wilson tried to abolish the practice after World War I Clemenceau and Lloyd George ""said emphatically that they could not agree never to make a private or secret diplomatic agreement of any kind.
Such understandings were the foundation of European diplomacy, and everyone knew that to abandon secret negotiations would be to invite chaos.
What was kept secret was the attached protocol that partitioned Poland and the Baltic into spheres of influence.
The following month, the Nazis and Soviets added two more secret protocols, declaring Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania part of the Soviet sphere.
Within a year, the Baltic states had been forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union.
For the next fifty years, including the first four years of glasnost, the Soviets refused to acknowledge these secret protocols.
They scorned the Baltic nationalists (who knew about the deal) and ignored the inconvenient fact that the Allies had copies of the German documents.
The old Soviet-Nazi protocols remain sensitive because they undermine the legitimacy of Soviet territorial expansion.
They directly impugn the sources of Soviet dominance of a multinational state.
There is ample reason, then, why the agreement was made secretly and why the Soviets long tried to keep it that way.
Aside from these protocols, secret pacts have rarely been used for important interstate projects since World War I That partly reflects the war experience itself and partly reflects America's rise to global prominence.
The volume provides official translations of documents from captured archives of the German Foreign Ministry and the Reich Chancellery.
The relevant maps and microfilms are held in the Federal Republic's Foreign Ministry.
The captured documents have all been published, in the original and in translation.
The Soviets long claimed that they could not find their copies and that the West German microfilms were forgeries.
They held to this formulaic answer through 1989, when Baltic nationalism became a serious political challenge.
The nationalists, of course, emphasized the illegitimacy of the protocols and actually published their texts as part of their rising protest of Soviet rule.
In August 1989, a senior Soviet officialfinallyacknowledged that the Soviets and Nazis had secretly divided Eastern Europe, but he insisted that the secret agreement had no bearing on the current boundaries of the Soviet Union.
They showed how Italy had been enticed into the war (through the London treaty) and revealed that Russia had been promised control of Constantinople.
The Allies were embarrassed by the publication of these self-seeking agreements and were forced to proclaim the larger principles for which their citizens were fighting and dying.2 Woodrow Wilson had always wanted such a statement of intent.
He argued that this was a war about big issues and grand ideals, not about narrow self-interest or territorial aggrandizement.
He dissociated the United States from the Allies' earlier secret commitments and sought to abolish them forever once the war had been won.
They provided a means for registering international agreements and, in the case of the UN, an incentive to do so.
Only registered agreements could be accorded legal status before any UN affiliate, including the International Court of Justice.
This mixture of legalism and idealism could never abolish private understandings, but it did virtually eliminate secret treaties among democratic states.
They underscore the fact that cooperation is often circumscribed and that its very limits may be fundamental to the participants.
Their aim is often to restrict the scope and duration of agreements and to avoid any generalization of their implications.
There was a strong, sustained reaction against secret diplomacy, mainly in the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Either his wartime allies had not told him of their earlier bargains or they had told him and he had kept the secret, despite his principled attacks on secret diplomacy.
Wilson's war aims were stated to a joint session of Congress on 8 January 1918.
When European leaders later challenged this commitment to open covenants, Wilson announced that he would never compromise the ""essentially American terms in the program,"" including Point One.
More often than not, there is no intention (and no realistic possibility) of extending them to wider issues, other actors, longer time periods, or more formal obligations.
They are simply not the beginning of a more inclusive process of cooperation or a more durable one.
Interstate bargains are frequently designed to be hidden from domestic constituencies, to avoid legislative ratification, to escape the attention of other states, or to be renegotiated.
They may well be conceived with no view and no aspirations about the longer term.
They are simply transitory arrangements, valuable now but ready to be abandoned or reordered as circumstances change.
The diplomatic consequences and reputational effects are minimized by using informal agreements rather than treaties.
To resolve a crisis, the agreement may have to be struck quickly and definitively, with no time for elaborate documents.
Because informal agreements can accommodate these restrictions, they are common tools for international cooperation.
States use them, and use them frequently, to pursue national goals by international agreement.
