Every man, woman and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles, hanging by the slenderest of threads, capable of being cut at any moment by accident or miscalculation or by madness.
The weapons of war must be abolished before they abolish us … To halt the spread of these terrible weapons, to halt the contamination of the air, to halt the spiralling nuclear arms race, we remain ready to seek new avenues of agreement.
Test ban negotiations need not and should not await general disarmament.
Just three months later, Kennedy was negotiating with British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan to use Christmas Island for a new series of United States nuclear tests.
In the early 1960s, renewed diplomatic tensions between the United States and Soviet Union meant the 1958 nuclear testing moratorium could not hold.
In March 1961, Harold Macmillan had diverted from a Caribbean tour, flying from Trinidad to Key West in Florida to meet with John F Kennedy.
The two leaders debated strategic cooperation, including the possibility of joint action in the brewing political crisis in Laos—the precursor to the Vietnam War.
Viewing Britain as a declining imperial power, the Kennedy administration saw the United States as the leader of the Western alliance and ‘the free world’—attitudes that sparked United States interventions in the Congo (with the murder of independence leader Patrice Lumumba), the Bay of Pigs fiasco in Cuba and deployment of United States Special Forces in Indochina.
Macmillan in turn hoped for an Anglo-American partnership, where Washington would recognise the United Kingdom’s role on the UN Security Council.
With France losing the Algerian War, it tried to improve its crumbling imperial power by commencing a nuclear testing program in its North African colony.
Trying to maintain its status as the key European nuclear power, Macmillan hoped to encourage the United States to quickly negotiate a total ban on atmospheric testing, but believed that US nuclear superiority over Russia would best be maintained by another round of United States nuclear weapons tests before any ban.
Despite his disarmament rhetoric, Kennedy had won the presidency with talk of a fictitious missile gap with the Soviet Union, and the new administration sought to bolster its nuclear forces.
For this reason, the United States offered the United Kingdom use of the Nevada test site for further British nuclear experimentation, but sought something in return.
In December 1961, the two Western leaders held a meeting in Bermuda, this time to discuss the use of Britain’s Christmas Island facilities for United States nuclear testing.
If you’re talking about Britain, it would take five or six, but to be on the safe side, let’s say seven or eight and I’ll have another gin and tonic, if you would be so kind.
Kennedy, Macmillan and the Cold War: The irony of interdependence (Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2002), 154.
In earlier work at RAND Corporation, Kahn had critiqued the notion of Mutually Assured Destruction and advocated first strike attacks to decapitate the Soviet leadership.
Combined with traits from Nazi rocket scientist Werner Von Braun and ‘father of the hydrogen bomb’ Edward Teller, Kahn’s personality was used as a model for Doctor Strangelove, the scientist at the heart of Stanley Kubrick’s astounding satire of the nuclear era.
A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House (HoughtonMifflin, Boston, 2002 reprint), 491.
As leaders debated the test moratorium, the airstrip and infrastructure on Christmas Island were maintained, under a joint arrangement between London and Washington.
He then acceded to proposals from the United States military for the United States to conduct the further series of nuclear tests at Christmas Island and Johnston Atoll, codenamed Operation Dominic.
It is the joint view of the United States and UK governments that the existing state of nuclear development would justify the West in making such further series of nuclear tests as may be necessary for purely military reasons.
The agreement between the UK and United States governments allowed the US military to carry out nuclear weapons testing no more than 25 miles and no less than 5 miles from Christmas Island.
Britain traded the use of facilities at the Christmas Island base in return for access to the United States testing ground in the Nevada desert in order to test British nuclear weapons underground.
THE PRESIDENT—JOHN F KENNEDY The first phase of the United States program was conducted in a rush.
Between 25 April to 11 July, 24 atmospheric nuclear tests were conducted at Christmas Island, with weapons dropped from US aircraft.
The tests ranged in yield from the appropriately named ‘Petit’ at 2. kilotons to the massive ‘Pamlico’ at 3. megatons.
A week later, in Operation Swordfish, the submarine fired a rocket-launched antisubmarine ASROC nuclear depth charge.
In October, five more airdrops were detonated in the vicinity of Johnston Island, a United States possession located between the Marshall Islands and Hawai‘i.
Johnston was claimed for the Kingdom of Hawai‘i in July 1858, with the support of King Kamehameha.
With the United States takeover of Hawai‘i in 1898, Johnston effectively became a United States possession, even though the Territory of Hawai‘i continued to claim jurisdiction over both Kalama Island and neighbouring Sand Island well into the 20th century.
Johnston Atoll had first been used for two United States nuclear tests during Operation Hardtack in 1958.
This testing program involved nuclear tests on Bikini and Enewetak atolls in the Marshall Islands, but from 22 April 11 Full details of all 24 tests are available in ‘Operation Dominic 1’, United States Defense Threat Reduction Agency Fact Sheet, May 2015.
Today, the Royal Navy relies on United States Trident missiles aboard its basllistic missile submarines.
Two rocket launches from Johnston codenamed Teak and Orange both involved 3.8-megaton explosions from nuclear warheads on rockets launched from Johnston Atoll.
After the tests were completed, the island reverted back to the command of the United States Air Force.
These rocket-launched tests, collectively designated Operation Fishbowl, were designed to study the effects of nuclear detonations as defensive weapons against incoming ballistic missiles.
The 1.4-megaton highlevel explosion from Starfish Prime lit the sky from Australia to Hawai‘i, causing an enormous electromagnetic pulse that put out streetlights in Honolulu, 1,300 kilometres away.
The blast pumped radiation into the Van Allen belts, capable of destroying or seriously degrading the orbit of seven satellites.
These operations were preceded by a number of aborted nuclear missile launches from Johnston, including three that caused plutonium contamination on the island that still lingers today.
The first failed test ‘Bluegill’ on 2 June 1962 was aborted when radar lost track of the Thor missile carrying the nuclear warhead.
The next ‘Starfish’ test on 19 June led to massive contamination of Johnston Atoll.
The launch of a Thor missile carrying a nuclear warhead was aborted a minute into its flight, and a self-destruct order blew the missile apart at about 30,000 feet.
Large pieces of radioactive debris (including pieces of the booster rocket, engine, re-entry vehicle and missile parts) fell back to the island.
More debris landed in the surrounding waters and on adjacent Sand Island, where residual plutonium from the test device was found.
It is however also likely that residual plutonium, in addition to that recovered from Sand Island, fell into the waters of JA.14 The test codenamed Bluegill Prime in July caused the most serious contamination.
After a malfunction on the launch pad, officials destroyed the rocket by remote control after ignition but before the rocket had lifted off.
Plutonium material, mixed with the flaming fuel, drained into trench cables and was carried away in the smoke from several fires.
This resulted in a deposition of alpha contamination on the launch pad complex that represented a major contamination problem.
Contaminated debris was scattered throughout the wire-enclosed pad area and neighbouring areas.
Metal revetment buildings were highly contaminated with alpha activity.
Burning fuel flowing through cable trenches caused contamination on the interior of the revetments and all equipment contained therein.
Fuel, which spilled and flowed over the compacted coral surrounding the launch mount and revetments, resulted in highly contaminated areas.
Prevailing winds at the time of the destruction caused general contamination of all areas downwind of the launch mount.
In an effort to continue with the testing program, United States troops were sent in to do a rapid clean-up.
The troops scrubbed down the revetments and launch pad, carted away debris and removed the top layer of coral around the contaminated launch pad.
The plutonium-contaminated rubbish was dumped in the lagoon, polluting the surrounding marine environment.
At the time of the Bluegill Prime disaster, the top-fill around the launch pad was scraped by a bulldozer and grader.
It was then dumped into the lagoon to make a ramp, so the rest of the debris could be loaded onto landing craft to be dumped out into the ocean.
An estimated 10 per cent of the plutonium from the test device was in the fill used to make the ramp.
Much of these sediments may have been incorporated back into the islands in the 1964 dredging and filling work, and thus much of the plutonium contamination from Bluegill Prime may have been redeposited on the island.
Any contamination not redeposited on the island through dredge and fill still contaminates the lagoon.
The major Bluegill Prime disaster seriously affected the health of United States Naval Air Force personnel who were present at Johnston Island.
Crewmember Michael Thomas notes that the flight crew and ground support staff were trapped on the island following the destruction of the nuclear warhead.
Nearly 30 per cent of the crew experienced reproductive problems, with their wives suffering stillbirth and deformities in babies.
In the Bluegill Double Prime test, the rocket was destroyed at a height of 109,000 feet after it malfunctioned 90 seconds into the flight.
United States Defence Department officials confirm that when the rocket was destroyed, it contributed to the radioactive pollution on the island.
Thomas served at Johnston Atoll in 1962 as a member of United States Naval Air Force, Navy Patrol Squadron Six, Flight Crew One.
THE PRESIDENT—JOHN F KENNEDY *** With the completion of Operation Dominic at Christmas Island and two series of atmospheric and underground tests at the Nevada test site , the United States revived negotiations with the Soviet Union for a test ban treaty.
As with all Pacific nuclear test sites, the end of nuclear testing has not ended the nuclear hazard for the peoples of the Pacific.
Since then, United States defence authorities have surveyed the island in a series of studies, and collected 45,000 tonnes of soil contaminated with radioactive isotopes.
Plutonium pollution was heaviest near the old rocket launching site, in the lagoon offshore the launch pad and near Sand Island.
The contaminated soil was dug up and collected on the north of the island, in a fenced area covering 24 acres.
Plans for a permanent United States satellite tracking base on the island failed to materialise and, in September 1963, the last United States forces left the island.
British forces did an initial clean-up, dumped unwanted material into the ocean and packed their bags.
Tons of rusting vehicles, batteries, drums of unused asphalt and other toxic wastes were simply abandoned on the island.
On 29 June 1964, the Royal Navy owered its flag at the HMS Resolution base at Port London.
Johnston was used by the United States military until 2000 and the island was expanded many times in size through dredging and reconstruction.
Beyond the 1962 nuclear tests, Johnston Atoll was used to store chemical weapons from Okinawa after 1970 and drums of Agent Orange defoliant from the Vietnam War in 1972.
It is thus seen as critical to have Kiritimati Island reassessed for radioactive contamination in light of the increasing evidence based on the cancer levels in the Marshall Islands.
Funded by a £9.1-million contract from the UK Ministry of Defence , a team from Safety and Ecology Corporation Ltd was deployed in 2005 for a clean-up operation on Christmas Island.
SEC sought to remove more than 23,000 cubic metres of military material, but this focused on rusting equipment, oil drums, waste asphalt, asbestos and toxic chemicals left behind four decades earlier.
Toxic or otherwise hazardous waste, including radioactive material, was transported back to the United Kingdom for disposal.
Illustrative calculations on the radiological surveillance of Christmas Island.
Kiribati country report for United Nations Conference on Environment and Development , South Pacific Regional Environment Program , Apia, June 1992, 56.
Radioactive Waste’, Under-Secretary of State for Defence Andrew Robathan, UK House of Commons, Hansard Written Answers for 17 February 2011.
THE PRESIDENT—JOHN F KENNEDY The operation involved extensive negotiation with local communities, given some equipment had been repurposed for housing and pig pens.
Despite this attempted clean-up, comprehensive surveys of possible radiological contamination on the south-east corner of the island were not conducted.
In Kiribati, when the tests ended, much of the equipment used for the testing were dumped in the ocean or just left behind.
In seeking to have a study done on assessing the safety of Kiritimati from radiation, an offer was quickly made for a clean-up of the island, more than 30 years after the tests, by one of the testing countries.
With this history in mind, our region collectively has been most vocal about nuclear issues.
In fact, the very establishment of the Pacific Islands Forum, the annual gathering of our Pacific leaders, emanated from the frustration of not being able to discuss nuclear issues, deemed political by the metropolitan powers who were members within the South Pacific Commission at that time and also the testers of the nuclear weapons.
Operation Dominic highlighted the hypocrisy of Britain’s refusal to acknowledge the health problems faced by military personnel after their service on Christmas Island during Operation Grapple.
The United States would provide compensation to its troops from Operation Dominic for the same illnesses found amongst British veterans that would not by compensated by the UK Government.
Steadman, Safety and Ecology Corporation Ltd, to WM 2006 conference, 26 February–2 March 2006, Tucson Arizona.
However, earlier that very year, the UK MoD had refused compensation, arguing that there was no proof his cancer was caused by exposure to ionising radiation.
I am a casualty of the Cold War and whilst I am pleased that I am receiving compensation and recognition from the United States government, it really galls me lying here—a critically ill man—that the British Government continues to fail in its duty of care towards me and thousands of other nuclear test veterans by denying that we were exposed to radiation during service.
In light of the overwhelming evidence and research in the United States which has led to this compensation payment, I call on the Prime Minister to admit that mistakes have been made, to apologise for the pain and suffering inflicted on the nuclear test veterans and their families, and to order a full public inquiry into the whole nuclear test veteran issue.
I would like to see the automatic award of War Pensions to any nuclear test veteran suffering from one of the 19 recognised diseases under the United States Radiation Exposure Compensation Act.
Spackman was one of the 15 aircrew of Canberra bombers who participated in the 1954 Aconite program, collecting samples of radioactivity after United States nuclear tests in the Marshall Islands.
For this hazardous duty, Spackman was 27 The United States legislation works on a presumptive list that recognises lung cancer as one of many diseases that can be caused by radiation released in the tests.
THE PRESIDENT—JOHN F KENNEDY awarded a Queen’s Commendation for Distinguished Service in 1957.
He was diagnosed with aggressive cancer of the pharynx in 2000 and, despite treatment, died five months later.
For the survivors of United States and British nuclear testing in the Pacific, the debate over the economic, social and environmental impact has not ended.
From medical research to court battles, from NGO activity to parliamentary debates, the story of Christmas Island continues into the 21st century.
