With Soviet-U.S relations at a critical point following disagreements over contested Berlin, there was great fear that a third, even more devastating, world war was around the corner.
The threat of nuclear war escalated during those uneasy times with Russia and the U.S arming themselves to the teeth, preparing for full-on open conflict mutually anticipating an invasion.
One particular point in history had the whole world shaking over its fate.
The Cuban Missile crisis was, arguably, the most significant political event that occurred during the second half of the twentieth century.
Even before the Second World War, the U.S was hostile to Soviet Russia and its communistic ideologies that directly conflicted with western ideas of a free market and capitalism.
The United States even orchestrated a series of covert actions against the Bolsheviks during the infamous Revolution of 1917 by funding the Bolshevik enemies the Whites, and later on interfering with military operations by sending in thousands of troops to Vladivostok and Archangelsk to help the Whites in combat.
As Adolf Hitler’s Operation Barbarossa overwhelmed the Soviet Union during mid 1941, The United States provided Russia with huge quantities of weapons, ships, aircraft, rolling stock, strategic materials and other humanitarian supplies through the Lend-Lease Program signed by F.D Roosevelt.
The United States feared that the growing power of the Soviet Union might cause a shift in global power, leaving the United States and many democratic countries of Europe vulnerable to its ideological influence.
This became a real possibility after the creation of the Eastern Bloc and Russia’s development of the atomic bomb in 1949 which resulted with the United States organizing NATO to “contain communism” from spreading over the whole world.
After the success of the Cuban Revolution of 1959 Fidel Alejandro Castro took power.
The United States feared that Castro, a communist, would ally with the Soviet Union.
Clearly, having a potential ally to the enemy near the coast was a sizable threat to U.S security so the U.S decided to take action.
The United States tried using military force to assassinate Fidel Castro in the Bay of Pigs Invasion which, ultimately, was a failure.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev promised to defend Cuba with Soviet arms if any military action was taken by the United States following the failed invasion.
At this point in the Cold War Russia was secretly losing the arms race.
The United States already had “Jupiter” ballistic missiles positioned in Turkey and Italy aimed at every major city of the Soviet Union.
To Khrushchev this wasn’t surprising news and he understood that the U.S.S.R. would perish if it didn’t find an equally strategic advantage.
With Cuba as U.S.S.R.’s new valuable ally, the opportunity was obvious.
Throughout the late-summer and early-fall of 1962 the Soviets ferried launch equipment and personnel necessary for the preparation of missiles to Cuba.
Because they feared being discovered they could not use military ships.
Soviet leadership started the deployment of nuclear missiles in the belief that Washington would not detect the missile sites until it was too late.
Luckily for the United States, some information was leaked to the CIA from a Soviet defector GRU colonel Oleg Penkovsky.
With his information the United States were able to quickly identify the missile launching sites that were being erected in Cuba.
And historians will remember with gratitude the name of the GRU Colonel Oleg Penkovsky.
Thanks to his priceless information the Cuban crisis was not transformed into the last World War.
The National Photographic Interpretation Center found what they they thought to be surface-to-air missiles.
These were the words that President John F Kennedy heard early in the morning on the 16 October while having breakfast, still wearing pajamas.
Later that day President Kennedy and his advisors scheduled two meetings.
Kennedy was informed that even though the missiles do not currently have nuclear warheads armed, it is only a matter of time before the Russians ship the main weaponry From such a great vantage point, the SS-4 missiles could target any city in the 1100 miles radius which left the whole eastern coast vulnerable.
For this meeting he hand-picked a group of trusted government officials in total secrecy to advise him on the crisis.
This assembly was later on referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or the Ex-Comm.
Robert McNamara, then Secretary of Defense, outlined many different courses of action the U.S.could take to settle the crisis.
Mr President, in this list there are a series of alternative plans ranging from Roman numeral N°1 with a minimum of about 50 sorties directed solely against the known MRBMs as of last night, to alternative N°5 which covers alternative invasion plans.
If there is any possibility the enemy is equipped with operational nuclear weapons, I am certain the plans would have to be changed.
The most extreme course of action was a full-on invasion of Cuba in order to seize or destroy the nuclear warheads before the Soviet Union had a chance to react.
In order to maintain secrecy, Kennedy followed his pre-crisis schedule.
As of this point the Soviets didn’t know that the United States knew of the missiles in Cuba.
Officials feared that if the Russian’s found out then they might hide the missiles or simply launch them if they were ready.
The latter, however, was unlikely, but the United States did not want to take any chances.
John F Kennedy understood that if the nation found out about the critical situation in Cuba, uncontrollable panic would follow.
Consequently, Kennedy did not break any public engagements for the next four days.
However, as soon as JFK entered his car he became serious and focused his whole attention on the crisis.
Ex-Comm did not know if Gromyko personally knew about the missiles or if he was informed that the United States knew.
After a polite exchange of minor world events, Kennedy shifted the topic to Cuba.
Gromyko read a statement saying that Soviet aid was solely for the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful democracy.
During another Ex-Comm meeting a majority opinion had been reached on recommending a blockade of Cuba.
Kennedy liked the idea of the blockade because it provided the Soviets a way out of the crisis.
Kennedy, who was already late, asked his brother to continue the Ex-Comm meetings to draw up full plans for both scenarios.
Again, he chose not to cancel this trip because he wanted to maintain secrecy.
On Saturday, October 20, Robert Kennedy called the President to say that he had to come back to Washington and cancel his trip to finalize his decision.
It was necessary for the President to make a final decision wether to air strike the missile sites or hold a military quarantine.
He wanted to know the percentage of success if a surgical air strike of Cuba was to take place.
General Walter Sweeney, the head of Strategic Air Command replied that all the missiles sites that were known would be taken out.
Kennedy asked the general the estimated casualties, civilian and military.
Military alert was raised to DEFCON 3 and instructions were given to be ready to launch missiles on Russian cities within minutes of the President’s speech.
Twenty planes with nuclear bombs were ready to strike the U.S.S.R. on command.
On October 22, President John F Kennedy gave his famous speech on television.
In his reknown speech he described the situation in Cuba and gave a detailed explanation of America’s decision.
He was enraged at his military for not successfully hiding the missiles and he was angered by the American “quarantine”, which was an act of war, no matter what it was technically called.
Khrushchev sent a response to Kennedy stating that the missiles in Cuba are purely defensive and that Kennedy’s statement poses a serious threat towards world peace and the security of nations.
In response to Kennedy’s speech, Fidel Castro mobilized all of Cuba’s military forces.
He had anticipated invasion from the United States ever since the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The British press questioned the authenticity of the existence of Soviet bases in Cuba and linked his actions to his re-election.
However, most other countries in Europe sympathized Kennedy’s decision and speech, namely Germany and France.
On the following day, Kennedy ordered six jets to fly over the missile sites.
The photographs showed that the Soviets were testing the missiles for launch.
On the same day, the Organization of American States unanimously approved of the quarantine, realizing that they were also threatened by the missiles in Cuba.
United States ships were ordered to communicate with the Russian vessels and if those did not stop, the United States were to disable any incoming ships.
Ex-Comm received a message that the Soviet Ships had stopped and were turning back.
Khrushchev was not ready to challenge the military blockade and bring the crisis to a whole new level.
The notification, sent round the world from Strategic Air Command HQ, was purposely left uncoded to let the Soviet Union know just how serious the United States were.
Although no action was taken from Russia, the crisis had not been avoided.
Kennedy had United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confront Russia at the United Nations.
The United States would not lose a strategic position if this was to take place.
By this time United States had submarines with nuclear warheads capable of targeting Moscow and other major centers around Russia’s borders.
The United States let it through because there was no reason to believe it carried contraband cargo.
The letter stated that the United States and Russia were “pulling on ends of a rope in which there is a knot.
Dobrynin claimed that the missiles in Cuba were justified because of American missiles in Turkey.
A U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba and another U-2 had, supposedly, gone off course and mistakenly flew into Russian air space.
Officials feared that Russia might think that the U-2 was on a reconnaissance mission precluding a nuclear strike.
Ex-Comm had previously decided that if a scout plane was to be shot down over Cuba, the Air Force would retaliate by bombing.
After the downing of the U-2 the Joint Chiefs pushed even harder for a strike on Cuba.
Khrushchev stated that if the United States remove the missiles from Turkey Russia would, in turn, remove their missiles from Cuba.
Robert Kennedy proposed to completely ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and answer, publicly, to the first.
He had stayed up most of the night and received statements from diplomats in the United States so he was aware that the crisis was at a very extreme point.
Nikita Khrushchev feared the worst that the United States was going to declare war on the Soviet Union.
Esteemed Mr President: I have received your message of October 27, 1962.
This message, received early in the morning by Eastern Standard Time effectively ended the crisis.
Kennedy, however, understood that Khrushchev’s response was genuine and that he would stay true to his word.
Castro did not like the fact that Cuba had not got what it wanted out of the crisis mainly Guantanamo Bay, which the Russian’s guaranteed would fall back under Cuban control.
The compromise was an embarrassment for Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of the “Jupiter” missiles from Turkey and Italy wasn’t made public.
The relations of many Soviet states greatly deteriorated namely with China as China also saw Russia’s decision as cowardice.
Following the crisis the Hotline Agreement was made, which created the Moscow-Washington hotline, a direct communications link from the Oval Office to the Kremlin.
However, the most important events that came later on, under the rule of Leonid Brezhnev for the U.S.S.R. and Gerald Ford for the U.S., were the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks.
The Talks ended with Russia and the U.S.A. signing an anti-nuclear pact that limited the amount of nuclear warheads each country was allowed to hold.
Unknown at the time, Russia was losing the arms race the U.S.A. had many more nuclear warheads than Russia could ever dream of producing.
By creating such a tense situation, Khrushchev provoked the United States into signing a disarming treaty, thereby guaranteeing safety to his country and his people.
Every living person has to be forever in debt to the brave men that were afflicted with the Ex-Comm and to Mr Nikita Khrushchev.
H Holt, 1994 Stuart Murray, Atlas of American Military History.9 Bibliography: Michael J Carley.
