The Oleg Penkovsky Story and the Important of Human Intelligence in Cold War Crises Christoffer J Henriksen Senior Capstone History.9 Professor: Dr.
While technology provides insight into what one’s opponents are doing, it lacks the distinctly human factor necessary for a full assessment of a given situation.
Brush PassA method of exchanging information in which two parties exchange information while seeming to accidentally brush past each other in public.
Main focus was military, especially nuclear, but would gather any information.
Main focus was political, especially nuclear, but would gather any information available.
Persona non gratasomeone being told to leave a country, and not return.
This is usually due to the person doing something illegal or worsening relations between the two countries.
RezidentA Soviet or Russian Chief of Station in the intelligence services.
Spy satellites do not feel, spy planes do not need food, and drones do not drink water.
Technology does not generally have the failings and frailties that humans do.
HumInt provides insights into the minds of the enemy, and provides necessary context for the full analysis on information gathered by technology.
By examining the information Oleg Penkovsky passed during debriefing sessions more closely we can see just how important his position was and the absolute necessity of human intelligence in the Nuclear Age, along with what may drive someone to defect.
Penkovsky is one of the most important spies of the Twentieth Century, according to Peter Deriabin and Jerrold Schechter’s The Spy Who Saved the World, but authors tend to overlook the uses of his information.
Most authors focus on other more colorful personalities, or the operational aspects of Penkovsky.
They do not give the information he passed the full attention it deserves.
In 1960, a Russian intelligence officer approached the West offering information.
In this time, Penkovsky became heavily dissatisfied with the Soviet system, and even considered defecting on the spot.
However, as we shall, see it was to the West’s benefit that he did not.
He passed much of this information when he exited the Soviet Union in 1961 as part of his cover position in a different Soviet bureau.
There he met with his handlers, and, in a series of discussions lasting several hours each, debriefed the team on a wide variety of internal workings of the Soviet Union.
Th,e Berlin Crisis began in 1958 with Khrushchev threatening to sign a peace treaty with East Germany and lasted until the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961.
Both sides were readying for war in on this issue, and even the slightest edge could mean the difference between victory and defeat.
The information Penkovsky passed allowed for the identification of the missiles the Soviets installed in Cuba.
With a precise knowledge of the limits and capabilities of the weapons the Executive Committee of the National Security Council to make rational decisions by knowing the stakes.
The nature of this study requires working in multiple areas; the first is the field of CIA history.
One of the most recent books on the history of the CIA is Legacy of Ashes by Tim Weiner.
In this book Weiner argues that the CIA has been a failure from the start.
HumInt against the Soviet Union was a major failure that machines, such as the U2 spyplane or corona satellite, could not mitigate.
Ultimately Weiner’s argument is that, in order to maintain the national security of the United States, it is necessary to reform the CIA so the nation’s leaders can know what those who threaten America are plotting.
However, he wrote nothing outright and there is no direct evidence given.
When addressing the Penkovsky operation, Trento ventures to the edges of the historiography.
He describes Penkovsky as a hardline conservative, who believed that Khrushchev was going to destroy the Soviet Union, and possibly the World, in nuclear war.
While Penkovsky did believe that Khrushchev could lead to nuclear war, his professional frustrations also played an important role in his decision to defect.
Thus we can conclude Trento represents an outlier in the historiography.
Corera dedicated approximately 50 pages to the Penkovsky operation in his book The Art of Betrayal, whose main focus was a larger history of MI6, the British secret intelligence service.
It is accepted that Penkovsky was a walk-in who genuinely wanted to work for the West.
The debriefing transcripts provide the basis for any study on Penkovsky, this one included.
There was some debate over the authenticity of the document, but the CIA accepted it as legitimate.
The Spy Who Saved the World was the first work on Penkovsky, and provides an outline for most later works on Penkovsky.
The newest point this work brings to the literature is a different theory on Penkovsky’s arrest, which is addressed later in this article.
It is a subject which has been covered by academics and non-academics alike.
However, there is a changing historiography as new documents have become available.
Essentially, what Kennedy did is record an hour-by-hour analysis of the Crisis as it unfolded.
The Doves, according to this book, were Robert Kennedy, President John F Kennedy, and Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara.
The War Hawks were everyone else, largely the top commanders of the military.
Essentially, Kennedy is breaking down what/how the Cuba Crisis happened.
The second main line of the literature of the Crisis comes from the October Crisis White House tapes, which record the conversations held by the ExComm.
Interestingly the role of Robert Kennedy is one of the subjects that has changed over the course of the historiography.
Kennedy placed himself firmly next to his brother, in favor of the blockade.
However he is now known for exhorting the CIA to give the United States a more direct reason for invading Cuba.
Hershberg is also able to more accurately trace the effects of the resolution of the crisis due to the time that has passed.
A Hard and Bitter Peace by Edward H Judge and John W Langdon traces the entirety of the Cold War from its origins to conclusion with the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The authors incorporate many of the changes, which Hershberg points out.
American Diplomacy in the Berlin Crisis, 1958-1963 by Richard D Williamson.
The origin of the Berlin Crisis goes back to the division of Germany in World War II.14 This was a very tense issue in the Early Cold War.
The new works have a distinct advantage because they are able to place the Berlin Crisis in its full context.
However, from the intelligence perspective it is absolutely necessary to include Penkovsky, as he passed large amounts of information related to this event.
MI6 is still highly secretive, and has not declassified its documents yet.
Soviet-American Relations and the Struggle for Power in the Kremlin, June-November 1961, 1-2.
Biographies are highly important in situations such as the West saw with Penkovsky.
It reveals how a potential defector or double agent gained access to the information they did as well as their motivations.
By looking at Penkovsky’s early life and career one sees how he got to be in a position to gather as much sensitive information as he did, and why he decided to give this information to the West.
Penkovsky was born in 1919 in the Caucus region of Russia, and his father left when he was four months old, leaving him to be raised by his mother alone.
He went on to finish his classes and attend the Second Kiev Artillery School, graduating in 1939.
He participated in these as a Political Commissar, a position he held for four years.
Following this, he went to Finland as part of the Winter War with the 91st Rifle Division.
Only 10% of the original strength survived the action, and all the regimental commanders were killed.
Penkovsky stated that the only reason he survived was because he was an artilleryman and they were somewhat behind the lines.
With the destruction of his unit, he was transferred to the Moscow Military District; at this 17 Ultimately he was accepted in 1940.
April 1961” FOIA/EDSN 0000012392, 3-4. 11 point he was twenty-three years old.
Here Penkovsky joined the Military Council of the Moscow Military District, Extraordinary Missions Section.
Through this, he met his future father-in-law, Dmitri Afanasyevich Gapanovich.
Gapanovich mentored Penkovsky, though not as much as his patron, Varentsov, whom he met shortly afterwards.
He was seeking glory and recognition because the war was almost over and all he had received for his service in Finland was a commendation and a silver cigarette case.
Penkovsky received assignment to a subdivision under Sergei Sergeyevich Varentsov, the Chief of Artillery of the Ukrainian Front, and a future patron of Penkovsky.
Penkovsky worked under him for three months as the commander of a training reception center for anti-tank artillery regiments.
Ultimately, Penkovsky’s desire to go to the front was realized, and his orders transferred him to 323rd Anti-Tank Regiment of the 8th Anti-Tank Brigade under General Tikvich.
However, Tikvich was a drunkard and a womanizer, so he was removed and replaced with Penkovsky.
Penkovsky received wounds and doctors sent him to Moscow for treatment and recovery in 1944.
This was fortunate for him because he met many friends during his period of recuperation.
Varentsov then promised Penkovsky his old regiment back and named Penkovsky his front line liaison.
For his work, Varentsov also rewarded him with a recommendation to the military academy.
Varentsov was clearly taking Penkovsky under his wing and assisted Penkovsky’s rise.
Penkovsky also assisted Varentsov by making arrangements for the funeral of Varentsov’s daughter after her suicide.
The military police arrested and executed her husband, a prominent military man, for his role in a black market ring while occupying Poland.
One day, while working in a military hospital as a nurse, she grabbed the pistol of a passing officer, and shot herself in the head.
When Penkovsky heard this, he sold his watch to buy her a dress and coffin, and made all the necessary arrangements.
The Central Committee made him the Marshal of Rocket Artillery after the War, and then later Chief Marshal of Artillery.
Penkovsky went back to the front in time for the end of the war, and Varentsov requested that he remain for a year with the occupation forces.
However, Penkovsky desired to return home as his wife had just graduated from her ten year classes.
Varentsov made arrangements for Penkovsky to attend the Frunze Military Academy, which Penkovsky entered in 1948 after passing the entrance exams.
His classes took three years, and then he worked for a year based on 23 “Meeting 1 April 1961”, 7.
In 1949, Penkovsky then entered the Military Diplomatic Academy, MDA, which he attended until 1953.
It was during his time at the MDA that Penkovsky received a promotion to the rank of Colonel.
Penkovsky was the chief of class due to his experience and rank, yet another award for the ambitious Penkovsky.
Upon graduation, Penkovsky went into the 4th Directorate of the GRU.27 This Directorate was interested in Asia and the Middle East, and because of this Penkovsky went to Turkey.
This was largely due to the favoritism which was prevalent in the Soviet system.
Through this system, Penkovsky gained access to many military secrets that would have been otherwise unavailable.
This rise also shows the origins of his dissatisfaction with the Soviet system, which ultimately pushed him to defection.
Penkovsky’s Decision to Defect In the previous section one clearly sees how Penkovsky rose to the position he did.
However, to fully understand Penkovsky’s motivations to defect, one must fully explore his background, specifically his time in Turkey.
Through inherent flaws in the Soviet System, its mishandling of Penkovsky, and Penkovsky’s personal arrogance, his defection becomes not a possibility, but rather a certainty.
Savchenko was an old man, and the two worked together for three months.
However, after this period many problems began arising between them stemming from the actions of the other GRU officer stationed in Ankara, Lieutenant Colonel Nikolay Ionchenko.
IONCHENKO was attempting to purchase military manuals from Turks in this crude manner.
Naturally, the Turkish Counterintelligence was efficient and they noticed this.
Savchenko worked to ensure that Ionchenko appeared to be a better officer than Penkovsky.
Also, Ionchenko was bitter that Penkovsky was above him because Ionchenko had learned Turkish, and Penkovsky had learned English.
This conflict of interests and personalities was creating maelstrom which none of the parties involved could survive unscathed.
As time wore on and Penkovsky became more frustrated, he decided it would be best to transfer to a different station.
This greatly displeased Penkovsky and helped push him towards his decision.
Penkovsky shows his 28 A rezident is a Soviet or Russian Chief of Station for the Intelligence services.
When the Shah of Iran visited Turkey, orders went out from Moscow that all intelligence operations in Turkey were to be suspended.
Due to the heightened security and the fact that Turkish Counterintelligence was aware of Ionchenko being an intelligence officer, Turkish police arrested him, and, ultimately, declared persona non grata .33 This event caused the storm brewing Penkovsky and Savchenko to break.
Before Ionchenko was png-ed, Savchenko ordered Penkovsky to go and pay Ionchenko’s bail.
Naturally, Penkovsky was not happy about this because the operation should not have happened in the first place.
To have received official operational funds would have meant going through Penkovsky, who would have rejected the request.
This act of deception led to a large fight between the two men, which culminated in Penkovsky accusing Savchenko of lying about his Communist beliefs.
Essentially, Penkovsky was accusing Savchenko of the ultimate betrayal in the Soviet Union.
Penkovsky, unable to report Savchenko via GRU lines, was forced to report him via the KGB rezident.
This report made all the way up the chain to the head of the KGB, Ivan Serov.
The term “persona non grata” refers to someone being told to leave a country, and not return.
However, the head of the GRU brought in a report on Penkovsky from Savchenko.
Marshal of the Armed Forces and World War II Hero, Zhukov reprimanded Savchenko for incompetence in duty, on the other hand.
Shortly after Penkovsky’s recall, the Soviet’s also recalled Savchenko.
Penkovsky won the first round of this fight, but the second round was yet to begin.
Even though he won his bout with Savchenko, Penkovsky did not escape unscathed.
When he arrived at the train station in Moscow two of Savchenko’s powerful friends, both of whom were generals in the GRU, confronted him.
These two thought that Penkovsky wanted to be the military attaché, while Penkovsky believed he could have done a better job as attaché, he did not desire the position.
Shtemenko claimed to not know him, and that he could do nothing for Penkovsky.
Savchenko’s other friend was preparing to retire, so things were expected to blow over.
To make it more likely that he would be sent abroad, Penkovsky entered the Dzerzhinsky Academy in September 1958 to learn about the rocket program, and what we see here is that as Penkovsky’s frustration and disappointment with the Soviet system grew, so did his access to sensitive information.
During this time, Khrushchev removed Shtemenko as head of the GRU due to tension between Khrushchev and Zhukov, part of which included a sabotage school run by Zhukov and Shtemenko.
Serov succeeded Shtemenko as head of the GRU.39 This change of leadership alleviated some of Penkovsky’s frustration.
It was then that the GRU higher-ups considered Penkovsky for a post in India because of his background in rockets.
Serov, the new head of the GRU, considered India a good place for operations, and it was possible that India would receive rockets.
Penkovsky began preparing for the station by studying the codes, and other necessary information.
The KGB denied him, however, much to his dissatisfaction due to a problem with his family history.
It was the rejection of his exit visa that sounded the death knell of his Soviet/Communist loyalties.
The problem with his family history, which led to the rejection of his visa, goes back to his father and grandfather.
Vladimir Florianovich Penkovsky, Penkovsky’s father, was a mining engineer, and joined the White Army when the Revolution came, ultimately achieving the rank 38 “Meeting 1 April 1961”, 2.
Penkovsky and his mother developed a myth that his father had died in 1919.
It was possible to overlook Penkovsky’s father being a White Army Officer due to the circumstances.
Both of these were major problems, though most of the controversy seems to have focused around his father.
With the dissatisfaction of the rejection of an exit visa due to his family history, Penkovsky began looking for an opportunity to defect.
He was on a train with his wife and daughter coming back from a vacation in Odessa, and spotted a group of American students.
However, there was an Armenian with the group, who Penkovsky knew as a KGB spy.
He began watching the American Embassy carefully, but impatiently, waiting for his chance.
They delivered everything properly and you can see here your original letter.
I had noticed them in the railroad car and remembered their appearance.
I arrived in Moscow on the tenth of August and on the twelfth I spotted them as they were walking down to the river from Red Square.
At first they were frightened, but I spoke to them at length and told them what a coincidence it was to see them again.
I was so interested in the conversation, that, as an intelligence man, I made an error.
I had already given them two envelopes, and it was high time to end the conversation.
I told the Americans to go with me to an entrance way so at least we could say farewell and I could shake their hands, but they were frightened and started to walk away.
In a dangle operation a Soviet, in this case, operative approached Western personnel offering to provide information or to defect.
If the Westerner accepted, they were immediately arrested and declared png.
The Soviets used these as propaganda victories, and acted as if they uncovered a Western provocation attempt.
It made its way into the hands of John Abidian, the CIA’s man in Moscow.
He immediately took it up to a secure room at the top of the American Embassy.
This room, known as “the Bubble,” was made of Plexiglas, and was suspended within a larger room.
There was no way the KGB could bug this room, as they commonly did to foreign embassies.
This is important because if the KGB found out about Penkovsky at this point, the operation could be over before it began.
Abidian came to the conclusion that Penkovsky was a genuine defector, and passed the information on to CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
At Langley, the information ended up in the hands of Jack Maury, the head of the Soviet Division in the Directorate for Plans.
Maury passed the information to Joe Bulik, the head of Operations inside the Soviet Union.
Bulik faced the task of discovering who wrote the letter and deciding if the author was genuine or a provocation.
While Bulik did not circulate the letters themselves, he passed around the basic facts, and the unanimous consensus was that the author was genuine.
Bulik then set up a meeting with Maury, Paul Garbler, the Moscow Station Chief, and Richard Helms, the director in charge of covert operations, to determine the author’s motivations.
At this time, such a process of acceptance was necessary because both the Soviets and the CIA were smarting from the CIA’s first big operation, Pyotr Popov.
Popov held the rank of Major, and fed the information on the GRU’s structure and information.
This operation lasted until 1958, when the KGB forced him to become a triple agent, and pass false information.
When he alerted his CIA handlers of the new state of affairs, the Soviets arrested him and his handler.
One story says he was cremated alive before an audience of other GRU officers.
Penkovsky knew what the stakes were, and what terrors awaited in failure.
This operation caused 47 Oleg Penkovsky, “Letter to be Passed to Appropriate Authorities of the United States of America”, FOIA/EDSN 0000012268.
Chicken feed is information which the other side already knows, but the subject does not know this.
By providing truthful and accurate information, the subject builds trust from those he talking to.
Despite these fears, the CIA dispatched an officer meant to contact Penkovsky.
COMPASS, as he was codenamed, was a miserable failure, and has never allowed his name to be de-classified.
COMPASS, a single man, grew paranoid and depressed during under his time in Moscow, and took to drinking heavily.
He was tasked with developing an operational plan, and contact Penkovsky.
His suggestions were to use the original dead drop developed by Penkovsky, or to have Penkovsky toss information over the walls of the America House, housing for bachelors in the American Embassy, at a specified time, on a specified day.
I did not understand a damn thing and he called at the wrong time, and I did realize the call was from you, but I understood nothing that the man rattled off.
He said something about waiting and then “bye-bye” I was not in the best of shape myself but I was not drunk because I never drink too much, but I could not understand a thing.
Penkovsky was hungover from a drinking session the night before, and COMPASS did not have very good Russian language skills.
All of the others Penkovsky approached were too afraid to take his information though.
Penkovsky pressed the information on Wynne as boarded a plane to leave.
However, MI6 were suspicious of Penkovsky due to the directness of his approach, and wrote him off as a standard provocation attempt.
Ultimately, the CIA had enough of COMPASS, and, with the refusal of the American Embassy in Moscow to allow a qualified CIA officer in, decided to bring the British in on the operation.
The two organizations put together a team of two CIA officers and two MI6 officers.
The CIA portion of the team consisted of George Kisevalter, from the Popov operation, and Joe Bulik.
Together this team debriefed Penkovsky over everything he knew during his trips outside the Soviet Union in 1961, ranging from the organization and procedures of the Soviet intelligence agencies to the Soviet missile program.
This occurred on three occasions in 1961, twice to London and once to Paris for trade fairs and exhibitions.
Penkovsky believes that the KGB would not have allowed him out if it had not been for Wynne.
One of these was the intelligence and security organizations of the Soviet Union.
The other, and vastly more important, two topics were the Soviet stances on Berlin, and the Soviet missile program.
While much of this information was already known thanks to the Popov Operation, it was still helpful.
This updated information allowed the Western Intelligence services to more accurately seek out potential weaknesses in these organizations or disrupt operations.
The GRU’s members mostly had military backgrounds, being the military intelligence department, which gives the West an idea on how many of its members think.
Penkovsky was skilled at developing these relationships being friends with many generals, and even having a patron in Varentsov, who became the Chief Marshal of Artillery.
It becomes apparent that the system itself made Penkovsky’s defection possible.
According to Penkovsky, the primary purpose and basic task of both the KGB and the GRU was early warning of an impending nuclear attack.
While the basic task of the KGB and the GRU was the same, the two organizations had different focuses.
The GRU focused on the military and scientific, especially nuclear, advancements of the West, and the KGB focused on the political aspects.
Serov was a former KGB man, and, when Stalin died, he backed Beria in the ensuing power struggle.
However, he was a distant relation of Khrushchev’s, and was spared from being shot.
According to Penkovsky, he knew how to interrogate and shoot people, and left the executive functions to his deputies.
He also had troubles with another GRU official, who had many failures in Turkey.
They could then predict what actions the GRU was most likely to make, and then take the appropriate countermeasures.
They are sent to live in a country using illegal papers making them appear as if they are citizens of the country.
The term “illegal” stems from the fact that they are living in the country illegally, as opposed to “legals”, who were under diplomatic cover.
The Second Directorate dealt with Europe, and specialized in radio intelligence.
Penkovsky reported that the only GRU agents in this directorate were old and not very good.
The Fourth Directorate was known as the “Eastern Directorate” because it dealt with all the Asian parts of the world, from Egypt and Turkey, to Japan.
Coding was handled by a separate section called the “Coding Section”, and rear service 61 “Meeting 5 Leeds April 1961” FOIA/EDSN 0000012395, 25.
Even when I have to go to the Tenth Directorate , either I am met by the officer I am to see, after a phone call, or am told to go to a specific room or they may issue me a temporary one-day pass.
There was one case where an officer was court-martialed for losing his work folio.
Actually, two officers were enemies and one burned the working folio of the other and the one whose folio could not be produced was tried.
Gathering information or infiltration was highly dangerous and no easy task.
Despite the strength of these security measures, there was still a resolution passed by the Presidium pointing out other flaws of the intelligence services.
Flaws clearly existed, intra-office rivalry for example, the West simply had to find them to exploit them.
Some of the sites were permanent and others were mobile, but GRU officers on the fifth floor of the GRU’s headquarters in Moscow handled all the Illegals.
Every RP has its radio station, but of course their equipment is nowhere near the capacity of the GRU OSNAZ stations near Moscow.
Often they act as relay stations and when they get an incoming message say from the direction of Iran, the entire coded message is transmitted to Moscow.
This commander of intelligence operations in a military district is responsible for conducting intelligence against the country to which the district is adjacent.
What this lets the West know is how the GRU communicated within the USSR, and the necessity of infiltrating the communications network to advance signals intelligence goals.
The KGB and GRU had separate radio technology shops, but the two readily shared information.
There were two similarities between the KGB and the GRU radio communications as well.
A sub-organization handled all normal communications, and the Eighth Section handled transmitting mechanics.
There are many other unnamed similarities stemming from the fact that the KGB had no formal academy of its own, so it stole recruits from the GRU’s Military Diplomatic Academy.
Even more importantly, it also means that the two organizations had similar operations procedures.
This made counterintelligence much easier because once the procedures for one organization were compromised; the other one’s were as well.
The KGB was unscrupulous over who they recruited adding to the size of the organization.
All Russians reported to the KGB, and informers reported on everything while 69 “Meeting 14 Unknown Location May 1961” FOIA/EDSN 0000012402, 12.
The KGB was an unscrupulous organization, and would do anything to gather more information.
They did not like sending unmarried people out, because they had no reason to return if they decided to defect.
Two months ago we sent a GNTK Delegation to the German Federal Republic.
He put the notebook in the pocket of his overcoat and forgot it in the car when he got out.
He became so upset that when his comrades went shopping he hanged himself.
He used the cord of an electric iron which he attached to the electric fixture on the ceiling.
While this example is extreme, it is clear that the intelligence organizations expected their proper execution of their instructions, and mistakes were not tolerated.
Penkovsky’s arrogance comes out with his giving permission to the West to use the information he provided.
This rough sketch of the Soviet intelligence organizations shows how someone on the inside can gather information that an eye in the sky cannot gather.
It also shows the necessity of chicken feed in determining a potential agent’s credentials.
Penkovsky also provided updated information on the GRU after any re-organization due to Popov.
After World War II the victorious powers, Britain, France, the US, and the Soviet Union divided Germany.
As Berlin lay in the heart of the Soviet Zone, it quickly became a contentious issue, as the Cold War quickly began.
Between 1958 and 1961 the issue of Berlin came to a head with Khrushchev threatening to turn control over to the East German government.
While Penkovsky’s information on the Soviet intelligence agencies, especially the GRU, was essential to establish his credentials, it was only with the his help that the West knew what was occurring in the Soviet camp as the Berlin Crisis reached its peak in 1961, and lead to effective decision making.
Stalin, the successor to Lenin, died in 1953, and Nikita Khrushchev became the head of the Soviet Union after a power struggle between himself and Lavrenti Beria.
While the West had built up its own impressions of Khrushchev since 1953, Penkovsky felt the need to pass along his own.
Khrushchev rose up through the ranks and became Minister of Agriculture.
While not a powerful position, he was able to build a basis of support for his bid to the leadership.
Here he showed his energy and resourcefulness, as Penkovsky points out.
He gathered those he had appointed to positions, who were also members of the Central Committee.
This gave him a quorum, and allowed him to be seated in his position at the head of the Soviet Union.
At the last meeting which took place after the convocation of the plomas of the PROKOMITET they talked about everyone’s troubles with agriculture.
After this, KHRUSHCHEV traveled all over the country dealing with his opponents at the conference in accordance with the decisions of the Plenum.
He arrived in Tbilisi, you remember, and then went to the East, to the virgin lands – talking about the great new territories and towns.
All that time the military council were working on their plan – SUBLOV and MIKOYAN participated.
BIRYUZOV made his reporting on the questions of how they need more money and how rockets must be tested.
There were numerous cases where the missions were not fulfilled, much new testing was necessary, and the problems must be looked into.
To make up for his lack of popularity, Khrushchev moved to secure his position.
He gave pensions to the families of those who were tortured and executed, and many of those arrested were rehabilitated.
While he was doing this, he was attempting to create a cult of personality.
Ironically, as Penkovsky pointed out, Khrushchev centered his around denouncing Stalin and his cult of personality.
Khrushchev needed to increase his popularity before he could carry out his will with the impunity of Stalin, and he tried to accomplish this by pursuing multiple major programs at once.
Originally, when he first came to power, he emphasized long-range aviation, but he later switched to missiles.
However, according to Penkovsky, this was simply Khrushchev testing the waters.
At the time Khrushchev first proposed a peace treaty, the Warsaw Pact armies were not strong enough to back up his proposed bite.
Penkovsky clearly alerted the West that Khrushchev was feeling confident enough in his armies by 1961.
One of the ideas Penkovsky pushed about Khrushchev is how many lies Khrushchev told.
Penkovsky believed that the West could use this information to knock down any prestige Khrushchev tried gaining from summit meetings.
The first is the death of Mitrofan Nedelin, Chief Marshal of Artillery, and the U2 Incident.
In 1960, the Soviets shot down an American U2 spyplane piloted by Gary Francis Powers while on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union.
When Khrushchev confronted President Eisenhower about this, he was met with a flat denial.
The Soviets produced Powers, and the Eisenhower Administration was thoroughly embarrassed.
However, according to Penkovsky, there was no direct hit as Khrushchev claimed.
It also took more V-75’s to take down the plane than Khrushchev let on, not to mention the Soviet fighter jet which was also shot down in the process.
Penkovsky reported that Khrushchev feared that another incident such as this would lead to war.
Also in 1960, the Soviets were trying to find ways to launch their missiles farther and faster, even including nuclear power.
At one of these tests, many of the top artillery commanders there, including Nedelin.
The waiting period came to a close, and people began leaving the protective observation bunker.
It was at this point that the second stage of the missile ignited and exploded killing all those outside the bunker, including Nedelin.
To cover this, the Soviets announced that Nedelin died in a plane crash.
Penkovsky argued that if the West exposed this lie, it would embarrass Khrushchev.
While Penkovsky was meeting with his handlers, the Berlin Crisis was reaching its peak.
In 1948, in an attempt to force the Western Powers out of Berlin, Stalin cut-off the supplies to the city via rail and road.
To get around this, without violating any of the treaty rights, the Western Powers began flying in all the supplies for the city with one plane landing after another.
Khrushchev even went so far as to refer to the city as the “Testicles of the West” because, when he squeezed, they screamed.
While relations over the city were tense, neither side did anything about it until 1958.92 It was then that things started to get hot.
This meant that the treaty rights were moot, and the West would be forced to deal with the East German government.
East Germany greatly desired this because it meant they could stem the hemorrhage of Eastern Germans fleeing to West Germany via Berlin by having control over access to the city from both land and air.
What would happen is East Germans fled to West Berlin, there; they would claim their West German citizenship.
Since the East German government still claimed these people as citizens, they were considered criminals.
The refugees, therefore, could not take land routes to the larger West Germany.
The West German government did not want the peace treaty Khrushchev was threatening because it would force the West to recognize the East German government as legitimate.
This was particularly bad because the West Germans were invoking the Hallstein Doctrine, and would ruin any hopes of re-unification for some time.
West German Foreign Minister Walter Hallstein developed this doctrine to isolate East Germany.
In its most basic form the Doctrine was a staunch and rabid refusal of recognition towards the East German government.
The West German government claimed authority over all of Germany, and demanded to be recognized as the only legitimate government of Germany.
If another country held talks with the East German government, West Germany strongly protested, and would even go so far as to threaten to break off diplomatic ties with said country.
The West scrambled to find a response, and received a six-month reprieve from the execution of the treaty for their efforts.
This delegation would walk out after a speech by Zhou due to the SinoSoviet split.
Heads of state from other People’s Democracies planned to attend as well.
The entireties of the various Warsaw Pact militaries were prepared, including the rear services of all the Soviet military districts and even the GRU.99 This was the largest mobilization of militaries to that point.
According to the rumors Penkovsky heard, the purposes of the manoeuvers were twofold.
If it is only a local attack by us then it will be parried, but of course if a larger conflict develops that is why combat readiness is needed.
KHRUSHCHEV, our General Staff and the GRU know perfectly well that secret preparations in modern times are not possible due to intelligence techniques.
But under the guise of manoeuvers, concerning which he will insist that they are only manoeuvers, their extent and duration can easily be extended.
If the allies swallow the second pill and say “very well since you have signed a treaty with East Germany we will deal with East Germany”, then the strain will be relieved and the manoeuvers will terminate and the result of these will serve as a valuable training exercise for joint operations.
If not the powder is still dry and military action can still be employed.
This is the dual purpose for which these manoeuvers are planned for the early days of October.1 Tensions were rising over the divided Germany.
However, due to the speed with which the Wall was erected, it was not possible for the West to receive any information, as there was no operational procedure for Penkovsky to deal with this.
The rapidity of the erection of the Berlin Wall led to a revision of the operational plan, which the team discussed with Penkovsky in his second trip out of the Soviet Union in 1961.
In the original plan Penkovsky was to do a sort of modified brush pass with Janet Chisholm, the wife of the MI6 Moscow Station Chief.
The temporary solution was to use a dead drop, and give a specific person a call.
An American representative would then empty the dead drop within the next halfhour.5.
Although the West did not receive the information, they knew that the Soviets were up to something, and considering the climate of the times, Berlin was the most logical place to look.
With the changes in place, the operation was in full swing, and things were going well.
Ultimately, the information passed by Penkovsky on the manoeuvers was unnecessary because Khrushchev allowed the ultimatum for the signing of the peace treaty to lapse.
However, with the Cold War warming, knowing that the Soviets and their allies were planning military manoeuvers allowed the West to begin their own preparations to pre-empt any actions by the Soviets.
U2 spy planes or Corona Satellites, the two technological masterpieces of the early CIA, could not gather the information presented by Penkovsky but rather human ears had to listen for it.
As Penkovsky had studied the Soviet missile program, the West knew the precise ranges and payloads, among other technical details of the Soviet missile program.
There were many reasons for Cubo-Soviet decision to install missiles on the island of Cuba.
The most blatant of these was the failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in mid-April 1961.
In which a group of American trained Cuban émigrés landed at the Bay of Pigs.
In January of 1962, the United States gathered votes to suspend Cuba from the Organization of American States.
Many of these states also followed the American example and ended diplomatic relations with Cuba.
The United States also enacted economic aggression against Cuba going back to trade restrictions in 1960.
These actions were viewed as diplomatic and economic preparations for invasion.
In 1962, there were two extensive United States military exercises in the Caribbean, both of which appeared to be practice for invading Cuba.
The purpose of Operation Mongoose was to infiltrate Cuba for intelligence, but also for raids, and if possible, assassinating Castro.
These missiles were capable of carrying nuclear warheads, and delivering nuclear payloads into the important cities of the Soviet Union, such as Moscow.
Another Soviet motivation was that Khrushchev thought he could get away with installing offensive missiles without the West noticing.
Looking back, if it had not been for the U2 spyplane flights John McCone ordered over the island, Khrushchev probably would have gotten away with it.
A line was being drawn in the sand, and crossing this line meant nuclear war.
The Kennedy Administration did not believe McCone when he warned the administration of the potential for Soviet missiles.
It took the observation of semi-trucks carrying missile-like tubes to get the White House to allow the resumption of U2 overflights of Cuba.
However in order to understand the interplay between the TechInt and the HumInt in this situation it is necessary to go to a different time and place.
In World War II, the RAF flew over the German V-weapon research site at Peenemünde.
Buildings were identified, largely incorrectly, but there were other objects which analysts could not identify.
It was only with the inpouring of information from foreign labor, forced to work at the sites, and anti-German Poles and Swedes that the British were able to piece together precisely what the site was doing.
While this process was much more convoluted, the crateology involved in the crisis provides a striking similarity.
During the crisis, the U2 spyplanes took many photos of the Soviet ships carrying the missiles to Cuba.
Analysts were set to work to determine the contents of the photographed crates.
Using scaling techniques the size of the contents of the crates could be calculated.
Then, using the sizes given by Penkovsky, the exact type of missile contained in the crate could be determined.
Thanks to Penkovsky the United States knew how large the missiles it was facing were.
According to Penkovsky, the V-75 was the premier Soviet air defense rocket.
Considered thus, this rocket was given to Soviet satellites in order to protect themselves.
Thus, there was no atomic warhead, because those are too expensive to put on anti-aircraft rockets.
The detonation, however, relied upon a proximity fuse, which was set to the calculated distance the rocket would destroy the targeted aircraft.
To make the detonation more effective a process of grooving was employed.
What this grooving did was, similar to a hand grenade, adjust the size and direction of the shrapnel.7 The rocket had a range of 40 km.
This information alerted the West to the dangers of the V-75, especially in regards to U2 spyplanes, which was previously thought to fly beyond the range of the V-75.
The offensive Soviet missiles installed in Cuba were the R-12 and R-14, both of which Penkovsky learned about in his classes at the Dzerzhinsky Academy.
This rocket was in mass production in 1962.119 This model was included in the rockets given to the various People’s Democracies.0 The R-14 had a 4500 km range when armed with a nuclear warhead, and 9000 km when armed with a conventional warhead.
However even more importantly it was being prepared for mass production, which means that it would soon be available to for the People’s Democracies.
With this information in hand, the President Kennedy’s advisors knew just how serious the situation was.
Unfortunately for the West, the KGB arrested Penkovsky during or shortly after the Cuba Crisis, between October 22 and November 2.
Several days later, someone triggered one of the signals given to Penkovsky.
There was a mark put on the proper street post, and the correct individuals were called, with the proper signals given.
Scholars believe that Penkovsky was attempting to do as the Biblical Samson did.
When the Philistines captured Samson, they cut his hair; the way God recognized him to give him his strength.
Samson prayed to God to give him the strength necessary to bring the temple down upon the heads of his captors, and he was.
Samson brought the pillars down killing himself and bringing the roof collapsing down on the heads of the Philistines.
Thankfully, the recipients of the signal decided to play it cool, and did not begin a pre-emptive nuclear exchange.
Thanks to the information that Penkovsky provided, the United States knew precisely what it was dealing with in Cuba with the R-12 and R-14.
He also gave information about personalities vital to the Soviet Missile program, as well as its inner workings.
The Intelligence Services went from equal terms with the KGB to being a half step behind.
However, this has not stopped authors from theorizing on this question, and three theories seem to have come about in the historiography.
The leading theory is the KGB caught him on simple chance through the use of normal surveillance.
After Popov operated in Moscow right under the KGB’s nose, the KGB began randomly tailing diplomats.
The organization also realized that wives could be used, and would randomly tail them as well.
What some authors believe is that it was on one of these random surveillances of Janet Chisholm that the KGB spotted Penkovsky, and they worked from there to identify Penkovsky.
This was the first theory developed, and, with the evidence available, holds the most weight.
The second theory developed was that Penkovsky was revealed by a double agent in the American NSA by the name of Jack Dunlap.
Approximately six months after the KGB arrested Penkovsky, Dunlap had his clearance revoked due to suspicions of his being a Soviet agent.
Some authors take his suicide two months later as an admission of guilt.
Dunlap did have access to documents emanating from Penkovsky, as investigators found some in a search of his apartment.
The third theory comes from the most recent work on Penkovsky, Dead Drop by Jeremy Duns.
According to Duns it was a British correspondent, John Wolfenden, in Moscow blackmailed into working for the KGB after being caught in a revealing situation with another man.
According to Duns, Wolfenden alerted the KGB to Janet Chisholm being involved in an operation.
This seemingly small piece of information would be enough when combined with the KGB’s constant surveillance of foreign diplomats.
Two of those involved with the operation presented on their experiences with the operation.
One of the purposes of this discussion was to analyze weaknesses inherent in the operation as part of the CIA’s fiftieth anniversary.
Lewellyn Thompson was adamant that the CIA could not run operations through diplomatic positions in the United States embassy.
Chisholm had been a secretary in MI6 before marrying Rauri Chisholm, an MI6 officer.
This was a problem because Rauri had worked in Berlin with George Blake, a member of the notorious Cambridge Five.
Rauri Chisholm was, therefore, a known MI6 officer, and would be under constant suspicion.
This suspicion extending to his wife is only natural, giving credence to the first theory of the discovery of Penkovsky.
Penkovsky was ambitious by nature, and desired to provide high quality information.
He craved acknowledgement from the handlers on the quality of his contributions, two qualities that clearly drove Penkovsky to defect.
It is believed that Penkovsky was attempting to gather too much information too quickly.
The second weakness stemming from Penkovsky himself was that he called many of the shots in the operation.
His handlers allowed this because he was demonstrably an effective and productive operator.
Following the main theory on Penkovsky’s capture these two reasons become more important.
Even though he was captured in 1962, and tried and executed in 1963, Penkovsky managed to force changes in the Soviet leadership.
Varentsov, after rising to the heights of Chief Marshal of the Artillery, was demoted to the rank of major general, and discharged.
He was also expelled from the Central Committee and his seat in the Supreme Soviet was removed.
Many other less important military personnel were also disciplined for their laxity in security.
Depending on how much the KGB forced Penkovsky to talk, the KGB and the GRU would need to change their operational procedures.
The military would also need to change many of its procedures, as they were now well known to the West.
Clearly, Human Intelligence contributed to the Western success in two early Cold War Crises that could have easily gone nuclear.
The information passed in regards to the Berlin Crisis alerted the West to Khrushchev’s readiness to go to war on the issue.
Penkovsky also alerted the West to the military power the Soviet Union was capable of bringing out in a conflict over Germany.
It is also clear that Penkovsky was defecting due to deep professional frustrations, which gave the West a sign to look for in later defectors.
The True Story of Oleg Penkovsky and the Cold War’s Most Dangerous Operation.
Revised to Include New Revelations From Soviet and Cuban Sources.nd ed.
