By Eric Black | Columnist Atlantic national editor Benjamin Schwartz quotes Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, right, who, in his retirement, emphasized that President Kennedy, left, felt allowing the missiles would be politically unacceptable.
It will not only revise some of what you think you know about the crisis, but also serves as a reminder of how hard it is to bravely follow your thoughts and questions where they lead instead of always tacking back to the safety of groupthink.Although the 50th anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, it hasn’t exactly been in the news much.
Maybe we all know just enough about it to be dangerous.The Atlantic piece and the book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials that met during the famed “13 Days” of the crisis.It turns out that a huge portion of the received version of the story that we were all raised on is a lie.
Bobby Kennedy’s book, titled “13 Days,” was the main source for the lies, but there are many more sources.
Its author, Sheldon M Stern, worked as a historian at the Kennedy Library in Boston from 1977 to 2000, and was the first person who was not an ExComm member to have access to the full set of tapes made of the ExComm meetings.
He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of “13 Days” before he listened to the tapes and discovered falsehood after omission after distortion.Distorting RFK’s roleThe biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself.
The received version, which relies on RFK’s own book and on the testimony of Kennedy loyalists, generally portrays RFK as a cool-headed voice of reason.
The Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine’s national editor Benjamin Schwartz, takes a somewhat different tack.
Schwartz seizes the occasion to work through elements of the heroic version of the tale that clearly have bothered him for years.
He challenges fundamental elements of the tale, starting with the argument that it was worth risking a nuclear confrontation to keep those missiles out of Cuba in the first place.For example, the United States had nuclear missiles positioned in Turkey, close to the Soviet Union.
The Soviets weren’t happy about that and Schwartz surmises that this fact absolutely contributed to Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to put Soviet missiles in Cuba.The Soviets had ICBM’s on their own territory that could reach the United States and missiles on submarines that could rise up out of the ocean and nuke us from close range so the fact that missiles in Cuba could reach the United States quickly was of no real consequence.
The Soviets weren’t violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the United States decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war.The tapes indicate clearly that JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered the real military balance of power which greatly favored the United States and would have continued to do so.Maybe this comes across as a summary compiled by a self-hating American of the notoriously subversive media elite.
But, on the tapes, the Kennedy brothers and their advisers make all the same points.
From the Schwartz review:“A missile is a missile,” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara asserted.
Courtesy of the CIAA U-2 reconnaissance photo showing evidence of missile assembly in Cuba.
Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place.PoliticsThe Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK’s watch.
DeterrenceThe always popular presidential belief that the United States needs to show resolve and toughness in order to deter future provocations.
And here Schwartz really unburdens his chest challenging what he calls the playground logic:“ This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny.
Thank goodness Khrushchev decided this wasn’t worth blowing up the world over.
But as I torture myself with all these misgivings about the way the Kennedy brothers and their genius friends handled the crisis, I realize that I’ve known most of these facts and arguments for years.
I continue to be impressed with the power of wanting one’s team to be heroic, and able to believe that they are, even when the facts point in a different direction.
MinnPost's in-depth, independent news is free for all to access — no paywall or subscriptions.
SUPPORT MINNPOST Eric BlackVeteran journalist Eric Black writes Eric Black Ink for MinnPost.
His latest award is from the Society of Professional Journalists, which in May 2017 announced he’d won the national Sigma Delta Chi Award for online column writing.
Our reporters are only able to do their work thanks to support at all levels.
To republish, copy the HTML at right, which includes our tracking pixel, all paragraph styles and hyperlinks, the author byline and credit to MinnPost.
It will not only revise some of what you think you know about the crisis, but also serves as a reminder of how hard it is to bravely follow your thoughts and questions where they lead instead of always tacking back to the safety of groupthink.</p> <p>Although the 50<sup>th</sup> anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, it hasn’t exactly been in the news much.
Maybe we all know just enough about it to be dangerous.</p> <p>The Atlantic piece and the book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials that met during the famed “13 Days” of the crisis.</p> <p>It turns out that a huge portion of the received version of the story that we were all raised on is a lie.
He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of “13 Days” before he listened to the tapes and discovered falsehood after omission after distortion.</p> <h4><b>Distorting RFK’s role</b></h4> <p>The biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself.
Stern found that the tapes revealed Bobby Kennedy as “confrontational and hawkish from day one through day thirteen -and even beyond into the November post-crisis.”</p> <p></p> <p>The Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine’s national editor Benjamin Schwartz, takes a somewhat different tack.
He challenges fundamental elements of the tale, starting with the argument that it was worth risking a nuclear confrontation to keep those missiles out of Cuba in the first place.</p> <p>For example, the United States had nuclear missiles positioned in Turkey, close to the Soviet Union.
The Soviets weren’t happy about that and Schwartz surmises that this fact absolutely contributed to Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to put Soviet missiles in Cuba.</p> <p>The Soviets had ICBM’s on their own territory that could reach the United States and missiles on submarines that could rise up out of the ocean and nuke us from close range so the fact that missiles in Cuba could reach the United States quickly was of no real consequence.
The Soviets weren’t violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the United States decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war.</p> <p>The tapes indicate clearly that JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered the real military balance of power which greatly favored the United States and would have continued to do so.</p> <p>Maybe this comes across as a summary compiled by a self-hating American of the notoriously subversive media elite.
From the Schwartz review:</p> <p>“A missile is a missile,” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara asserted.
Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place.</span></p> <h4>Politics</h4> <p>The Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK’s watch.
And here Schwartz really unburdens his chest challenging what he calls the playground logic:</p> <p>“ This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny.
It will not only revise some of what you think you know about the crisis, but also serves as a reminder of how hard it is to bravely follow your thoughts and questions where they lead instead of always tacking back to the safety of groupthink.Although the 50th anniversary of the missile crisis was last fall, it hasn\u2019t exactly been in the news much.
Maybe we all know just enough about it to be dangerous.The Atlantic piece and the book it reviews are based on the complete transcript of the deliberations of the special ExComm of top Kennedy administration officials that met during the famed \u201c13 Days\u201d of the crisis.It turns out that a huge portion of the received version of the story that we were all raised on is a lie.
Bobby Kennedy\u2019s book, titled \u201c13 Days,\u201d was the main source for the lies, but there are many more sources.
He had read, and accepted, the fundamental accuracy of \u201c13 Days\u201d before he listened to the tapes and discovered falsehood after omission after distortion.Distorting RFK\u2019s roleThe biggest distortion was the role of RFK himself.
The received version, which relies on RFK\u2019s own book and on the testimony of Kennedy loyalists, generally portrays RFK as a cool-headed voice of reason.
Stern found that the tapes revealed Bobby Kennedy as \u201cconfrontational and hawkish from day one through day thirteen -and even beyond into the November post-crisis.\u201dThe Atlantic book review that got me started on this post, written by the magazine\u2019s national editor Benjamin Schwartz, takes a somewhat different tack.
The Soviets weren\u2019t happy about that and Schwartz surmises that this fact absolutely contributed to Nikita Khrushchev\u2019s decision to put Soviet missiles in Cuba.The Soviets had ICBM\u2019s on their own territory that could reach the United States and missiles on submarines that could rise up out of the ocean and nuke us from close range so the fact that missiles in Cuba could reach the United States quickly was of no real consequence.
The Soviets weren\u2019t violating any international laws by installing missiles on the territory of a willing ally but the United States decision to blockade Cuba actually was an illegal act of war.The tapes indicate clearly that JFK, RFK and the ExComm generally realized that the Cuban missiles would not have significantly altered the real military balance of power which greatly favored the United States and would have continued to do so.Maybe this comes across as a summary compiled by a self-hating American of the notoriously subversive media elite.
Shown are missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place.PoliticsThe Republicans would surely make hay if the Soviets seemed to be stealing some advantage of JFK\u2019s watch.
And here Schwartz really unburdens his chest challenging what he calls the playground logic:\u201c This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny.
But as I torture myself with all these misgivings about the way the Kennedy brothers and their genius friends handled the crisis, I realize that I\u2019ve known most of these facts and arguments for years.
