Because of In order to avoid a nuclear exchange, these discussions and the declassification of Khrushchev turned his back on his Cuban ally secret U.S., Soviet, and Cuban documents, we and came to terms with his Cold War rival.
By now know much more about the missile crisis. doing so, the Soviet leader risked both his ties During the crisis, both Kennedy and with Cuba and his country’s reputation as a Khrushchev worried that events could spiral global superpower. out of control into a nuclear war.
Newly disAfter the missile crisis, the United States covered evidence suggests that their fears were and the Soviet Union established a hotline to justified. ease communication between leaders in times According to the head of operational of crisis.
The arrangement featured teletype planning for the Soviet General Staff in 1962, machines installed in both the Kremlin and General Anatoly Gribkov, nuclear warheads the White House.
Leaders reportedly used the had indeed reached Cuba in the weeks before hotline dozens of times.
The Soviet warthe risk of a misunderstanding resulting in heads were for use deadly conflict. on short-range, tactical nuclear missiles.
The The missile crisis also impressed Kennedy most powerful tactical missiles on the island and Khrushchev with the dangers of making were capable of striking targets up to one hunnuclear threats.
Although the United States mainland horror of a nuclear war, leaders on both sides was beyond the range of the missiles, they recognized the need to embark on a new path could have been used with devastating results to prevent nuclear confrontation in the future. against American troops invading Cuba.
At The ideological conflict would continue, but a 1992 meeting in Havana, Gribkov said that while they remained in power Khrushchev the missiles could have been launched by the and Kennedy worked to diminish the tensions Soviet commander in Cuba without authorizabetween the two nations. tion from Moscow.
Considering its Place in Cold War History 4 Kennedy, who had been under considerable pressure from the military and members of Congress to invade Cuba, had feared an invasion could provoke a nuclear response.
