It’s . . . it’s the kind of conduct that’s such that one might expect of the Soviet Union.
T his article analyzes the role of the Pearl Harbor moral analogy in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
People draw moral analogies when they judge the rights and wrongs of an act on the basis of parallels with previous actions deemed to be moral or immoral.
Whereas strategic historical analogies use past cases to discern what is at stake in a situation and whether certain policies will be effective, moral historical analogies focus on the ethics of a decision.
For example, recent proponents of humanitarian intervention in Darfur regularly invoke the failure to halt genocide during World War II or in Rwanda in 1994.
Bush told the audience, “Here we will learn that each of us bears responsibility for our actions and for our failure to act.
First, ethical parallels with 1941 contributed signiªcantly to President John F Kennedy’s decision not to launch immediate air strikes against Cuba and to proceed instead with a naval blockade of the island.
The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was a sufªcient condition for Kennedy to reject the option of an air strike without prior warning to Moscow.
Furthermore, by eliminating the surprise attack option, the Pearl Harbor moral analogy removed the most attractive air strike option in strategic terms and thereby pushed the administration toward choosing the blockade.
Third, although many historians of the Cuban missile crisis have noted the use of the Pearl Harbor analogy, no previous studies have examined its role in any detail.
Fortunately, a major source has recently become available that sheds light on this role.
President Kennedy secretly taped many of the key meetings during the crisis, enabling us to hear and assess the impact of the analogy on the discussion and actors’ policy preferences.
Many studies of the missile crisis weave references to the Pearl Harbor analogy into the narrative but provide little reºection on its role in decision-making.
Paul Anderson brieºy discussed the analogy in a 1981 article, although at the time only limited sources were available.
In reality, Robert Kennedy was extremely hawkish at the start of the crisis.
The ofªcials who ªrst discussed the moral analogy were Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone and Under Secretary of State George Ball.
Robert Kennedy, far from having been the ªrst to champion the normative parallel, was himself deeply inºuenced by it as he changed from being a hawk to a dove.
Fourth, the use of ethical parallels in the Cuban missile crisis offers insights into wider foreign policymaking.
Scholars previously have explored how decision-makers employ historical analogies, but they have not focused speciªcally on moral analogies.
This neglect is unwarranted because moral analogies have unique characteristics and can enable ethical concerns to feature suddenly and unexpectedly in decision-making.
Moral analogies tend to be employed by leaders with a propensity for moral rhetoric in regard to formative experiences.
The analogies have the greatest impact when referring to conspicuously immoral behavior.
The fact that moral analogies prospered in the unfertile soil of the Cuban missile crisis deliberations provides signiªcant evidence for their wider potential impact.
Fifth, four decades after the Cuban missile crisis ended, analogies with important errors.
I listened to all the relevant material from the Kennedy tapes, but I cite from the above works where I consider the published version to be an accurate rendition of what was said.
In several cases I found errors in the published transcript, as indicated in the relevant footnotes.
Indeed, the very phrase “Pearl Harbor in reverse” that was invoked to discredit air strikes during the Cuban missile crisis, was again employed to question the morality of a United States attack on Iraq.
The varying power of this moral analogy over time highlights the circumstances in which ethical parallels tend to be effective and ineffective.
Soviet missile installations in Cuba were discovered on 15 October 1962, and President Kennedy was briefed the following morning.
The White House perceived the deployment as a major threat to national security and the United States position in the region and assembled an executive committee to deal with the crisis.
On Monday, 22 October, after nearly a week’s deliberations, Kennedy publicly announced both the discovery of the missiles in Cuba and Washington’s imposition of a “quarantine” or blockade on shipments of offensive weapons to the island.
After a period of great tension, the crisis ended on 28 October when Nikita Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the weapons dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union.
The United States in return pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly told Moscow that United States missiles in Turkey would be removed within a few months.
This article begins with a brief theoretical examination of the role of morality, analogies, and moral analogies, in foreign policymaking.
Morality in Foreign Policy Many theorists of international relations relegate moral concerns to a peripheral role in the formation of foreign policy.
The realist tradition has focused on the importance of anarchy in international politics, which necessitates the pursuit of national interest deªned narrowly in terms of power.
Other scholars, however, have argued that politics is inherently goal-oriented and that moral principles can shape an actor’s objectives.
The bombing of Dresden in World War II indicates that ethical concerns can erode over time.
In contrast, the clear-cut nature of the norm against chemical warfare has allowed for relatively few violations.
The Norm against Surprise Attacks Richard Betts has deªned a surprise attack as an assault against a target that is not prepared for it because of mistaken estimates of whether, when, where, 7.
Robert Art and Kenneth Waltz argue that “states in anarchy cannot afford to be moral.
When participants in the ExComm discussions used the phrase “Pearl Harbor in reverse,” they were at least implicitly subscribing to the view that surprise attacks are inherently wrong.
The supposed immorality of surprise attacks implies that states typically issue a warning before starting hostilities, but after World War II countries largely abandoned the practice of declaring war on each other.
Moreover, surprise attacks are not necessarily more likely than other attacks to violate the norm against targeting civilians or the laws of war.
Such assaults often use the beneªts of surprise to target military or other directly threatening objectives rather than civilians.
Further ambiguity arises from the fact that surprise attacks rarely can be clearly distinguished from non-surprise attacks.
Fidel Castro and Khrushchev considered a United States attack quite likely given Washington’s earlier backing for the 1961 invasion of Cuba by Cuban expatriates at the Bay of Pigs.
Furthermore, a norm against surprise attacks raises a number of moral and policy dilemmas.
President Kennedy would have considered the overthrow of the Castro regime to be a moral good.
Lessons for Defense Planning (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1982), 11.
In 1989, former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued that the Kennedy administration had not intended to invade Cuba in 1962.
Many scholars have contested this claim, and even McNamara acknowledged that for an outside observer the evidence at the time, including United States military exercises in the region, pointed strongly toward such an invasion.
Ethical concerns had featured only to a limited extent in the administration’s previous policies toward Cuba.
The administration also carried out subversion, psychological warfare, and assassination in Cuba—effectively state terrorism.
In United States policy toward Cuba, the ends usually justiªed the means.
Furthermore, the Cuban missile crisis is the type of foreign policy situation in which we would expect morality to be relatively unimportant.
On Tuesday, 16 October 1962—the ªrst day of the Cuban missile crisis—Attorney General Robert Kennedy called for a stepped-up program of sabotage on the island.
The next day, President Kennedy approved a series of subversive actions in Cuba, including a grenade attack on the Chinese embassy in Havana.
Some scholars have argued that analogies are mostly used as post-hoc rationalizations.
Khong, by contrast, claims that leaders use analogies not only to justify policies but also to perform speciªc cognitive and information-processing tasks essential to political decision-making.
Analogies, in his view, enable an actor to deªne problems, to understand the political stakes involved, to contemplate possible solutions, to gauge the odds of success, to weigh moral concerns, and to grasp potential dangers.
Even when an analogy is being employed purely as a rhetorical device, the rhetoric can encourage other policymakers to internalize the analogy and alter their preferences accordingly.
A wide range of historical analogies was used during the Cuban missile crisis.
On one occasion, General Curtis LeMay described President Kennedy’s blockade policy as analogous to appeasement at Munich in 1938, a reference that played on Kennedy’s sensitivity to the fact that his father, Joseph P Kennedy, had suffered political disgrace for his pro-appeasement stance in the 1930s.
President Kennedy noted that a United States attack on Cuba might give the Soviet Union an opportunity to take military action in Berlin, in the same way that the USSR invaded Hungary in 1956 while the West’s attention was focused on the Suez Crisis.
Toward the end of the Cuban missile crisis, the Kennedy brothers discussed how World War I had broken out through a series of actions with unintended consequences—a historical parallel they clearly wished to avoid.
At the same time, the attack shattered the American isolationist movement and provided the impetus for a global national security policy.
Pearl Harbor was the watershed event for the Kennedy generation—the day that changed their lives.
John F Kennedy entered the United States Navy despite poor health, and his subsequent heroism in the Paciªc War (together with the public relations efforts of his father) made Kennedy famous back in the United States.
He developed a lifelong revulsion toward the death and destruction he had seen.
Robert Kennedy, who was sixteen at the time of Pearl Harbor, was among the many policymakers who never forgot the Japanese attack.
May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 4; Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and his Times , 41.
The Pearl Harbor analogy was also invoked in October 1962 to argue against a surprise United States air strike on Cuba.
The ExComm participants did not carefully reºect on the ethics of Japanese actions in 1941.
After all, the Pearl Harbor attack did not target civilians or necessarily violate the laws of war.
Pearl Harbor did contravene the norm of declaring war before initiating hostilities, although the limited salience of this norm even before World War II is indicated by the lack of protests when Japan launched a surprise attack against Tsarist Russia in 1904.31 Moreover, Pearl Harbor was not intended to be a complete surprise attack.
Tokyo had planned to break off relations with the United States thirty minutes before striking Pearl Harbor, but logistical problems caused the message to be delivered several hours after the attack had begun.
Despite a degree of ethical complexity, Pearl Harbor came to be perceived as a clear-cut evil act, with disingenuous Japanese diplomacy followed by a devastating attack against the innocent United States.
Bartlett told Bolshakov that the President “is very angry about what has happened in Cuba.
Although the 1904 attack was not widely condemned, it was still remembered.
In 1941 the United States considered a surprise attack by Japan as a likely way for hostilities to begin—in light of the 1904 parallel—although few thought that the target would be Pearl Harbor.
Leaders may be tempted to reach clear moral judgments about policy options by thinking about past decisions that are judged to have been right or wrong.
Moral analogies are most likely to be invoked in countries that have a tradition of moral rhetoric in foreign policy and of reasoning by historical parallel.
Leaders in the United States readily use moral language in foreign policy statements.
Moral analogies are an intellectual device that gives normative concerns an unusual degree of signiªcance in policymaking.
They bring to center-stage ethical issues that otherwise might not be explicitly present in the policymaking process.
The general behavior becomes associated with memories of the particular case , so that surprise attacks and Japanese behavior become fused in the mind as collectively immoral.
By invoking an analogy, a policymaker can take an ambiguous moral concept such as “surprise attacks are wrong” and considerably enhance its salience and its impact on decision-making.
Recent work in the neurosciences has shown that information received when an individual is emotionally aroused is more likely to be recalled at a later date.
Such vivid experiences, particularly at a formative period in life, become the basis for many historical analogies.
The Holocaust moral analogy would be much more effective if another regime gassed its population to death in extermination camps, as opposed to killing its population in almost any other way.
Similarly, ofªcials who worried in 1962 that air strikes against Cuba would violate the moral norm against surprise attacks had fewer concerns that a U.S.-supported invasion of Cuba by expatriates might also violate this norm.
References to analogies and to moral concerns can be purely rhetorical devices to build support for policies adopted for other reasons.
To distinguish analogies used in a rhetorical fashion from analogies that actually shaped an actor’s policy preferences, we need to consider whether historical parallels were used consistently and coherently both in public and in private.
We also need to bear in mind that moral and analogical arguments can sometimes shape policymaking implicitly.
Even when decision-makers did not raise the Munich analogy directly in October 1962, they had internalized the “lesson” that concessions to aggressive dictators would merely invite further aggression.
The discussion here is not intended to give the false impression that the 1941 attack was the sole factor in the minds of the ExComm participants.
The dozen or so occasions when Pearl Harbor was mentioned were spread out over a week of the crisis.
The moral analogy with Pearl Harbor was by no means the only variable at work in 1962, but it did prove to be of great signiªcance; it was sufªcient to eliminate the option of a surprise attack and thereby push the administration toward enacting a blockade.
The Kennedy tapes allow us to determine precisely when and for whom the Pearl Harbor analogy mattered, how it shaped the discussion, and in what ways it solidiªed opinion for and against particular policy options.
The Pearl Harbor analogy was used in three different ways during the crisis.
First, it was employed largely as a rhetorical device to warn about the blance to the Japanese attack and therefore suggested the historical parallel, whereas the Bay of Pigs invasion did not.
Failing to intervene to stop genocide is more clearly wrong than any particular intervention to stop genocide is clearly right.
Once we examine speciªc “moral” actions in international affairs, the normative clarity starts to blur, and we tend to question the motives of the actors involved.
Furthermore, an analogy drawn with historical positive moral behavior has the burden of proposing a series of active measures for decision-makers today.
In contrast, analogies with immoral acts tell a decision-maker what to avoid.
Therefore, moral analogies tend to be more effective at eliminating rather than supporting policy options.
Second, the parallel with 1941 was invoked as a moral analogy, representing both a rhetorical tool to win support in the ExComm and an intellectual device that independently shaped policymakers’ opinions.
During the ªrst meeting of the ExComm, on the morning of Tuesday, 16 October, moral debate was largely absent.
Instead, the participants broadly agreed that the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have to be removed either by an air strike or by an invasion.
Ofªcials put forth strong arguments for a sudden air strike that would destroy the missiles before they became operational.
Any warning before an American attack, even to United States allies, would pose major risks.
Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon averred that a warning might escalate the situation if it induced the Soviet Union to take a tough stand.
National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy stressed that a warning would produce divisions among America’s allies.
President Kennedy commented that “warning , it seems to me, is warning everybody.
And obviously you can’t sort of announce that in four days from now you’re gonna take them out.
They may announce within three days that they’re gonna have warheads on ‘em.
His hawkish stance reºected his shock at the Soviet Union’s secret deployment of missiles and was in keeping with his previous hardline positions on Cuba.
In Robert Kennedy’s mind, any attack was risky, and an immediate invasion would minimize the risks by providing a deªnitive solution to the Cuban problem.
The ªrst ExComm meeting ended with a broad consensus in favor of surprise air strikes at least against the missile sites.
President Kennedy noted that the United States would “certainly” take out the missiles—the only question was whether to broaden the attack.
At the second ExComm meeting, later that evening, the president considered publicly announcing the discovery of the missiles 24 hours before the strikes began.
General Taylor, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Dillon, and Bundy all criticized the efªcacy of a warning.
Under Secretary of State George Ball thought that a few hours notice would be useful for rela38.
Clearly, for him and for the ExComm more generally, moral considerations were at this stage peripheral at best.
After the second ExComm meeting had formally ended and the president had left, the discussion continued.
Deputy CIA Director General Marshall Carter used the analogy with Pearl Harbor in its ªrst sense—as a warning about unintended escalation.
Thus, when the Pearl Harbor analogy was initially drawn, it was largely used as a rhetorical device to suggest the escalatory potential of air strikes.
The Japanese attack had inºamed the United States and led to almost four years of war.
Carter’s analogy helped to establish the growing feeling that military action in Cuba might have unexpected and costly consequences.
Carter’s boss at the CIA, John McCone, was the one who ªrst used the analogy with Pearl Harbor in its second incarnation—as an ethical parallel— when he met President Kennedy the next morning, 17 October.
From this point on, the moral analogy was the dominant reference to Pearl Harbor.
The ethics of Pearl Harbor were not discussed in a sophisticated manner.
Rather, the Japanese attack was viewed as the epitome of wrongful behavior, and association with it was a powerful taboo.
Although the analogy was certainly employed as a rhetorical device, it also inºuenced policymakers’ beliefs, helping them to make sense of a complex situation under great time pressure.
In a memorandum, which McCone carried with him at the discussion, the CIA director challenged the apparent consensus in favor of a sudden air strike.
McCone wanted an ultimatum issued to Moscow threatening air strikes within 24 hours if the missiles were not dismantled.
The lack of any documentary evidence for this conversation means that extreme caution is required.
The alleged note has never been found, and the exchange reported by Sorensen does not appear in the transcript of the ExComm meeting.
Sorensen’s account of the crisis, and Elie Abel’s book The Missile Crisis (published in 1966, a year after Soresen’s account appeared), are the only sources for the anecdote.
Because Robert Kennedy initially was vehemently in support of an immediate invasion of Cuba and saw a blockade, by contrast, as “a very slow death,” one can reasonably conclude that Sorensen in his post-hoc account (written at a time when the administration’s handling of the missile crisis was regarded as a great success and when Robert Kennedy was already beginning to contemplate a run for the presidency) signiªcantly embellished Robert Kennedy’s moral conversion at that stage.
We do, however, have substantiation for George Ball’s “Pearl Harbor” memorandum, which he wrote on Wednesday evening, opposing air strikes and favoring a blockade.
If a surprise attack were carried out against Cuba, Ball argued, then far from establishing our moral strength . . . . . . would, in fact, alienate a great part of the civilized world by behaving in a manner wholly contrary to our traditions, by pursuing a course of action that would cut directly athwart everything we have stood for during our national history, and condemn us as hypocrites in the opinion of the world.
On the second question, the president abandoned his initial view and at this point favored issuing a warning before any air strike began—in large part because of the analogy with Pearl Harbor.
At the ExComm meeting that day, Rusk noted the military advantages of a “quick strike” but also suggested that prior notiªcation to Khrushchev would legitimize a United States military response and retain the support of allies.
In response, the president echoed some of his earlier fears about what Khrushchev might do in the period between any warning and the initiation of air strikes.
Kennedy speculated that the Soviet Union might try to hide the missiles in the Cuban woods.
He became more interested in a warning when McNamara indicated that the United States could probably keep track of the missiles.
Even though it may be illusory, I think we still have to do it, because I think that the impact on opinion and the reaction would be very much different.
Before Ball mentioned Pearl Harbor, President Kennedy had been noncommittal on the issue of a warning and raised a series of possible objections to this course of action.
But after Ball spoke, Kennedy favored issuing an announcement to Khrushchev before any air strikes began.
If one listens to the tapes, Kennedy’s sympathy with Ball’s argument is obvious.
Having come to oppose a surprise attack, the president outlined a possible plan.
President Kennedy agreed that although the United States would lose the advantage of surprise, a warning would give Khrushchev a chance to get Soviet personnel out of the ªring line.
My transcription of Ball’s speech is slightly different from that in the Naftali, May, and Zelikow volume.
Gilpatric recalled that Robert Kennedy “brought up the analogy of Pearl Harbor.
He didn’t want this country to be in the position that Japan had put itself in with that raid.
The surprise attack option, which only recently had been the consensus approach, had been eliminated.
Ofªcials pointed out that air strikes might not destroy all the missiles and could even provoke a crash effort to launch the surviving MRBMs.
They also warned that in the event of a surprise attack the Soviet Union might respond elsewhere, and the United States would achieve global infamy.
After the meeting, Acheson met with President Kennedy and urged immediate surgical air strikes.
In response, with the president absent, Robert Kennedy paced the room, arguing that he now supported a blockade.
Earlier that morning, during discussions at the State Department, Robert Kennedy was still toying with the idea of an attack, but now he was ªrmly against this course of action.
According to the transcript, Kennedy said, “We have to decide in advance we’d do it,” implying that the decision to offer a warning to Khrushchev had yet to be made.
Although Robert Kennedy stressed that the administration had to deal with the Soviet threat right away, he wanted to gain the support of the Organization of American States and to give Khrushchev an opportunity to pull back.
Douglas Dillon later claimed that he had been convinced by Robert Kennedy’s speech—indeed he thought the whole ExComm had been persuaded by it, with a couple of exceptions.
On Saturday, 20 October, the tenor of the discussions initially shifted in a more hawkish direction.
The president worried that the missile threat would increase each day, and he again broached the possibility of air strikes, albeit with a few hours’ notice so that Soviet personnel could leave the vicinity.
His brother supported a mixture of blockade followed by air strikes to avoid a Pearl Harbor-style attack.
The president himself ªnally swung around in support of the blockade, which despite some difªculties would buy time and keep more options open.
A CIA report also suggested that eight nuclear missiles in Cuba might already be operational, raising the stakes for any U.S. strike.
Secretary of State Rusk immediately agreed with the president—a sudden attack had no support in law or morality and therefore had to be ruled out.
By the time the ExComm met on Monday, 22 October, in the ªnal hours before President Kennedy publicly announced the United States response, Robert Kennedy was even more strongly opposed to immediate air strikes.
He indicated on Sunday to the president that such a move “would be a Pearl Harbor type of attack” and would provoke an unpredictable response from Moscow, 54.
Dillon recalled that Robert Kennedy said “We’ve got to look at history over its length.
We never want it said that the United States did the very same thing that we so resented when the Japanese did it to us in 1941.
At the Friday meetings, Robert Kennedy was following the president’s orders to forge a consensus for the blockade while the president was away on a campaign trip.
These difªculties would include a “nearly fatal” shock to the Western alliance.
According to Robert Kennedy, the administration could argue that air strikes were “just not considered on the basis of the fact that we couldn’t have the Pearl Harbor kind of operation, rather than go into all the details of why it would not” be practical.
Adlai Stevenson favored a negotiated settlement from the start but did not base his position on moral concerns about a surprise attack.
Dean Acheson was harshly critical about the relevance of moral analogies with Pearl Harbor.
In the present situation, the Soviet Union had installed ninety miles from our coast—while denying they were doing so—offensive weapons that were capable of lethal injury to the United States.
This they were doing a hundred and forty years after the warning given in 56.
Having focused intensely on the crisis for more than a week, the ExComm members came to regard the situation as largely unique and felt less need to search for historical reference points.
Robert Kennedy later wrote a memoir of the crisis, Thirteen Days, published posthumously in 1968.
The book was written with the help of Theodore Sorensen as part of Kennedy’s election campaign, and its depiction of the role of the Pearl Harbor analogy in the Cuban missile crisis is often at stark odds with the record in the Kennedy tapes.
Whatever validity the military and political arguments were for an attack in preference to a blockade, America’s traditions and history would not permit such a course of action.
Whatever military reasons could marshal, they were nevertheless, in the last analysis, advocating a surprise attack by a very large nation against a very small one.
This, I said, could not be undertaken by the United States if we were to maintain our moral position at home and around the globe.
Our struggle against Communism throughout the world was far more than physical survival—it had as its essence our heritage and our ideals, and these we must not destroy.
In reality, Robert Kennedy at the start of the crisis was bellicose and confrontational—strikingly different on occasion from the romanticized image in Thirteen Days.
The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was used by critics of the Bush administration to suggest that a preventive attack would be as morally wrong for Washington in 2003 as it had been for Tokyo in 1941.
Preventive war, anticipatory self-defense, was the doctrine with which the Japanese justiªed Pearl Harbor.
FDR, an earlier American president, said that it was a date that will live in infamy.
And now the Bush doctrine is a doctrine of preventive war, which makes America the self-appointed world’s judge, jury and executioner.
Preemptive wars are fought against an immediate threat while preventive wars are fought against distant threats.
See The White House, National Security Strategy of the United States, Washington, DC, 2002.
Enterprise on Pearl Harbor Day,” 7 December 2001, speech text distributed by The White House.
In 1962 the ExComm was concerned about the potential immorality of a surprise attack, whereas in 2002–2003 Arthur Schlesinger and Edward Kennedy focused on what they deemed the immorality of preventive wars.
The United States strikes against Iraq in March 2003 obviously were not a surprise.
George Ball, and later Robert Kennedy, were opposed in principle to surprise attacks similar to Pearl Harbor.
Concern also existed that a surprise attack would produce global outrage at the United States, with negative consequences for United States foreign policy.
On the contrary, their main fear at home, as repeatedly expressed in the ExComm, was that the blockade would be perceived as being too weak a response.
By 22 October the air strike option had been branded the “Pearl Harbor” option.
The ethical parallel with Pearl Harbor was repeatedly invoked in a coherent and consistent manner, and on each occasion it tended to frame the subsequent discussion.
Every time a surprise air strike was compared to the Japanese actions in 1941 the analogy unsettled the ExComm.
Surprisingly, the moral parallel between air strikes and Pearl Harbor was never openly questioned within the ExComm meetings, even by those whose arguments the analogy undermined (although Dean Acheson did criticize the relevance of Pearl Harbor on at least one occasion outside the ExComm).74 Although the historical parallel was used in part for advocacy and justiªcation, the evidence strongly suggests that the analogy’s chief exponents, such as Ball, Robert Kennedy, and John Kennedy, believed in its essential truth.
The perceived lessons of Pearl Harbor helped policymakers comprehend the moral nature of the air strike option and the likelihood of subsequent global infamy.
The Pearl Harbor analogy tied many of these disparate arguments together into a highly salient formulation.
In doing so, the analogy made an ambiguous moral argument against surprise attacks far more powerful.
The Pearl Harbor moral analogy was crucial in spurring the ExComm to reject the option of an air strike without warning.
Before the introduction of the Pearl Harbor analogy on Thursday, 18 October, President Kennedy had been wary of issuing a warning, for fear that Khrushchev might use the opportunity to outmaneuver him, threaten Berlin, hide the missiles, or prepare them for launch.
After Ball’s remarks (and McNamara’s claim that the United States could probably keep track of Soviet missiles after any warning), the president’s position changed dramatically.
Dean Rusk did, however, argue on 18 October that an initial consultation with Khrushchev would help to convince Americans that military force was a last resort.
Many of the same ªgures were critical of the use of historical analogies in the Vietnam War decision-making process.
The Pearl Harbor analogy had a far-reaching impact on Robert Kennedy, whose position underwent a remarkable shift from the cynicism of his “sink the Maine” comment to his later idealistic moralism.
The tapes suggest that despite his initial bellicosity, he came to accept and internalize the moral parallel between air strikes and Pearl Harbor.
Robert Kennedy was not a dove who latched onto the Pearl Harbor analogy merely as a rhetorical device.
Rather, he was a hawk who altered his position largely because of the Pearl Harbor analogy.
Most writers attribute a major role to Robert Kennedy in shaping the ExComm discussions, especially at the meetings when President Kennedy was absent (where Robert Kennedy would often be circulating ideas at his brother’s behest).77 Robert Kennedy’s speech on Friday, 19 October, played a considerable role in ªrming up the blockade position at a time when the JCS, Acheson, Bundy and others were mobilizing for an attack on the missile sites.
McNamara later argued that Robert Kennedy’s arguments against a Pearl Harbor–style strike had been important in swinging the president toward the quarantine.
Douglas Dillon also switched his position to a large extent because of the Pearl Harbor analogy.
McCone, for his part, had been worried about the “Pearl Harbor” implications of a surprise attack from the start.
The impact of the Pearl Harbor moral analogy—ªrst on McCone and Ball, then on President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, and later on Dillon, Rusk, McNamara, and others—suggests that it was a sufªcient condition to eliminate the option of a surprise air strike.
Even in the absence of other factors, ethical parallels with 1941 would have been enough to prevent a surprise attack.
Even if no one had mentioned Pearl Harbor, the ExComm would have worried about the potential wider political repercussions of air strikes.
Memories of Pearl Harbor were by no means the only factor that favored a blockade.
President Kennedy raised doubts about the likely success of air strikes and about possible Soviet responses.
As he told the JCS on 19 October, the blockade offered a degree of control, helping to avoid escalation to nuclear war.
John Kennedy’s caution and his desire to keep options open, as well as his willingness to examine how things looked from the other side, were personal traits largely independent of historical analogies.
Nevertheless, the Pearl Harbor parallel proved to be an important causal factor in the decision to introduce a blockade.
The rejection of a surprise attack placed the next option—an attack preceded by a warning—in the spotlight.
The strategic difªculties attending this course of action in turn pushed the administration toward the quarantine.
Although a surprise United States attack could, at least in theory, have been a surgical strike against the missile sites, any warning to the Soviet Union would have necessitated a much larger-scale assault to counter the expected mobilization of Cuban air defenses.
President Kennedy was well aware that the larger the attack became, the greater the risk of Soviet retaliation.
Furthermore, one of the major United States concerns was whether an air strike would destroy all the missile sites.
Air strikes after a warning would have offered fewer guarantees in this regard than a surprise attack.
Moreover, the ExComm could only guess what Khrushchev would do in the interim between a warning and the ªrst sorties.
By eliminating the most effective air strike option in strategic terms—a surgical surprise attack—the Pearl Harbor analogy played an important causal role in eliminating all air strike options and thereby facilitating the blockade.
Moral analogies are intellectual devices that can bring ethical concerns into policymaking, even when vital national interests are at stake.
As discussed earlier, the effectiveness of a moral analogy depends on a range of variables, including the clarity or ambiguity of the moral argument, the nature of the foreign policy issue under question, the similarity between the cases, and the salience of the analogous example.
In the Cuban missile crisis, the moral norm against surprise attacks was not clear-cut, the high stakes involved in the crisis allowed only a limited role for morality, and the parallels between air strikes against Cuba and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor were only superªcial.
Nonetheless, the analogy still mattered; mainly, it appears, because of the extraordinary salience of Pearl Harbor.
This ªnding suggests that the key variable shaping the impact of moral analogies is whether they focus on a striking event such as Pearl Harbor, the Holocaust, or the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.
Pearl Harbor was still so resonant in 1962 that decision-makers applied a moral injunction against surprise attacks in the Cuban missile crisis, even though few if any of them regarded such a ban as a compelling wider ethical principle.
To get a sense of the salience of Pearl Harbor in 1962, one can imagine a situation today in which the United States discussed a policy option that involved exploding an aircraft or targeting a tall building.
The action might be abandoned simply because it bore some slight physical resemblance to the attacks of 11 September 2001.
The event remains iconic but is not as salient for policymakers who were born after 1941.
Second, prospective air strikes on Cuba bore some slight physical resemblance to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, thus making the analogy more striking.
The invasion of Iraq bore no physical resemblance at all to events in 1941, and thus the analogy was purely abstract.
Third, in 1962 the moral analogy referred to the Japanese surprise attack, whereas in 2002–2003 critics of the Bush administration critics referred to Japan’s preventive-war motivation.
If the Japanese had offered a clear warning or declaration of war before initiating an explicitly preventive conºict in 1941, the attack on Pearl Harbor would probably not have achieved the same degree of notoriety.
Ernest May, Richard Neustadt, and Yuen Foong Khong all viewed the Cuban missile crisis as a positive instance of learning from the past.
However, we need to distinguish between the wisdom of a policy promoted by a particular argument and the strength of the argument itself.
President Kennedy made a wise choice in deciding on the quarantine, but the moral parallel between air strikes against Cuba and Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor was superªcial at most.
In 1941, the Japanese struck ªrst to provoke a wider war and achieve a dominant imperial position in East Asia.
In 1962, the United States could have claimed a moral case for destroying the missiles with a proportionate attack, given the deceitful manner in which they were placed on the island, and perhaps also by invoking the Monroe Doctrine.
Few international observers would have jumped to make the Pearl Harbor moral analogy, given its relative lack of salience outside the United States.
Furthermore, the notion that countries had to give a formal warning before engaging in hostilities was not a universally accepted moral norm.
A limited air strike would likely have provoked criticism, including from key allies such as Britain, but it seems far-fetched to suggest that this censure would have paralleled Japanese infamy.
What created a sense of moral equivalence between the projected air strikes against Cuba and Pearl Harbor was to a large extent the surface physical resemblance—in both cases, an attack from the sea with aircraft.
Although the Kennedy brothers had supported aggressive covert actions (including plots to assassinate Castro) and a sneak attack by Cuban expatriates against Castro’s regime over the previous eighteen months, these did not physically look like the handiwork of Tojo.
