Include role play exercises. • partisan perceptions, • negotiation under stress, uncertainty, high stakes; • moving from confrontation to collaboration without accommodation/appeasement • Review lessons from early 1980s creation of Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers • Role of people-to-people diplomacy.
Because we don't understand the dangers, we make no attempt, no serious attempt, to repair the hostility between the United States and Russia.
And so we are allowing ourselves to sleepwalk into another catastrophe.
We must wake up.” William J Perry, former United States Secretary of Defense “The nuclear threat is again real.
Sitting at his dacha looking across Black Sea toward Turkey, where US nuclear missiles were based, he affirmed: “We have a legal right to put missiles in Cuba like they have in Turkey right on our border.
Gromyko lied to me and Khrushchev tried to put the missiles in Cuba secretly.
FACILITATED DIALOGUE TO ENGAGE ALL SIDES For the First Time, All Three Sides Were in One Room Three breakthrough dialogues—small, facilitated, no press: • 1987 Harvard • 1989 Moscow • 1992 Havana We developed the ”Critical Oral History” method “Be Soft on the People, Hard on the Problem” Separate personal dynamics from substantive issues --Don’t concede on facts or substance.
The result of the meetings was the telling of a new story, which transformed the memory in public consciousness of one of the most traumatic events in human history.
Cuba on the Brink captures the drama and dangers of leaders, countries and ideologies on a collision course with nuclear catastrophe.
What We Learned by Going “Back to the Brink” “…top-level participants in one room spoke openly, revealed very old secrets, discovered shockingly mistaken assumptions, and came to a new shared understanding that provided inspiration for those striving at the end of the Cold War to overcome decades of confrontation.
Assist each side to gain detached perspective on its own position, beliefs and assumptions, and emotions and understand the viewpoint of the other side.
Decrease the risk of reflexive thinking, emotional reaction and destructive conflict.
THE “THIRD SIDE” The Third Side is a way of looking at the conflict not just from one side or the other-not just from one’s own “bell tower”--but from the larger perspective of the surrounding community of stakeholders, those whose interests are also at stake —as if you ”go to the balcony,” see the players on a stage from a higher perspective.
You can have natural sympathies for one side or the other and still choose to take the Third Side.
Taking the Third Side means seeking to understand both sides of the conflict, encouraging a process of cooperative negotiation, supporting a process of truth and reconciliation, a fair and wise solution – one that fairly meets the essential needs of both sides and the larger community.
EMPATHY IS NOT THE SAME AS SYMPATHY Empathy is a capacity based on perception.
Alexis Johnson, Diplomat in Asia Adlai Stevenson, Ambassador to UN George Ball, Under Secretary of State Those American former ambassadors to Russia, who knew Russia deeply--George Kennan, Jack Matlock--were against expansion of NATO in 1996, as was William Perry, who had worked closely with Russian colleagues and has extensive knowledge of the country, culture and people.
KENNEDY'S SECRET BACK CHANNEL APPROACH TO CASTRO TO REDUCE RISK OF NUCLEAR ARMAGEDDON The Kennedy Administration sought secretly to find an accord with Cuba that would remove the Soviet missiles in return for a modus vivendi between Washington and Havana.
During an Excomm meeting on October 26, Kennedy approved a message to be sent to Castro, disguised as a Brazilian peace initiative sent by the government of populist president Joao Goulart, rather than one from Washington.
The draft cable instructed the Brazilians to carry the message to Castro that his regime and “the well-being of the Cuban people” were in “great jeopardy” if he did not expel the Russians and their weapons.
If he did, however, “many changes” in the relations between Cuba and the Organization of American States and the US could follow.
This move was a deliberate attempt to defuse as much as possible the hostility that Kennedy's request for an answer by the next day was likely to provoke in Moscow.
Prior meetings between Dobrynin and Kennedy had sometimes degenerated into shouting matches.
On this occasion, Dobrynin notes, the attorney general kept his emotions in check and took the ambassador into his confidence in an attempt to cooperate on the resolution of the crisis.
This strategy succeeded where an effort to compel Khrushchev to respond through an ultimatum might have failed.
It gave Khrushchev positive incentives to remove the Soviet missiles and reduced the emotional and political cost to him of the withdrawal.
MCGEORGE BUNDY’S EXPLANATION OF THE PRIVATE BARGAIN —THE MISSILE TRADE DEAL— …and reasons for deceiving the public for over two decades “Concerned as we all were by the cost of a public bargain struck under pressure at the apparent expense of the Turks, and aware as we were from the day's discussion that for some…even this unilateral private assurance might appear to betray an ally, we agreed without hesitation that no one not in the room was to be informed of this additional message.
We denied in every forum that there was any deal, and in the narrowest sense what we said was usually true, as far as it went.
Ambassador Dobrynin felt that Robert Kennedy's book Thirteen Days did not adequately express that the ""deal"" on the Turkish missiles was part of the resolution of the crisis.
And here I have a confession to make to my colleagues on the American side, as well as to others who are present.
So Kennedy and Khrushchev made use of a back channel and secret agreements.
It widened his circle of compassion …led to quick agreement on Test Ban Treaty …promoted introspection, and to put ourselves in other’s shoes.
He honored Russian “acts of courage,” achievements in culture, science …reminded that we are all one community, all inhabit one small planet, all mortal …that we must seek practical agreements based on our shared interests. …that we can make a difference—that our destiny is not beyond our control 35 At our conference in 1992, Castro spoke for the first time of his mindset when he called for the preemptive nuclear first strike.
CASTRO ADDRESSES HIS CABLE TO KHRUSHCHEV FOR THE FIRST TIME … on that night of the 26th, we saw no possible solution.
Under the threat of an invasion, of an attack, with the enormous propaganda using all the mass media, and an international campaign talking about this very serious problem, we really couldn’t see any solution.
And I dared to write a letter to Nikita, a letter aimed at encouraging him.
The aim was to strengthen him morally, because I knew that he had to be suffering greatly, intensely.
I thought I knew what he was thinking and that he must have been at the time very anxious over the situation.
Everybody here was simply resigned to the fate that we would be forced to pay the price, that we would disappear.
Before having our country occupied — totally occupied — we were ready to die in defense of our country.
I would have agreed, in the event of the invasion that you are talking about, with the use of tactical nuclear weapons.
You’ve asked me to speak frankly and, in all frankness, I must say that I would have had that opinion.
A DIALOGUE WITH THE SPIRIT OF RESPECT, SINCERE INQUIRY, HONESTY What Fidel Castro said at end of Havana meeting: “I must say with absolute sincerity that I have learned a great deal at this meeting.
Like a new Delphic Oracle, a repository of wisdom, to commemorate not Apollo slaying a dragon but real human beings defusing conflict for the sake of the future.
Initially the idea of a blockade was criticized as inadequate and foolish.
He stood against action that could lead to unprecedented catastrophe for humanity (“Positive No” to defend core values) Reputation for strength/weakness has consequences for foreign policy.
NATO exercise “Able Archer”) “We are back to 1983, and I don’t enjoy being thirty-four years younger in this way.
Let us not try to rebuild Russia in our image—we have different histories, political cultures.
In the first instance, the deterioration of relations is a result of actions taken by the United States.
ABM Russia sees as threat to deterrence • Third: Regime change and color revolutions AND THEN hostility was stimulated by Russian reactions The United States followed Putin’s lead in modernizing nuclear arsenal Both sides see themselves as reacting to other’s provocations 63 BOTH COUNTRIES HAVE THEIR DIVISIONS… In Russia, current perspectives draw upon historical Slavophiles vs.
United States power was unrivaled United States control of global institutions was strong There was a broad perception that a U.S.-led liberal world order would continue to set the rules, standards, and norms for international interactions.
United States and Russia each now blame the other side for the deterioration in relations.
It is easy to choose whatever time frame you want to determine kto vinovat.
You interfered in the former Soviet states on You interfered in the newly independent our border. states on your border.
You launched military invasions of sovereign You launched military invasions of states. sovereign states.
Your economy is based on inequality Your economy is based on inequality You violate human rights You violate human rights You don’t keep your agreements You don’t keep your agreements Your actions are provoking a new arms race… Your acts are provoking a new arms race… 72 EXERCISE 73 THERE IS ALSO THE FACTOR OF PSYCHOLOGICAL BIAS AND THE “SECURITY DILEMMA” Defensive actions by one state to increase its security can make other side more insecure, trigger a reaction, creating a selffulfilling prophecy, an action-reaction dynamic and arms race.
When there is uncertainty about the other side’s motives and, even if they are ambiguous, we tend to emphasize danger and exaggerate the hostility of the other.
The Aegis Ashore launch pad is “practically identical” to Aegis Warship system capable of launching Tomahawk cruise missiles.
If you cling to the idea that one’s negotiation counterpart is extreme and hostile, you can trigger exactly that behavior.
Those who saw Russia as a power like the Soviet Union, an expansive state that could only be deterred by military force , feel vindicated by Russia’s belligerence today.
They think it was the right course of action to absorb Moscow’s former clients into NATO and the EU while Russia was weak and disoriented after the Soviet collapse.
For those who think the independent new Russia was not a threat in 1991, they see it as a classic action-reaction spiral, a human failure to negotiate skillfully, to build a collaborative relationship and realize shared interests.
You are told that government officials have confirmed that everyone should seek immediate shelter.
January 13, 2018 Nuclear Wake-Up Call for Hawaii The alert was false but the nuclear threat is real and more terrifying than anything that comes across your newsfeed.
A Near-Death Experience, They Say Changes You Forever… • The fear led us to reach out.
Through collaborative community engagement, education, film, mediation, indigenous wisdom, music and cultural exchange, we are encouraging the peoples of the United States and Russia – the two countries with over 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons – to act now to compel their political leaders to take concrete steps that will immediately reduce the nuclear risk and at the same time work with all countries towards a world without nuclear weapons.
NuclearWakeUpCall.Earth Adopt The Nuclear Playbook Ten Steps We Must Take Immediately to Avert a Nuclear Catastrophe NUCLEAR PLAYBOOK 1.
If the United States and Russia begin to take their nuclear weapons off launch on warning, this will immediately reduce the time crunch—the impetus toward use of nuclear weapons—in moments of crisis.
End the sole, unchecked power of any United States president to launch a nuclear attack.
No one person – in any country – should have the power to launch nuclear weapons.
Support Congressional legislation to prohibit a United States President from launching a first-use nuclear strike without a declaration of war by Congress that expressly authorizes such strike.
A large-scale nuclear exchange would have drastic effects on climate—sending billions of tons of soot into the atmosphere — and, though scientists disagree on the predicted impact, it would put the lives of billions of people in jeopardy due to crop failure—a “nuclear famine”— beyond the hundreds of millions who would die due to the blast, firestorms and radiation.
We must at all times keep open channels of communication in US-Russian relations on nuclear risk reduction, a safe space insulated from our political differences, as we did during the old Cold War.
Restart a dialogue aimed at reducing the nuclear danger, on strengthening strategic stability, including rules of the road for cyberweapons and other emerging technologies.
We had one round of strategic stability talks with the Russians last September.
Agree on New START and work out our differences on the Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty.
The Russians are still angry over the United States pullout from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
But Reagan and Gorbachev reached agreement in the 1980s when the divisions were at least as deep.
There are ways for both sides to protect their interests and reach a new agreement.
Reopen military-to-military channels of communication with nuclear powers.
We have managed to talk with the Russians and avoid major incidents in Syria, even though we are on opposite sides.
There is no reason both countries can’t do the same for strategic, global conflict.
Efforts should include cooperation to reduce the danger of cyber interference in strategic systems and command and control.
A no-first-use pledge would demonstrate that the United States views its weapons as deterrents to nuclear warfare, not as tools of aggression.
Critics in the United States argue that this policy will reduce the security of our allies and that the credible threat of the first use of nuclear weapons is a powerful deterrent against a range of significant nonnuclear threats— chemical, biological, cyber.
But others argue that the United States has sufficient conventional forces to deter or respond to such attacks and that the policy creates more risks than its alleged benefits — including heightening the risk that Russia or China might miscalculate in crisis leading to a devastating unintended nuclear war.
Cooperate with Russia and other nuclear powers on nuclear nonproliferation.
We need a multilateral approach to negotiations with emerging nuclear powers which is more likely to succeed – with Iran, North Korea and elsewhere.
Former United States Secretary of Defense William Perry and others, including General James Cartwright, former head of United States Strategic Command, argue that the United States should do away with its land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles.
They are the weapon system most likely to be fired in response to a false alarm and cause an apocalyptic, accidental nuclear war.
And they are no longer needed to deter a nuclear strike from Russia, which can be achieved by the two other elements of the nuclear triad—submarines and bombers.
We are keeping ICBMs only because of vested interests—from defense companies that produce them and from states that get jobs and revenue from having them on their territory.
This can be a first focus in challenging the $1.7 trillion United States spending plan to enhance our nuclear arsenal.
Instead, we should focus on eliminating some types of nuclear weapons, refurbishing the remaining weapons where possible, and making any replacements without enhancing capabilities.
Bernard Lown Co-Founders IPPNW Nobel-Prize Winners 1985 We need to compel our politicians to adopt The Nuclear Playbook because our lives are at stake.
NUCLEAR FREE PLAYBOOK Towards a world without nuclear weapons Build a bipartisan, grassroots coalition to compel our elected political leaders in the U.S. to make major reductions in our nuclear arsenal without reducing our security.
The United States and Russia now have over 90% of the world’s nuclear weapons 13,000 nuclear warheads and about 8,000 active weapons.
Both countries share responsibility to move toward low numbers of nuclear weapons, take them progressively off launch-ready alert, renounce their first use, and otherwise reduce, as much as possible, nuclear weapons as a source of fear, tension, and confrontation.
Nuclear Security expert Bruce Blair argues that the United States can act now to reduce its nuclear stockpile by 75%, including elimination of land-based ballistic missiles , cancellation of most enhancement measures in the current $1. trillion modernization program--and still maintain a deterrent through 5 new strategic submarines and 40 heavy strategic nuclear bombers.
A Global Reawakening to the Existential and Escalating Nuclear Threat – through education, media, outreach at all levels.
A mass global movement that brings together people of all ages, from all backgrounds and all walks of life to act now to reduce the threat of nuclear war, to work to create a more peaceful world and eliminate nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
THE THIRD SIDE A Mobilized Community Acting Systematically Motivated by a New Story THE THIRD SIDE IN CITIZEN DIPLOMACY, SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND CAMPAIGNS • Uses the power of peer pressure and the force of public opinion.
Teacher, Bridge Builder, Healer Brought doctors together to form a Third Side Coalition Dr.
Teacher, Bridge Builder What Soviet Children Are Saying About Nuclear Weapons IPPNW Project Broadcast nationally in both countries 1983 Third Side Role: Filmmakers as Teachers High Profile Films, Both Academy Award Nominees, Women, Academy Award Winner Third Side Role: Journalists as Witnesses, Teachers Educating for the Public Good Acting on their ethical responsibility to inform the public about the clear and present existential nuclear danger.
