The problem -which has plagued United States foreign policy time and again -is that these lessons are myths, based on sheer lies about how the crisis began and how it ended.
This article was published 12/10/2012 , so information in it may no longer be current.
Opinion WASHINGTON -The Cuban missile crisis broke out 50 years ago this month, and its lessons on weakness, strength and compromise have been recited ever since by politicians, pundits and historians.
This is the notion that United States president John F Kennedy got Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to back down and remove his nuclear missiles from Cuba entirely through the threat of force.
Khrushchev would take his missiles out of Cuba; Kennedy would take his very similar missiles out of Turkey.
This is the legend that Kennedy cowered before Khrushchev at a summit in Vienna in the spring of 1961 and that, as a result, the crafty Communist aggressively deployed missiles in Cuba thinking the young president was too weak to respond.
In fact, the evidence -much of it declassified a decade ago from the Kremlin archives, and recounted in Khrushchev's Cold War, a superb book by Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali -reveals that it was Khrushchev who shipped the missiles out of weakness and insecurity.
And the abject failure of that ploy, the determined resistance of JFK, so riled Khrushchev that he sent missiles to Cuba a year later as a desperate effort to compensate for what he now saw as American superiority.
At the end of the Second World War, Soviet troops occupied eastern Germany; the U.S., British and French armies occupied sectors of the west.
With the onset of the Cold War, the borders hardened into two separate countries.
In 1948, Soviet premier Joseph Stalin mounted a blockade to isolate and ultimately take over West Berlin, but the United States Air Force kept moving in supplies.
In 1959, Khrushchev mounted an effort to take over all of Berlin, but United States president Dwight Eisenhower resisted, and the two reached a provisional truce at Camp David.
In 1961, after the Vienna meeting with Kennedy, Khrushchev renewed his assault, announcing that if the West didn't sign a treaty turning over all Berlin to East Germany, there would be war.
Kennedy resisted, too, and in fact the Berlin crisis of August 1961 was nearly as tense as the Cuban crisis of October 1962.
At one point, United States and Soviet tanks faced each other, within firing range, across a checkpoint for 25 hours.
Or, rather, there was a missile gap, but America was way ahead of the Soviet Union, not the other way around.
Kennedy wanted to reveal this fact, both to the American public and to the world.
In fact, though, he had nothing; the missile program was in total disarray.
The balance of forces with rivals, to the east and west, was palpably shifting against him.
Khrushchev really did believe the United States might launch a nuclear first strike against the Soviet Union.
During the Berlin crisis, Kennedy had ordered the Pentagon to conduct a study of whether such a strike was possible.
The top secret study -a detailed, 36-page attack plan -concluded it was very feasible.
It's unknown how much Khrushchev knew about this plan, but the Joint Chiefs wrote follow-up assessments, Kennedy himself read them and held at least one meeting in the Oval Office to discuss the issue.
The Soviet premier had not given up on grabbing West Berlin, but he knew he had no leverage.
If the United States did launch a nuclear strike, he wasn't even sure any of his missiles or bombers would be capable of retaliating.
Khrushchev did have a fair number of medium-range missiles, so he shipped them to Cuba, to put them within firing range of the United States.
If he could install them without notice, then announce another gambit on Berlin , those missiles would give him something to bargain with.
And once Kennedy announced that they had, Khrushchev knew he would have to pull them out.
The secret tapes reveal that on Oct., just the third day of the crisis, Kennedy wondered aloud why Khrushchev had put the missiles in Cuba.
He figured they must have been part of a bargaining gambit and that, to get them out, he might have to give Khrushchev ""some out,"" a way to save face.
On the final day, Oct., when Khrushchev proposed just such a trade, Kennedy pounced on it eagerly.
Toward the very end of the discussion, the only adviser agreeing with JFK was George Ball, an undersecretary of state who would later be the Johnson administration's sole dissident on escalation in Vietnam.
Kennedy ignored the overwhelming majority of his aides and instructed his brother, attorney general Robert Kennedy , to go tell the Soviet ambassador that he would take the deal -but only if it was kept secret.
And it was, for the next 25 years, until the tapes were about to come out and a few of JFK's advisers decided to reveal the truth pre-emptively -though even then, they didn't say they opposed the trade.
The resolution of the Cuban crisis may hold some lessons for crises today.
There was no telephone contact between Kennedy and Khrushchev in October 1962.
They did send telegrams back and forth, and Kennedy maintained a back channel through the Soviet embassy -even as ships and submarines confronted one another, troops were mobilized, and, in one particularly tense moment, a U-2 spy plane was shot down.
Second, at some point, one side might clearly have the upper hand, in which case it should seek ways to give the other side a way out.
The United States was about to station new Polaris submarines in the Mediterranean; each sub carried 16 nuclear missiles and was less vulnerable to attack.
The United States, in other words, gave up nothing in military capability.
Get the day’s breaking stories, weather forecast, and more sent straight to your inbox every weekday morning.
Third, there is no contradiction between striking a deal and maintaining vigilance; compromise is not the same as appeasement.
Fourth, there should be no illusions that the resolution of one crisis will spawn an era of peace.
The Turkish trade didn't save Khrushchev's face quite enough in the end.
Two years later, he was ousted by Kremlin hard-liners, who then proceeded to fund a massive ICBM build-up to match what the United States had already started to do.
The Cold War was matched, and fuelled, by a nuclear arms race for another 30 years.
Still, never again was there an armed confrontation over Berlin or Cuba.
The current standoff with Iran over the state of its nuclear program is hardly as intense as the Cuban crisis, but it bears some of the same patterns.
Under tremendous pressure, in this case financial, Iran's leaders are offering compromises to ease the crisis.
Their terms to date are unacceptable -they'd require the West to call off the sanctions before Iran stopped enriching uranium -but that doesn't mean the door to talks should be closed.
We don't know the Iranians' precise motives or how they assess the balance of forces.
They might simply be trying to keep us dangling, but they might genuinely be looking for ""some out,"" as Kennedy put it.
Unless we want war , it's worth extending and paying close attention to any feelers.
The Cuban missile crisis -the reality, not the myth -offers some pointers on how to do that.
David Petraeus and the Plot to Change the American Way of War. -Slate Advertisement Advertise With Us Report Error Submit a Tip Refund .jti-logo { padding: 1rem; text-align: center; display: block; } .jti-logo img { width: 200px; } The Free Press is certified by The Winnipeg Free Press invites you to share your opinion on this story in a letter to the editor.
Letters must include the writer’s full name, address, and a daytime phone number.
