JFK and the Cold War JFK focused on the Cold War and Cuba presented the first big test Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy Berlin Crisis • The separation between East and West Berlin had grown increasingly hostile since the Berlin Airlift in 1948.
Berlin Wall • In August 1961, Khrushchev responded by building a wall to separate Communist East Germany and nonCommunist West Germany.
Alliance for Progress • The United States and Soviet Union were competing for allies in the developing world, Asia and Latin America.
The Space Program • One of Kennedy’s lasting impacts was jump-starting America’s space program.
Fidel Castro • The United States was concerned about Cuba since 1959, when communist Fidel Castro overthrew the U.S.-backed dictator.
A Plan to Overthrow Castro • When Kennedy became President, he was informed that the CIA was planning an overthrow of Cuba. – CIA was training a group of Cubans to invade and overthrow.
Bay of Pigs Invasion • On April 17, 1961, the attempted invasion/overthrow was a catastrophe.
Kennedy Decides • Kennedy faced one of the most difficult decisions a President has had to make.
Response • To everyone’s relief, Khrushchev called back ships approaching Cuba.
Disaster Averted • JFK agreed and the world was relieved that nuclear war had been averted.
You and I are still alive.”-Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, to JFK Kennedy Assassinated • On November 22, 1963, John and his wife, Jackie rode in an open limousine through Dallas.
Lee Harvey Oswald • News of JFK’s death spread rapidly, and shocked the nation.
Oswald Shot • Two days later, TV cameras showed Oswald being transferred between jails.
Warren Commission • A commission, named after Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren, was formed to investigate the entire incident.
Lyndon B Johnson Beginnings • Lyndon Baines Johnson assumed the role of President on November 22, 1963.
Consumer and Environmental Protection Water Quality and Clean Air Actsupported standards for the quality of air and water.
Warren Court • The Supreme Court Chief Justice at the time was Earl Warren.
