Although the ship’s declared cargo was “technical equipment,” that was presumed to be a deception.
In reply to JFK’s query, he was informed that the aircraft carrier Essex, carrying anti-submarine helicopters would handle the interception.
As the meeting continued, they received word that the Soviet ships, including the Gagarin and the Kimovsk, that actually were carrying nuclear weapons, had turned away from Cuba.
So, JFK had made the order to stop Soviet ships, an aggressive and risky step, not knowing they had already turned back.
With the new information, the order to intercept the ships was recalled.
It took hours for that information to get to the White House, forcing the president and his aides to make their decisions in virtual darkness.
October 25 Low-flying flights of eight planes flew over Cuba morning and afternoon to supplement the U-2 photography.
All six Soviet submarines in the area or moving towards Cuba were followed and harassed and at times forced to surface in the presence of United States military ships.
The United States had 25 destroyers, two cruisers, several submarines, and several carriers in Caribbean waters surrounding Cuba.
October 26 A Soviet-chartered freighter was stopped at the quarantine line and searched for contraband military supplies.
A rambling letter arrived from Khrushchev stating that despite ideological differences, he wanted to compete peacefully, not by military means. – Missing Intelligence – Neither Kennedy nor the members of the ExComm had access to the latest information supplied by Navy surveillance planes.
Khrushchev’s personal reply to Kennedy said that the nuclear weapons were operational and under Soviet control; they were rigged to go off in the event of an attack on Cuba.
October 25, 1962 Kennedy’s reply to the official letter stated the US’s intent to go ahead with the blockade, and he regretted the deterioration in their relationship.
Khrushchev recalled the personal letter he had addressed to Kennedy, fearing it would make things worse.
In addition, Soviet radar tracked United States bombers, armed with nuclear weapons as they made repeated approaches to the Soviet border, then abruptly turned away.
October 25, 1962 By the time Khrushchev met with the Presidium, he had decided to remove the missiles, or at least some of them.
He cast the outcome as a victory, having strengthened Cuba and preventing an American attack.
October 26, 1962 Khrushchev had a letter delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow, at 5 PM local time, telling Kennedy he would remove military specialists from Cuba if the United States would promise to not invade Cuba.
In speaking of peaceful competition, he echoed the “noble rivalry” that Robert Frost proposed in their meeting of September 7.
Castro announced Cuba would fire on American aircraft that violated Cuban airspace and asked Soviet General Pliev to disperse his missiles.
Later Pliev reported that he would also use anti-aircraft weapons if Soviet installations were attacked.
Castro wrote to Khrushchev warning that the United States might also use nuclear weapons against the USSR and reasoned that as a measure of self-defense, Khrushchev should strike first.
Khrushchev further proposed signing the nuclear test ban treaty that he knew Kennedy wanted, and said the two deals could be negotiated and approved simultaneously.
Because Khrushchev feared an invasion of Cuba, rather than wait for translation and telegraph transmission of his proposal to Kennedy, the Presidium decided to broadcast the letter on Soviet radio.
Events Were Spiraling Out of Control As Seen by the US October 27, 1962 Kennedy wanted to accept Khrushchev’s idea but the EXComm rejected it.
He considered it the only hope for a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
Not only that, but Kennedy felt the missiles did not add to United States or European security; on the contrary, they were targets in a confrontation between the East and West.
The ExComm had previously considered such an exchange, and it had indeed been suggested in the American press by the Washington Post columnist, Walter Lippman.
But the members of the ExComm, to a man, rejected the proposal, as it would signal the NATO allies that the United States would not protect them.
The Chiefs of Staff were preparing to recommend a massive airstrike on Cuba on October 27th or 28th, to be followed by an invasion.
A U-2 plane strayed over the Soviet Union on a routine 7-hour mission over the North Pole to collect air samples to monitor for Soviet nuclear tests.
The pilot had lost his way, because magnetic compasses were useless near the Pole; he had to rely on a sextant and star charts.
Despite the appearance of Soviet MiGs as well as nuclear-armed United States F-102’s, the U-2 that was now empty of fuel landed safely on a remote airstrip.
Cubans shot at low-flying United States reconnaissance planes, forcing some to turn back.
McNamara believed that if that continued, they would have to shoot back.
A U-2 overflying Cuba was shot down by a surface-to-air missile and the pilot killed.
Soviet troops had been expecting an invasion that morning, but when it didn’t come after a sleepless night, General Pliev, as well as others, went to sleep.
When commanders of the anti-aircraft missile units asked for permission to fire on the U-2, Pliev couldn’t be reached.
Pliev had ordered that American planes could not be shot at without his direct orders.
General Grechko, Pliev’s deputy in charge of air defense, gave the order to shoot down the plane.
But it was dark as the group considered its response, and immediate retaliation was impossible in the dark.
A further complication – the Chiefs of Staff rejected the idea of a retaliatory strike against the SAM missiles, as they believed that some nuclear missiles were already operational in Cuba, and a strike might provoke a nuclear response from the Soviets.
Robert Kennedy and Ted Sorensen drafted a letter for the president to send to Khrushchev.
In it, he offered negotiations if the Soviet missiles were removed under UN supervision.
When that was accomplished, the United States would end the blockade and neither the United States nor its Latin American allies would invade Cuba.
Later that evening, Kennedy asked select members of the ExComm to join him in the Oval Office.
Among those excluded were Vice President Johnson, General Taylor and John McCone.
He wanted Robert Kennedy to secretly and orally negotiate the missile swap.
Dean Rusk proposed that Robert tell Dobrynin that if the USSR accepted the President’s proposal, the missiles would be removed from Turkey, but that would not be publicly announced.
When Robert Kennedy met with Dobrynin, he indicated that the deal would be honored only if it remained secret.
He asked for Khrushchev’s reply by the next day, and provided a direct number to the White House for him to deliver it.
Late in the evening, the USS Cony spotted a Soviet submarine it had been tracking as it surfaced in the Bermuda Triangle to recharge its batteries.
While the Cony and other United States ships watched the sub, a Navy pilot flew over and dropped several loud incendiary devices to activate his photoelectric camera lenses.
The sub captain believed he was under attack, and gave the order to prepare the nuclear torpedo.
As the signal officer descended from the bridge, he got stuck with his searchlight in the shaft of the conning tower, delaying the commander.
At the same time, the Cony’s captain signaled an apology for the plane’s aggressive behavior.
The apology was recognized in that moment of delay, and the order was given to stop preparations for firing.
Soviet Submarine, B-59, Kimovsk 11 PM ET, October 27 As the military was preparing for war, new instructions were issued that nuclear weapons were not to be used if engagement was only with Cuba.
If the Chinese or Soviets were also involved, nuclear weapons could be used.
Agreement – War is Averted As Seen by the USSR October 28, 1962 The Presidium was already meeting to confirm Khrushchev’s decision to dismantle the missile installations in Cuba p282 when Kennedy’s proposal given by Robert Kennedy to Dobrynin arrived.
Khrushchev ordered his foreign minister to immediately communicate to Dobrynin that Kennedy’s proposal was acceptable, Then a telegram arrived from Castro who said he had reliable information that the United States would invade Cuba in a few hours.
Castro proposed that the USSR make a first strike on the USA with nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev urged patience, announcing the United States guaranteed it would not invade Cuba.
Khrushchev needed to assure Kennedy that the Soviets were accepting his proposal, and was working under the belief that Kennedy would be making an address to the nation at 5 PM – perhaps announcing military action.
Thus, once again, Khrushchev took the step of having his letter to Kennedy broadcast via radio.
November 2, 1962 President Kennedy addressed the nation, reporting that aerial photos taken on November 1 showed that Soviet launch sites were being dismantled and missiles crated.
He said that aerial surveillance and the quarantine would continue until the threat was removed.
November 20, 1962 The United States ended its quarantine after the Soviets removed their IL–28 bombers from Cuba.
Jupiter Missiles in Cigli, Turkey August 5, 1963 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in Moscow.
The United States and USSR established a hotline to facilitate future communications between the two leaders.
In the presence of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, foreign ministers sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty.
Seated are, from left, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, and Foreign Minister Alec Douglas-Home.
Standing immediately behind Gromyko are United Nations Secretary General U Thant and Khrushchev.
To the right of Khrushchev and standing at the wall is Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin.
By secretly installing missiles in Cuba that threatened the United States and then agreeing to remove those missiles if the United States agreed not to invade Cuba, they had secured the sovereignty of a new Communist country in the Western Hemisphere, without the cost of war.
We actually had our strategic missiles ready to be launched, while the United States had surrounded the island of Cuba with naval vessels and had concentrated its infantry and air force.
But we showed that if we were guided by rational aims and the desire not to allow a war to happen, the disputed questions could be resolved by compromise.
That’s why in my memory the very best recollections remain about the late United States president.
He showed soberness of mind; he didn’t allow himself to be frightened, nor did he allow himself to become intoxicated with the military might of the United States; he didn’t decide to go for broke.
They rely heavily on the stories written by Serhii Plokhy in Nuclear Folly.
His access to records from Russia and the Ukraine detail the crisis from the Soviet point of view, juxtaposed to the actions the United States was taking, and the progress of the military build-up in Cuba.
Fidel Castro had led a revolution in Cuba to overthrow Fulgencio Batista, the country’s corrupt dictator.
Because of his leftist ideologies, the United States opposed Castro, and wanted to protect United States investments.
Castro was well aware of the United States role in the Bay of Pigs invasion, the failed attempt to overthrow his government.
After that, the United States continued clandestine efforts to destabilize the country.
Castro sought protection from the Soviet Union, and eventually that resulted in the Soviet’s secret shipments and installation of weapons, including nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Also, the USSR was in competition with China over leadership of Communist nations.
At the same time, the Soviets knew the United States was far ahead in weaponry and had positioned threatening military bases around their nation.
Positioning their missile within striking distance of Washington, D.C., and other major United States cities would help to even the nuclear threat.
The United States feared Communist aggression in Europe, Asia, and now in Latin America, specifically in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States shore.
United States intelligence failed to recognize the Soviets delivery of aggressive weaponry and instead believed the Soviet leadership when they said the equipment was only for the defense of Cuba – to repel a United States invasion.
Kennedy’s September announcement that the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba would not be tolerated forced the United States to take whatever action was necessary to remove them.
The horrifying prospect of nuclear war was overwhelming to the nations’ leaders, more so than to their militaries.
The leaders sought advice – and consent – from their advisors, but in the end, the decisions and negotiations were made by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
If Kennedy had taken the advice of the Joint Chiefs to respond militarily, it is highly likely that Soviet missiles would have been launched at the U.S, instigating a nuclear conflict.
Mistakes by those charged with carrying out orders can lead to escalation and conflict that were not intended by the leaders.
When military conflict is threatened, mistakes by one side can be misinterpreted by the other, potentially provoking a military response.
The members of the military must at times make quick decisions on their own without guidance from their leaders.
As an example, General Grechko’s order to shoot down the United States U-2 could have triggered war.
Mistakes related to the use of nuclear forces would result in the destruction of nations.
But if mistakes were to affect decisions related to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no learning period.
President Kennedy’s efforts to keep pressure on Khrushchev through the quarantine and aerial surveillance while still giving him room to honorably change course were effective.
Khrushchev’s rambling personal letters to Kennedy provided some insight, revealing his deep concern over the military conflict both sides were preparing for, and the calamity that would come if the conflict escalated to nuclear war.
He also sought to justify providing the weapons to Cuba in comparison to the U.S.’s installation of weapons in Europe and military bases elsewhere.
He said that if the presence of weapons the United States considered offensive prevented an attack, then they were indeed, defensive.
The slow, deliberate decision-making of President Kennedy gave him time and the advice of experts to consider military options as well as diplomatic ones.
His decision to enact a quarantine was the most cautious and was opposed unanimously by the military Chiefs of Staff.
It should be noted that the U.S.’s delay in making that decision had the downside of allowing the Soviet’s time to complete the installation of several missile sites, thereby increasing the threat.
On October 16th, the day the missiles in Cuba were revealed by photographic evidence, Kennedy discussed the situation with Adlai Stevenson.
Stevenson had rejected Kennedy as his vice-presidential running mate in 1956; they were not friends and their personalities were distinctly different.
While Kennedy and most of his advisors had thought a military strike necessary, Stevenson emphatically recommended pursuing a peaceful solution and followed-up on the discussion the next day with a memo.
Stevenson’s analysis appears to have guided Kennedy over the next several days as his inclination turned in that direction.
When Khrushchev publicly proposed they remove the missiles in Cuba if the United States removed its missiles from Turkey, the reaction of most other countries would be to consider it a fair deal, and wrong for the United States to reject the offer and undertake military action against Cuba.
In contemplating the possibility of military action, Robert Kennedy repeatedly brought up the question of morality.
Castro denied that, but his interpreter remembered and Castro’s telegram to Khrushchev was found.
See Sergei Khrushchev, Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev Volume 3 Statesman 1953-1964.
Khrushchev’s rivals in the Communist party deposed him largely due to his erratic and cantankerous behavior, regarded by the party as a tremendous embarrassment on the international stage.
