Our committee will proceed simultaneously with the American EXCOMM Committee, challenging delegates to widen their scope of history and devise creative solutions through collaboration.
Note that the purpose of crisis committees is to role-play a response for an emergency, formulate ﬂexible –yet realistic– solutions, make impromptu speeches, and most importantly, enjoy yourselves.
Three of us, Lucy Seo, Richard Kang, and Scott Kim, will be chairing/directing this committee in JejuMUN/GECMUN VI, and it is an honor that we are able to participate with you in this prestigious conference.
Joint Crisis Committees are committee styles in which two committees face each other in a pending crisis, and we are glad to spearhead this new committee style for the ﬁrst time in South Korea.
We will be working in conjunction with Kruschev’s Soviet Committee, along with the secretariats, in order to plan every meticulous step for your perfect MUN experience.
We hope, you too, will make every effort to be prepared, participate, and collaborate in order to make for a fun and enjoyable MUN experience.
For all Joint Crisis Committee delegates, don’t hesitate to contact us.
We are glad to answer any questions, concerns, or obstacles you face in your research process.
Yours Sincerely, EXCOMM INTRODUCTION/HISTORICAL BACKGROUND After the fall of the German Third Reich, the majority of Eastern Europe was occupied by communist regimes.
Germany became the unofﬁcial boundary between communism and democracy, after being divided into a market-economy East, and a communist West.
The spread of communism eventually led to the formation of a new faction, and in fear of such wild-ﬁre like expansion of pro-USSR communist ideologies, the USA started to support the noncommunist European nations with the Marshall Plan with a belief that communism will not spread more if Europeans have no ﬁnancial and economic difﬁculties.
With this American support, Western Europe was able to recover quickly, but it was not a secret that the United States had successfully increased their inﬂuence in the European continent.
This solidiﬁed division within Europe was the unofﬁcial start of the Cold War.
An organization that consists of United States’ allies, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , was established in 1949.
The communist states then countered with the establishment of the Warsaw Pact six years later.
Despite the short period of relaxation in the tension after the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, the arms race and space race soon ignited the Soviet-American rivalry.
Despite the fact that the USA had more access to rocket research and technology, following the successful recruitment of German engineers after World War II, it was the Soviet Union who were ﬁrst to shoot a successful Intercontinental Ballistic Missile , R-7, as well as the ﬁrst to launch an artiﬁcial satellite, Sputnik.
Sputnik particularly, was a shock to the American public in terms of both pride and national security.
Soon, the whole world would be thrust into the power struggle between these two global superpowers, as the Cold War devoured global politics.
While, the Soviet armies, stationed in Eastern European nations following World War II, refused to leave in order to maintain a communist presence and inﬂuence in the region.
Such radical tensions heightened to the point that the USSR and the USA, both strategically planted militaristic assets in regions to intimidate and pressure the other.
Eventually this would result in an event that would threaten the fate of the entire world.
With medium and intermediate-range missiles stationed in Cuba, the whole North American continent – from the Paciﬁc to Atlantic –would fall under the range of nuclear missiles, which meant a direct threat to the national security of the United States.
The operation to install nuclear warheads on the island , was soon executed secretly.
However, the crisis started as the Central Intelligence Agency of the USA discovered that there were missiles being readied in Cuba.
The rise in diplomatic tension between the First and the Second World put the world at the brink of a nuclear disaster.
With wise moves, this crisis may end peacefully with the restoration of the relationship between the two sides.
Or, if pride, politics, and power get in the way, the whole world could burn.
GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS Operation Anadyr Operation Anadyr Is the 1962 secret Cold War operation by the Soviet Union to deploy a large variety of weaponry to Cuba for the ultimate goal of preventing an American invasion of the island.
Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is the military staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
It is the central organization of the Armed Forces Administration, and is responsible to oversee the operational management of the armed forces under the Russian Ministry of Defence.
During the Cold War, the Soviet General Staff maintained Soviet plans for the invasion of Western Europe.
The Bay of Pigs Invasion The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba undertaken by the American sponsored rebel group, Brigade 2506 on 17 April 1961.
A counter-revolutionary military group (made up of mostly Cuban exiles and some United States military personnel), trained and funded by the Central Intelligence Agency , Brigade 2506 intended to overthrow the increasingly communist government of Fidel Castro.
Launched from Guatemala and Nicaragua, the invading force was defeated within three days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces, under the direct command of Castro.
It was signiﬁcant in the sense that it was an attempt to prevent Cuba from becoming a communist nation without direct intervention from the United State’s military.
Even the contradictory CIA ﬁgures for the USSR's weaponry, which showed a clear advantage for the US, were far above the actual count.
It is based on the theory of deterrence, which holds that the threat of using strong weapons against the enemy prevents the enemy's use of those same weapons.
The strategy is a form of the Nash equilibrium, in which, once armed, neither side has any incentive to initiate a conﬂict or to disarm.
It was arguably the main reason the Soviet Union and the United Stateswere hesitant to engage in direct combat.
Ballistic Missile A ballistic missile refers to a missile system that could deliver one or more warheads with a high, elliptical trajectory.
Early American attempts of ICBM started with the RTV-A-2 Hiroc in 1946, followed by the Atlas missile program.
While the United States had German engineers such as Wernher von Braun, the USSR attempted to develop with their own engineers.
Surprisingly enough, the USSR was ﬁrst to launch a successful ICBM, R-7, which carried the ﬁrst satellite, Sputnik, into space.
The Pentagon The Pentagon was built during World War II, under the direction of Colonel Leslie R Groves Jr.
Being the largest ofﬁce building in the world, the Pentagon is the headquarters of the United States Department of Defense.
This Soviet rumor assumed the Pentagon was a core spot for the development of nuclear weapons during the Cold War.
It is your role as delegates to identify different methods to utilize this particular asset, under the Secretary of Defense.
Central Intelligence Agency The CIA stands for Central Intelligence Agency and is an American government agency responsible for analyzing and evaluating foreign intelligence.
In 1960, the CIA was granted legal authority to use reconnaissance airplanes to collect geographical images of communist countries.
It is unique to the Central Intelligence Agency to command an immense amount of both human and material assets to gather intelligence to support the other branches of government defense agencies in the United States.
The NSC is primarily concerned with national security and foreign and military matters.
First set up by Harry S Truman, the 33rd president of the United States, this council advises the president on matters that revolve around national security, foreign policy, and collaboration among governmental agencies.
Due to the rising tensions of the Cold War, the members of the NSC were pivotal to President Kennedy’s strategic defense policies; not only that, many of Kennedy’s cabinet members were also in this council to advise him on certain matters.
The members of the cabinet are executive ofﬁcials of many bureaucratic branches or organizations of the federal government, who are eligible to succeed the president in times of crises.
The United States does not explicitly state or describe such a branch of ‘advisory’ committee, but after the precedent of George Washington, the presidents of the United States have appointed ofﬁcials for multiple purposes.
As seen with the Supreme Court Case Myers United States, the president reserves the right to appoint and dismiss all public ofﬁcials under the approval of the Senate.
First World Nation First World Nation, is a term used during the cold war that included countries that were aligned with NATO views and opposed to the Soviet Union.
Recently it has developed a positive connotation with multiple characteristics of a politically stable, democratic country.
Second World Nation Second World Nation, is a term used to describe former communist-socialist and/or industrial states that were largely in the Soviet Sphere of Inﬂuence.
Namely, parts of Eastern and Southern Europe and Western Asia were known as Second World Nations.
Third World Nation Third World Nation, is a term that was frequently used during the Cold War to refer to developing countries of Asia and Africa.
Recently, it developed a derogatory connotation that alluded to high poverty rates, economic instability, and the lack of basic education.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization North Atlantic Treaty Organization, or NATO, is an intergovernmental military organization between 29 countries across North America and West Europe.
This organization was created shortly after the agreement of the North Atlantic Treaty on April 4, 1949.
NATO functions to support countries with military assets in response to external attacks, and this may be an important organization to consider for delegates with relatable portfolio powers.
Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance Warsaw Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance, or simply known as the Warsaw Pact, refers to a treaty which has established a collective defensive system of the Soviet Union and its allies in Central and Eastern Europe that was signed on May 14, 1955.
Its primary purpose of establishment was to reinforce the Soviet Union’s inﬂuence on the satellite states.
The Soviet Armies were stationed in the aforementioned nations, and were often utilized to curb down the states’ cry for freedom.
Another purpose of its establishment was to check North Atlantic Treaty Organization , especially after when NATO started to expand its inﬂuence by accepting Federal Republic of Germany as a member.
Full member of 20th Presidium: Chairman of the Presidium Leonid Brezhnev is currently a chairman of the presidium, yet his power is only titular and superﬁcial.
He was working in several local party posts, and as he devoted himself to the party, his power and rank rose steadily yet surely.
The biggest luck he caught was to be a follower of Khrushchev, who soon became a leader of the Soviet Union.
Until now, it is not hard to say that Brezhnev is one of the most loyal supporters of Khrushchev, however, some say he is too ambitious.
With great trust he gained during Stalin’s regime, he was able to be the First Deputy Minister of Defense in 1956, and soon the Minister of Defense.
Even though Khrushchev wanted to put more focus on nuclear weapons, Malinovsky was the one who stubbornly advocated the importance of conventional forces.
He does believe that the Red Army should be the strongest military force on the planet while underestimating the possibility of global nuclear warfare.
Full member of 20th Presidium: former chairman of Presidium Nikolay Shvernik is an old politician who recently returned to taking an active role in current regime.
He once was at the theoretical peak of the power, when he was Chairman of the Presidium, under Stalin’s regime.
After Stalin’s era, he was removed from his role in the Presidium, but soon made his return, with a new role to rehabilitate the victims of Stalin’s Great Purges.
Considering the fact that Khrushchev is attempting to erase all the reminisce of Stalin, it is not hard to see that Khrushchev is utilizing Shvernik for his own purpose.
Soviet Delegate/Representative at the UN LValerian Zorin has a self-explanatory role: Delegate of USSR in the United Nations.
If anything happens to be wrong with Operation Anadyr, it is clear he would be the ﬁrst one to talk to other nations regarding the issue.
Zorin’s word may save the world from the brink of nuclear warfare, however, his word may put the world in a nuclear apocalypse as well.
Full member of 20th Presidium: 1st deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers Anastas Mikoyan is one of the few high-ranking party ofﬁcers who has preserved his position and life at the same time.
Mikoyan attentively assisted Khrushchev’s plans to destroy the myth of Stalin.
He remained as a strong ally to Khrushchev, even when there was a coup.
Until now, as a loyal messenger of the First Secretary of the Union, he often makes his visit to other states – even to the United States and Japan.
He is always a good card for the Soviet government to play in order to maintain its foreign affairs.
Chairman of the KGB Vladimir Semichastny is the head of Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti , or Committee for State Security, appointed by Khrushchev in 1961.
His younger years were devoted to the Ukrainian Communist Youth League, and soon, his efforts brought him to Moscow.
Semichastny is known for his strong attitude against the western world – probably due to his long career as a radical communist.
Defense Minister of Cuba Removing the Cuban government which was rotting with corruption, Fidel Castro successfully established a communist government on the island.
Raul, the brother of the new leader of Cuba, also assisted the revolution.
In 1959, the First Secretary of Cuba, Fidel Castro, appointed Raul Castro to a number of crucial positions including the Defense Minister.
Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alexander Alexeyev, after several years working as a Soviet agent disguised as a journalist, was appointed as ambassador to Cuba.
His experience in Havana, for several years, was more valuable than nearly any Soviet diplomat for building the bridge between the USSR and Cuba.
His political career started in 1931 when he supervised Stalinist purges in the Urals and Ukraine.
He was favored by Nikita Khrushchev as he defended him in many times political turmoil anti-party group in the Politburo.
However, despite his public relations with Khrushchev, he disagrees with many of Khrushev’s ideas.
Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko was a Soviet politician during the Cold War as the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
His political career started when he was appointed a chief of the United States division of the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs in 1939.
In 1946, he was appointed as the Soviet ambassador to the United States of America, also representing the Soviet Union in the United Nation Security Council.
Although Gromyko held a prominent position within the Soviet Union, he wasn’t strongly identiﬁed in any political faction and remained fairly neutral.
GRU Colonel Codenamed the HERO, Oleg Penkovsky was a senior military ofﬁcer in the Soviet Union, served in the British Intelligence.
However, after World War II, he attended Franze Military Academy, graduating in 1948.
After some years in service with the GRU, he was promoted to the rank of Colonel.
While in service as a colonel for the GRU, his mission was to uncover intelligence of the western world.
However, he was disappointed with the rise of Nikita Khrushchev as the Premiere of the Soviet Union.
As a spy, he revealed more than 5,000 classiﬁed documents, photographs, most noticeably the Soviet Union’s inability to operate long-range ICBMs.
However, from 1944 to 1946, he studied international relations in Higher Diplomatic School of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which led to the service in the Soviet embassy in the United States of America.
Soviet Marshal: Commander-in-Chief of the Warsaw Pact forces Andrei Grechko is a Soviet Marshal, and Commander in Chief of the Warsaw Pact Forces.
However, his political career started in 1928 when he joined the communist party, being an active member.
Even for a member of the communist party with a military background, Grechko was known for his strict views of a strong military deﬁning a country’s power.
He was a strong patreon of using nuclear arms in the battlefront instead of keeping it as a last resort.
General of the Army Issa Alexandrovich Pliyev was a general of the Soviet Army.
His military career started when he joined the Soviet Red Army in 1922.
He then graduated Leningrad Cavalry School in 1926 and Frunze Military Academy.
Tsander formed the Moscow Group for the Study of Reactive Motion, which later became known as RNII, the ofﬁcial center for R & D of missiles and rocket-powered gliders.
He led the development of the world’s ﬁrst ICBM, known as the R-7, as well as several generations of military and communications satellites, ballistic missiles, manned and unmanned space crafts and much more.
As a vital member of the Soviet space industry, Korolev’s contributions, let alone his existence, was a heavily guarded secret.
There is not much that is known about him aside from his ﬂare for rocketry.
His contributions during the Great Patriotic War made him the ﬁrst Secretary of the Sverdlovsk Regional Committee, Later he was appointed by Nikita Khrushchev himself, to lead economic planning in urban regions.
Despite having an engineering background, Kirilenko was known for his meticulous organization.
However, by 1961, due to the increased workload, combined with his old age, it was rumored his health is deteriorating quickly.
Those battles earned him ﬁve wounds, two of which pushed him to the brink of death, but also helped lift him to the position of Chief of Staff of the 48th Army.
While being assigned to a myriad of different positions, he ended up with the position of Commander in Chief of the Strategic Missile Force, a branch of the Russian Armed Forces that controls Russia’s land-based ICBMs.
It is the main force that would be used to attack an enemy’s nuclear silos, military facilities, and infrastructure.
Secretary of the Central Committee: member of the Presidium Frol Kozlov, or the Man of Krushchev, was originally a worker at a textile factory.
After studying engineering in Leningrad he became a prominent party member.
His active participation in party affairs brought his ranks step by step – eventually to the central committee.
In 1959, Krushchev, the ﬁrst secretary of the party and the Premier of the USSR, declared Kozlov as his successor, or the next leader of the union – a title which seems to guarantee the future.
But, it is still a mystery if this man would be able to take Krushchev’s regime successfully in the future.
Kozlov must remember that there are other party members who are capable of being the next leader, too.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk is the Secretary of State under President John F Kennedy since 1961.
Previously, Rusk served as a reserve captain and staff ofﬁcer during World War II at the China-Burma-India Theater, and to his efforts, he received the Legion of Merit for his service.
After the war, he served within the United States Department of State under the ofﬁce of United Nations Affairs.
Rusk was inﬂuential in American actions during the Korean War; for example, he suggested the divide of Korea at the 38th parallel.
After being disqualiﬁed from combat duty due to his poor vision, he had been hired as a “whiz kids” to revitalize the Ford Motor Company; after successfully reforming the failing company, he assumed the role of president of the Ford Motor Company.
After that, McNamara has been the Secretary of Defense under President John F Kennedy since 1961.
During his time as Secretary of Defense, McNamara was responsible for increasing the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War, and successfully gaining full control of Pentagon operation.
He has been pivotal in modernizing the armed forces and restructuring the budget procedure, cutting down on unnecessary spending on obsolete weapons.
Former Secretary of State and Advisor to JFK Dean Acheson is one of the Advisors to President John F Kennedy.
During his time as the Secretary, he helped create and lead American foreign policy during the Cold War.
After the Truman administration, he retired but continued to inﬂuence the government under President John F Kennedy.
United States Delegate/Representative at the UN Adlai E Stevenson is the United States Ambassador to the United Nations under President John F Kennedy.
He worked at the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, Federal Alcohol Administration, Department of the Navy, and Department of State.
Here, he worked closely with representatives from the Soviet Union, which resulted him to be appointed as the United States Delegate to the United Nations.
Special Council Representative Theodore Sorensen is part of the White House Counsel under President John F Kennedy as an adviser and speechwriter.
He worked early on with John F Kennedy as a chief legislative aide since 1953, when Kennedy was just a Senator from Massachusetts.
In the Kennedy administration, Sorenson is responsible for speeches for the President and assisting in his domestic agenda.
Edgar Hoover is the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation under President John F Kennedy.
In 1935, he founded the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which was focused on ﬁghting domestic crimes.
Before his time at the Bureau of Investigation, he worked at the War Emergency Division of the Department of Justice.
From there, he became the head of the Bureau of Investigation’s General Intelligence Division at a very young age.
He quickly rose to the Director role; at the Bureau, he was known for his radical and unpredictable leadership, such as ﬁring all female agents, and then erratically ﬁring the remaining agents from time to time.
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy is the National Security Advisor under President John F Kennedy.
Bundy had served as an intelligence ofﬁcer during World War II, planning the invasion of Sicily and France.
Following the war, he worked at the Council on Foreign Relations, studying the implementation of the Marshall Plan.
He then worked as a speechwriter for the Republican Presidential candidate, Thomas Dewey, in 1948.
After Dewey lost the election, Bundy joined a think tank as a political analyst.
Douglas Dillon is the Secretary of the Treasury under President John F Kennedy.
Dillon began his career in 1938 as the Vice President and Director at the investment bank, Dillon, Read & Co.
He then served in the military during World War II, leaving the army as Lieutenant Commander.
President Eisenhower appointed Dillon as the United States Ambassador to France in 1953.
Eisenhower followed up by appointing Dillon to be the Under Secretary of State for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment in 1958.
Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D Taylor is a senior Army ofﬁcer and an Ambassador to South Vietnam.
He graduated from the United States Military Academy and was involved in many battles including Normandy invasion of World War II as well as the Korean war.
F Kennedy trusted Taylor immensely as his foreign policy views aligned with Taylor, nominating him to the position of Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Director of Central Intelligence Agency John McCone is the Director of the Central Intelligence.
He replaced the previous CIA director Allen Dulles, who was forced a resignation by President John F Kennedy.
In 1958, he became chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, where he revealed information about Israeli nuclear weapons program.
This was a big factor in President Kennedy’s selection of McCone as the Director of CIA, as he was willing to deal with nuclear weapons with the international community.
United States Ambassador At Large for Soviet Affairs Llewellyn E Thompson has been the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union since 1957.
Before that, he was known to have successfully negotiated the Austrian State Treaty.
He maintained a unique relationship with Nikita Khrushchev due to his history of assisting the Soviet Union during times of crisis.
Under the authority vested in Article II, Section 2 of the United States, The President appointed Thompson as an Ambassadors at Large to deal with speciﬁc foreign policies that threatened the security of the United States; Thompson has 20+ years of experience dealing with the Soviets diplomatically, including the shoot-down of the American U-2 Spy Plane, and the turmoil that arose after the construction of the Berlin Wall, and is serving as a key diplomatic advisor/negotiator for John F Kennedy.
In the 1950s, he helped his brother by being Chief Counsel of the campaign.
In 1961, he became one of the youngest Attorney Generals ever, at the age of only 36.
This role made him the lead legal advisor of the President; in addition to his legal role, it is rumoured that he has a knack for foreign affairs and brokering deal, acting as ‘free limb’ for the president.
Special Assistant to the President Since 1961, Kenneth O’Donnell has been the White House Appointments Secretary under President John F Kennedy.
Before he served as White House Appointments Secretary, he built up his political career as assistant council and campaign organizer-working mainly for the Kennedy family’s elections.
He is considered as a reliable and dependable source for President Kennedy and his family.
Head of CIA’s Directorate of Intelligence Ray S Cline is the Head of the CIA’s Directorate of Intelligence under Director of Central Intelligence John McCone.
Cline began his career in World War II when he joined the Ofﬁce of Strategic Services.
Later, his work was transferred to the CIA, where he was tasked to gather intelligence on Korea, Soviet Union, and the People’s Republic of China.
In 1958, he became Chief of the United States Naval Auxiliary Communications Center in CIA’s Taiwan station.
Vice President of the United States of America Lyndon B Johnson, often referred to as LBJ, was considered as a “ridiculously and comparatively brusque , with crude manners” by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, and many other members of the White House; throughout his Vice Presidency, LBJ looked for ways to secure his inﬂuence in the executive branch, and sought for ways for him to secure more power within the White House.
To keep him happy, Kennedy kept LBJ busy, informed, and tied to many jobs as heads to committees.
However, he took minor diplomatic mission-roles, and attended Cabinet and NSC meetings; further on, he was appointed as the chairman of the National Aeronautics Space Council, to further research in the United States space program to catch-up the Soviets.
White House Press Secretary Pierre Emil George Salinger was ﬁrst involved with the Kennedys as a legal counsel for the Senate Select Committee to investigate a series of organized crime.
This experience led Salinger to be known within the Kennedy family, and Robert Kennedy proposed to John F Kennedy to be his press secretary during his presidency.
During Kennedy’s presidency, Pierre Salinger accompanied Kennedy in various diplomatic trips such as the 1961 meeting with the Soviet Premier, Nikita Krucshchev.
Salinger is known to have managed the rampaging press corps with his natural wit and enthusiasm; not only that, Salinger has an innate specialty in constructing personal relationships with many of whom he interviewed.
Conventional Military Force The battle fronts of the wars of the past, and that of today, look very different.
From swords clashing to bullets ﬂying, and from bullets now to nuclear weapons.
The push of a button can now do much more than the pull of a trigger and the swing of the sword, meaning much more power, destruction, and casualties.
However, that very ease of use and power of nuclear weapons, has frightened the entire world; after all, nuclear warfare can result in the end of mankind.
It is also to be considered that some ofﬁcers prefer the old, conventional style of war, and do not trust the new technology.
The committee will be an opportunity to explore both sides of the spectrum, ﬁnding a compromise between the old and the new within the Union.
However, it is to be remembered that the crisis concerns more than a mere two nations of the global committee.
States such as Cuba and Turkey are of close proximity to the crisis, and new factions now fragment the globe.
Delegates are encouraged to predict the reaction and be prepared for whatever it is the UN has in mind.
As aforementioned, the two most prominent powers that sparked the crisis are not the only stakeholders involved.
Other neighboring nations and the alliances has made the entire world a part of the crisis.
Thus, the two seeds of this global tension are obligated to alleviate the canvas they’ve stretched too far.
If either, or both, fail to do so, the results will be catastrophic to say the least.
The very fact that this conﬂict was sparked might leave lasting impacts and even the alleviation of the tension might not be clear-cut.
Delegates should consider all that is necessary to resolve this crisis and its aftermath for the good of the international community.
Media might be a pivotal medium to express the cabinet’s decisions and progress regarding the crisis.
This decision is entirely up to the delegates, and how they want to utilize this important tool.
A committee with extensive use of the media might be restrained to it and may leak too much classiﬁed information to the opponent.
On the contrary, a committee with too little use of the media may lose its support from the people, and it is crucial for the delegates to ﬁnd a middle ground between these two extremes in order to deescalate the radically surging tensions.
Remember, the USA is a land of freedom, built upon the hands of our Founding Fathers with The Constitution carved in our very bones.
Maintaining this contact and possibly applying diplomatic power, asserting a stance for global peace from international communities, may possibly be a medium for tranquil alleviation.
Other radical solutions may involve depicting the USA as if they are on the brink of war, ready to make any move possible as a global superpower.
This may be effective in characterizing USA as a determined, tenacious country with no room for compromise or tradeoffs.
Though this may provide temporary emotional sanctum for the delegates, there may be other unintended, dangerous consequences resulting from this forceful action taken by the cabinet.
