While we were unable to actually “visit” the Washington Monument during our recent trip to the Nation’s Capital, the tallest stone structure in the world was visible from our hotel room window near Dupont Circle & from many of the places around town we did visit.
Top of the Washington Monument Photo by John White The monument, also the world’s tallest obelisk at 555+ feet, has been closed to the public since the recent earthquake of August 23, 2011.
On our 2nd day in D.C., September 26, 2011, the National Park Service announced the monument would be closed indefinitely due to structural damage.The Washington Monument was designed by Robert Mills.
President John F Kennedy signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 today in the Treaty Room at the White House.
JFK Signs the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty The White House Treaty Room October 7, 1963 Photo by Robert Knudsen JFK Library PhotoThe President said:“Today the fear is a little less & the hope a little more.
The Democratic & Republican candidates for President in 1960 squared off tonight in the 2nd of 4 face-to-face televised debates.This debate was held in Studio A of NBC affiliate WRC-TV on Massachusetts & Nebraska Avenues.The debate was moderated by Frank McGee of NBC News.The topics of this debate included Foreign Policy & Civil Rights.Senator Kennedy, the Democratic nominee, was asked:“In your acceptance speech you said that your campaign would be based on what you wanted to ask of the American people.
JFK responded:“If they elect me President, I will do my best to carry the United States through a difficult period.
I would not want people to elect me because I promise them the easy, soft life.
The 1st show in the series aired after the second televised debate between John F Kennedy & Richard Nixon.The show stars Martin Milner as Tod Stiles & George Maharis as Buz Murdock, 2 young men in search of adventure as they drive across the USA in a Chevrolet Corvette.
One of the episodes “A Walk with the Serpent” was filmed in Boston & included scenes at Bunker Hill, Lexington & the Old North Church.
A second episode, “Kiss the Maiden, All Forlorn” was filmed in downtown Dallas, Texas & aired on April 13, 1962.
Less than a month after the terrorists attacks of 9-11, President George W Bush announced tonight, in a televised address from the White House, that “Operation Enduring Freedom” has been launched in Afghanistan.The military operation, carried out with the assistance of Great Britain, Canada, Australia, Germany & France, will target the Taliban which supported al-Qaida in the 9-11 terrorists attacks on the United States.
US Marines Alpha Company Battalion Landing Team Operation El Dorado May 5, 2004 Photo by Cpl Jemssy Alvarez, Jr.
Dies John Birch Killed John Birch Society John Dillinger John F Fitzgerald John F Fitzgerald Dies John Glenn John Quincy Adams I John Quincy Adams II John W Hinckley Johnny I Hardly Knew Ye III Johnny I Hardly Knew Ye IX JOHNNY I HARDLY KNEW YE VI Johnny I Hardly Knew Ye XII Jomo Kenyatta Joseph Gargin Joseph P Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy Suffers Stroke Joseph Welch Jr.
