Peril of 1962 stand-off still with us21 Oct, 2012 04:30 PM5 minutes to readJack Kennedy had no idea the missile crisis dragged on a month longer.
Photo / APJack Kennedy had no idea the missile crisis dragged on a month longer.
But the past is a foreign country, a place where everything was in black-and-white and men still wore hats, so it's just scary stories about a long-gone time.Or so it seems.The outlines of the tale are well known.
There couldn't be a more hair-trigger situation than that, you might think but then things got a lot worse.AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.At the start of the 1960s Moscow had gained a new communist ally in Fidel Castro, but the United States kept talking about invading Cuba.
However, from Cuba the Soviet missiles would be only five minutes away from their American targets.
That caused panic in Washington.Early in October 1962 the first Soviet SS-4 missiles arrived in Cuba, and American U-2 spy planes discovered them almost at once.
President John F Kennedy knew about them by October 16, but he did not go on television and warn the American public of the risk of nuclear war until October 22.
He then declared a naval blockade of Cuba, saying he would stop Soviet ships carrying more missiles from reaching the island by force if necessary.
That would mean war, and probably nuclear war, but at least the blockade gave the Russians time to think before the shooting started.The Soviet leaders were now desperately looking for a way out of the crisis they had created.
It was the closest the world ever came to an all-out nuclear war.Even so, they weren't really scared enough.
Two conflicts down, a dozen still to go30 Oct, 2012 04:30 PMQuick ReadNew ZealandGwynne Dyer: Learn to love your insignificance12 Nov, 2012 04:30 PMQuick ReadWhat almost nobody knew until very recently is that the crisis did not really end on October 28.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November, reveals that it continued all the way through November.AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.US intelligence was unaware that along with the SS-4s, the Soviet Union had also sent more than a hundred shorter-range ""tactical"" nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Khrushchev's deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, who was sent to Cuba to tell Castro the happy news, quickly realised that he must not have them.The second half of the crisis, invisible to Americans, was Mikoyan's month-long struggle to pry Castro's fingers off the hundred tactical nuclear missiles.In the end, he only succeeded by telling Castro that an unpublished law forbade the transfer of Soviet nuclear weapons to a foreign country.
In December, they were finally crated up and sent home.So it all ended happily, in one sense but the whole world could have ended instead.
AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.Then he said the bit that applies to us.
